{"id": "43609", "revid": "2366721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43609", "title": "Jumping", "text": "Form of movement in which an organism or mechanical system propels itself into the air\nJumping or leaping is a form of locomotion or movement in which an organism or non-living (e.g., robotic) mechanical system propels itself through the air along a ballistic trajectory. Jumping can be distinguished from running, galloping and other gaits where the entire body is temporarily airborne by the relatively long duration of the aerial phase and high angle of initial launch.\nSome animals, such as the kangaroo, employ jumping (commonly called \"hopping\" in this instance) as their primary form of an locomotion, while others, such as frogs, use it only as a means to escape predators. Jumping is also a key feature of various activities and sports, including the long jump, high jump and show jumping.\nPhysics.\nAll jumping involves the application of force against a substrate, which in turn generates a reactive force that propels the jumper away from the substrate. Any solid or liquid capable of producing an opposing force can serve as a substrate, including ground or water. Examples of the latter include dolphins performing traveling jumps, and Indian skitter frogs executing standing jumps from water.\nJumping organisms are rarely subject to significant aerodynamic forces and, as a result, their jumps are governed by the basic physical laws of ballistic trajectories. Consequently, while a bird may jump into the air to initiate flight, no movement it performs once airborne is considered jumping, as the initial jump conditions no longer dictate its flight path.\nFollowing the moment of launch (i.e., initial loss of contact with the substrate), a jumper will traverse a parabolic path. The launch angle and initial launch velocity determine the travel distance, duration, and height of the jump. The maximum possible horizontal travel distance for a projectile occurs at a launch angle of 45\u00b0, but any launch angle between 35\u00b0 and 55\u00b0 will result in ninety percent of the maximum possible distance. However, the jump angle for humans which maximizes horizontal distance travelled is lower at ~23-26\u00b0 (see section \"Standing long jump mechanics\" below).\nMuscles (or other actuators in non-living systems) do physical work, adding kinetic energy to the jumper's body over the course of a jump's propulsive phase. This results in a kinetic energy at launch that is proportional to the square of the jumper's speed. The more work the muscles do, the greater the launch velocity and thus the greater the acceleration and the shorter the time interval of the jump's propulsive phase.\nMechanical power (work per unit time) and the distance over which that power is applied (e.g., leg length) are the key determinants of jump distance and height. As a result, many jumping animals have long legs and muscles that are optimized for maximal power according to the force-velocity relationship of muscles. The maximum power output of muscles is limited, however. To circumvent this limitation, many jumping species slowly pre-stretch elastic elements, such as tendons or apodemes, to store work as strain energy. Such elastic elements can release energy at a much higher rate (higher power) than equivalent muscle mass, thus increasing launch energy to levels beyond what muscle alone is capable of.\nA jumper may be either stationary or moving when initiating a jump. In a jump from stationary (i.e., a \"standing jump\"), all of the work required to accelerate the body through launch is done in a single movement. In a \"moving jump\" or \"running jump\", the jumper introduces additional vertical velocity at launch while conserving as much horizontal momentum as possible. Unlike stationary jumps, in which the jumper's kinetic energy at launch is solely due to the jump movement, moving jumps have a higher energy that results from the inclusion of the horizontal velocity preceding the jump. Consequently, jumpers are able to jump greater distances when starting from a run.\nAnatomy.\nAnimals use a wide variety of anatomical adaptations for jumping. These adaptations are exclusively concerned with the launch, as any post-launch method of extending range or controlling the jump must use aerodynamic forces, and thus is considered gliding or parachuting.\nAquatic species rarely display any particular specializations for jumping. Those that are good jumpers are primarily adapted for speed, and execute moving jumps by simply swimming to the surface at a high velocity. A few primarily aquatic species that can jump while on land, such as mud skippers, do so via a flick of the tail.\nLimb morphology.\nIn terrestrial animals, the primary propulsive structure is the legs, though a few species use their tails. Typical characteristics of jumping species include long legs, large leg muscles, and additional limb elements.\nLong legs increase the time and distance over which a jumping animal can push against the substrate, thus allowing more power and faster, farther jumps. Large leg muscles can generate greater force, resulting in improved jumping performance. In addition to elongated leg elements, many jumping animals have modified foot and ankle bones that are elongated and possess additional joints, effectively adding more segments to the limb and even more length.\nFrogs are an excellent example of all three trends: frog legs can be nearly twice the body length, leg muscles may account for up to twenty percent of body weight, and they have not only lengthened the foot, shin and thigh, but extended the ankle bones into another limb joint and similarly extended the hip bones and gained mobility at the sacrum for a second 'extra joint'. As a result, frogs are the undisputed champion jumpers of vertebrates, leaping over fifty body lengths, a distance of more than eight feet.\nPower amplification through stored energy.\nGrasshoppers use elastic energy storage to increase jumping distance. Although power output is a principal determinant of jump distance, physiological constraints limit muscle power to approximately 375 Watts per kilogram of muscle. To overcome this limitation, grasshoppers anchor their legs via an internal \"catch mechanism\" while their muscles stretch an elastic apodeme (similar to a vertebrate tendon). When the catch is released, the apodeme rapidly releases its energy. Because the apodeme releases energy more quickly than muscle, its power output far exceeds that of the muscle that produced the energy.\nThis is analogous to a human throwing an arrow by hand versus using a bow; the use of elastic storage (the bow) allows the muscles to operate closer to isometric on the force-velocity curve. This enables the muscles to do work over a longer time and thus produce more energy than they otherwise could, while the elastic element releases that work faster than the muscles can. The use of elastic energy storage has been found in jumping mammals as well as in frogs, with commensurate increases in power ranging from two to seven times that of equivalent muscle mass.\nClassification.\nOne way to classify jumping is by the manner of foot transfer. In this classification system, five basic jump forms are distinguished:\nLeaping gaits, which are distinct from running gaits (see Locomotion), include cantering, galloping, and stotting or pronging. Some sources also distinguish bounding as a cyclical motion of repeated jumps, used to maintain energy from one jump to the next.\nHeight-enhancing devices and techniques.\nThe height of a jump may be increased by using a trampoline or by converting horizontal velocity into vertical velocity with the aid of a device such as a half pipe.\nVarious exercises can be used to increase an athlete's vertical jumping height. One category of such exercises\u2014plyometrics\u2014employs repetition of discrete jumping-related movements to increase speed, agility, and power.\nIt has been shown in research that children who are more physically active display more proficient jumping (along with other basic motor skill) patterns.\nIt is also noted that jumping development in children has a direct relationship with age. As children grow older, it is seen that their jumping abilities in all forms also increase. Jumping development is more easily identifiable in children rather than adults due to the fact that there are less physical differences at a younger age. Adults of the same age may be vastly different in terms of physicality and athleticism making it difficult to see how age affects jumping ability.\nIn 2021, researchers incorporated ratchets into a robot design and created a robot capable of jumping over thirty meters vertically.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43610", "revid": "50014652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43610", "title": "Grease", "text": "Grease may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43611", "revid": "2970597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43611", "title": "Hari", "text": "One of the names of the Hindu deity Vishnu\nHari () is among the primary epithets of the Hindu preserver deity Vishnu, meaning 'the one who takes away' (sins). It refers to the one who removes darkness and illusion, the one who removes all obstacles to spiritual progress. \nThe name Hari also appears as the 650th name of Vishnu in the Vishnu Sahasranama of the Mahabharata and is considered to be of great significance in Vaishnavism.\nEtymology.\nThe Sanskrit word \"\u0939\u0930\u093f\" (Hari) is derived from the Proto-Indo-European root \"*\"\u01f5\u02b0el-\" to shine; to flourish; green; yellow\" which also gave rise to the Persian terms \"zar\" 'gold', Greek \"khloros\" 'green', Slavic \"zelen\" 'green' and \"zolto\" 'gold', as well as the English words \"yellow\" and \"gold\".\nThe same root occurs in other Sanskrit words like \"haridr\u0101\", 'turmeric', named for its yellow color.\nIn Hinduism, beginning with Adi Sankara's commentary on the Vishnu sahasranama, \"hari\" became etymologized as derived from the verbal root \"h\u1e5b\" \"to grab, seize, steal\", in the context of Vaishnavism interpreted as \"to take away or remove evil or sin\", and the name of Vishnu rendered as \"he who destroys samsara\", which is the entanglement in the cycle of birth and death, along with ignorance, its cause; compare \"hara\" as a name of Shiva, translated as \"seizer\" or \"destroyer\".\nIn Indian religions.\nIn Sikhism.\nThe name \"\u0a39\u0a30\u0a3f\" (Hari) is frequently used as a name for Waheguru in the \"Sri Guru Granth Sahib\":\u0a39\u0a30\u0a3f \u0a39\u0a30\u0a3f \u0a39\u0a30\u0a3f \u0a39\u0a30\u0a3f \u0a28\u0a3e\u0a2e\u0a41 \u0a39\u0a48 \u0a17\u0a41\u0a30\u0a2e\u0a41\u0a16\u0a3f \u0a2a\u0a3e\u0a35\u0a48 \u0a15\u0a4b\u0a07 \u0965\nHari, Hari, Hari, Hari is the Name (of the Lord); rare are those who, as Gurmukh, obtain it. (SGGS, Ang.1313)In the \"Varan Bhai Gurdas\", an early explanation and interpretation of Sikh theology, Bhai Gurdas also associates the name \"\u0a39\u0a30\u0a3f\" (Hari) in the form of Hari Krishan in the Dwapur Yuga with the letter \"\u0a39\" (h) in \"\u0a35\u0a3e\u0a39\u0a3f\u0a17\u0a41\u0a30\u0a42\" (Waheguru).\nHowever, in the context of the \"Sri Guru Granth Sahib\", the name \"Hari\" refers to the one monotheistic God of Sikhism, as similar to \"Hari\" is used in Vaishnavism for Parabrahman as well. However Sarabloh Granth and Dasam Granth call Krishna as Hari several times. Krishna creates several Krishna during his avatar during Ras Leela which is what Guru Ram Das mentioned in Adi Granth that Hari himself creates several Kanha for the Gopis and he himself becomes those Gopis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43613", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43613", "title": "Pension", "text": "Retirement fund\nA pension (; from la\u00a0'payment') is a fund into which amounts are paid regularly during an individual's working career, and from which periodic payments are made to support the person's retirement from work. A pension may be either a \"defined benefit plan\", where defined periodic payments are made in retirement and the contributions to the pension are adjusted to support these defined retirement payments, or a \"defined contribution plan\", under which defined amounts are paid in during working life, and the retirement payments are whatever can be afforded from the fund.\nPensions should not be confused with severance pay; the former is usually paid in regular amounts for life after retirement, while the latter is typically paid as a fixed amount after involuntary termination of employment before retirement.\nThe terms \"retirement plan\" and \"superannuation\" tend to refer to a pension granted upon retirement of the individual; the terminology varies between countries. Retirement plans may be set up by employers, insurance companies, the government, or other institutions such as employer associations or trade unions. Called \"retirement plans\" in the United States, they are commonly known as \"pension schemes\" in the United Kingdom and Ireland and \"superannuation plans\" (or \"super\") in Australia and New Zealand. \nA pension created by an employer for the benefit of an employee is commonly referred to as an occupational or employer pension. Labor unions, the government, or other organizations may also fund pensions. Occupational pensions are a form of deferred compensation, usually advantageous to employee and employer for tax reasons. Many pensions also contain an additional insurance aspect, since they often will pay benefits to survivors or disabled beneficiaries. Other vehicles (certain lottery payouts, for example, or an annuity) may provide a similar stream of payments. Individuals without access to employer-sponsored pensions sometimes use annuities to create a guaranteed income stream similar to a traditional pension.\nThe common use of the term \"pension\" is to describe the payments a person receives upon retirement, usually under predetermined legal or contractual terms. A recipient of a retirement pension is known as a \"pensioner\" or \"retiree\".\nTypes.\nEmployment-based pensions.\nA retirement plan is an arrangement to provide people with an income during retirement when they are no longer earning a steady income from employment. Often retirement plans require both the employer and employee to contribute money to a fund during their employment in order to receive defined benefits upon retirement. It is a tax deferred savings vehicle that allows for the tax-free accumulation of a fund for later use as retirement income. Funding can be provided in other ways, such as from labor unions, government agencies, or self-funded schemes. Pension plans are therefore a form of \"deferred compensation\". A SSAS is a type of employment-based Pension in the UK. The 401(k) is the iconic self-funded retirement plan that many Americans rely on for much of their retirement income; these sometimes include money from an employer, but are usually mostly or entirely funded by the individual using an elaborate scheme where money from the employee's paycheck is withheld, at their direction, to be contributed by their employer to the employee's plan. This money can be tax-deferred or not, depending on the exact nature of the plan.\nMilitary.\nSome countries also grant pensions to military veterans. Military pensions are overseen by the government; an example of a standing agency is the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. \"Ad hoc\" committees may also be formed to investigate specific tasks, such as the U.S. Commission on Veterans' Pensions (commonly known as the \"Bradley Commission\") in 1955\u201356. Pensions may extend past the death of the veteran himself, continuing to be paid to the widow.\nIn the U.S., retired military receive a \"military retirement pay\", not called a \"pension\" as they can be recalled to active duty at any time. Military retirement pay is calculated on number of years on active duty, final pay grade and the retirement system in place when they entered service. Members awarded the Medal of Honor qualify for a separate stipend. Retirement pay for military members in the reserve and US National Guard is based on a point system.\nState pension.\nMany countries have created schemas for their citizens and residents to provide income when they retire (or in some cases become disabled). Typically this requires payments throughout the citizen's working life in order to qualify for benefits later on. A basic state pension is a \"contribution based\" benefit, and depends on an individual's contribution history. For examples, see National Insurance in the UK, or Social Security in the United States of America.\nSocial pensions.\nSocial pensions are intended to prevent economic deprivation at old age. Over 80 countries have social pensions. Examples of universal pensions include New Zealand Superannuation and the Basic Retirement Pension of Mauritius. Most social pensions are means tested, such as Supplemental Security Income in the United States of America or the \"older person's grant\" in South Africa.\nDisability pensions.\nSome pension plans will provide for members in the event they suffer a disability. This may take the form of early entry into a retirement plan for a disabled member below the normal retirement age.\nDefined benefit plans.\nA defined benefit (DB) pension plan is a plan in which workers accrue pension rights during their time at a firm and upon retirement the firm pays them a benefit that is a function of that worker's tenure at the firm and of their earnings. In other words, a DB plan is a plan in which the benefit on retirement is determined by a set formula, rather than depending on investment returns. Government pensions such as Social Security in the United States are a type of defined benefit pension plan. Traditionally, defined benefit plans for employers have been administered by institutions which exist specifically for that purpose, by large businesses, or, for government workers, by the government itself. A traditional form of defined benefit plan is the \"final salary\" plan, under which the pension paid is equal to the number of years worked, multiplied by the member's salary at retirement, multiplied by a factor known as the \"accrual rate\". The final accrued amount is available as a monthly pension or a lump sum, but usually monthly.\nIn the US, 26 U.S.C.\u00a0https:// specifies a defined benefit plan to be any pension plan that is not a defined contribution plan (see below) where a defined contribution plan is any plan with individual accounts. A traditional pension plan that \"defines\" a \"benefit\" for an employee upon that employee's retirement is a defined benefit plan. In the U.S., corporate defined benefit plans, along with many other types of defined benefit plans, are governed by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA).\nIn the United Kingdom, benefits are typically indexed for inflation (known as Retail Prices Index (RPI)) as required by law for registered pension plans. Inflation during an employee's retirement affects the purchasing power of the pension; the higher the inflation rate, the lower the purchasing power of a fixed annual pension. This effect can be mitigated by providing annual increases to the pension at the rate of inflation (usually capped, for instance at 5% in any given year). This method is advantageous for the employee since it stabilizes the purchasing power of pensions to some extent.\nIf the pension plan allows for early retirement, payments are often reduced to recognize that the retirees will receive the payouts for longer periods of time. In the United States, under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, any reduction factor less than or equal to the actuarial early retirement reduction factor is acceptable.\nMany DB plans include early retirement provisions to encourage employees to retire early, before the attainment of normal retirement age. Companies would rather hire younger employees at lower wages. Some of those provisions come in the form of additional \"temporary\" or \"supplemental benefits\", which are payable to a certain age, usually before attaining normal retirement age.\nDue to changes in pensions over the years, many pension systems, including those in Alabama, California, Indiana, and New York, have shifted to a tiered system. For a simplified example, suppose there are three employees that pay into a state pension system: Sam, Veronica, and Jessica. The state pension system has three tiers: Tier I, Tier II, and Tier III. These three tiers are based on the employee's hire date (i.e. Tier I covers 1 January 1980 (and before) to 1 January 1995, Tier II 2 January 1995 to 1 January 2010, and Tier III 1 January 2010 to present) and have different benefit provisions (e.g. Tier I employees can retire at age 50 with 80% benefits or wait until 55 with full benefits, Tier II employees can retire at age 55 with 80% benefits or wait until 60 for full benefits, Tier III employees can retire at age 65 with full benefits). Therefore, Sam, hired in June 1983, would be subject to the provisions of the Tier I scheme, whereas Veronica, hired in August 1995, would be permitted to retire at age 60 with full benefits and Jessica, hired in December 2014, would not be able to retire with full benefits until she became 65.\nCriticisms.\nTraditional defined benefit plan designs (because of their typically flat accrual rate and the decreasing time for interest discounting as people get closer to retirement age) tend to exhibit a J-shaped accrual pattern of benefits, where the present value of benefits grows quite slowly early in an employee's career and accelerates significantly in mid-career: in other words it costs more to fund the pension for older employees than for younger ones (an \"age bias\"). Defined benefit pensions tend to be less portable than defined contribution plans, even if the plan allows a lump sum cash benefit at termination. The open-ended nature of these risks to the employer is the reason given by many employers for switching from defined benefit to defined contribution plans over recent years. The risks to the employer can sometimes be mitigated by discretionary elements in the benefit structure, for instance in the rate of increase granted on accrued pensions, both before and after retirement.\nThe age bias, reduced portability and open ended risk make defined benefit plans better suited to large employers with less mobile workforces, such as the public sector (which has open-ended support from taxpayers). This coupled with a lack of foresight on the employers part means a large proportion of the workforce are kept in the dark over future investment schemes.\nDefined benefit plans are sometimes criticized as being paternalistic as they enable employers or plan trustees to make decisions about the type of benefits and family structures and lifestyles of their employees. However they are typically more valuable than defined contribution plans in most circumstances and for most employees (mainly because the employer tends to pay higher contributions than under defined contribution plans), so such criticism is rarely harsh.\nThe \"cost\" of a defined benefit plan is not easily calculated, and requires an actuary or actuarial software. However, even with the best of tools, the cost of a defined benefit plan will always be an estimate based on economic and financial assumptions. These assumptions include the average retirement age and lifespan of the employees, the returns to be earned by the pension plan's investments and any additional taxes or levies, such as those required by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation in the U.S. So, for this arrangement, the benefit is relatively secure but the contribution is uncertain even when estimated by a professional. This has serious cost considerations and risks for the employer offering a pension plan.\nOne of the growing concerns with defined benefit plans is that the level of future obligations will outpace the value of assets held by the plan (Unfunded mandate). This \"underfunding\" dilemma can be faced by any type of defined benefit plan, private or public, but it is most acute in governmental and other public plans where political pressures and less rigorous accounting standards can result in excessive commitments to employees and retirees, but inadequate contributions. Many states and municipalities across the United States of America and Canada now face chronic pension crises.\nDefined contribution plans.\nA defined contribution (DC) plan, is a pension plan where employers set aside a certain proportion (i.e. contributions) of a worker's earnings (such as 5%) in an investment account, and the worker receives this savings and any accumulated investment earnings upon retirement. These contributions are paid into an individual account for each member. The contributions are invested, for example in the stock market, and the returns on the investment (which may be positive or negative) are credited to the individual's account. Defined contribution plans have become widespread all over the world in recent years, and are now the dominant form of plan in the private sector in many countries. For example, the number of defined benefit plans in the U.S. has been steadily declining, as more and more employers see pension contributions as a large expense avoidable by disbanding the defined benefit plan and instead offering a defined contribution plan.\nMoney contributed can either be from employee salary deferral or from employer contributions. The portability of defined contribution pensions is legally no different from the portability of defined benefit plans. However, because of the cost of administration and ease of determining the plan sponsor's liability for defined contribution plans (you do not need to pay an actuary to calculate the lump sum equivalent that you do for defined benefit plans) in practice, defined contribution plans have become generally portable.\nIn a defined contribution plan, investment risk and investment rewards are assumed by each individual/employee/retiree and not by the sponsor/employer, and these risks may be substantial. In addition, participants do not necessarily purchase annuities with their savings upon retirement, and bear the risk of outliving their assets. (In the United Kingdom, for instance, it is a legal requirement to use the bulk of the fund to purchase an annuity.)\nThe \"cost\" of a defined contribution plan is readily calculated, but the benefit from a defined contribution plan depends upon the account balance at the time an employee is looking to use the assets. So, for this arrangement, the \"contribution is known\" but the \"benefit is unknown\" (until calculated).\nDespite the fact that the participant in a defined contribution plan typically has control over investment decisions, the plan sponsor retains a significant degree of fiduciary responsibility over investment of plan assets, including the selection of investment options and administrative providers.\nExamples.\nIn the United States, the legal definition of a defined contribution plan is a plan providing for an individual account for each participant, and for benefits based solely on the amount contributed to the account, plus or minus income, gains, expenses and losses allocated to the account (see 26 U.S.C.\u00a0https://). Examples of defined contribution plans in the United States include individual retirement accounts (IRAs) and 401(k) plans. In such plans, the employee is responsible, to one degree or another, for selecting the types of investments toward which the funds in the retirement plan are allocated. This may range from choosing one of a small number of pre-determined mutual funds to selecting individual stocks or other financial assets. Most self-directed retirement plans are characterized by certain tax advantages, and some provide for a portion of the employee's contributions to be matched by the employer. In exchange, the funds in such plans may not be withdrawn by the investor prior to reaching a certain age\u2014typically the year the employee reaches 59.5 years old (with a small number of exceptions)\u2014without incurring a substantial penalty.\nAdvocates of defined contribution plans point out that each employee has the ability to tailor the investment portfolio to his or her individual needs and financial situation, including the choice of how much to contribute, if anything at all. However, others state that these apparent advantages could also hinder some workers who might not possess the financial savvy to choose the correct investment vehicles or have the discipline to voluntarily contribute money to retirement accounts.\nIn the US, defined contribution plans are subject to IRS limits on how much can be contributed, known as the section 415 limit. In 2009, the total deferral amount, including employee contribution plus employer contribution, was limited to $49,000 or 100% of compensation, whichever is less. The employee-only limit in 2009 was $16,500 with a $5,500 catch-up. These numbers usually increase each year and are indexed to compensate for the effects of inflation. For 2015, the limits were raised to $53,000 and $18,000, respectively.\nExamples of defined contribution pension schemes in other countries are, the UK's personal pensions and proposed National Employment Savings Trust (NEST), Germany's Riester plans, Australia's Superannuation system and New Zealand's KiwiSaver scheme. Individual pension savings plans also exist in Austria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Greece, Finland, Ireland, Netherlands, Slovenia and Spain.\nNotional Defined Contributions are defined contribution plans where contributions are tracked as a notional amount for each individual, for example in Italy, Latvia, Poland and Sweden.\nRisk sharing pensions.\nIn collective risk sharing schemes members pool their contributions and to a greater or less extent share the investment and longevity risk. There are multiple naming conventions for these plans reflecting the fact that the future payouts are a \"target\" or \"ambition\" of the plan sponsor rather than a guarantee, common naming conventions include: \nLife annuity.\nOn retirement, the member's account can be used to purchase an life annuity which then provides a regular pension income until death. Life annuity insures against the risk of longevity and outliving retirement savings. Due to generally longer female life expectancy women have to contribute more to pensions to reach the same pension annuities in case of identical retirement age.\nFunded.\nIn a funded pension plan, contributions are invested in a fund towards meeting the future pension benefits. All plans must be funded in some way, so this type of plan is more accurately known as pre-funded or fully-funded. The future returns on the investments, and the future benefits to be paid, are not known in advance, so there is no guarantee that a given level of contributions will be enough to meet the benefits. Typically, the contributions to be paid are regularly reviewed in a valuation of the plan's assets and liabilities, carried out by an actuary to ensure that the pension fund will meet future payment obligations. This means that in a defined benefit pension, investment risk and investment rewards are typically assumed by the sponsor/employer and not by the individual. If a plan is not well-funded, the plan sponsor may not have the financial resources to continue funding the plan.\nOccupational pensions are typically provided through employment agreements between workers and employers, and their financing structure must meet legislative requirements. In common-law jurisdictions, the law requires that pensions be pre-funded in trusts, with a range of requirements to ensure the trustees act in the best interests of the beneficiaries. These jurisdictions account for over 80% of assets held by private pension plans around the world. Of the $50.7 trillion of global assets in 2019, $32.2T were in U.S. plans, the next largest being the U.K. ($3.2T), Canada ($2.8T), Australia ($1.9T), Singapore ($0.3T), Hong Kong and Ireland (each roughly $0.2T), New Zealand, India, Kenya, Nigeria, Jamaica, etc.\nCivil-law jurisdictions with statutory trust vehicles for pensions include the Netherlands ($1.8T), Japan ($1.7T), Switzerland ($1.1T), Denmark ($0.8T), Sweden, Brazil and S. Korea (each $0.5T), Germany, France, Israel, P.R. China, Mexico, Italy, Chile, Belgium, Spain and Finland (each roughly $0.2T), etc. Without the vast body of common law to draw upon, statutory trusts tend to be more uniform and tightly regulated.\nCanadians have the option to open a registered retirement savings plan (RRSP), as well as a range of employee and state pension programs. This plan allows contributions to this account to be marked as un-taxable income and remain un-taxed until withdrawal. Most countries' governments will provide advice on pension schemes.\nSeveral countries have hybrid systems which are partially funded. Spain set up the Social Security Reserve Fund and France set up the Pensions Reserve Fund; in Canada the wage-based retirement plan (CPP) is partially funded, with assets managed by the CPP Investment Board while the U.S. Social Security system is partially funded by investment in special U.S. Treasury Bonds.\nPay-as-you-go.\nIn an unfunded or pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) pension plan current pension benefits are paid from current pension contributions. Pension arrangements provided by the state in many countries in the world are at least partially unfunded, with benefits paid directly from current workers' contributions and taxes. This method of financing is known as pay-as-you-go, or PAYGO. The social security systems of many European countries are unfunded, having current benefits paid directly out of current taxes and social security contributions.\nSocial and state pensions depend largely upon legislation and future taxes for their sustainability. Some have identified funds, but these hold essentially government bonds\u2014a form of IOU.\nSome countries, such as Germany, France, Italy and Spain, have very little saved pension assets and depend the pay-as-you-go approach. Nevertheless, in terms of typical net income replacement in retirement, these countries rank well relative to those with pension assets. The pay-as-you-go financing depends on intergenerational solidarity and the future dependency ratio.\nIn Pay-as-you-go pension systems working adults pay for the current pensions of their parents and grandparents generations, while the pensions of people above retirement age are paid by child and grandchild generations. \nActuarial fairness.\nFor pension schemes with actuarial fairness the discounted total of contributions for each individual is equal to the discounted total of expected pension benefits received. Pensions can redistribute within a generation and between generations. \nUnderfunding.\nAnother growing challenge is the recent trend of states and businesses in the United States purposely under-funding their pension schemes in order to push the costs onto the federal government. For example, in 2009, the majority of states have unfunded pension liabilities exceeding all reported state debt. Bradley Belt, former executive director of the PBGC (the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, the federal agency that insures private-sector defined-benefit pension plans in the event of bankruptcy), testified before a Congressional hearing in October 2004, \"I am particularly concerned with the temptation, and indeed, growing tendency, to use the pension insurance fund as a means to obtain an interest-free and risk-free loan to enable companies to restructure. Unfortunately, the current calculation appears to be that shifting pension liabilities onto other premium payers or potentially taxpayers is the path of least resistance rather than a last resort.\" Challenges have further been increased by the post-2007 credit crunch. Total funding of the nation's 100 largest corporate pension plans fell by $303bn in 2008, going from a $86bn surplus at the end of 2007 to a $217bn deficit at the end of 2008. \nDependency ratio.\nA growing challenge for pay-as-you-go pensions is the dependency ratio. As birth rates in most countries drop and life expectancy increases, an ever-larger portion of the population is elderly. This leaves fewer workers for each retired person. In many developed countries this means that government and public sector pensions could potentially be a drag on their economies unless pension benefits are reduced or pension contribution are increased. Higher old-age dependency ratio can result in a pensions crisis.\nEconomic challenges.\nLow interest rates can make it more difficult for pension funds to generate returns on their investments, which can in turn lead to lower benefits for pensioners. In addition, economic downturns can lead to higher unemployment rates, which can result in lower contributions to pension plans. The share of people who don't contribute or contribute less to pensions can rise, for example in the gig economy.\nBalancing pension funding.\nBalancing pension funding can include a decrease of real pensions, increases in pension contributions, reducing the expected years in retirement by increasing the retirement age or reforming the pension system. Low total fertility rates and high old-age dependency ratios lead to forecasts of further pension reforms. Some software allow to predict the effect of pension policies. The electoral costs of pension reforms can depend on financial literacy. \nIncrease of pension contributions.\nThis approach involves the increase of employee or employer pension contributions. This decreases the employee's disposable income and the rise of the direct labor cost degrades the labour demand and increases the costs of production, reducing competitivity. \nDecrease of real pensions.\nOne pension reform approach is to decrease the amount of real pensions paid to retirees or to decrease the length of pensions by increasing the retirement age closer to the life expectancy.\nBalancing total fertility rate.\nAnother pension reform approach is changing the pension system to be intrinsically balanced regardless of the total fertility rate. One proposed pension system extends the overlapping generations model to balance the life-cycle of human capital formation through parenting and pensions.\nThe size of pension contributions can depend on the children's pension contributions, which balance out the pension system.\nEffects.\nRisk and responsibility.\nThe benefits of defined benefit and defined contribution plans differ based on the degree of financial security provided to the retiree. With defined benefit plans, retirees receive a guaranteed payout at retirement, determined by a fixed formula based on factors such as salary and years of service. The risk and responsibility of ensuring sufficient funding through retirement is borne by the employer or plan managers. This type of plan provides a level of financial security for retirees, ensuring they will receive a specific amount of income throughout their retirement years. However this income is not usually guaranteed to keep up with inflation, so its purchasing power may decline over the years.\nOn the other hand, defined contribution plans are dependent upon the amount of money contributed and the performance of the investment vehicles used. Employees are responsible for ensuring that their contributions are sufficient to provide for their retirement needs, and they face the risk of market fluctuations that could reduce their retirement savings. However, defined contribution plans provide more flexibility for employees, who can choose how much to contribute and how to invest their funds.\nHybrid plans, such as cash balance and pension equity plans, combine features of both defined benefit and defined contribution plans. These plans have become increasingly popular in the U.S. since the 1990s. Cash balance plans, for example, provide a guaranteed benefit like a defined benefit plan, but the benefit is expressed as an account balance, like a defined contribution plan. Pension equity plans are a type of cash balance plan that credits employee accounts with a percentage of their pay each year, similar to a defined contribution plan.\nIncentives for parental investment.\nPay-as-you-go pensions can misalign incentives between parental investment and elderly care. According to the old-age-security hypothesis, the elderly care by the child generation can offset the cost of raising a child.\nGender pension gap.\nThe gender pension gap, the difference between genders in average pensions, varies by country. In OECD countries the gender pension gap varied from 3% in Estonia to 47% in Japan according to data between 2013 and 2018. Eastern European countries tend to have a smaller pension gender gap due to less pronounced gender differences in part-time jobs. Possible contributions to the pension gender gap include gender pay gaps, differences in employment rates, parental leave, unpaid care work and gender roles. \nYears in retirement.\nThere is a gender gap in expected years in retirement with 22.8 years for women and 18.4 years for men on average (OECD, 2022), contributed by sex differences in life expectancy. The difference in years in retirement contribute to gender-differentiated pension rates.\nPillars.\nMost national pension systems are based on multi-pillar schemes to ensure greater flexibility and financial security to the old in contrast to reliance on one single system. In general, there are three main functions of pension systems: saving, redistribution and insurance functions. According to the report by the World Bank titled \"Averting the Old Age Crisis\", countries should consider separating the saving and redistributive functions, when creating pension systems, and placing them under different financing and managerial arrangements into three main pillars.\nThe Pillars of Old Age Income Security:\nHowever, this typology is rather a prescriptive than a descriptive one and most specialists usually allocate all public programmes to the first pillar, including earnings-related public schemes, which does not fit the original definition of the first pillar.\nZero pillar.\nThis non-contributory pillar was introduced only recently, aiming to alleviate poverty among the elderly, and permitting fiscal conditions. It is usually financed by the state and is in form of basic pension schemes or social assistance. In some typologies, the zero and the first pillar overlap.\nFirst pillar.\nPillar 1, sometimes referred to as \"the public pillar\" or \"first-tier\", answers the aim to prevent the poverty of the elderly, provide some absolute, minimum income based on solidarity and replace some portion of lifetime pre-retirement income. It is financed on a redistributive principle without constructing large reserves and takes the form of mandatory contributions linked to earnings such as minimum pensions within earnings-related plans, or separate targeted programs for retirement income. These are provided by the public sector and can be pay-as-you-go financed.\nSecond pillar.\nPillar 2, or \"the second tier,\" built on the basis of defined benefit and defined contribution plans with independent investment management, aims to protect the elderly from relative poverty and provides benefits supplementary to the income from the first pillar to contributors. Therefore, the second pillar fulfils the insurance function. In addition to DB's and DC's, other types of pension schemes of the second pillar are \"the contingent accounts\", known also as Notional Defined Contributions (implemented for example in Italy, Latvia, Poland and Sweden) or \"occupational pension schemes\" (applied, for instance, in Estonia, Germany and Norway).\nThird pillar.\nThe third tier consists of voluntary contributions in various different forms, including occupational or private saving plans, and products for individuals.\nFourth Pillar.\nThe fourth pillar is usually excluded from classifications since it does not usually have a legal basis and consists of \"informal support (such as family), other formal social programs (such as health care or housing), and other individual assets (such as home ownership and reverse mortgages).\"\nThese five pillars and their main criteria are summarised in the table below by Holzmann and Hinz.\nMultipillar Pension Taxonomy: \nHistory.\nIn the classical world, Romans offered veteran legionnaires (centurions) military pensions, typically in the form of a land grant or a special, often semi-public, appointment. Augustus Caesar (63 BC\u2013AD 14) introduced one of the first recognisable pension schemes in history with his military treasury. In 13 BC Augustus created a pension plan in which retired soldiers were to receive a pension (of minimum 3,000 denarii in a lump sum, which at the time represented around 13 times a legionnaires' annual salary) after 16 years of service in a legion and four years in the military reserves. The retiring soldiers were in the beginning paid from general revenues and later from a special fund (\"aeririum militare\") established by Augustus in 5 or 6 AD. This was in an attempt to quell a rebellion within the Roman Empire which was facing militaristic turmoil at the time.\nWidows' funds were among the first pension type arrangement to appear. For example, Duke Ernest the Pious of Gotha in Germany founded a widows' fund for clergy in 1645 and another for teachers in 1662. \"Various schemes of provision for ministers' widows were then established throughout Europe at about the start of the eighteenth century, some based on a single premium others based on yearly premiums to be distributed as benefits in the same year.\"\nModern forms of pension systems were first introduced in the late 19th century. Germany was the first country to introduce a universal pension program for employees.\nGermany.\nAs part of Otto von Bismarck's social legislation, the Old Age and Disability Insurance Bill was enacted and implemented in 1889. The Old Age Pension program, financed by a tax on workers, was originally designed to provide a pension annuity for workers who reached the age of 70 years, though this was lowered to 65 years in 1916. Unlike accident insurance and health insurance, this program covered industrial, agrarian, artisans and servants from the start and was supervised directly by the state.\nGermany's mandatory state pension provisions are based on the pay-as-you-go (or redistributive) model. Funds paid in by contributors (employees and employers) are not saved and neither invested but are used to pay current pension obligations.\nIreland.\nThere is a history of pensions in Ireland that can be traced back to Brehon Law imposing a legal responsibility on the kin group to take care of its members who were aged, blind, deaf, sick or insane. For a discussion on pension funds and early Irish law, see F Kelly, \"A Guide to Early Irish Law\" (Dublin, Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies, 1988). In 2010, there were over 76,291 pension schemes operating in Ireland.\nIn January 2018, a \"total contributions approach\" qualification system was announced, effective from March 2018, for those pensioners who reached state pension age after 1 September 2012. The new system requires a person to have 40 years' worth or contributions to receive the full rate and a minimum total period of paid contributions of 520 weeks with ten years' full coverage. The State Pension is payable from age 66 with the age being increased to 67 in 2021 and 68 in 2028.\nSpain.\nThe history of pensions in Spain began in 1908 with the creation of the National Insurance Institute (INP) and the design of old-age pensions in a free affiliation scheme subsidised by the State. Although in 1919 the pension system was made compulsory and in 1931 an attempt was made to unify the different branches of insurance, the INP failed to ensure that pensions acted as immediate remedial measures for the old-age problem that was evident at the time. Public intervention in social insurance in Spain during these years was greatly determined by the failure of private initiatives such as the Savings and Pension Fund of Barcelona.\nThe Mandatory Workers' Retirement (ROO) was the first compulsory social insurance in Spain and was aimed at wage earners between the ages of 16 and 65 who earned no more than 4,000 pesetas a year. This was followed by the creation of the Social Security system in 1963, early retirement and the possibility of partial retirement in 1978 and the special regime for self-employed workers in 1985.\nVarious reforms and adjustments have been made over time, such as the 1995 reform that established the sustainability factor and the 2011 reform that raised the retirement age from 65 to 67. Currently, the pension system in Spain is still under debate to ensure its long-term sustainability with proposals such as the implementation of private pension plans and the revision of the conditions of access to public pensions.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe decline of Feudal systems and formation of national states throughout Europe led to the reemergence of standing armies with their allegiances to states. Consequently, the sixteenth century in England marked the establishment of standardised systems of military pensions. During its 1592\u201393 session, Parliament established disability payments or \"reliefe for Souldiours ... [who] adventured their lives and lost their limbs or disabled their bodies\" in the service of the Crown. This pension was again generous by contemporary standards, even though annual pensions were not to exceed ten pounds for \"private soldiers\", or twenty pounds for a \"lieutenant\".\nThe beginning of the modern state pension came with the Old Age Pensions Act 1908, that provided 5 shillings (\u00a30.25) a week for those over 70 whose annual means do not exceed \u00a331.50. It coincided with the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws and Relief of Distress 1905-09 and was the first step in the Liberal welfare reforms to the completion of a system of social security, with unemployment and health insurance through the National Insurance Act 1911.\nIn 1921, The Finance Act introduced tax relief on pension contributions in line with savings and life insurance. As a consequence, the overall size of the fund was increased since the income tax was now added to the pension as well.\nThen in 1978, The State Earnings-Related Pension Scheme (SERPS) replaced The Graduated Pension Scheme from 1959, providing a pension related to earnings, in addition to the basic state pension. Employees and employers had the possibility to contribute to it between 6 April 1978 and 5 April 2002, when it was replaced by the State Second Pension.\nAfter the Second World War, the National Insurance Act 1946 completed universal coverage of social security, introducing a State Pension for everybody on a contributory basis, with men being eligible at 65 and women at 60. The National Assistance Act 1948 (11 &amp; 12 Geo. 6. c. 29) formally abolished the poor law, and gave a minimum income to those not paying National Insurance.\nThe early-1990s established the existing framework for state pensions in the Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act 1992 and Superannuation and other Funds (Validation) Act 1992. Following the highly respected Goode Report, occupational pensions were covered by comprehensive statutes in the Pension Schemes Act 1993 and the Pensions Act 1995.\nIn 2002, the Pensions Commission was established as a cross-party body to review pensions in the United Kingdom. The first Act to follow was the Pensions Act 2004 that updated regulation by replacing OPRA with the Pensions Regulator and relaxing the stringency of minimum funding requirements for pensions while ensuring protection for insolvent businesses. In a major update of the state pension, the Pensions Act 2007, which aligned and raised retirement ages. Following that, the Pensions Act 2008 has set up automatic enrolment for occupational pensions, and a public competitor designed to be a low-cost and efficient fund manager, called the National Employment Savings Trust (or \"Nest\").\nUnited States.\nThe first \"American\" pensions came in 1636, when Plymouth Colony, and subsequently, other colonies such as Virginia, Maryland (1670s) and NY (1690s), offered the first colonial pension. The general assembly of the Virginia Company followed by approving a resolution known as Virginia Act IX of 1644 stating that \"...all hurt or maymed men be relieved and provided for by the several counties, where such men reside or inhabit.\" Furthermore, during King Philip's War, otherwise known as the First Indian War, this Act was expanded to widows and orphans in Virginia's Act of 1675.\nPublic pensions got their start with various 'promises', informal and legislated, made to veterans of the Revolutionary War and, more extensively, the Civil War. They were expanded greatly, and began to be offered by a number of state and local governments during the early Progressive Era in the late nineteenth century.\nFederal civilian pensions were offered under the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS), formed in 1920. CSRS provided retirement, disability and survivor benefits for most civilian employees in the U.S. Federal government, until the creation of a new Federal agency, the Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS), in 1987.\nPension plans became popular in the United States during World War II, when wage freezes prohibited outright increases in workers' pay. The defined benefit plan had been the most popular and common type of retirement plan in the United States through the 1980s; since that time, defined contribution plans have become the more common type of retirement plan in the United States and many other western countries.\nIn April 2012, the Northern Mariana Islands Retirement Fund filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. The retirement fund is a defined benefit type pension plan and was only partially funded by the government, with only $268.4 million in assets and $911 million in liabilities. The plan experienced low investment returns and a benefit structure that had been increased without raises in funding.\nAccording to \"Pensions and Investments\", this is \"apparently the first\" U.S. public pension plan to declare bankruptcy.\nSee also.\nSpecific:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43614", "revid": "43066271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43614", "title": "Arsinoe", "text": "Arsinoe (), meaning \"elevated mind\", may refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43615", "revid": "50882363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43615", "title": "Pension fund", "text": "Program, fund, or scheme that provides retirement income\nA pension fund, also known as a superannuation fund in some countries, is any program, fund, or scheme which provides retirement income. The U.S. Government's Social Security Trust Fund, which oversees $2.57 trillion in assets, is the world's largest public pension fund. Pension funds typically have large amounts of money to invest and are the major investors in listed and private companies. They are especially important to the stock market where large institutional investors dominate. The largest 300 pension funds collectively hold about USD$6 trillion in assets. In 2012, PricewaterhouseCoopers estimated that pension funds worldwide hold over $33.9 trillion in assets (and were expected to grow to more than $56 trillion by 2020), the largest for any category of institutional investor ahead of mutual funds, insurance companies, currency reserves, sovereign wealth funds, hedge funds, or private equity.\nClassifications.\nOpen vs. closed pension fund.\nOpen pension funds support at least one pension plan with no restriction on membership while closed pension funds support only pension plans that are limited to certain employees. Closed pension funds are further subclassified into:\nPublic vs. private pension funds.\nA public pension fund is one that is regulated under public sector law while a private pension fund is regulated under private sector law. In certain countries, the distinction between public or government pension funds and private pension funds may be difficult to assess. In others, the distinction is made sharply in law, with very specific requirements for administration and investment. For example, local governmental bodies in the United States are subject to laws passed by the states in which those localities exist, and these laws include provisions such as defining classes of permitted investments and a minimum municipal obligation.\nPlan design.\nDefined benefit (DB).\nA defined benefit plan promises a formula-based pension (for example, a percentage of final or career-average earnings multiplied by years of service). The benefit is specified in advance, and the plan sponsor is responsible for ensuring sufficient funding to meet the promise. In DB schemes, investment and longevity risks largely remain with the sponsor (often an employer or a public plan).\nDefined contribution (DC).\nA defined contribution plan specifies the contributions paid into an individual account; the eventual benefit depends on contributions and investment returns rather than a pre-set formula. In DC schemes, investment and longevity risks are typically borne by the member. \u201cMoney purchase\u201d plans are a canonical DC form.\nDifferences between DB and DC.\nDB and DC plans differ primarily in (i) the promise (benefit vs. contribution), (ii) the risk bearer (sponsor vs. member), and (iii) portability and funding mechanics. These distinctions underpin regulatory and policy debates tracked in international monitoring such as OECD Pensions at a Glance. \nAccompanying insurance within pension funds.\nOccupational and personal pension plans frequently bundle or administer ancillary risk benefits that insure members and their dependants against contingencies other than old age. Supervisory guidance notes that, in addition to a retirement objective, plans may provide disability, sickness, and survivors' benefits. \nDeath benefits.\nMany plans include death-in-service cover, paying a lump sum (often structured via group life arrangements) or a survivors' pension to a spouse, partner, or dependants. UK regulatory guidance recognizes schemes that provide lump-sum death benefits and the option to establish separate \u201cgroup life only\u201d schemes for this purpose.\nThe tax treatment of death benefits and unspent pension balances varies by jurisdiction and over time; for example, the UK has announced that most unused pension funds and certain death benefits will fall within the deceased\u2019s estate for inheritance tax from 6 April 2027.\nSurvivors' pensions and spousal protections.\nIn systems governed by ERISA in the United States, the default form of benefit for married participants in many employer plans is a Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity (QJSA), which continues payments over both lifetimes. A Qualified Preretirement Survivor Annuity (QPSA) protects the spouse if the participant dies before retirement. The U.S. Internal Revenue Service specifies that QJSA survivor percentages typically range from 50% to 100% of the participant\u2019s annuity.\nPlan terms and local law determine eligibility of non-marital partners. Some employers extend survivor options to domestic partners as a matter of policy even when not legally required. \nDisability and ill-health benefits.\nPension funds may provide disability (invalidity) pensions or permit ill-health early retirement, often defined with reference to an inability to perform suitable work. U.S. law permits \"qualified disability benefits\" within pension plans (subject to plan and tax rules), although detailed regulation differs between DB and DC contexts.\nSome arrangements include a waiver of contributions/premiums during qualifying disability so that accruals or insurance cover continue while the member is unable to work. Such waiver provisions are common in group life or rider form.\nHow they work.\nIt is important to distinguish between pension plan, funds and firm. A pension plan is a benefits program set up and sustained by an employer or an employee group. They are managed by state or private firms as well as pension funds. Pension funds are financial mechanisms that provide retirement income for employees after their working life. They work by accumulating contributions from employers, and sometimes employees, which are then invested to grow over time. Upon retirement, employees receive benefits, typically calculated as a percentage of their average salary during their working years. For instance, consider a scenario where a pension scheme offers a payment equivalent to 1% of an individual's average salary over the last five years of their employment for each year they served with the employer. Thus, if an employee worked for 35 years at the company and had an average final salary of $60,000, they would be entitled to an annual pension of $21,000. It is important to point out that one cannot usually take early withdrawals or loans from pensions. Public sector pensions, like the California Public Employees\u2019 Retirement System (CalPERS), often include cost-of-living escalators and can be more generous than private sector pensions. Private pension plans are regulated by federal laws such as the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) and are insured by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), which guarantees benefits if a pension plan fails.\nHow pension funds invest their money.\nPension funds can make investments into stocks, bond, real estate, and other assets. However, they have to be prudently managed compared to other types of funds due to their lower risk tolerance. For many years, they mainly invest into stable stocks and bond. In order to keep high returns, with changing market conditions, they started to invest into other assets. As of 2023, many pension funds are moving away from managing active stock portfolios towards passive investment methods, focusing on index funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) that replicate market indices. Additionally, there's an increasing trend to diversify into alternative assets like commodities, high-yield bonds, hedge funds, and real estate. Newer investment tools for pension funds include asset-backed securities, such as those tied to student loans or credit card debt, which are used to boost returns. Investing in private equity is also rising in popularity; these are long-term investments in non-public companies, aimed at achieving substantial profits through eventual sales when these companies reach maturity. Furthermore, real estate investment trusts (REITs) are becoming a frequent choice for pension funds due to their passive investment approach in the real estate sector. Direct investments in commercial properties like office buildings, warehouses, and industrial parks are also prevalent.\nMany governments around the world have established public pension systems that are partially or fully funded by investments rather than relying solely on payroll taxes. This approach helps to ensure the long-term solvency of these pension programs. Some examples of governments that use pension fund investments are:\nThese are just a few examples of governments that have adopted an investment-based approach to managing their public pension systems. By diversifying and growing their pension fund assets, these countries aim to mitigate the risks of running out of money in the future as their populations age.\nGovernance.\nPension funds are important financial institutions which manage the retirement savings of millions. Effective governance in these entities is crucial not only to safeguard these funds but also to ensure that they meet their future obligations to pensioners. The governance structures, strategies, and practices of pension funds significantly influence their stability, performance, and the trust of their stakeholders. Proper governance ensures that decisions are made transparently and that fund managers are accountable to stakeholders, including employees, retirees, and employers.\nAccording to the OECD Guidelines for Pension Fund Governance, the governance structure should clearly identify and separate operational and oversight responsibilities. Every pension fund should have a governing body, accountable to the pension plan members and beneficiaries. This body is ultimately responsible for ensuring adherence to the terms of the arrangement and the protection of the best interest of plan members and beneficiaries. The governing body should also meet minimum suitability standards to ensure a high level of integrity, competence, experience, and professionalism. Additionally, there should be adequate internal controls in place to ensure compliance with the law.\nChallenges.\nMany pension funds have problems with governance. In Hungary, where pension funds are established as not-for-profit institutions, there is evidence that the governing body is generally ineffective in looking after the best interests of its members. Most funds are established by financial institutions that find it easy to promote their candidates to the fund's supervisory board. Some pension funds in the United States have also been the subject of governance problems too, as well as in other countries.\nHistory of pension funds.\nThe first concepts of providing retirement benefits have roots in ancient civilizations such as Rome and Greece. The pension system as we know it originated in the 19th century. In 1889, German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck started an early modern pension scheme. His goal was to help older German\u00b4s citizens. However, this idea came from the United States of America. In 1875 American Express Company introduced its own pension plan. During the early 20th century pension plans for public employees were growing, which resulted in the creation of a U.S. federal retirement plan, known as Social Security, in 1935. After World War II, pension funds became the primary tool for providing retirement benefits, which was supported by the growth of labour unions. By the 1970s, they held large amounts of financial assets and had evolved to be significant participants in financial markets. But in the 1980s and 1990s pension funds faced significant challenges. The stock market crash in 1987 and the recession in the early 1990s had a negative impact on pension funds. Furthermore, demographic shifts and rising life expectancies placed pressure on these funds to sustain retirement benefits over extended durations.\nRegulation.\nIn the United States, pension plans are regulated mainly by The Employee Retirement Income Security Act 1974(ERISA). It provides framework for the regulation of employee pension and plans which are private pension funds offering. In 2006 was introduced The Pension Protection Act (PPA). This act come with new funding requirements for defined pension plans. As well as with new rules for calculating plan assets and liabilities.\nPension funds in European Union are regulated by Directive 2003/41/EC, also known as the IORP directive. This directive was recast and adopted in December 2016. It should promote long-term investment via occupational pension funds. Additionally, beneficiaries and members should now be better informed about their entitlements, address challenges faced by occupational pension funds operating across borders, and foster long-term investments in economic activities that boost growth, enhance the environment, and increase employment opportunities.\nLargest pension funds.\nThe following table lists the largest public pension funds by total assets by the SWF Institute.\nBy country.\nCzech Republic.\nPenzijn\u00ed p\u0159ipoji\u0161t\u011bn\u00ed (Pension Plan, PP).\nSource:\nDopl\u0148kov\u00e9 penzijn\u00ed spo\u0159en\u00ed (Supplementary Pension Savings, DPS).\nSource:\nItaly.\nAccording to the 2023 annual relation of COVIPit , at the end of 2022 Italian private supplementary pension funds managed 206.5 billion euros (equal to 10.8% of GDP and 4% of Italian families financial activities).\nINPS is the main Italian public pension fund. There exist also private pension funds, managed by private banks, and ruled by collective agreements in the public and private sectors.\nMalaysia.\nThe contributions are invested by the EPF in various sectors, such as equities, bonds, and property, to generate returns. Members can withdraw their savings under specific conditions, such as retirement at the age of 55, for healthcare, housing, or education. The EPF also allows partial withdrawals before retirement for certain approved purposes. It has total of around 265 billion USD of asset under management as of end 2023.)\nRomania.\nThe pension system in Romania is made of three pillars. One is the state pension (Pillar I \u2013 Mandatory), the second is a private mandatory pension where the state transfers a percentage of the contribution it collects for the public pension, and the third is an optional private pension (Pillar III \u2013 Voluntary). The Financial Supervisory Authority \u2013 Private Pension is responsible for the supervision and regulation of the private pension system.\nTurkey.\nGovernment.\nSocial Security Institution was established by the Social Security Institution Law No:5502 which was published in the Official Gazette No: 26173 dated 20.06.2006 and brings the Social Insurance Institution, General Directorate of Ba\u011f-kur and General Directorate of Emekli Sand\u0131\u011f\u0131 whose historical development are summarized above under a single roof in order to transfer five different retirement regimes which are civil servants, contractual paid workers, agricultural paid workers, self-employers and agricultural self-employers into a single retirement regime that will offer equal actuarial rights and obligations.\nPrivate.\nOYAK (Ordu Yard\u0131mla\u015fma Kurumu/Armed Forces Pension Fund) provides its members with \"supplementary retirement benefits\" apart from the official retirement fund, T.C.Emekli Sand\u0131\u011f\u0131/SSK, to which they are primarily affiliated. In addition to the retirement benefit, OYAK pays \"disability benefits\" to the members on duty when they become partially or fully disabled as well as \"death benefits\" to the heirs of the deceased member if the death occurs during the member's subscription to the foundation. OYAK is incorporated as a private entity under its own law subject to Turkish civic and commercial codes. OYAK, while fulfilling its legal duties, as set in the law, also provides its members with social services such as loans, home loans and retirement income systems. The initial source of OYAK's funds is a compulsory 10 percent levy on the base salary of Turkey's 200,000 serving officers who, together with 25,000 current pensioners, make up OYAK's members. Some other Turkish private pension funds:\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, pension funds include schemes which result in a deferral of income by employees, even if retirement income provision is not the intent. The United States has $19.1 trillion in retirement and pension assets ($9.1 trillion in private funds, $10 trillion in public funds) as of 31 December 2016. The largest 200 pension funds accounted for $4.540 trillion as of 30 September 2009.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43616", "revid": "20248368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43616", "title": "Arsinoe II", "text": "Queen of the Ptolemaic Kingdom (c.316\u2013c.270/268 BC)\nArsino\u00eb II (, c. 316 BC \u2013 between 270 and 268 BC) was Queen consort of Thrace, Anatolia, and Macedonia by her first and second marriage, to king Lysimachus and king Ptolemy Keraunos respectively, and then Queen of the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Egypt by marriage to her brother, Pharaoh Ptolemy II Philadelphus. As an Egyptian queen she acquired the royal name Arsinoe Philadelphos, as well the title \"nswt-bjtj\" (\"King of Upper and Lower Egypt\") that may suggest she was co-ruler with her husband; the exact meaning of this elevation and whether it occurred during her life or posthumously is uncertain. After her death, Arsinoe was deified at the orders of her husband and the cult of Arsinoe Philadelphos became widespread in the Ptolemaic territories.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nArsino\u00eb was the first daughter of Pharaoh Ptolemy I Soter, founder of the Hellenistic state of Egypt, and his second wife Berenice I of Egypt.\nShe was maybe born in Memphis, but was raised in the new city of Alexandria, where her father moved his capital. Nothing is known of her childhood or education, but judging from her later life as patron of scholars and noted for her learning, she is estimated to have been given a high education. Her brothers were tutored by intellectuals hired by their fathers, and it is regarded likely that she attended these lessons as well: she corresponded with the intellectual Strato of Lampsacus later in life, and he may have previously been her tutor.\nQueen of Lysimachus.\nAround the age of 15, Arsino\u00eb married King Lysimachus, who was then around 60 years old. Together, the pair had three sons: Ptolemy Epigonos, Lysimachus, and Philip.\nIn order to position her sons for the throne, she had Lysimachus' first son, Agathocles, poisoned on account of treason.\nArsinoe reportedly paid for a rotunda in the Samothrace temple complex, where she was likely an initiate.\nQueen of Ptolemy Keraunos.\nIn 281 BC, Lysimachus died in battle and Arsino\u00eb fled to Cassandreia (). There, she married her paternal half-brother Ptolemy Keraunos. Ptolemy Keraunos was a son of Ptolemy I Soter and his first wife, Eurydice of Egypt. The marriage was for political reasons: both claimed the throne of Macedonia and Thrace (by the time of his death Lysimachus was ruler of both regions, and his power extended to southern Greece and Anatolia). Their relationship was never good.\nAs Ptolemy Keraunos was becoming more powerful, Arsino\u00eb decided it was time to stop him and conspired against him with her sons. This action caused Ptolemy Keraunus to kill two of her sons, Lysimachus and Philip, while the eldest, Ptolemy, was able to escape and to flee north, to the kingdom of the Dardanians.\nArsino\u00eb sought refuge in the Samothrace temple complex, which she had benefited during her tenure as queen. She eventually left from Samothrace for Alexandria, Egypt, to seek protection from her brother, Ptolemy II Philadelphus.\nIt is not known which year she left for Egypt. She may have left as early as 280/279 BC, directly after the murder of the younger sons, or as late as 277/276 BC, when the claim of her eldest son to the Macedonian throne had clearly failed, following the succession of Antigonus II Gonatas.\nQueen of Egypt.\nIn Egypt, she is believed to have instigated the accusation and exile of Arsinoe I, the wife of her younger brother Ptolemy II. Whether this belief was correct remains unknown. It is not known which year she arrived in Egypt, nor when her sister-in-law was exiled, nor whether the divorce between her brother and Arsinoe I may have taken place without the involvement of Arsinoe II.\nWhatever the case, after the divorce of Ptolemy, Arsinoe II then married her brother. As a result, both were given the epithet \"Philadelphoi\" ( \"Sibling-lovers\"). The closer circumstances and reasons behind the marriage is not known. According to R. A. Hazzard, the year of their marriage is 273 or 272 BC because of the change of the preamble in the papyri. \nHer role as queen was unprecedented in the dynasty at the time and became a role model for later Ptolemaic queens: she acted alongside her brother in ritual and public display, became a religious and literal patron, and was included in the Egyptian and Greek cults created for them by her brother. Sharing in all of her brother's titles, she was quite influential, having towns dedicated to her, her own cult (as was Egyptian custom), appearing on coinage, and contributing to foreign policy, including Ptolemy II's victory in the First Syrian War between Egypt and the Seleucid Empire.\nAccording to Posidippus, she won three chariot races at the Olympic Games, probably in 272 BC.\nDeification.\nShe died in 270 or 268 BC and circumstantial evidence supports the latter date. After her death, Ptolemy II established a cult of Arsinoe Philadelphus. She received burial and deification rites at Mendes, where she had been a priestess. Those rites are commemorated in the Mendes stele. This stele also includes the decree of Ptolemy II announcing her cult. All temples in Egypt were required to include a cult statue of Arsinoe II alongside the main deity of the sanctuary. In the relief at the top of the stele, Arsinoe is depicted among the deities receiving sacrifice from Ptolemy - an image that recurs throughout the country. Separate temples were constructed for Arsinoe, at Memphis, and elsewhere. The Fayyum region became the Arsinoite nome, with Arsinoe as its patron goddess. From 263 BC, a portion of tax on orchard and vineyard produce in each nome of Egypt was dedicated to funding the local cult of Arsinoe.\nArsinoe's cult was also propagated in Alexandria. An annual priesthood, known as the Canephorus of Arsinoe Philadelphus, was established by 269 BC. The holder of the office was included as part of the dating formula in all official documents until the late second century BC. An annual procession was held in Arsinoe's honour, led by the Canephorus. Every household along the procession's route was required to erect a small altar of sand and sacrifice birds and lentils for Arsinoe. A large temple was erected by the harbour in Alexandria. The admiral Callicrates of Samos erected another sanctuary at Cape Zephyrium, at the eastern end of the harbour, where Arsinoe was worshipped as Aphrodite Euploia (Aphrodite of the good-sailing). Similar sanctuaries were established at a number of port-cities under Ptolemaic control, including Citium in Cyprus, Delos in the Nesiotic League, and Thera. As a result of these sanctuaries, Arsinoe became closely associated with protection from shipwrecks. Coinage and statuettes depicting the divine Arsinoe survive. Her divine attributes are a small ram's horn behind her ear - symbolising her connection to the ram of Mendes - and a pair of cornucopiae which she carries. She appears in this guise on a set of mass-produced faience Oenochoae, which seem to have been associated with funerary ritual in Alexandria.\nArsinoe seems to have been a genuinely popular goddess throughout the Ptolemaic period, with both Greeks and Egyptians, in Egypt and beyond. 'Arsinoe' is one of the few Greek names to be naturalised as an Egyptian personal name in the period. Altars and dedicatory plaques in her honour are found throughout Egypt and the Aegean, while hundreds of her faience oenochoae have been found in the cemeteries of Alexandria.\nMarriage and issue.\nArsinoe married Lysimachus of Thrace in 300 or 299 BC and had three children:\nAfter Lysimachus' death in 281 BC, Arsinoe was briefly married to her half-brother Ptolemy Ceraunus from 280 to 279 BC and then to her full-blooded, younger brother Ptolemy II of Egypt from the late 270s BC until her death. Ptolemy II's children by his first wife Arsinoe I, including his eventual successor Ptolemy III, were posthumously declared to be children of Arsinoe II in the late 260s BC.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43617", "revid": "27983612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43617", "title": "Shark", "text": "Predatory cartilaginous fishes\nSharks are a group of elasmobranch cartilaginous fishes characterized by a ribless endoskeleton, dermal denticles, five to seven gill slits on each side, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head. Modern sharks are classified within the division Selachii and are the sister group to the Batomorphi (rays and skates). Some sources extend the term \"shark\" as an informal category including extinct members of Chondrichthyes (cartilaginous fish) with a shark-like morphology, such as hybodonts. Shark-like chondrichthyans such as \"Cladoselache\" and \"Doliodus\" first appeared in the Devonian Period (419\u2013359 million years), though some fossilized chondrichthyan-like scales are as old as the Late Ordovician (458\u2013444 million years ago). The earliest confirmed modern sharks (Selachii) are known from the Early Jurassic around https://\u00a0million years ago, with the oldest known member being \"Agaleus\", though records of true sharks may extend back as far as the Permian.\nSharks range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark (\"Etmopterus perryi\"), a deep sea species that is only in length, to the whale shark (\"Rhincodon typus\"), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately in length. They are found in all seas and are common to depths up to . They generally do not live in freshwater, although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river sharks, which can be found in both seawater and freshwater, and the Ganges shark, which lives only in freshwater. Sharks have a covering of placoid scales (denticles) that protects the skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics. They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth.\nSeveral shark species are apex predators, which are organisms that are at the top of their food chain with select examples including the bull shark, tiger shark, great white shark, mako sharks, thresher sharks and hammerhead sharks. Some sharks are filter-feeding planktivores, such as the whale shark and basking shark, which are among the largest fish ever lived.\nSharks are caught by humans for shark meat or shark fins. Many shark populations are threatened by human activities. Since 1970, shark populations have been reduced by 71%, mostly from overfishing and mutilating practice such as shark finning.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nUntil the 16th century, sharks were known to mariners as \"sea dogs\". This is still evidential in several species termed \"dogfish\", or the porbeagle.\nThe etymology of the word \"shark\" is uncertain. The most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of \"predator, one who preys on others\" from the Dutch , meaning 'villain, scoundrel' (cf. \"card shark\", \"loan shark\", etc.), which was later applied to the fish due to its predatory behaviour.\nA now disproven theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word (), meaning 'shark'. \nEvidence for this etymology came from the Oxford English Dictionary, which notes that \"shark\" first came into use after Sir John Hawkins' sailors exhibited one in London in 1569 and posted \"sharke\" to refer to the large sharks of the Caribbean Sea. However, the Middle English Dictionary records an isolated occurrence of the word \"shark\" (referring to a sea fish) in a letter written by Thomas Beckington in 1442, which rules out a New World etymology.\nEvolutionary history.\nFossil record.\nThe oldest total-group chondrichthyans, known as acanthodians or \"spiny sharks\", appeared during the Early Silurian, around 439 million years ago.\"\" The oldest confirmed members of Elasmobranchii \"sensu lato\" (the group containing all cartilaginous fish more closely related to modern sharks and rays than to chimaeras) appeared during the Devonian. Anachronistidae, the oldest probable representatives of Euselachii, the group containing modern sharks (Selachii) and rays (Batomorphi) to the exclusion of most extinct elasmobranch groups, date to the Carboniferous. Selachii and Batomorphi are suggested by some to have diverged during the Triassic. Fossils of the earliest true sharks may have appeared during the Permian, based on remains of \"synechodontiforms\" found in the Early Permian of Russia, but if remains of \"synechodontiforms\" from the Permian and Triassic are true sharks, they only had low diversity. Modern shark orders first appeared during the Early Jurassic, and during the Jurassic true sharks underwent great diversification. Sharks largely replaced the hybodonts, which had previously been a dominant group of shark-like fish during the Triassic and Early Jurassic.\nTaxonomy.\nSharks belong to the division Selachii in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes. The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras. It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks, but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.\nThe division Selachii is divided into the superorders Galeomorphi (or Galea), and Squalomorphi (or Squalea). The galeomorphs are the Heterodontiformes, Orectolobiformes, Lamniformes, and Carcharhiniformes. Lamnoids and carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade, but recent studies show that Lamnoids and orectoloboids are a clade. Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be squalomorphs. The squalomorphs are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha. The former includes cow shark and frilled shark, though some authors propose that both families be moved to separate orders. The Squalomorpha contains the Squaliformes and the Hypnosqualea. The Hypnosqualea may be invalid. It includes the Squatiniformes, and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batomorphi.\nThere are more than 500 species of sharks split across thirteen orders, including several orders of sharks that have gone extinct:\nAnatomy.\nTeeth.\nShark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life. Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime. The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months. In most species, teeth are replaced one at a time as opposed to the simultaneous replacement of an entire row, which is observed in the cookiecutter shark.\nTooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting. The teeth of plankton-feeders such as the basking shark are small and non-functional.\nSkeleton.\nShark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates. Sharks and other cartilaginous fish (skates and rays) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue. Cartilage is flexible and durable, yet is about half the normal density of bone. This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy. Because sharks do not have rib cages, they can easily be crushed under their own weight on land.\nJaw.\nThe jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium. The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called \"tesserae\", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic. This gives these areas much of the same strength found in the bony tissue found in other animals.\nGenerally sharks have only one layer of tesserae, but the jaws of large specimens, such as the bull shark, tiger shark, and the great white shark, have two to three layers or more, depending on body size. The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers. In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.\nFins.\nFin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers. Most sharks have eight fins. Sharks can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.\nDermal denticles.\nUnlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body. This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy. Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming. Some species of shark have pigmented denticles that form complex patterns like spots (e.g. Zebra shark) and stripes (e.g. Tiger shark). These markings are important for camouflage and help sharks blend in with their environment, as well as making them difficult for prey to detect. For some species, dermal patterning returns to healed denticles even after they have been removed by injury.\nTails.\nTails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape. Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments. Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion. This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment. This allows more efficient locomotion among these negatively buoyant cartilaginous fish. By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.\nTiger sharks have a large upper lobe, which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed. The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark, which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring, has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey. Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.\nPhysiology.\nBuoyancy.\nUnlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, sharks rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene, and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone. Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass. The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming. Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark, have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.\nSome sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility. Researchers use this condition to handle sharks safely.\nRespiration.\nLike other fish, sharks extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills. Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom\u2013dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks. While the shark is moving, water passes through the mouth and over the gills in a process known as \"ram ventilation\". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills to ensure a constant supply of oxygenated water. A small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are \"obligate ram ventilators\" and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.\nThe respiratory and circulatory process begins when deoxygenated venous blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart. Here, the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta where it branches into afferent branchial arteries. Gas exchange takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent branchial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta. The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses. From there venous blood re-enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.\nThermoregulation.\nMost sharks are \"cold-blooded\" or, more precisely, poikilothermic, meaning that their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the family Lamnidae (such as the shortfin mako shark and the great white shark) are homeothermic and maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. In these sharks, a strip of aerobic red muscle located near the center of the body generates the heat, which the body retains via a countercurrent exchange mechanism by a system of blood vessels called the rete mirabile (\"miraculous net\"). The common thresher and bigeye thresher sharks have a similar mechanism for maintaining an elevated body temperature.\nLarger species, like the whale shark, are able to conserve their body heat through sheer size when they dive to colder depths. The scalloped hammerhead closes its mouth and gills when diving to depths of around 800 metres, holding its breath until it reaches warmer waters again.\nOsmoregulation.\nIn contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth, the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5%) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater. This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments. A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark, which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea. When a shark dies, the urea is broken down to ammonia by bacteria, causing the dead body to gradually smell strongly of ammonia.\nResearch in 1930 by Homer W. Smith showed that sharks' urine does not contain sufficient sodium to avoid hypernatremia, and it was postulated that there must be an additional mechanism for salt secretion. In 1960 it was discovered at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine that sharks have a type of salt gland located at the end of the intestine, known as the \"rectal gland\", whose function is the secretion of chlorides.\nDigestion.\nDigestion can take a long time. The food moves from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs. Unwanted items may never get past the stomach, and instead the shark either vomits or turns its stomachs inside out and ejects unwanted items from its mouth.\nOne of the biggest differences between the digestive systems of sharks and mammals is that sharks have much shorter intestines. This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca.\nFluorescence.\nA few sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark, where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid.\nSenses.\nSmell.\nSharks have keen olfactory senses, located in the short duct (which is not fused, unlike bony fish) between the anterior and posterior nasal openings, with some species able to detect as little as one part per million of blood in seawater. The size of the olfactory bulb varies across different shark species, with size dependent on how much a given species relies on smell or vision to find their prey. In environments with low visibility, shark species generally have larger olfactory bulbs. In reefs, where visibility is high, species of sharks from the family Carcharhinidae have smaller olfactory bulbs. Sharks found in deeper waters also have larger olfactory bulbs.\nSharks have the ability to determine the direction of a given scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril. This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound.\nThey are more attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species, and as a result often linger near or in sewage outfalls. Some species, such as nurse sharks, have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.\nSight.\nShark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates, including similar lenses, corneas and retinas, though their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment with the help of a tissue called tapetum lucidum. This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters. The effectiveness of the tissue varies, with some sharks having stronger nocturnal adaptations. Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do. Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes. To protect their eyes some species have nictitating membranes. This membrane covers the eyes while hunting and when the shark is being attacked. However, some species, including the great white shark (\"Carcharodon carcharias\"), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey. The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated. Some believe that electro- and chemoreception are more significant, while others point to the nictating membrane as evidence that sight is important, since presumably the shark would not protect its eyes were they unimportant. The use of sight probably varies with species and water conditions. The shark's field of vision can swap between monocular and stereoscopic at any time. A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of sharks found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind. The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind. The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.\nHearing.\nAlthough it is hard to test the hearing of sharks, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey from many miles away. The hearing sensitivity for most shark species lies between 20 and 1000\u00a0Hz.\nA small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel. The lateral line shows a similar arrangement, and is open to the environment via a series of openings called lateral line pores. This is a reminder of the common origin of these two vibration- and sound-detecting organs that are grouped together as the acoustico-lateralis system. In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.\nElectroreception.\nThe ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs. They number in the hundreds to thousands. Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce. This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark) find prey. The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce. Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.\nLateral line.\nThis system is found in most fish, including sharks. It is a tactile sensory system which allows the organism to detect water speed and pressure changes near by. The main component of the system is the neuromast, a cell similar to hair cells present in the vertebrate ear that interact with the surrounding aquatic environment. This helps sharks distinguish between the currents around them, obstacles off on their periphery, and struggling prey out of visual view. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50\u00a0Hz.\nLife history.\nShark lifespans vary by species. Most live 20 to 30 years. The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years. Whale sharks (\"Rhincodon typus\") may also live over 100 years. Earlier estimates suggested the Greenland shark (\"Somniosus microcephalus\") could reach about 200 years, but a recent study found that a specimen was 392 \u00b1 120 years old (i.e., at least 272 years old), making it the longest-lived vertebrate known.\nReproduction.\nUnlike most bony fish, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young. Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle. Sharks mature slowly relative to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around age 13\u201315.\nSexual.\nSharks practice internal fertilization. The posterior part of a male shark's pelvic fins are modified into a pair of intromittent organs called claspers, analogous to a mammalian penis, of which one is used to deliver sperm into the female.\nMating has rarely been observed in sharks. The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female. In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct. Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating. The bite marks may also come from courtship behavior: the male may bite the female to show his interest. In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.\nAsexual.\nThere have been a number of documented cases in which a female shark who has not been in contact with a male has conceived a pup on her own through parthenogenesis. The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage. The extent of this behavior in the wild is unknown. Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.\nScientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present. Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity, which helps build defenses against threats to the species. Species that rely solely on it risk extinction. Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark's decline off the Irish coast.\nBrooding.\nSharks display three ways to bear their young, varying by species, oviparity, viviparity and ovoviviparity.\nOvoviviparity.\nMost sharks are ovoviviparous, meaning that the eggs hatch in the oviduct within the mother's body and that the egg's yolk and fluids secreted by glands in the walls of the oviduct nourishes the embryos. The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids. As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional. Lamniforme sharks practice \"oophagy\", where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs. Taking this a step further, sand tiger shark pups cannibalistically consume neighboring embryos. The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth. The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted. Most ovoviviparous sharks give birth in sheltered areas, including bays, river mouths and shallow reefs. They choose such areas for protection from predators (mainly other sharks) and the abundance of food. Dogfish have the longest known gestation period of any shark, at 18 to 24 months. Basking sharks and frilled sharks appear to have even longer gestation periods, but accurate data are lacking.\nOviparity.\nSome species are oviparous, laying their fertilized eggs in the water. In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s). These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection. The egg case is commonly called a \"mermaid's purse\". Oviparous sharks include the horn shark, catshark, Port Jackson shark, and swellshark.\nViviparity.\nViviparity is the gestation of young without the use of a traditional egg, and results in live birth. Viviparity in sharks can be placental or aplacental. Young are born fully formed and self-sufficient. Hammerheads, the requiem sharks (such as the bull and blue sharks), and smoothhounds are viviparous. \nBehavior.\nThe classic view describes a solitary hunter, ranging the oceans in search of food. However, this applies to only a few species. Most live far more social, sedentary, benthic lives, and appear likely to have their own distinct personalities. Even solitary sharks meet for breeding or at rich hunting grounds, which may lead them to cover thousands of miles in a year. Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins.\nSharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools. Sometimes more than 100 scalloped hammerheads congregate around seamounts and islands, e.g., in the Gulf of California. Cross-species social hierarchies exist. For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.\nWhen approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display. This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.\nSpeed.\nIn general, sharks swim (\"cruise\") at an average speed of , but when feeding or attacking, the average shark can reach speeds upwards of . The shortfin mako shark, the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to . The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts. These exceptions may be due to the warm-blooded, or homeothermic, nature of these sharks' physiology. Sharks can travel 70 to 80\u00a0km in a day.\nIntelligence.\nSharks possess brain-to-body mass ratios that are similar to mammals and birds, and have exhibited apparent curiosity and behavior resembling play in the wild.\nThere is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.\nSleep.\nAll sharks need to keep water flowing over their gills in order for them to breathe; however, not all species need to be moving to do this. Those that are able to breathe while not swimming do so by using their spiracles to force water over their gills, thereby allowing them to extract oxygen from the water. It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them and as such they are not truly asleep.\nSpecies that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious. It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord, rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species. In 2016 a great white shark was captured on video for the first time in a state researchers believed was sleep swimming.\nEcology.\nFeeding.\nMost sharks are carnivorous. Basking sharks, whale sharks, and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton: basking sharks practice ram feeding, whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean. This type of feeding requires gill rakers\u2014long, slender filaments that form a very efficient sieve\u2014analogous to the baleen plates of the great whales. The shark traps the plankton in these filaments and swallows from time to time in huge mouthfuls. Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.\nOther highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks, which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals. Cookiecutter teeth are enormous compared to the animal's size. The lower teeth are particularly sharp. Although they have never been observed feeding, they are believed to latch onto their prey and use their thick lips to make a seal, twisting their bodies to rip off flesh.\nSome seabed\u2013dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators. Angel sharks and wobbegongs use camouflage to lie in wait and suck prey into their mouths. Many benthic sharks feed solely on crustaceans which they crush with their flat molariform teeth.\nOther sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole. The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact. The great white and other large predators either swallow small prey whole or take huge bites out of large animals. Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun shoaling fishes, and sawsharks either stir prey from the seabed or slash at swimming prey with their tooth-studded rostra.\nThe bonnethead shark is the only known omnivorous species. Its main prey is crustaceans and mollusks, but it also eats a large amount of seagrass, and is able to digest and extract nutrients from about 50% of the seagrass it consumes.\nMany sharks, including the whitetip reef shark are cooperative feeders and hunt in packs to herd and capture elusive prey. These social sharks are often migratory, traveling huge distances around ocean basins in large schools. These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.\nRange and habitat.\nSharks are found in all seas. They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater. Sharks are common down to depths of , and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below . The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at .\nRelationship with humans.\nAttacks.\nIn 2006 the International Shark Attack File (ISAF) undertook an investigation into 96 alleged shark attacks, confirming 62 of them as unprovoked attacks and 16 as provoked attacks. The average number of fatalities worldwide per year between 2001 and 2006 from unprovoked shark attacks is 4.3.\nContrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans. Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks. These sharks are large, powerful predators, and may sometimes attack and kill people. Despite being responsible for attacks on humans they have all been filmed without using a protective cage.\nThe perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916, and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the \"Jaws\" film series. \"Jaws\" author Peter Benchley, as well as \"Jaws\" director Steven Spielberg, later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.\nTo help avoid an unprovoked attack, humans should not wear jewelry or metal that is shiny and refrain from splashing around too much.\nIn general, sharks show little pattern of attacking humans specifically, part of the reason could be that sharks prefer the blood of fish and other common preys. Research indicates that when humans do become the object of a shark attack, it is possible that the shark has mistaken the human for species that are its normal prey, such as seals. This was further proven in a recent study conducted by researchers at the California State University's Shark Lab. According to footage caught by the Lab's drones, juveniles swam right up to humans in the water without any bites incidents. The lab stated that the results showed that humans and sharks can co-exist in the water.\nIn captivity.\nUntil recently, only a few benthic species of shark, such as hornsharks, leopard sharks and catsharks, had survived in aquarium conditions for a year or more. This gave rise to the belief that sharks, as well as being difficult to capture and transport, were difficult to care for. More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long-distance transportation. The great white shark had never been successfully held in captivity for long periods of time until September 2004, when the Monterey Bay Aquarium successfully kept a young female for 198 days before releasing her.\nMost species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate. Some species can flourish in home saltwater aquaria. Uninformed or unscrupulous dealers sometimes sell juvenile sharks like the nurse shark, which upon reaching adulthood is far too large for typical home aquaria. Public aquaria generally do not accept donated specimens that have outgrown their housing. Some owners have been tempted to release them. Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of and can live up to 25 years.\nIn culture.\nIn Hawaii.\nSharks figure prominently in Hawaiian mythology. Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form. A common theme was that a shark-man would warn beach-goers of sharks in the waters. The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them. Hawaiian mythology also includes many shark gods. Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua, or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua. Kamaku describes in detail how to offer a corpse to become a shark. The body transforms gradually until the kahuna can point the awe-struck family to the markings on the shark's body that correspond to the clothing in which the beloved's body had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua becomes the family pet, receiving food, and driving fish into the family net and warding off danger. Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies. The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery. Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.\nKamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele, and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii. He was able to assume all human and fish forms. A summit cliff on the crater of Kilauea is one of his most sacred spots. At one point he had a \"heiau\" (temple or shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that jutted into the ocean on the island of Molokai. Kamohoali'i was an ancestral god, not a human who became a shark and banned the eating of humans after eating one herself. In Fijian mythology, Dakuwaqa was a shark god who was the eater of lost souls.\nIn American Samoa.\nOn the island of Tutuila in American Samoa (a U.S. territory), there is a location called Turtle and Shark (\"Laumei ma Malie\") which is important in Samoan culture\u2014the location is the site of a legend called \"O Le Tala I Le Laumei Ma Le Malie\", in which two humans are said to have transformed into a turtle and a shark. According to the U.S. National Park Service, \"Villagers from nearby Vaitogi continue to reenact an important aspect of the legend at Turtle and Shark by performing a ritual song intended to summon the legendary animals to the ocean surface, and visitors are frequently amazed to see one or both of these creatures emerge from the sea in apparent response to this call.\"\nIn popular culture.\nIn contrast to the complex portrayals by Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, the European and Western view of sharks has historically been mostly of fear and malevolence. Sharks are used in popular culture commonly as eating machines, notably in the \"Jaws\" novel and the film of the same name, along with its sequels. Sharks are threats in other films such as \"Deep Blue Sea\", \"The Reef\", and others, although they are sometimes used for comedic effect such as in \"Finding Nemo\" and the \"Austin Powers\" series. Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean. Such examples include the \"Tom and Jerry\" cartoons, \"Jabberjaw\", and other shows produced by Hanna-Barbera. They also are used commonly as a clich\u00e9d means of killing off a character that is held up by a rope or some similar object as the sharks swim right below them, or the character may be standing on a plank above shark infested waters.\nPopular misconceptions.\nA popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer, but this is not scientifically supported. Sharks have been known to get cancer. Both diseases and parasites affect sharks. The evidence that sharks are at least resistant to cancer and disease is mostly anecdotal and there have been few, if any, scientific or statistical studies that show sharks to have heightened immunity to disease.\nOther apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer and treat osteoarthritis. No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.\nThreats to sharks.\nFishery.\nIn 2008, it was estimated that nearly 100 million sharks were being killed by people every year, due to commercial and recreational fishing. In 2021, it was estimated that the population of oceanic sharks and rays had dropped by 71% over the previous half-century.\nShark finning yields are estimated at for 2000, and for 2010. Based on an analysis of average shark weights, this translates into a total annual mortality estimate of about 100 million sharks in 2000, and about 97 million sharks in 2010, with a total range of possible values between 63 and 273 million sharks per year. Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia. In southern Australia, shark is commonly used in fish and chips, in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake. In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language, Telugu language) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not developed, cooking the flesh breaks it into powder, which is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed, they are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu. Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce a delicacy called h\u00e1karl. During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.\nSharks are often killed for shark fin soup. Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water. Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade. The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators. Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world. Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009. Poachers illegally fin millions each year. Few governments enforce laws that protect them. In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins. From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins. It is estimated by TRAFFIC that over 14,000 tonnes of shark fins were exported into Singapore between 2005\u20132007 and 2012\u20132014.\nShark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries and is erroneously considered healthy and full of nutrients. Scientific research has revealed, however, that high concentrations of BMAA are present in shark fins. Because BMAA is a neurotoxin, consumption of shark fin soup and cartilage pills, therefore, may pose a health risk. BMAA is under study for its pathological role in neurodegenerative diseases such as ALS, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease.\nSharks are also killed for meat. European diners consume dogfishes, smoothhounds, catsharks, makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays. However, the U.S. FDA lists sharks as one of four fish (with swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish) whose high mercury content is hazardous to children and pregnant women.\nSharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish. Harvesting sharks before they reproduce severely impacts future populations. Capture induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished. Capture-induced parturition is rarely considered in fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).\nThe majority of shark fisheries have little monitoring or management. The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries. Major declines in shark stocks have been recorded\u2014some species have been depleted by over 90% over the past 20\u201330 years with population declines of 70% not unusual. A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.\nShark culling.\nIn 2014, a shark cull in Western Australia killed dozens of sharks (mostly tiger sharks) using drum lines, until it was cancelled after public protests and a decision by the Western Australia EPA; from 2014 to 2017, there was an \"imminent threat\" policy in Western Australia in which sharks that \"threatened\" humans in the ocean were shot and killed. This \"imminent threat\" policy was criticized by senator Rachel Siewart for killing endangered sharks. The \"imminent threat\" policy was cancelled in March 2017. In August 2018, the Western Australia government announced a plan to re-introduce drum lines (though, this time the drum lines are \"SMART\" drum lines).\nFrom 1962 to the present, the government of Queensland has targeted and killed sharks in large numbers by using drum lines, under a \"shark control\" program\u2014this program has also inadvertently killed large numbers of other animals such as dolphins; it has also killed endangered hammerhead sharks. Queensland's drum line program has been called \"outdated, cruel and ineffective\". From 2001 to 2018, a total of 10,480 sharks were killed on lethal drum lines in Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef. From 1962 to 2018, roughly 50,000 sharks were killed by Queensland authorities.\nThe government of New South Wales has a program that deliberately kills sharks using nets. The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being \"extremely destructive\" to marine life, including sharks. Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks were killed in the nets in New South Wales\u2014also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals were killed in the nets, including dolphins, whales, turtles, dugongs, and critically endangered grey nurse sharks. There has been a very large decrease in the number of sharks in eastern Australia, and the shark-killing programs in Queensland and New South Wales are partly responsible for this decrease.\nKwazulu-Natal, an area of South Africa, has a shark-killing program using nets and drum lines\u2014these nets and drum lines have killed turtles and dolphins, and have been criticized for killing wildlife. During a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal's shark-killing program\u2014during the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins were killed in KwaZulu-Natal. Authorities on the French island of R\u00e9union kill about 100 sharks per year.\nKilling sharks negatively affects the marine ecosystem. Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark culling a \"knee-jerk reaction\" and says, \"sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans.\"\nGeorge H. Burgess, the former director of the International Shark Attack File, \"describes [shark] culling as a form of revenge, satisfying a public demand for blood and little else\"; he also said shark culling is a \"retro-type move reminiscent of what people would have done in the 1940s and 50s, back when we didn't have an ecological conscience and before we knew the consequences of our actions.\" Jane Williamson, an associate professor in marine ecology at Macquarie University, says \"There is no scientific support for the concept that culling sharks in a particular area will lead to a decrease in shark attacks and increase ocean safety.\"\nOther threats.\nOther threats include habitat alteration, damage and loss from coastal development, pollution and the impact of fisheries on the seabed and prey species. The 2007 documentary \"Sharkwater\" exposed how sharks are being hunted to extinction.\nConservation.\nIn 1991, South Africa was the first country in the world to declare Great White sharks a legally protected species (however, the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board is allowed to kill great white sharks in its \"shark control\" program in eastern South Africa).\nIntending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000. Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in \"United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins\". In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to \"purchase\" shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas. Seeking to close the loophole, the Shark Conservation Act was passed by Congress in December 2010, and it was signed into law in January 2011.\nIn 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states. This prohibition was amended in June 2013 to close remaining loopholes.\nIn 2009, the International Union for Conservation of Nature's \"IUCN Red List of Endangered Species\" named 64 species, one-third of all oceanic shark species, as being at risk of extinction due to fishing and shark finning.\nIn 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead, oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks. The majority, but not the required two-thirds of voting delegates, approved the proposal. China, by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan, which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition. In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.\nIn 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark, shortfin mako shark, mackerel shark, tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries. Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing. Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.\nUnder the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010. It was the first global instrument concluded under CMS and aims at facilitating international coordination for the protection, conservation and management of migratory sharks, through multilateral, intergovernmental discussion and scientific research.\nIn July 2013, New York state, a major market and entry point for shark fins, banned the shark fin trade joining seven other states of the United States and the three Pacific U.S. territories in providing legal protection to sharks.\nIn the United States, and as of January 16, 2019, 12 states including (Massachusetts, Maryland, Delaware, California, Illinois, Hawaii, Oregon, Nevada, Rhode Island, Washington, New York and Texas) along with 3 U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands) have passed laws against the sale or possession of shark fins.\nSeveral regions now have shark sanctuaries or have banned shark fishing\u2014these regions include American Samoa, the Bahamas, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, the Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Palau.\nIn April 2020 researchers reported to have traced the origins of shark fins of endangered hammerhead sharks from a retail market in Hong Kong back to their source populations and therefore the approximate locations where the sharks were first caught using DNA analysis.\nIn July 2020 scientists reported results of a survey of 371 reefs in 58 nations estimating the conservation status of reef sharks globally. No sharks have been observed on almost 20% of the surveyed reefs and shark depletion was strongly associated with both socio-economic conditions and conservation measures. Sharks are considered to be a vital part of the ocean ecosystem.\nAccording to a 2021 study in \"Nature\", overfishing has resulted in a 71% global decline in the number of oceanic sharks and rays over the preceding 50 years. The oceanic whitetip, and both the scalloped hammerhead and great hammerheads are now classified as critically endangered. Sharks in tropical waters have declined more rapidly than those in temperate zones during the period studied. A 2021 study published in \"Current Biology\" found that overfishing is currently driving over one-third of sharks and rays to extinction.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43618", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43618", "title": "Black panther", "text": "Variant of leopard and jaguar\nA black panther is the melanistic colour variant of the leopard (\"Panthera pardus\") and the jaguar (\"Panthera onca\"). Black panthers of both species have excess black pigments, but their typical rosettes are also present. They have been documented mostly in tropical forests, with black leopards in Africa and Asia, and black jaguars in Central and South America. Melanism is caused by a recessive allele in the leopard, and by a dominant allele in the jaguar.\nLeopard.\nIn 1788, Jean-Claude Delam\u00e9therie described a black leopard that was kept in the Tower of London and had been brought from Bengal. In 1794, Friedrich Albrecht Anton Meyer proposed the scientific name \"Felis fusca\" for this cat, the Indian leopard (\"P. p. fusca\").\nIn 1809, Georges Cuvier described a black leopard kept in the M\u00e9nagerie du Jardin des plantes that had been brought from Java. Cuvier proposed the name \"Felis melas\", the Javan leopard (\"P. p. melas\"). By the late 19th century, the occurrence of black and spotted leopard cubs in the same litter had been repeatedly recorded in India. Black leopards were thought to be more common in Travancore and in the hills of southern India than in other parts of the country. Black leopards were also frequently encountered in southern Myanmar.\nBy 1929, the Natural History Museum, London had skins of black leopards collected in South Africa, Nepal, Assam and Kanara in India. Black leopards were thought to be common on the Malay Peninsula and on Java.\nA black African leopard (\"P. p. pardus\") was sighted in the alpine zone of Mount Kenya in the winter of 1989\u20131990.\nIn Kenya's Laikipia County, a black leopard was photographed by a camera trap in 2007; in 2018, a female subadult black leopard was repeatedly recorded together with a spotted leopard about farther east in a grassland.\nIn India's Western Ghats, black leopards were sighted and photographed in 2010 and 2012 in the Kas Plateau Reserved Forest, and in Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary in 2012. In 2015, a dead black leopard was found on a highway near Satara in Maharashtra.\nIn May 2012, a black leopard was photographed at an elevation of in Nepal's Kanchenjunga Conservation Area.\nAt least one black leopard was photographed in mixed deciduous forest in Thailand's Kaeng Krachan National Park during a one-year-long camera trapping survey from 2003 to 2004. In 2009, black leopards were photographed more often than spotted leopards in Kui Buri National Park.\nMost leopards recorded at 16 sites south of the Kra Isthmus between 1996 and 2009 were black, indicating a near-fixation of melanism in Peninsular Malaysia. In 2019, a black individual was photographed outside a protected area in Jeli District.\nBoth black and spotted leopards were recorded in Gunung Gede Pangrango National Park in West Java between 2005 and 2017.\nFrequency of melanism appears to be approximately 11% over the leopard's range. Data on the distribution of leopard populations indicates that melanism occurs in five subspecies in the wild: the Indian leopard, Javan leopard, African leopard, Indochinese leopard (\"P. p. delacouri\") and Sri Lankan leopard (\"P. p. kotiya\"). Based on records from camera traps, melanistic leopards occur foremost in tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests.\nMelanism in the leopard is conferred by a recessive allele.\nIt is thought that melanism confers a selective advantage under certain conditions since it is more common in regions of dense forest, where light levels are lower. Preliminary studies also suggest that melanism might be linked to beneficial mutations in the immune system.\nThe typical spots and rosettes are present but hidden due to the excess melanin.\nThe taxonomic status of captive black leopards and the extent of hybridization between the Javan leopard and other leopard subspecies is uncertain. Therefore, coordinated breeding programs for black leopards do not exist in European and North American zoos. Black leopards occupy space needed for breeding endangered leopard subspecies and are not included within the North American Species Survival Plan.\nA black Amur leopard (\"P. p. orientalis\") was exhibited at the San Diego Zoo in 2017.\nA pseudo-melanistic leopard has a normal background color, but the spots are more densely packed than normal, and merge to obscure the golden-brown background color. Any spots on the flanks and limbs that have not merged into the mass of swirls and stripes are unusually small and discrete, rather than forming rosettes. The face and underparts are paler and dappled, like those of ordinary spotted leopards.\nJaguar.\nIn 1801, F\u00e9lix de Azara described a black jaguar observed by local people near the Paran\u00e1 River in Paraguay.\nIn 2004, a female black jaguar was recorded in Mexico's Sierra Madre Occidental.\nIn 2009, a black jaguar was photographed by a camera trap for the first time in Costa Rica's Alberto Manuel Brenes Biological Reserve.\nIn Barbilla National Park, black jaguars were recorded in 2013.\nIn the mountains of the Cordillera de Talamanca, 104 records of jaguars were obtained between 2010 and 2019; 26 of them showed melanistic jaguars. \nIn eastern Panama, black jaguars were repeatedly photographed in the Mamon\u00ed River Valley between 2016 and 2018, mostly in primary forest. Five black jaguars have been monitored in the V\u00e1rzea forest of Mamirau\u00e1 Sustainable Development Reserve in the Brazilian State of Amazonas between 2003 and 2018.\nBlack jaguars were also recorded in the Brazilian Par\u00e1 state.\nMelanism in the jaguar is caused by deletions in the melanocortin 1 receptor gene and conferred by a dominant allele.\nIn the United States.\nThere have been numerous reported black panther sightings in the New Orleans area since late 2010. Recent photographs are still under examination by the Louisiana Department of Wildlife &amp; Fisheries.\nIn Florida, a few melanistic bobcats have been captured; these have apparently been mistaken for Florida panthers. Ulmer (1941) presents photographs and descriptions of two animals captured in Martin County in 1939 and 1940. In the photographs, they appear black, and one of the hunters called them black.\nThe Academy specimen, upon close examination, is far from black. The most heavily pigmented portions are the crown and dorsal area. In most lights these areas appear black, but at certain angles the dorsal strip has a decidedly mahogany tint. The mahogany coloring becomes lighter and richer on the sides. The underparts are lightest, being almost ferruginous in color. The chin, throat and cheeks are dark chocolate-brown, but the facial stripes can be seen clearly. The limbs are dark mahogany. In certain lights the typical spot-pattern of the Florida bobcat can be distinctly seen on the side, underparts and limbs. The Bronx Park animal appears darker and the spots are not visible, although the poor light in the quarantine cage may have been the reason.\nIn Australia.\nBlack panther sightings are frequently recorded in rural Victoria and New South Wales\nThe \"Animal X Natural Mysteries Unit\" led an investigation into the phantom panther. Mike Williams, a local researcher, said he had sent scat and hair found by locals to labs for analysis, which identified it as scat from dogs that had feasted on swamp wallaby, and hair from a domestic cat. Williams said he also had leopard scat and hair collected from a private zoo tested by one of the same labs, but that these samples came back with the same results of dog scat and domestic cat hair. The lab used was not identified in the episode.\nCougar.\nThere is no authenticated case of a truly melanistic cougar. No specimen has been photographed or killed in the wild, nor has it ever been bred in captivity. Unconfirmed sightings known as the \"North American black panther\" are currently attributed to errors in species identification by non-experts, and by the mimetic exaggeration of size.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43619", "revid": "13518729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43619", "title": "Great white shark", "text": "Species of large lamniform shark\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe great white shark (Carcharodon carcharias), also known as the white shark, white pointer, or simply great white, is a species of large mackerel shark which can be found in the coastal surface waters of all the major oceans. It is the only known surviving species of its genus \"Carcharodon\". The great white shark is notable for its size, with the largest preserved female specimen measuring in length and around in weight at maturity. However, most are smaller; males measure , and females measure on average. According to a 2014 study, the lifespan of great white sharks is estimated to be as long as 70 years or more, well above previous estimates, making it one of the longest lived cartilaginous fishes currently known. A year later another study found that male great white sharks take 26 years to reach sexual maturity, while the females take 33 years to be ready to produce offspring. Great white sharks can swim at speeds of 25\u00a0km/h (16\u00a0mph) for short bursts and to depths of .\nThe great white shark is arguably the world's largest-known extant macropredatory fish, and is one of the primary predators of marine mammals, such as pinnipeds and dolphins. The great white shark is also known to prey upon a variety of other animals, including fish, other sharks, and seabirds. It has only one recorded natural predator, the orca.\nThe species faces numerous ecological challenges which has resulted in international protection. The International Union for Conservation of Nature lists the great white shark as a vulnerable species, and it is included in Appendix II of CITES. It is also protected by several national governments, such as Australia (as of 2018). Due to their need to travel long distances for seasonal migration and extremely demanding diet, it is not logistically feasible to keep great white sharks in captivity; because of this, while attempts have been made to do so in the past, there are no aquariums in the world known to house a live specimen.\nThe great white shark is depicted in popular culture as a ferocious man-eater, largely as a result of the novel \"Jaws\" by Peter Benchley and its subsequent film adaptation by Steven Spielberg. While humans are not a preferred prey, this species is nonetheless responsible for the largest number of reported and identified fatal unprovoked shark attacks on humans. However, attacks are rare, typically occurring fewer than 10 times per year globally.\nEtymology and naming.\nThe most common English names for the species include 'great white shark', 'white shark', and Australian variant 'white pointer'. These names are thought to refer to its white underside, which is noticeable in dead sharks lying upside down. Colloquial use favours the name 'great white shark' or simply 'great white', with 'great' perhaps emphasizing the size and power of the species. Scientists typically use 'white shark', as there is no \"lesser white shark\" to be compared to, though some use 'white shark' to refer to all members of the Lamnidae.\nThe scientific genus name \"Carcharodon\" is a portmanteau of two Ancient Greek words: the prefix \"carchar-\" is derived from \u03ba\u03ac\u03c1\u03c7\u03b1\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 (\"k\u00e1rkharos\"), which means \"sharp\". The suffix \"-odon\" derives from \u1f40\u03b4\u03ce\u03bd (\"od\u1e53n\"), a which translates to \"tooth\". The specific name \"carcharias\" is from the \u03ba\u03b1\u03c1\u03c7\u03b1\u03c1\u03af\u03b1\u03c2 (\"karkhar\u00edas\"), the Ancient Greek word for shark. The great white shark was one of the species originally described by Carl Linnaeus in his 1758 \"10th edition of Systema Naturae\" and assigned the scientific name \"Squalus carcharias\", \"Squalus\" being the genus that he placed all sharks in. By the 1810s, it was recognized that the shark should be placed in a new genus, but it was not until 1838 when Sir Andrew Smith coined the name \"Carcharodon\" as the new genus.\nThere have been a few attempts to describe and classify the white shark before Linnaeus. One of its earliest mentions in literature as a distinct type of animal appears in Pierre Belon's 1553 book \"De aquatilibus duo, cum eiconibus ad vivam ipsorum effigiem quoad ejus fieri potuit, ad amplissimum cardinalem Castilioneum\". In it, he illustrated and described the shark under the name \"Canis carcharias\" based on the ragged nature of its teeth and its alleged similarities with dogs. Another name used for the white shark around this time was \"Lamia\", first coined by Guillaume Rondelet in his 1554 book \"Libri de Piscibus Marinis\", who also identified it as the fish that swallowed the prophet Jonah in biblical texts.\nTaxonomy and evolution.\nThe white shark is the sole recognized extant species in the genus \"Carcharodon\", and is one of five extant species belonging to the family Lamnidae. Other members of this family include the mako sharks, porbeagle, and salmon shark. The family belongs to the Lamniformes, the order of mackerel sharks.\nPhylogeny.\nThe modern clade of the Lamnidae is estimated to have emerged between 65 and 46 million years ago (mya) based on a 1996 molecular clock using the mitochondrial DNA gene cytochrome \"b\". Most phylogenetic analyses based on molecular data or anatomical features place the great white shark as the sister species to the mako shark clade with the \"Lamna\" clade as the most basal in the family. Under this topology, the 1996 clock estimated the great white shark's divergence from the makos to have occurred between 60 and 43 mya. A more recent 2024 clock using genome-wide autosomal single nucleotide polymorphisms estimated a later alternate divergence between the shortfin mako and great white shark at 41.6 mya. A minority of analyses recovered an alternate placement of the great white shark as the most basal member. A 2025 clock using the whole mitogenome with this topology estimated the divergence between the great white shark and other lamnids at 47.4 mya.\nFossil history.\nThe great white shark first unambiguously appears in the fossil record in the Pacific basin about 5.3 mya at the beginning of the Pliocene. Although there are few claims of fossils dated as early as 16 mya, their validity is doubted as mislabeled or misidentified. Like all sharks, the great white's skeleton is made primarily of soft cartilage that does not preserve well. The overwhelming majority of fossils as a result are teeth. Nevertheless, paleontologists have confidently traced the emergence of the great white shark and its immediate ancestry to a large extinct shark known as \"Carcharodon hastalis\". This species appeared worldwide during the Early Miocene (~23 mya) and had teeth alike to the modern great white shark's, except that the cutting edges lacked serrations. The form was probably derived from an ancient lineage of large white sharks that arose in the early Eocene (~56-48 mya) from a primitive mako-like shark. \"C. hastalis\" occupied a middle to high trophic position in its ecosystems and was probably piscivorous (fish-eating) with some addition of marine mammals to its diet.\nAround 8 mya, a Pacific stock of \"C. hastalis\" evolved into \"C. hubbelli\". This divergent lineage, sometimes described as a chronospecies, was characterized by a gradual development of serrations over the next few million years. They were initially fine and sparse but a mosaic of fossils throughout the Pacific basin document an increase in quantity and coarseness over time, eventually becoming fully serrated as the great white shark's by 5.3 mya. Serrations are more effective at cutting prey than non-serrated edges, facilitating further specialization towards a mammal diet. It is likely the ancestral unserrated stock had already been regularly targeting marine mammals for millions of years, and therefore maintained an environment favoring rapid selection towards increasingly serrated teeth once a mutation for incipient serrations appeared. Teeth from the same strata may exhibit significant variation in serration development and morphology, which may be indicative of persistent interbreeding with \"C. hastalis\" for at least some time. The great white shark dispersed as soon as it emerged, with fossils in the Mediterranean, North Sea Basin, and South Africa occurring as early as 5.3-5 mya. Colonization of the northwestern Atlantic appeared to have delayed, with fossils absent until 3.3 mya.\nAppearance and anatomy.\nThe great white shark has a stocky, torpedo-shaped body with a short, cone-shaped snout; long gill slits that do not reach around the head; a large triangular first dorsal fin, which partly lines up with the pectoral fins, and tiny second dorsal fin; a caudal fin with similarly sized lopes and one keel; and a tiny anal fin. The species has a countershaded coloration; being dark on top, usually blue-gray or gray-brown, with a white underside. It also has black tips on the underside of the pectoral fins. There is evidence that the species can change pigments, adding melanin to blotches of white. The skin is covered in dermal denticles which are smaller than in other sharks, with a three ridged surface; each ridge having tips which point backwards.\nSize.\nThe great white shark is considered to be the largest macropredatory shark and fish. Females are generally larger than males; the former measure on average in length while the latter average in length. Similarly, females are recorded to weigh compared to for males. The maximum size of the white shark has been debated. Its reputation has led to exaggerated and discredited claims of specimens up to during the 19th and 20th centuries. Biologists Richard Ellis and John E. McCosker wrote that \"These giants seem to disappear or shrink when a responsible observer approaches with tape measure\".\nAccording to shark expert J.\u00a0E. Randall, the largest white shark reliably measured was a specimen reported from Ledge Point, Western Australia in 1987. He stated, \"Undoubtedly \"Carcharodon carcharias\" exceeds in length, but as yet there is no authenticated record of such a size\". A 2014 study of white shark catch records in the northwest Pacific concluded that the longest reliably measured shark was in total length and the heaviest weighed . A complete female great white shark specimen caught in the Mediterranean and displayed in the Museum of Zoology in Lausanne, Switzerland, measured in total body length with the caudal fin in its depressed position, and is estimated to have weighed making it the largest preserved specimen.\nTeeth and jaws.\nThe triangular teeth are lined with serrations and can reach . They are broader on the upper jaw and overall more slender in juveniles. The teeth are arranged in rows like a conveyor belt, with teeth in the back moving to replace those in front. An open mouth exposes roughly 26 and 24 front row teeth on the front row of the upper and lower jaw respectively, with a total of 300 teeth in the mouth. The jaws are separate from the skull, and are connected to the body entirely by muscles and tendons; allowing them to project in and out. The jaws can reach a gape of 150 degrees.\nA 2008 study using a computer scan of a long and juvenile white shark determined that the specimen could exert a bite force of in the front and in the back. From this, the researchers deduced that a specimen long and massing could exert a bite force of in the front and in the back. The jaws are strengthened by mineralized cartilage; this is lacking in young white sharks which have to eat softer food.\nSenses.\nAs with other sharks, white sharks use five senses when hunting; eyesight, hearing, olfaction (smell), electroreception (via pits called Ampullae of Lorenzini) and water movement detection (via a lateral line). Analysis of the brain and cranial nerves suggest that sight and smell are the most developed. The eyes of the white shark can appear solid black but have blue irises, and the pupil is more horizontal than in other species. The eyes have a relatively low ratio of rods to cones, indicating daytime vision. They lack nictitating membranes but possess well developed muscles that allow them to roll around to keep track of prey and roll back to avoid attacks. The white shark has a relatively large olfactory bulb, an adaptation for smelling across open ocean; it can detect potential prey from . The vomeronasal system, located in the roof of the mouth, also appears to play a role in olfactory sensing. It's lateral line can detect disruptions in the water from away.\nInternal physiology.\nThe great white shark is an obligate ram ventilator; to breathe it must swim constantly so water flows through the gills. Spiracles, extra breathing holes behind the eyes common in bottom dwelling sharks, is reduced or absent in this species. It has a large, double-lobed, liver that can be almost 30% of its body weight, and stores lipids, fatty acids and oils. The liver helps keep the shark from sinking, as the oil has six times the buoyancy of the surrounding water. The lipids and fatty acids provide the shark energy for travel and fuel for reproduction and growth. One study concluded that a white shark liver is more energy-rich than whale blubber. White sharks appear to have strong immune systems and can tolerate high amounts of toxic heavy metals in their blood, moreso than other vertebrates. They are also documented to heal relatively quickly from even serve wounds, and the species' genome shows \"positive selection in key genes involved in the wound-healing process...\".\nUnlike most other fish, white sharks are endothermic ('warm-blooded'). Their bodies can maintain temperatures warmer than the surrounding water, which allows them to be active and hunt in cool waters. One study found that stomach temperatures ranged from in waters . White sharks maintain a warm body temperature via a complex blood vessel system known as a rete mirabile, were warm blood generated from the dark slow-twitch muscles is constantly supplied to other parts of the body within a countercurrent exchange system. Heat is retained within the body rather than exiting via the gills. Warm blood can also be redirected from the liver to the body core via a vascular shunt, which can open and close. In addition, the species has an enlarged, thickened heart and its blood contains more red-blood cells and hemoglobin than even most mammals and birds.\nDistribution and habitat.\nGreat white sharks range from tropical to temperate and even colder waters around the world, with major populations in the northeastern Pacific, western North Atlantic, the Mediterranean, southern African waters, northwestern Pacific, Oceania and both the Pacific and Atlantic coasts of South America. Shark expert Greg Skomal lists the Farallon Islands, California, Guadalupe Island, Mexico, Cape Cod, Massachusetts, Western Cape, South Africa, Neptune Islands, Australia, and both Stewart Island and the Chatham Islands, New Zealand as major coastal feeding aggregations. Researchers have also identified an offshore feeding aggregation between western North America and Hawaii dubbed the White Shark Caf\u00e9.\nWhite sharks can be found both along the coast and in the open ocean, and may dive to depths of up to but are typically closer to the surface. Deeper dives are more common in the open ocean. Coastal habitats used include nearshore archipelagos, offshore reefs, banks and shoals, and headlands. A 2018 study indicated that white sharks will congregate in anticyclonic eddies in the open ocean. Juvenile white sharks are more limited to shallow coastal waters with temperatures between . Increased observation of young sharks in areas they were not previously common, such as Monterey Bay on the central California coast, suggest climate change may be forcing juveniles towards the poles.\nMigrations.\nWhite sharks go on vast migrations; one individual that was tagged off the South African coast swam to the southern coast of Australia and back within a year. Another white shark from South Africa was tracked and documented swimming to Australia's northwestern coast and back, a journey of in under nine months. In May 2024, a satellite tag was recovered from an Indonesian fisherman which was determined to have come from a subadult female great white shark tagged off the South African coast in May 2012 which swam to and got killed off the Indonesian coast in November 2016.\nIn the northeastern Pacific, white sharks travel between the coastal US and Mexico and the Hawaiian Archipelago; they feed along the coast mostly during fall and winter, and farther out to sea during spring and summer. In the western North Atlantic, white shark congregate between the Gulf of Maine and Cape Hatteras during spring and summer, and shift farther south towards Florida and around to the Gulf of Mexico during the fall and winter. In fall, winter and spring, some sharks disperse widely across the ocean, reaching as far east as the Azores.\nBehavior and ecology.\nGreat white sharks are more active during the daytime; how they sleep is not well understood. At nighttime, one individual was recorded swimming slowly in one direction along a current with its mouth open. White sharks typically swim at around but can sprint up to . One individual was recorded cruising at a sustained speed of while migrating, which is fast for a shark and more similar to fast-swimming tuna. White sharks display various surface behaviors, such as poking its head out or spyhop to observe an object above the water, as well as 'Repetitive Aerial Gaping' where a spy-hopping shark repeatedly gaping its mouths while belly-up, possibly as a sign of frustration after missing a bait.\nThe white shark is generally considered to be a solitary species, though aggregations do occur. A 2016 study of sharks around Mossel Bay, South Africa concluded that white shark associations are generally random with few social interactions. By contrast, a 2019 study found that sharks around Neptune Islands gathered in non-random aggregations. Similarly a 2022 study of white sharks at Guadalupe Island suggests that individuals may associate so that they can learn from others where to find prey or carcasses to scavenged. White shark aggregations can also differ in composition of individuals based on age and sex. At Neptune Islands, sightings of subadult females peak during April and May, subadult males in February and again in September, adult females in June and adult males in September.\nDiet and feeding.\nThe great white shark is an apex predator that opportunistically feeds on fish, cephalopods, marine mammals, sea birds and sea turtles. Diet differs based on size and age; individuals that have reached can feed on marine mammals, while juveniles are limited to smaller prey like fish and cephalopods. Great white sharks are said to prefer prey with high fat content, but even large individuals are recorded to eat low-fat foods.\nMarine mammals preyed on include pinnipeds and cetaceans. They are also recorded to bite sea otters but do not usually consume them. The seasonal availability of pinnipeds drives white shark migration to certain locations. Targeted species include harbor seals, northern elephant seals and California sea lions off western North America; harbor seals and gray seals off eastern North America; Cape fur seals off South Africa; Cape fur seals (Australian subspecies), New Zealand fur seals, and Australian sea lions off Australia; and New Zealand fur seals off New Zealand. White sharks mainly hunt pinnipeds by ambush and often target newly weaned young as they have thick blubber but are still small, inexperienced and vulnerable. Adults are more difficult to overpower and can injure the shark with their teeth and claws; adult male elephant seals are particularly formidable as they can grow as massive as adult white sharks. Some species will mob the shark. \nObservations off California find that white sharks ambush pinnipeds near the surface from below, seizing and dragging them under. Earless seals, like elephant seals, are more likely to be struck in front of the hind flippers or the head\u2014even leading to decapitation\u2014while sea lions were more likely to be grabbed behind the torso. With their large fore-flippers, sea lions are usually able to break free from the first bite but are weakened and usually recaptured. Prey is released after it dies of blood loss, and the shark feeds on the carcass after it floats to the surface. In 1984, Tricas and McCosker suggested that white sharks bite pinnipeds, release them and then wait for them to bleed to death before eating, though this has been refuted. Off South Africa, ambushes on Cape fur seals usually involve the shark leaping or breaching out of the water. To breach, a shark starts at around below the surface and ascends quickly towards its target, increasing its tail movements and pitch angle. Sharks may breach partially or entirely out of the water at different angles, clearing up to when airborne. Missed seals may be chased after; such pursuits involve the prey using its speed and agility to escape as the shark employs various maneuvers to catch them. The longer the chase, the less likely the shark succeeds. Sharks commonly consume fur seals quickly after they are killed. White sharks in Cape Cod hunt seals in shallow water, relying on the murkiness of the water for concealment and striking them from the sides.\nCetacean species recorded as prey include small toothed whales like bottlenose dolphins, common dolphins, Indo-Pacific humpback dolphins, striped dolphins, Risso's dolphins and harbor porpoises. Bite wounds from white sharks have also been documented on dusky dolphins, dwarf sperm whales, pygmy sperm whales and even beaked whales. White sharks typically attack them from behind\u2014beyond the prey's echolocation\u2014and target the tail, underside or dorsal area. There are two records of white sharks managing to kill a small humpback whale, one involved two sharks working as a pair. In both cases the whale was weakened by net entanglement, and the sharks employed strategic biting and as well as drowning. White sharks are more likely to scavenge large whales. Multiple sharks will gorge themselves on a single whale carcass, biting into it and ripping off chunks by shaking their heads side-to-side. They may spit out pieces, possibly judging them to be too low in energy using their teeth as mechanoreceptors. The sharks do not appear to act aggressively towards each other, but accidental bites can occur. Eventually, the sharks become lethargic, they can no longer lift their heads out of the water nor can they get in a good bite as they bump into the dead whale.\nWhite sharks feed on numerous fish species, including other sharks. One 2023 study found that juvenile and subadult white sharks off the east coast of Australia fed primarily on ray-finned fishes, particularly flathead grey mullets, Japanese scads and various species of porgies, mackrels and tuna. Off California, white sharks will eat cobezons, white seabasses, lingcod, halibut, leopard sharks, smooth-hounds, spiny dogfishes, school sharks, stingrays, bat rays and skates. In the Mediterranean, they consume Atlantic bluefin tunas, bullet tunas, Atlantic bonitos, swordfishes, blue sharks, shortfin makos and stingrays. An ocean sunfish was also recorded in a white shark stomach. Off the northeastern US, juveniles commonly eat bottom-dwelling fish like hake, while off South Africa they often prey on dusky sharks. The remains of an adult whale shark was found in a white shark, though whether this is active hunting or scavenging could not be determined.\nThey are also recorded to consume cephalopods as evidenced by beaks found in their stomachs. Off South Africa, white sharks under were found with remains of coastal and bottom-dwelling species like certain octopus species, as well as species of the genera \"Sepia\" and \"Loligo\", while sharks over that length seem to prefer more open ocean species like those of the genera \"Ancistrocheirus\", \"Octopoteuthis\", \"Lycoteuthis\", \"Ornithoteuthis\", \"Chiroteuthis\" and \"Argonauta\". Near Guadalupe, white sharks have been documented with scars which appear to have been caused by neon flying squids, jumbo squids and giant squids. Both fish and cephalopods may be important food sources at the White Shark Caf\u00e9.\nOther animals recorded as prey include sea turtles. The shells of green sea turtles and loggerhead sea turtles have been found in white shark stomachs in the Mediterranean, and bites have been recorded on leatherback sea turtles off central California. Around Seal Island, South Africa, white sharks are recorded to attack and kill seabirds like Cape cormorants, white-breasted cormorants, kelp gulls, Cape gannets, brown skuas, sooty shearwaters, and African penguins, but rarely consume them.\nSocial communication.\nGreat white sharks communicate with each other through a complex array of body language. Most behaviors have been observed at aggregations around seal rookeries shortly after peak hunting periods, where sharks then engage in extensive socializing. At least 20 unique forms of body language are known, most of which consist of two sharks swimming with or around each other in passing, parallel, or in circles to examine the other in a ritualized manner. Occasionally one shark will openly show off its body in a lateral display to the other. It is hypothesized that the main purpose of these interactions is to establish social rank by size to avoid competition. Indeed, observations by Sperone and colleagues in 2010 found display behaviors to be more common between individuals of similar size where differences are not immediately obvious. There is no evidence that sex is a significant factor in behavioral patterns. With dominance established, the smaller shark then acts submissively towards the larger shark by yielding during subsequent encounters or simply avoiding confrontation. Body language is less frequent in California and Australia compared to Dyer Island in South Africa. It is thought that this is because the former locations are less densely populated, and so sharks there are more readily familiar with each other's hierarchy.\nDirect violence is extremely rare, as individuals typically end conflicts through peaceful means. Splash fights appear to be the most common way of resolving ownership disputes over prey. Here, one shark slaps the surface with its tail to splash water at the competing shark. The competitor either withdraws or responds with a tail splash of its own. Usually one or two splashes are exchanged per shark, though individuals will sometimes persist with more. The contest is \"won\" by the shark that compels the other to concede via the most tenacious splashing, which appears to be determined by a cumulative signal strength of vigor and strength. Larger body size does not always secure superior signal strength, on occasion the smaller shark emerges victorious. Great white sharks have also been observed employing tail splashing to intimidate tiger sharks around a whale carcass, and even against boats and shark cages which were likely perceived as competitors.\nReproduction and growth.\nLittle is known of the reproductive behavior of the great white shark. There are two anecdotal accounts of the species possibly mating, one in 1991 and a second one in 1997, both off New Zealand. These testimonies both report belly to belly rolling during copulation. It is assumed that the male bites onto the female's head or fin while inserting one of his claspers, as is the case in other shark species. The accounts also suggest that that white sharks mate in shallow water away from feeding areas. Females at Guadalupe and Cape Cod have been seen with scarring that may have been the result of copulation, possible evidence that these areas are used for mating. Conversely other studies have concluded that white sharks may mate offshore; males were found to gather in the White Shark Caf\u00e9 during spring and where followed by some females, suggesting a lek mating system where females move through and choose their partners. In 2013, it was proposed that whale carcasses are an important location for sexually mature sharks to meet for mating.\nSome pregnant females have been caught and have provided information on the species' reproductive biology. The great white shark is ovoviviparous; fertilized eggs hatch within the female, and the embryos continue to develop within each uterus. Their nourishment comes in three stages; they first feed on their yolk sacs, followed by a milky substance secreted by the uterus known as lipid histotrophy, and finally switch to consuming unfertilized eggs. After around 12 months, the female gives live birth to two\u2013to\u2013ten pups. Birth intervals last two or three years. A 2024 metastudy concluded that white sharks give birth during spring and summer in shallow waters surrounding islands with temperatures of . White sharks are born at a length of . In July 2024, a possible newborn white shark was filmed for the first time, off the coast of southern California (just off Carpinteria), measuring an estimated and with a pale complexion, originally attributed to histotrophy. A follow-up study confirmed the Carpinteria shark being a newborn, but suggests that the paleness is embryonic epithelium that covers the shark's skin denticles, known to exist in the related salmon shark, and rubs off shortly after birth.\nBands in the shark's vertebrate are used to determine the animal's age and growth. Early studies determined that the species grows relatively quickly; a 1985 study concluded that white sharks reach maturity nine to ten years of age at a length of . Conversely, a 2015 study concluded that white sharks are a slow growing and long lived species. Males were found to reach maturity at around 26 years at a length of around while females take 33 years to reach maturity at a length of around . Their growth rate levels off after the age of 40.\nMortality and health.\nGreat white sharks are estimated to reach over 70 years of age. A 2018 study of sharks off eastern Australia and New Zealand found that juveniles had a survival rate of over 70%, while adults survived at a rate of over 90%.\nWhite sharks are sometimes preyed on by orcas, which they also likely compete with for food. The first recorded orca predation occurred at the Farallon Islands in 1997 when an estimated female orca killed an estimated white shark. Another similar attack apparently occurred there in 2000, but its outcome is not clear. Subsequently, orca predation on white sharks would be documented off South Africa and Australia. Around South Africa, orcas typically hunt white sharks in groups of two\u2013to\u2013six. These cetaceans consume the energy-rich liver of the sharks and dead white sharks washed ashore are found with these organs removed. In 2017, a live white shark was seen with purported orca teeth marks, the first piece of evidence for the species surviving an attack. The arrival of orcas in an area can cause white sharks to flee and forage elsewhere for the rest of the year, as has been documented both off South Africa and California. In addition to orcas, white sharks may also fall prey to other sharks as pups and juveniles, including older white sharks.\nThere are two recorded instances of the ectoparasitic cookiecutter shark targeting subadult white sharks off Guadalupe. However, the relative dearth of predation records indicates that white sharks are not a common food source for them. The great white shark is the definitive host of two species of tapeworms from the genus \"Clistobothrium\", these being \"Clistobothrium carcharodoni\" and \"Clistobothrium tumidum\". The former is believed to be transmitted to great whites through the consumption of infected cetacean prey which serve as intermediary or paratenic hosts of the tapeworm. The latter species of tapeworm's transmission vector is currently unknown. The intensity of \"C. carcharodoni\" infestations in affected great whites is extremely high; in one case, up to 2,533 specimens were recovered from the spiral intestine of a single individual.\nRelationship with humans.\nPrior to the 1970s, the great white shark as a species was known mostly to biologists and fishermen. The release of the 1971 documentary \"Blue Water, White Death\" is crediting with bringing the shark to public attention. The white shark's popularity would increase further with the 1974 novel \"Jaws\" written by Peter Benchley, and its 1975 film adaptation directed by Steven Spielberg. The novel and film helped create the image of the species as a dangerous maneater. Benchley would later express regret stating \"I cannot rewrite \"Jaws\", nor make an ignoble monster of this magnificent animal.\".\nCompared to other fish, the great white shark was not an important species for fishermen. Their meat was considered tasty but was it was not considered worth it due to the difficulty of hauling them in. Nevertheless, their reputation and size made them targets for sport fishing. The species was lured by chumming, and them presented with a hooked bait. Port Lincoln, South Australia was an epicenter of white shark fishing starting in the 1950s. In 1959, a fisherman named Alf Dean caught a shark, and was given the record for being the largest fish caught by rod and reel. A larger white shark was caught in Streaky Bay but was disqualified based on the bait used.\nBites.\nOf all shark species, the great white shark is responsible for the largest number of recorded shark bite incidents on humans, with 351 documented unprovoked bite incidents on humans since 1580 as of 2024. The majority of them have been non-fatal, while 59 have been fatal. White sharks do not appear to find humans suitable as prey, though cases of humans being consumed have been reported.\nIn 1984, Tricas and McCosker proposed that white sharks attack humans out of mistaken identity; surfboards in particular may have a similar silhouette to seals and sea lions. A 2021 study concludes that the sharks are likely colorblind and cannot see in fine enough detail to determine whether the silhouette above them is a pinniped or a swimming human, potentially vindicating the hypothesis. Other studies have disputed the 'mistaken identity' hypothesis and have instead proposed that shark bites are actually exploratory bites. A 2016 study finds that most shark bites on surfers are too superficial to kill a pinniped and compares them to the test bites they make on different objects. Similarly, a 2023 paper criticized the 'mistaken identity' hypothesis for focusing too much on vision and not considering the shark's other senses. The authors conclude that \"sharks don't make 'mistakes' but instead continually explore their environments and routinely investigate novel objects as potential prey by biting them\".\nGreat white sharks infrequently bite boats. Tricas and McCosker's underwater observations suggest that sharks are attracted to boats by the electrical fields they generate, which are picked up by the ampullae of Lorenzini.\nCaptivity.\nThe great white shark is difficult keep in captivity due to its large size and migratory nature. Attempts had been made since 1955, in facilities in North America, Hawaii, Australia and South Africa. The sharks survived only for days during the earliest attempts, while the early 1980s, aquariums like Steinhart Aquarium, Sea World San Diego, and Marineland of the Pacific were able to keep juvenile white sharks for weeks before releasing them. A major contributor to the morality of captive white sharks was the poor transport; many were accidentally captured by commercial gillnets and kept on fishing lines or in a tank before being handed over to aquarium staff, causing them stress. One famous shark named 'Sandy, who measured , was kept at Steinhart for five days in August 1980 and was released for bumping into the walls.\nThe most successful attempts at keeping the species occurred at the Monterey Bay Aquarium (MBA), where six white sharks were displayed between 2004 and 2011. Researchers at universities in California attributed the aquarium's success at exhibiting white sharks to the use of a net pen, which gave the sharks time to recover from capture prior to transport. A portable tank used to transport the fish to the exhibit allowed the sharks to swim continuously. The sharks started at but grew too big and had to be released; one shark was kept for 198 days and attracted one million visitors. Having gained enough information on the species, MBA discontinued keeping white sharks.\nTourism.\nAreas were white sharks gather have been sites for ecotourism; operators allow guests to view them from boats or from inside shark cages. Most operators allow chumming to attract the sharks. Cited benefits of ecotours include education, funding for research and increasing the value of living sharks. One study in southern Australia found that shark tours had positive effects on the participants knowledge and awareness of the animals and support for their conservation.\nThere is some fear that interactions with tourists could affect the sharks' behavior. At Neptune Islands, it was found that white sharks used more energy during encounters with cage divers. The researchers note, however, that cage-diving can have a minimal effect on shark populations as long as they limit interactions with individual sharks. In the same area, excessive boats drove away many sharks, though the implementation in 2012 of new regulations on the number of licensed boat operators and number of operating days per week allowed for the population to recover. There is also no strong evidence that chumming alters the feeding behavior of white sharks or habituates them to being fed by humans. In January 2023, the Mexican government banned white shark tourism at Guadalupe; due to reports of swimming outside cages, mishandling chum, littering and two incidents of sharks getting stuck and harmed by the cages, one of which may have resulted in death.\nConservation.\nAs of 2025, the great white shark is classified as vulnerable worldwide by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), due to a population decline of 30\u201349% over the past 159 years. It was also given a green status of \"moderately depleted\" with a recovery score of 59%. The biggest threat to white shark populations is accidental catching in fishing nets and, in Australia and South Africa, beach protection programs, where are caught in protective drum-lines and gillnets. They nevertheless have a high survival rate when released from nets. The species is included in Appendix II of CITES, meaning that international trade in the species (including parts and derivatives) requires a permit.\nEurope and the Mediterranean.\nThe IUCN listed the species as critically endangered around Europe in 2015 and in the Mediterranean in 2016. Factors that contributed to his listing include; its genetic isolation in this region, its slow growth rate, its decline in numbers along with those of other large shark species, and its negative public perception. The IUCN suggests that no more than 250 mature white sharks inhabit the waters around Europe, mostly in the Mediterranean. \nA 2017 study suggested a decrease in average size of Mediterranean white sharks which may be a sign of a declining population. In 2020 study examined records of white sharks from 1860 to 2016, and concluded that white shark sightings peaked in the 1880s and again in the 1980s, but detected a 61% decrease since 1975. Similarly a 2025 study found that only four white sharks were seen in the past ten years, in contrast to around ten sightings per year between 1985 and 1995. Causes of the decline including fishing. While there are no fisheries industry based on this species, it have been deliberately caught and harpooned in response to attacks or media reports. They are also accidently captured or intendedly killed when stealing from nets, longlines or hooks. Other possible causes include the decline of prey species like bluefin tuna and Mediterranean monk seals.\nThe great white shark is protected as an endangered species under the Barcelona Convention of 1978 (amended in 1995), of which every coastal Mediterranean nation is a signatory. These parties are required to conserve the shark and other vulnerable species. In 2009, white sharks were also given legal protections from fishing and capturing by then European Commission specifically Regulation No 43/2009. An EU funded program managed to successfully release a by-caught juvenile white shark around Lampedusa in 2023. Researchers have highlighted this as an example how cooperation between scientists and local fisherman is important for the conservation of the white shark in Mediterranean waters.\nSouth Africa.\nThe species has been protected in South Africa since 1991; the law bans both deliberate killing and selling. The province of KwaZulu-Natal, via the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board (KZN), allows for the use of nets around protected beaches to reduce the risk of shark attacks but not at major aggregation sights. A 1996 study estimated the average population size between 1989 and 1993 to be 1,279, while a 2004 estimated 1,953 individuals post-protection. A 2023 study concluded that white shark numbers off South Africa have remained stable since 1991. While sightings of sharks at major aggregation sites in Western Cape have declined since the early 2010s, the researchers have attributed this to shifting their distribution further east, possibly in response to attacks by orcas. The results of this study are disputed; in 2024 it was noted that catches of white sharks in KZN have declined since 2010, suggesting they have not moved eastward.\nOceania.\nThe great white shark population is estimated to be 2,500\u20136,750 individuals around eastern Australia and New Zealand. The species was given legal protection by the Australian Government under the Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation (EPBC) Act of 1999 and declared vulnerable in 2000. Similar protections are given at the state level; some of which have protected the species before the national government. New South Wales, Tasmania and Western Australia list the species as Vulnerable while Victoria lists it as endangered. In 2002, the Australian government created the White Shark Recovery Plan, implementing government-mandated conservation research and monitoring for conservation in addition to federal protection and stronger regulation of shark-related trade and tourism activities. An updated recovery plan was published in 2013 to review progress, research findings, and to implement further conservation actions. The report found that the 2002 plan had some success, having completed 14 of 34 tasks listed. A study in 2012 revealed that Australia's white shark population was separated by Bass Strait into genetically distinct eastern and western populations, indicating a need for the development of regional conservation strategies.\nThe causes of decline prior to protection included mortality from commercial and sport fishing harvests, as well as being caught in beach protection netting. In 2013, it was reported that deaths from commercial fishing have reduced and no incidental takes from sports fishing, though the population did not fully recover. In spite of official protections in Australia, great white sharks continue to be killed in state \"shark control\" programs within the country. The states of Queensland and New South Wales have implemented \"shark control\" programs (shark culling) to reduce shark attacks at beaches. These programs kill great white sharks (as well as other marine life) using shark nets and drum lines with baited hooks. Partly because of these programs, shark numbers in eastern Australia have decreased. Critics have disputed that these programs reduce shark-related fatalities, and have proposed alternatives like helicopter patrols as well as tagging and displaying the location of individual shark via social media. Western Australia implemented a shark cull program in 2013, but discontinued the following year in response to a recommendation by the Environmental Protection Authority.\nIn April 2007, great white sharks were given full protection in New Zealand waters from land, as well as from New Zealand-flagged boats outside this range. Violations of the law could carry as much as a $250,000 fine and up to six months in prison. In June 2018 the New Zealand Department of Conservation classified the great white shark under the New Zealand Threat Classification System as \"Nationally Endangered\". The species meets the criteria for this classification as there exists a small, stable population of between 250 and 1000 mature individuals. This classification has the qualifiers \"Data Poor\" and \"Threatened Overseas\".\nUnited States.\nCalifornia.\nIn addition to existing federal regulations, great white sharks have been protected under California state law since January 1, 1994. Under this law, catching, hunting, pursuit, capturing, and/or killing of great whites in California waters is strictly prohibited up to offshore, though exceptions exist for great whites caught for scientific research or unintentionally caught as bycatch. In both cases, a special permit is required in order to legally take them.\nIn 2013, great white sharks were added to California's Endangered Species Act. From data collected, the population of great whites in the North Pacific was estimated to be fewer than 340 individuals. Research also reveals these sharks are genetically distinct from other members of their species elsewhere in Africa, Australia, and the east coast of North America, having been isolated from other populations.\nA 2014 study estimated the population of great white sharks along the California coastline to be approximately 2,400.\nIn September 2019, California governor Gavin Newsom signed Assembly Bill 2109 into law, banning the use of shark bait, shark lures, and chumming to attract great whites in California waters, and prohibiting their usage within one nautical mile of any shoreline, pier, or jetty when a great white is visible or known to be present in the area.\nMassachusetts.\nIn June 2015, Massachusetts banned catching, cage diving, feeding, towing decoys, or baiting and chumming for its significant and highly predictable migratory great white population without an appropriate research permit. However, these restrictions apply to only activities within state waters, which extend three miles from shore. Therefore, there are over a dozen tour operators offering cage diving and some do bait and/or chum.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43620", "revid": "31541467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43620", "title": "Melisende, Queen of Jerusalem", "text": "Crusader ruler from 1131 to 1152\nMelisende (c. 1109 \u2013 11 September 1161) was the queen of Jerusalem from 1131 to 1152. She was the first female ruler of the Kingdom of Jerusalem and the first woman to hold a public office in the crusader kingdom. She was already legendary in her lifetime for her generous support of the various Christian communities in her kingdom. Contemporary chronicler William of Tyre praised her wisdom and abilities, while modern historians differ in their assessment.\nMelisende was of mixed Frankish\u2013Armenian heritage, the eldest daughter of King Baldwin\u00a0II and Queen Morphia. In the late 1120s, when it became clear that her father would likely not have a son, she was declared heir presumptive to the throne and married Fulk of Anjou. Baldwin II died in 1131, having conferred the kingdom on Melisende, Fulk, and their son Baldwin III. Melisende and Fulk were crowned shortly after.\nEarly in their joint reign, King Fulk attempted to rule without Queen Melisende. Barons led by Melisende's kinsman Count Hugh II of Jaffa revolted and, although Hugh was defeated and exiled, Melisende grew powerful and terrorized the king and his supporters until he agreed to accord a share of the government to her. Once reconciled, they had another son, Amalric, and Fulk no longer made any decision in the kingdom without Melisende's assent. During their joint rule, Melisende managed Church relations and patronage. After Fulk died in 1143, Melisende assumed full power and was crowned together with their elder son, Baldwin III. Baldwin reached the age of majority in 1145, but Melisende refused to cede any authority to him. After the fall of Edessa in 1144, Melisende urged a military intervention from Europe, which led to the Second Crusade.\nMelisende's relationship with Baldwin III collapsed in 1150 as she further reduced his role in state affairs. In 1152 the High Court divided the kingdom between mother and son. Within weeks, however, Baldwin invaded Melisende's portion and besieged her in the Tower of David. Melisende agreed to step down and retire to Nablus. She continued to involve herself in the affairs of her family, who also ruled the crusader states of Antioch and Tripoli. Although her influence in Jerusalem became limited, she counseled Baldwin and took a successful military initiative in his absence. Her patronage and involvement in ecclesiastical matters also continued. She died in 1161 after becoming incapacitated by an illness, possibly a stroke.\nBackground.\nMelisende was the eldest daughter of the Frankish count of Edessa, Baldwin II, and Morphia of Melitene, an Armenian noblewoman of the Greek Orthodox faith. She was likely born in Edessa sometime between 1104 and 1109 or slightly later. Her mixed heritage reflected the ethnoreligious diversity of the Latin East. She and her sisters Alice and Hodierna would have grown up speaking Armenian and probably Greek, but also became proficient in French.\nIn early 1118 Melisende's father set out on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. During this journey the king of Jerusalem, Baldwin I, died. Baldwin II was elected to succeed him. His wife and daughters stayed in Edessa while he consolidated his position in the kingdom. In late 1119 Baldwin sent for his family, and the new count of Edessa, Baldwin's cousin Joscelin of Courtenay, arranged for them to be escorted south. The cultural setting of Jerusalem was a distinct departure from what Melisende had experienced growing up in Edessa: alongside the Franks, the city's population was largely Arabic- and Syriac-speaking. Melisende's parents were crowned king and queen on Christmas. They had another daughter, Ioveta, the following year.\nBaldwin II was the first Latin ruler of Jerusalem to have children but all four of his children were daughters, and no conventions had yet developed in the crusader states regarding female succession. Baldwin and Morphia's marriage was happy despite there being no male heir to the kingdom. Michael, a contemporary Syriac Orthodox monk, credits Morphia with instilling \"the fear of God\" in Melisende, suggesting that she may have played a greater role than Baldwin in Melisende's spiritual upbringing. Like Baldwin I's wives Arda of Armenia and Adelaide del Vasto, Morphia took no part in the affairs of state. During the 18 months Baldwin spent in Muslim captivity in 1123-24, the kingdom was ruled first by the constable, Eustace I Grenier, and then by William of Bures, prince of Galilee; neither Melisende nor her mother were involved in government. The rulers of Jerusalem were expected not only to govern but to personally lead armies against near-constant threats from Muslim powers on the northern, eastern, and southern borders. This militarized model of kingship made female rule particularly problematic, as it clashed with entrenched expectations of a warrior-king.\nArchbishop William of Tyre, the chief chronicler of the 12th-century kingdom, does not explicitly describe Melisende's appearance or education. He was only born in 1130, and from the death of Fulcher of Chartres in 1127 there was no resident chronicler in the crusader states. William was studying in Europe from 1145 to 1165 and only started writing his \"History of Deeds Done Beyond the Sea\" in 1167. The intervening period is therefore poorly documented and frequently invites speculative interpretation by historians.\nHeir to the kingdom.\nMelisende remained unmarried unusually long for a noblewoman. The delay may reflect her father's lingering hope of producing a son; until then, Melisende remained a potential successor, and the king likely hesitated to settle for a match unworthy of that status, just as appropriate suitors may have been wary of her uncertain future. Queen Morphia died probably in 1126 or 1127. Because he no longer expected to have a son, King Baldwin started providing for his daughters and settling his succession: Melisende was to be his heir; Alice was married to Prince Bohemond II of Antioch; Hodierna may have been betrothed to Raymond of Tripoli at this time; and Ioveta, the youngest, was sent to the Convent of Saint Anne.\nIn late 1127 Baldwin and his advisors convened to discuss Melisende's marriage, which was now a matter of priority. They decided to offer her hand to Count Fulk V of Anjou. Aged around 37, Fulk was considerably older than Melisende and had 17 years of experience as ruler of Anjou. He had been to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage in 1120 and made a favorable impression on the nobles. His wife, Eremburga of Maine, had died in late 1126, and he already had grown children. An embassy led by the noblemen William of Bures and Guy I Brisebarre arrived at Fulk's court in early 1128.\nBefore he would agree to a marriage contract and leave his land, Fulk insisted that Melisende's position as heir be firmly established. A useful precedent was the formal recognition of Empress Matilda, who married Fulk's son Geoffrey Plantagenet in June 1128, as the heir presumptive to her father, King Henry I of England. Ioveta's status as (born to crowned parents) may have complicated her eldest sister's position; Fulk knew that Henry had invoked the principle of porphyrogeniture to justify his accession to the throne of England ahead of his older brother Robert Curthose. Ioveta was still a child, however, and a more serious threat may have come from Alice and Bohemond. The contemporary chronicler Matthew of Edessa records that Baldwin had promised the succession to Bohemond on the occasion of Bohemond's marriage to Alice. The historian Alan V. Murray suggests that it is more plausible that any such plan originated with Alice and Bohemond. The other potential claimants were Baldwin's nephews Ithier of Rethel and Manasses of Hierges. During the negotiations with Fulk, Baldwin started associating Melisende with himself in official documents: in a charter from March 1129 she is listed first among the witnesses, taking precedence even over all the clergy, but is titled only \"daughter of the king\". In a later charter, she again heads the list of witnesses and is explicitly called \"daughter of the king and heir of the kingdom\".\nHaving relinquished his counties to his son Geoffrey, Fulk arrived in the Kingdom of Jerusalem with the embassy in May 1129. Melisende married him before 2 June. Steven Runciman assumes that the marriage was celebrated in Jerusalem, but Jaroslav Folda notes that it could as easily have been in Acre and that most recent historians prefer not to speculate. King Baldwin bestowed upon them the cities of Acre and Tyre as Melisende's dowry. These were the most lucrative parts of the royal domain and were to be held by the couple during the king's lifetime. In the first half of 1130 Melisende gave birth to a son, Baldwin, which further secured the succession.\nPrince Bohemond II, the husband of Melisende's sister Alice, died in 1130, leaving their only child, the two-year-old Constance, as heir to the Principality of Antioch. Alice attempted to seize control of Antioch, but her and Melisende's father, King Baldwin II, advanced north to prevent her. Baldwin declined to assume direct rule in Antioch, probably wishing to focus on preparing Melisende and her husband, Fulk, for the government of Jerusalem; instead, he appointed Count Joscelin I of Edessa as regent until Constance's marriage could be arranged.\nReign.\nSuccession.\nKing Baldwin II fell seriously ill after his intervention in Antioch in 1130 and may have been confined to the palace upon his return to Jerusalem. Melisende and Fulk were present for one of his last recorded acts, a donation to the priory of the Holy Sepulchre. In August 1131 the couple were summoned, together with their infant son, Baldwin, to the house of the Latin patriarch of Jerusalem, where the gravely ill king chose to spend his final days. There, before the patriarch, William of Messines, and a gathering of prelates and nobles, Baldwin II commended the kingdom to Melisende, Fulk, and their son. He died shortly thereafter, on 21 August. The patriarch crowned Fulk and Melisende in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre on 14 September, the Feast of the Cross. They were the first king and queen to be crowned in that church. Joscelin I of Edessa, who had been entrusted with Antioch, died shortly after Baldwin II, and Fulk was invited by the Antiochene nobles to establish a new government in the principality, thus thwarting Melisende's sister Alice in her second attempt to claim authority there.\nStruggle with Fulk.\nEarly in her queenship, Melisende found herself deprived of the power she had during her father's lifetime. King Fulk did not associate her with himself in any of his public acts for the first five years of the new reign. He attempted to sideline Melisende, which was in contravention of both their marriage contract and the last will of her father, King Baldwin II. Melisende's exclusion from power was not just a matter of protocol: without a role in the government she could not make appointments and grant land. In 1134, noblemen led by Melisende's second cousin and vassal, Count Hugh II of Jaffa, revolted against Fulk. The reasons are not entirely clear. The conflict likely originated from Fulk's displacement of the established nobility from key posts\u2014such as castellans and officers\u2014in favor of newcomers from Anjou. The noblemen may have expected to be protected by the queen from the king's designs if they succeeded in restoring her to the place in government which her father had intended for her. The historian Malcolm Barber argues that Melisende must have been involved in the revolt, but concedes that her role is unknown.\nArchbishop William of Tyre recorded the rumor that the queen was having an illicit relationship with the \"young and very handsome\" Count Hugh, drawing the king's ire. The historian Hans E. Mayer points out that William himself did not believe the rumor and that a medieval queen, being constantly attended by the members of her household and the court, would have found it exceedingly difficult to have a secret lover. Hamilton, on the other hand, maintains that public opinion, spearheaded by the clergy, would have sided with Fulk and not, as it did, with Melisende if she had committed adultery. At court, Hugh was publicly charged with high treason by his stepson, Walter I Grenier, lord of Caesarea\u2014a charge that William claims was instigated by Fulk. Hugh denied the accusation and was challenged to a trial by combat, but did not appear. Instead he made common cause with the Fatimids of Egypt\u2013the Franks' principal adversaries\u2013whose garrison from Ascalon invaded the kingdom and caused considerable damage in the south before being repelled. The patriarch mediated peace: Hugh would cede the county of Jaffa to the king and receive it back after spending three years in exile. Before he could leave for Europe, Hugh was stabbed in the street by a knight. After recovering he went into exile, where he died.\nKing Fulk was widely suspected of ordering the attempted assassination of Hugh; though his involvement was never proven, his reputation was severely damaged. According to William of Tyre's 13th-century French translator, Melisende long grieved that Hugh had died \"for her\". She was incensed by Fulk's treatment of Hugh and the slight on her honor. Fulk's men did not dare appear in her presence. The queen directed most of her wrath at the viscount of Jerusalem, Rohard the Elder, whom she held most responsible for influencing Fulk. Fulk even feared for his own life. Mayer suggests that it was for this reason that Fulk stayed in Antioch in 1135. The court was disrupted until third parties mediated a reconciliation between the king and queen. After persistent attempts, Fulk succeeded in obtaining Melisende's pardon for Rohard and his other supporters, who were then able to appear at court again. From then on Fulk, in the words of William of Tyre, \"did not attempt to take the initiative, even in trivial matters, without her knowledge\".\nCo-rule with Fulk.\nFamily affairs.\nAfter their reconciliation, Fulk never again issued a charter pertaining to the Kingdom of Jerusalem without Melisende's consent. He did not seek Melisende's consent where he did not have to, however. He based his regency in Antioch on the decision of the barons of the principality, and Melisende had no claim to it. Maintaining hostilities with Fulk was not in Melisende's interest after she was restored to power. She needed to strengthen her succession, which had hitherto rested on only one son, and wished to influence Fulk's policies in Antioch, where her sister Alice once again seized power. Melisende did successfully intercede with Fulk not to interfere with Alice's actions. He returned from Antioch in late 1135, and the royal couple conceived another child. A son, Amalric, was born in 1136. He became Melisende's favorite child.\nAccording to Barber and Folda's interpretations, a tangible result of Melisende and Fulk's reconciliation is the luxurious Melisende Psalter\u2014a personal prayer book believed to have been commissioned by Fulk for Melisende around 1135, as part of his energetic attempts to ingratiate himself with her. It reflects the amalgamation of Western, Greek, and Armenian cultures in the crusader states. Folda argues that the psalter points to the recipient's artistic taste, interests, and sensibilities as queen of a diverse population.\nMelisende's intervention did not guarantee Alice's fortunes for long: she lost her regency in Antioch, this time permanently, when Raymond of Poitiers arrived to marry her still-underage daughter, Constance, in 1136. The queen was also determined to make provisions for her youngest sisters, Hodierna and Ioveta, who were children when their father died. Hodierna married the count of Tripoli, Raymond II, sometime before 1138. Barber believes that the union was arranged by Melisende in an attempt to link the ruling houses of all the crusader states. Ioveta, who had grown up in a convent, took vows as a nun around 1134. According to William's chronicle, Melisende judged that Ioveta was of too high birth to be a mere nun and decided that she should be made an abbess instead. Barber notes that \"there is no way of knowing\" whether Ioveta wished to live a monastic life or if Melisende induced her to negate the political threat which Ioveta may have represented as the sister born during their father's kingship.\nEcclesiastical and foreign relations.\nFolda proposes that in the early 1130s, Melisende contributed to the renovation of the Convent of Saint Anne, where her sister Ioveta lived. The only narrative description of Melisende's patronage, however, is William of Tyre's account of the construction of a convent in Bethany, which was close enough to Jerusalem for the queen to maintain contact. In February 1138 she and Fulk persuaded the patriarch and the canons of the Holy Sepulchre to cede the church at Bethany and its dependent villages so that a new religious community could be built there. The Convent of Saint Lazarus, as it came to be known, was in construction for six years. Melisende so generously endowed the convent with estates, golden and silver sacred vessels with precious stones, silks, and ecclesiastical robes that she made it richer than any other monastery or church in the kingdom. Initially Melisende installed an elderly abbess. When the abbess died, Ioveta succeeded as Melisende intended, and Melisende sent further gifts, namely books, ornaments, and chalices. In the construction and endowment of Bethany's convent Hamilton sees a \"spectacular\" example of Melisende's power of patronage.\nIn 1138 King Fulk and Queen Melisende started associating their elder son, Baldwin, in their acts, but elected not to have him crowned. Melisende's experience in governing likely expanded during Fulk's absences from court while engaged in military operations. In contrast to their predecessors, Fulk and Melisende showed little interest in wars of conquest, and the Fatimids sought a rapprochement with them. The couple focused instead on enforcing the blockade of Ascalon and securing the borders of the kingdom against the Turkish atabeg of Mosul, Zengi. As part of this effort, they invested vast sums of money in building the fortress of Bethgibelin in 1134-36. In 1139 Mu'in ad-Din Unur, ruler of Damascus, offered the town of Banias and a substantial payment to Fulk and Melisende in return for an alliance against Zengi, who had invaded Damascene territory. The king and queen accepted, seeking to safeguard their own interests in preventing Zengid expansion toward Jerusalem.\nMelisende maintained a firm control over the Church. From the late 1130s she oversaw a further expansion of religious institutions, including the endowment of the Temple of the Lord with extensive land in Samaria, several grants of land to the Holy Sepulchre, and grants to the Abbey of Saint Mary of the Valley of Jehosaphat, the Order of the Hospital, the leper hospital of Saint Lazarus, and the Premonstratensians of the Church of Saint Samuel at Mountjoy. Melisende consistently supported the Syriac Orthodox Church. The Syriac Orthodox archbishop of Jerusalem, Ignatius III J\u0101dida, appealed to Melisende after Fulk upheld the claim of a Frankish knight, Geoffrey of the Tower of David, to some of the Church's land. According to the Syriac monk Michael, Melisende was \"much saddened by the affair\". She informed Fulk, who was at Bethgibelin, and let it be known that anyone who aided the archbishop would have her deepest gratitude\u2013an implicit threat. Fulk agreed to delay judgement until the case was heard in Melisende's presence. Thanks to her intercession, the Syriacs kept their land. She worked to improve relations with the Armenian Church as well; its leader, the catholicos Gregory III, attended a synod of the Latin Church in Jerusalem in 1140. The Greek Orthodox Monastery of Saint Sabas also received an endowment from Melisende. Her lavish gifts became legendary and earned her a reputation as a devoutly religious woman as well as the Church's political support.\nFulk and Melisende's efforts to isolate Ascalon continued in the early 1140s. The couple erected two more fortresses, Ibelin in 1141 and Blanchegarde in 1142. They made no attempts to seize Ascalon itself.\nSole rule.\nAccession and consolidation.\nIn late 1143 the court was at Acre, enjoying a period of peace. On 7 November Melisende expressed a wish to have a picnic. While they were riding in the countryside, Fulk galloped off in pursuit of a hare. His horse stumbled and threw him off, and the heavy saddle struck him on the head. He was carried unconscious to Acre, where he died on 10 November. Melisende made a public demonstration of grief and then proceeded to take full charge of the government.\nMelisende, who had been consecrated, anointed, and crowned in 1131, underwent a second coronation on Christmas 1143, this time together with Baldwin III, who was also consecrated and anointed on this occasion. The rites were performed by Patriarch William. All power was in Melisende's hands; Baldwin was 13 at the time and Melisende was his guardian. The queen is commonly said to have acted as her son's regent, but neither she nor the chronicler William of Tyre saw her rule as a regency. Citing William's statement that royal power came to Melisende through hereditary right, Hamilton concludes that she was \"not a regent but the queen regnant\". Baldwin started issuing charters in 1144 at the latest, when he issued one without reference to Melisende; thenceforth all were issued jointly by the mother and son, leading Mayer to believe that Melisende forbade that any charters be issued in her son's name only.\nMelisende's first action as sole ruler was to appoint supporters to the kingdom's offices. As a woman, Melisende could not command the army. She appointed her first cousin Manasses of Hierges, who had recently arrived in the kingdom, to conduct military affairs in her name as constable. By choosing a cousin who was dependent on her patronage rather than giving such power to one of her subjects, Melisende ensured the preservation of royal authority. She may have been young enough to have more children, but two sons were sufficient and she opted not to remarry; Murray notes that in Manasses the queen had a \"substitute husband\" who could wield military authority on her behalf.\nBesides Manasses, the queen's inner circle comprised the lord of Nablus, Philip of Milly; the prince of Galilee, Elinand of Tiberias; and the viscount, Rohard the Elder. Philip's family had been undermined early in Fulk's reign, and this may explain Philip's loyalty to Melisende. Elinand commanded more knights than any other lord in the kingdom. Rohard had incurred the queen's wrath in the early 1130s by supporting her husband's attempt to exclude her, but he was a key figure in the city of Jerusalem and, apparently, both were content to make peace. The support of Philip, Elinand, and Rohard enabled Melisende to maintain her position through the control of Jerusalem, Samaria, and Galilee, all of which contained significant parts of the royal domain.\nChurch management.\nMelisende's patronage and strong personality led to a surge of architectural activity in Jerusalem. After she and Baldwin III were crowned, work started on enlarging the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. Folda argues that the project saw copious support from Queen Melisende and her cooperation with Patriarch William. The historian Nurith Kenaan-Kedar credits the Armenian characteristics of the Cathedral of Saint James in Jerusalem to the queen's support and influence.\nMelisende received a letter of encouragement from the famed monk Bernard of Clairvaux in 1144 or 1145, but in his next letter to the queen Bernard mentioned hearing \"certain evil reports\" of her. The \"evil reports\" might be related to the claim of an anonymous Premonstratensian monk from France, who wrote in his continuation of Sigebert of Gembloux's chronicle that in 1148 Melisende had poisoned Count Alfonso Jordan of Toulouse and arranged for the capture of his son Bertrand by the Muslims. The monk wrote that the queen did this to ensure that Alfonso Jordan, a relative of the counts of Tripoli, would not threaten the possession of Tripoli by her brother-in-law Raymond and sister Hodierna. Melisende was on good terms with the Premonstratensians, however, and Barber attributes the monk's hostility to the \"endemic misogyny of the monastic world\".\nIn filling key offices with trusted men, Melisende also turned her attention to the chancery: unwilling to retain her husband's confidant Elias as chancellor, she arranged for him to become bishop of Tiberias\u2014a promotion he could not have refused. In 1145 Melisende appointed Ralph the Englishman, another newcomer, to succeed Elias as chancellor. In January 1146 the archbishop of Tyre, Fulcher of Angoul\u00eame, was elected to the patriarchate, succeeding William of Messines, who had died in September 1145. Melisende insisted that Ralph be appointed to the vacated see of Tyre. Barber holds that Fulcher must have risen to the patriarchate with Melisende's support, yet he led the opposition to her choice of Ralph. The conflict over the see of Tyre marked the only time Melisende was at odds with the Church.\nHoly war.\nImmediately after his coronation, Baldwin III sought to assert himself in warfare, the one field in which he had the advantage over his mother. In 1144 he quelled a revolt at Wadi Musa. Queen Melisende and her constable, Manasses, faced the first crisis in her sole rule in November that year when the atabeg of Mosul, Zengi, besieged Edessa. The Edessenes appealed to the young king for help, but it was Melisende who made the decisions. She called a council, and it was decided that Manasses, Philip, and Elinand should lead a relief force. Mayer believes that the young king was not sent because Melisende resented his success at Wadi Musa; he argues that the queen did not wish to see her son gain a reputation as a military leader lest he become a threat to her political leadership. Barber suggests that Melisende did not send Baldwin, then aged fourteen, because she thought that the gravity of the situation required experienced adults. In any case, the army did not reach Edessa in time: the city fell to the Turks, who spared its Armenian and Greek population, but \"killed the Franks wherever they could\" according to the chronicler Michael the Syrian. When word of Edessa's fall reached Jerusalem, Melisende sent to Antioch to consult with its leaders about dispatching an embassy to the pope to request a new crusade. Baldwin III came of age on his fifteenth birthday in early 1145, but the occasion was not publicly celebrated.\nZengi was assassinated in September 1146. Early next year, Altuntash, who had governed Bosra and Salkhad in the Hauran in the name of the Damascene ruler Unur, struck for independence. He came to Jerusalem and offered to deliver his towns to the Franks if they would establish him as lord in the Hauran. Melisende convened her council to consider the proposal. Though Damascus was their ally, the offer was appealing: the Hauran had a largely Christian population, and control of the region would place Damascus in a vulnerable position. Unur's army prevented Altuntash from returning to either Bosra or Salkhad. The Franks assembled an army at Tiberias, but also informed Unur that they intended to reinstall Altuntash. Unur objected, citing the queen's own feudal law against supporting rebellious vassals of friendly powers. He offered to repay her costs. Melisende sent a knight, Bernard Vacher, to inform Damascus that her army would escort Altuntash back to Bosra but would not attack Damascene territory. Bernard was persuaded by Unur that the expedition should be dropped. He convinced the young King Baldwin, and the council decided to abandon the plan. Agitators in the army, angered by the loss of a potentially profitable campaign, demanded that the expedition go forward. Baldwin gave in, only to be soundly defeated after Unur allied with Zengi's successor Nur al-Din. After this defeat, Melisende associated her younger son, Amalric, in the issuance of a charter, which undermined Baldwin's position.\nThe news of the fall of Edessa had shocked Europe, prompting Pope Eugene III to launch the Second Crusade. King Louis VII of France, Queen Eleanor, and King Conrad III of Germany travelled to the Levant with their relatives, vassals, and troops, accompanied by papal legates. They were met near Acre on 24 June 1148 by a contingent from Jerusalem consisting of Queen Melisende, King Baldwin, Patriarch Fulcher, the archbishops and the bishops, the masters of the Knights Hospitaller and Templar, and the leading noblemen; it was the most impressive gathering of dignitaries ever held in the Latin East. A decision to attack Damascus had already been reached in April by Baldwin, Conrad, and Fulcher in a much smaller meeting, which Melisende apparently did not attend. The ensuing siege of Damascus ended in a swift and humiliating defeat for the crusaders. Accounts of the Second Crusade make little mention of Melisende and historians disagree about her stance on the attack on Damascus.\nIn 1149, after the death of Prince Raymond in another disastrous defeat of the Christians by Nur al-Din, Baldwin hastened to assume responsibility for Antioch. At this point Melisende further reduced his position: from 1149 she no longer issued charters jointly with him, but merely allowed him to consent.\nRupture with Baldwin III.\n[Baldwin III's] features were comely and refined, his complexion florid, a proof of innate strength. In this respect he resembled his mother ... He was of somewhat full habit, although he could not be called fleshy like his brother or spare like his mother. \u2014\u200aWilliam of Tyre, \"A History of Deeds Done Beyond the Sea \"\nThe dispute with the Church over the appointment of Melisende's chancellor, Ralph, to the see of Tyre reached its peak by 1149 and became a serious issue for the queen as the rift grew between her and Baldwin. To retain the Church as an ally, she either dismissed Ralph from the chancery or forced him to resign. She could not appoint a new chancellor without her co-ruler's consent, however, and the chancery thus collapsed. Mother and son henceforth employed separate scribes, which avoided an open break in their co-reign, but marked an unprecedented division of royal power.\nThe death of her trusted and most important vassal, Elinand, prince of Galilee, around 1149 was a setback for Melisende. After the capture of the count of Edessa by Zengid troops in 1150, Baldwin summoned the lords to march with him to Antioch, but those loyal to Melisende refused. This was, in Mayer's mind, the queen's attempt to prevent Baldwin from achieving any military success, and specifically from fulfilling the traditional role of the kings of Jerusalem in protecting the northern crusader states. Baldwin went anyway with the small force he could muster.\nFrom 1150 Melisende was preparing for a showdown with Baldwin: she set up her own administrative machinery and gathered the lords loyal to her. In 1150 she procured for her cousin and constable, Manasses, the hand of Helvis of Ramla, widow of her supporter Barisan of Ibelin. This angered Barisan's sons, Hugh, Baldwin, and Balian, because it led to them losing land in Ramla. Baldwin, for his part, held Manasses responsible for his estrangement from his mother. Melisende further consolidated her position against Baldwin in 1151 when she made her younger son, Amalric, count of Jaffa. He became her most important partisan besides the Church. The same year, the queen ordered the demolition of a mill at Jerusalem's Jaffa Gate to ease traffic congestion, and in 1152 hired Arabs from al-Bireh to rebuild the market and stalls along the Street of Bad Cooking; This was probably an attempt to win the support of the citizenry in addition to that of the nobles and the clergy.\nCivil war.\nBaldwin began to move against Melisende in early 1152. He demanded that the patriarch crown him on Easter Sunday without crowning her, which would signify that Baldwin would from then on be the sole ruler. Patriarch Fulcher refused, for the Church supported Melisende. On Easter Monday Baldwin staged a solemn procession through Jerusalem, the seat of Melisende's power, wearing a laurel wreath instead of a crown. He then summoned the High Court and requested a division of the kingdom between him and his mother. For Hamilton, this request was \"criminally irresponsible\" because the kingdom was too small to survive a division; yet Mayer argues that Melisende had \"de facto\" divided the kingdom over the previous two years. At the meeting Melisende argued that the entire kingdom belonged to her by hereditary right, implying that Baldwin was the one usurping her right, but agreed to the division. The queen retained the regions of Judaea and Samaria while Baldwin held Acre and Tyre.\nThe division of the kingdom was short-lived. Baldwin declared that the land he had been allocated was insufficient to financially support him as king. Realizing her son's intentions, Melisende moved from the unfortified town of Nablus to Jerusalem. Baldwin defeated Manasses at Mirabel and exiled him, then swiftly occupied Nablus, and moved with his force onto Jerusalem. Some of the lords in Melisende's portion deserted her; those who remained loyal until the end included her son Amalric, Philip of Milly, and Rohard the Elder. Upon hearing of her elder son's advance, Melisende withdrew with her household and followers to the Tower of David. Patriarch Fulcher at this point declared the Church's full support for the queen. He marched out with his clergy to admonish the king, only to return enraged after Baldwin rebuffed him. The king set up camp outside the city, after which the citizens opened the gates to him. He then proceeded to bombard the Tower with siege engines, but could not make progress because the besieged defended themselves valiantly.\nDespite being strongly fortified and well stocked, the Tower could not resist indefinitely, and so Melisende stood no chance of winning. After several days a settlement was negotiated, possibly by churchmen. Melisende might have been expected to retire to the convent of Bethany, but she held out for better terms, which saw her gain Nablus and adjacent lands for life along with her son's promise not to disturb her. Nablus would provide a substantial income but, being unfortified, could not be turned into a centre of military power. These terms suggest that, although she lost the war, Melisende retained powerful allies. Her subsequent conduct suggests that she agreed to abstain from politics, to rule Nablus not as queen but as any city lord would, and to act only with the king's consent. The eight-year-long struggle between mother and son was thus over by 20 April 1152. Melisende had exercised effective authority for sixteen years.\nRetirement.\nRetirement did not bring an end to Melisende's pursuits. Baldwin summoned a general assembly of the crusader states at Tripoli in mid-1152 intending to induce his widowed cousin Constance, princess of Antioch, to remarry and so relieve him of the responsibility for the principality. The attendees included the princess and her vassals and clergy as well as the count and countess of Tripoli. Though she was apparently neither summoned nor invited, Melisende also participated. Ostensibly she was there to help settle the marital problems of her sister Countess Hodierna and brother-in-law Count Raymond of Tripoli. Hamilton considers this a clever move because she could not be prevented from paying a visit to her sister, and once in Tripoli had to be invited to discuss her niece's marriage. Neither goal was achieved. The sisters set out for Jerusalem, and were escorted for a while by Hodierna's husband. As he was returning to Tripoli, he was killed by the Order of Assassins. The sisters returned to Tripoli for the funeral, after which Baldwin escorted Melisende home. Hodierna assumed rule over Tripoli as regent for her young son, Raymond III. Hamilton believes that from then on Baldwin's control over Antioch and Tripoli, ruled by Melisende's niece and sister respectively, depended on him treating his mother with respect.\nIn the aftermath of their conflict, Melisende made certain to mention Baldwin's consent in all her acts, and he honored her in return and allowed her to advise him. By sparing her further public humiliation, Baldwin avoided goading her into challenging him. In 1153 he conquered Ascalon, proving himself as a military leader, and made peace with Melisende. He distributed the lands around Ascalon following her advice. From 1154 Melisende was associated in her son's public acts and he confirmed the grants she had made during their estrangement. From 1156 the queen regained a measure of political influence, taking part in Baldwin's negotiation of a treaty with the Republic of Pisa in November. In 1157 she took a military initiative while the king was in Antioch. At her insistence the cave-fortress of el-Hablis, significant for controlling the territory of Gilead beyond the River Jordan, was attacked and recovered from the Muslims.\nMelisende maintained her interest in the matters of religion and continued her patronage of the Church as before her retirement. In 1157 Amalric married Agnes, daughter of the dispossessed Count Joscelin II of Edessa. Patriarch Fulcher protested that Amalric and Agnes were related within the prohibited degrees, but despite her piety Melisende did not object. The same year her stepdaughter Countess Sibylla of Flanders, Fulk's daughter from his first marriage, arrived in Jerusalem on a pilgrimage and entered the convent of Bethany. Fulcher died on 20 November, and though clergy assembled to elect his successor, Melisende intervened with Sibylla and Hodierna to secure the appointment of Amalric of Nesle as the next patriarch. The following year Baldwin married too; his wife, Theodora Komnene, became the new queen. Hamilton speculates that Melisende's forceful character made her sons reluctant to allow their wives to take part in state affairs. In 1160 Queen Melisende joined Hodierna in commissioning luxurious jewelry, gold tiaras, and silver utensils for the dowry of Hodierna's daughter, Melisende of Tripoli; this example of Melisende's art patronage demonstrates the queen's continued activity and the Franks' resolve to impress her niece's betrothed, the Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Komnenos. \nQueen Melisende's last public act was to assent with King Baldwin to Count Amalric's donation to the Holy Sepulchre on 30 November 1160. In 1161 she fell ill, with her memory impaired; she may have had a stroke. Hodierna and Ioveta nursed her for several months, permitting few people to see her. In the last weeks of her life Baldwin moved into Nablus, acquiring the land Philip of Milly held there. This was in breach of his agreement with his mother, but she was by then unaware of the outside world. She died on 11 September 1161. She was probably in her early fifties. William of Tyre records that Baldwin was inconsolable; Mayer calls this \"a fine public show of grief\". Melisende was buried, like her mother, in the Abbey of Saint Mary of the Valley of Jehosaphat, which had always been dear to her. Folda considers her tomb to have been her last major commission in Jerusalem and \"more magnificent than any king of Jerusalem ever received\". In her last will and testament she left property to, among others, the Orthodox Monastery of Saint Sabas. Baldwin barely outlived her, succumbing to an illness on 10 February 1163.\nLegacy.\nAssessment.\nWhen recounting the conflict between Melisende and her son Baldwin III, William of Tyre takes the queen's side. Mayer explains that William was the court historian to King Amalric, the son who had sided with the queen and succeeded Baldwin III, and that William was influenced by Melisende's lavish grants to the Church. William wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;She was a very wise woman, fully experienced in almost all spheres of state business, who had completely triumphed over the handicap of her sex so that she could take charge of important affairs.\nBarber notes that while William's description of Melisende as \"wise and judicious beyond what is normal for a woman\" may sound patronizing to a modern reader, it is particularly significant because the archbishop did not normally approve of the involvement of women in public affairs.\nHamilton agrees with William's judgment that \"striving to emulate the glory of the best princes... she ruled the kingdom with such ability that she was rightly considered to have equaled her predecessors in that regard\". For Hamilton, Melisende was \"a truly remarkable woman\" because for decades she exercised power in a kingdom where no woman had previously had a public role. Barber observes that William's opinion was not universally shared and that two of the greatest disasters suffered by the Franks in the Levant took place during Melisende's reign, namely the fall of Edessa in 1144 and the failure to conquer Damascus in 1148, though he concedes that \"the extent of her personal culpability for either of these events is arguable\". Barber contrasts this with Baldwin III's conquest of Ascalon the year after she was deposed. Hamilton concludes that Melisende was both cultured and devout, while Folda calls her the greatest patron of art in the 12th-century Kingdom of Jerusalem.\nAccording to Runciman, Melisende was \"a capable woman who in happier times might have ruled with success\". Mayer criticizes Melisende for not voluntarily abdicating in favor of Baldwin III, declaring that \"her thirst for power was greater than her wisdom\". He insists that \"in spite of all the praise William of Tyre heaps on Melisende's abilities\", her son was better suited to rule. Hamilton does not see why she should have felt the need to resign power to her \"inexperienced\" son, arguing that she was not a regent but the recognized co-ruler who governed well and enjoyed broad support. Mayer concludes that Melisende was \"one of the most energetic among mediaeval queens\". Although four female descendants followed her on the throne\u2014Sibylla (r.\u20091186\u00a0\u2013\u00a01190), Isabella I (r.\u20091190\u00a0\u2013\u00a01205), Maria (r.\u20091205\u00a0\u2013\u00a01212), and Isabella II (r.\u20091212\u00a0\u2013\u00a01228)\u2014Melisende remained the only queen of Jerusalem who reigned truly independently.\nArt and memorialization.\nMelisende features prominently in the illuminated manuscripts of William of Tyre's \"Historia\", which survives in 51 copies produced between the mid-13th and 15th centuries. The earliest to depict Melisende appear simultaneously in Acre and Western Europe about a century after her death. She is always shown together with a king\u2013her father, her husband, or her son\u2013usually subordinated but sometimes as the focus of the image. Most of the depictions in the Western manuscripts follow common iconographic types, such as her marriage, coronation, and mourning at a deathbed or a funeral. A notable exception are the illustrations of the hunt in which Fulk was fatally injured, some of which emphasize Melisende's importance. Although she is often depicted crowned, Melisende's portraits lack a consistent style and do not reflect her Armenian heritage or Byzantine influences, nor do they follow Western portrait conventions.\nMelisende's historical importance was widely recognized in the thirteenth century, but she had become mostly overlooked by the nineteenth. She does not appear in Celestia Bloss' \"Heroines of the Crusades\" (1854), where it is the French queen Eleanor of Aquitaine who represents the Second Crusade. Scholarly interest in Melisende intensified in the twentieth century, but she remains largely absent from popular memory. The historian Danielle Park believes that Melisende is rarely referenced in popular culture because her legacy\u2014marked by both her exceptional political authority rivaling that of her male crusader forebears and her controversial refusal to yield power to her son\u2014resists simple categorization as either hero or villain.\nMelisende appears in two works of historical fiction. In Emily Sarah Holt's \"Lady Sibyl's Choice\" (1879), Melisende predeceases Fulk and the fictional narrator laments her rights passing to Fulk's family. A strong-willed and independent Melisende, reflecting modern values of gender and equality, is a much more significant character in Judith Tarr's \"Queen of Swords\" (1997), though she is not the novel's central protagonist. The synopsis for Kate Mosse's play \"The Queen of Jerusalem\" promises to celebrate \"the extraordinary woman who ruled Jerusalem in the 12th century\" and reflects a broader trend of portraying Melisende as a forgotten figure to be reclaimed. Park argues that Melisende\u2019s appeal comes from her portrayal within a proto-feminist narrative that links her success in a male-dominated world to a universal female experience.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43621", "revid": "24043204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43621", "title": "Carcharodon carcharias", "text": ""}
{"id": "43645", "revid": "16528411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43645", "title": "Method", "text": "Method (, methodos, from \u03bc\u03b5\u03c4\u03ac/meta \"in pursuit or quest of\" + \u1f41\u03b4\u03cc\u03c2/hodos \"a method, system; a way or manner\" of doing, saying, etc.), literally means a pursuit of knowledge, investigation, mode of prosecuting such inquiry, or system. In recent centuries it more often means a prescribed process for completing a task.\nIt may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43649", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43649", "title": "Brave Combo", "text": "American polka/rock/worldbeat band\nBrave Combo is a polka rock band based in Denton, Texas. Founded in 1979 by guitarist/keyboardist/accordionist Carl Finch, they have been a prominent fixture in the Texas music scene for more than thirty-five years. Their music, both originals and covers, incorporates a number of dance styles, mostly polka, but also some Latin American and Caribbean styles like norte\u00f1o, salsa, rumba, cha-cha-cha, choro, samba, two-step, cumbia, charanga, merengue, ska, etc, all performed with a rock/worldbeat energy.\nAs part of their perceived artistic mission to expand the musical tastes of their listeners, they have often played and recorded covers of well-known songs in a style radically different from the original versions. Examples include polka versions of Jimi Hendrix's \"Purple Haze\" and the Doors' \"People are Strange\", the Rolling Stones' \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\" as a cha-cha, and \"Sixteen Tons\" as a cumbia.\nHistory and influences.\nIn a 1995 feature in \"The Santa Fe New Mexican\", band cofounder Carl Finch described Brave Combo's influence as a polka band with rock styles as an earnest way to escape an increasingly corporate cultural landscape, lamenting-\n'Rock had been removed from the common people' he said 'and musically I wanted what I do to have depth, I started listening to polka and ethnic records I'd find at Target six for $5 \u2014 nothing could beat that. At first, I\u2019d just buy whatever covers looked strangest but after a while I\u2019d do research and find out what was good.' Among the best, he soon discovered, were names like Larry Chesky and his big band polka sound, Norwegian accordion virtuoso Andrew Walter (\u201cexciting intense\u201d is Finch\u2019s assessment), and Eddie Blazonczyk, the \u201cGodfather\u201d of Chicago\u2019s Polish community. 'All this came out of a sense of desperation'.\nBrave Combo had its website at brave.com/bo, a domain hack. The domain name brave.com was purchased in 1995 by a fan of the band, who transferred it to the band in 1997. In mid-2010s, Finch sold the domain to Brave Software, which develops the web browser Brave, in exchange for bravecombo.com, which had been taken by a squatter, and an undisclosed sum of money.\nAwards and honors.\nThey won a Grammy Award in 1999 in the Best Polka Album category for their album \"Polkasonic\", and again in 2004 for their album \"\".\nIn naming Denton, Texas, the \"Best Music Scene\" for 2008, \"Paste\" magazine cited Brave Combo as the \"Grand Pooh-Bah of Denton bands\" and said that \"Brave Combo, is in many ways the template from which all the rest are cut: eclectic and artistically ambitious, with a high degree of musicianship and a strong DIY ethic.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43650", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43650", "title": "CFG", "text": "CFG may stand for:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43651", "revid": "3606755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43651", "title": "Spamdexing", "text": "Deliberate manipulation of search engine indexes\nSpamdexing (also known as search engine spam, search engine poisoning, black-hat search engine optimization, search spam or web spam) is the deliberate manipulation of search engine indexes. It involves a number of methods, such as link building and repeating related or unrelated phrases, to manipulate the relevance or prominence of resources indexed in a manner inconsistent with the purpose of the indexing system.\nSpamdexing could be considered to be a part of search engine optimization, although there are many SEO methods that improve the quality and appearance of the content of web sites and serve content useful to many users.\nOverview.\nSearch engines use a variety of algorithms to determine relevancy ranking. Some of these include determining whether the search term appears in the body text or URL of a web page. Many search engines check for instances of spamdexing and will remove suspect pages from their indexes. Also, search-engine operators can quickly block the results listing from entire websites that use Spamdexing, perhaps in response to user complaints of false matches. The rise of Spamdexing in the mid-1990s made the leading search engines of the time less useful. Using unethical methods to make websites rank higher in search engine results than they otherwise would is commonly referred to in the SEO (search engine optimization) industry as \"black-hat\" SEO. These methods are more focused on breaking the search-engine-promotion rules and guidelines. In addition to this, the perpetrators run the risk of their websites being severely penalized by the Google Panda and Google Penguin search-results ranking algorithms.\nCommon spamdexing techniques can be classified into two broad classes: \"content spam\" (\"term spam\") and \"link spam\".\nHistory.\nThe earliest known reference to the term \"spamdexing\" is by Eric Convey in his article \"Porn sneaks way back on Web\", \"The Boston Herald\", May 22, 1996, where he said :\nThe problem arises when site operators load their Web pages with hundreds of extraneous terms so search engines will list them among legitimate addresses.\nThe process is called \"Spamdexing,\" a combination of spamming\u2014the Internet term for sending users unsolicited information\u2014and \"indexing.\"\nKeyword stuffing had been used in the past to obtain top search engine rankings and visibility for particular phrases. This method is outdated and adds no value to rankings today. In particular, Google no longer gives good rankings to pages employing this technique.\nHiding text from the visitor is done in many different ways. Text colored to blend with the background, CSS \"z-index\" positioning to place text underneath an image\u00a0\u2014 and therefore out of view of the visitor\u00a0\u2014 and CSS absolute positioning to have the text positioned far from the page center are all common techniques. By 2005, many invisible text techniques were easily detected by major search engines.\n\"Noscript\" tags are another way to place hidden content within a page. While they are a valid optimization method for displaying an alternative representation of scripted content, they may be abused, since search engines may index content that is invisible to most visitors.\nIn the past, keyword stuffing was considered to be either a white hat or a black hat tactic, depending on the context of the technique, and the opinion of the person judging it. While a great deal of keyword stuffing was employed to aid in Spamdexing, which is of little benefit to the user, keyword stuffing in certain circumstances was not intended to skew results in a deceptive manner. Whether the term carries a pejorative or neutral connotation is dependent on whether the practice is used to pollute the results with pages of little relevance, or to direct traffic to a page of relevance that would have otherwise been de-emphasized due to the search engine's inability to interpret and understand related ideas. This is no longer the case. Search engines now employ themed, related keyword techniques to interpret the intent of the content on a page.\nContent spam.\nThese techniques involve altering the logical view that a search engine has over the page's contents. They all aim at variants of the vector space model for information retrieval on text collections.\nKeyword stuffing.\nKeyword stuffing is a search engine optimization (SEO) technique in which keywords are loaded into a web page's meta tags, visible content, or backlink anchor text in an attempt to gain an unfair rank advantage in search engines. Keyword stuffing may lead to a website being temporarily or permanently banned or penalized on major search engines. The repetition of words in meta tags may explain why many search engines no longer use these tags. Nowadays, search engines focus more on the content that is unique, comprehensive, relevant, and helpful that overall makes the quality better which makes keyword stuffing useless, but it is still practiced by many webmasters.\nMany major search engines have implemented algorithms that recognize keyword stuffing, and reduce or eliminate any unfair search advantage that the tactic may have been intended to gain, and oftentimes they will also penalize, demote or remove websites from their indexes that implement keyword stuffing.\nChanges and algorithms specifically intended to penalize or ban sites using keyword stuffing include the Google Florida update (November 2003) Google Panda (February 2011) Google Hummingbird (August 2013) and Bing's September 2014 update.\nHeadlines in online news sites are increasingly packed with just the search-friendly keywords that identify the story. Traditional reporters and editors frown on the practice, but it is effective in optimizing news stories for search.\nHidden or invisible text.\nUnrelated hidden text is disguised by making it the same color as the background, using a tiny font size, or hiding it within HTML code such as \"no frame\" sections, alt attributes, zero-sized DIVs, and \"no script\" sections. People manually screening red-flagged websites for a search-engine company might temporarily or permanently block an entire website for having invisible text on some of its pages. However, hidden text is not always spamdexing: it can also be used to enhance accessibility.\nMeta-tag stuffing.\nThis involves repeating keywords in the meta tags, and using meta keywords that are unrelated to the site's content. This tactic has been ineffective. Google declared that it doesn't use the keywords meta tag in its online search ranking in September 2009.\nDoorway pages.\n\"Gateway\" or doorway pages are low-quality web pages created with very little content, which are instead stuffed with very similar keywords and phrases. They are designed to rank highly within the search results, but serve no purpose to visitors looking for information. A doorway page will generally have \"click here to enter\" on the page; autoforwarding can also be used for this purpose. In 2006, Google ousted vehicle manufacturer BMW for using \"doorway pages\" to the company's German site, BMW.de. Google announced that they will inflict a penalty on doorway tactics.\nScraper sites.\nScraper sites are created using various programs designed to \"scrape\" search-engine results pages or other sources of content and create \"content\" for a website. The specific presentation of content on these sites is unique, but is merely an amalgamation of content taken from other sources, often without permission. Such websites are generally full of advertising (such as pay-per-click ads), or they redirect the user to other sites. It is even feasible for scraper sites to outrank original websites for their own information and organization names.\nArticle spinning.\nArticle spinning involves rewriting existing articles, as opposed to merely scraping content from other sites, to avoid penalties imposed by search engines for duplicate content. This process is undertaken by hired writers or automated using a thesaurus database or an artificial neural network.\nMachine translation.\nSimilarly to article spinning, some sites use machine translation to render their content in several languages, with no human editing, resulting in unintelligible texts that nonetheless continue to be indexed by search engines, thereby attracting traffic.\nLink spam.\nLink spam is defined as links between pages that are present for reasons\nother than merit. Link spam takes advantage of link-based ranking algorithms, which gives websites higher rankings the more other highly ranked websites link to it. These techniques also aim at influencing other link-based ranking techniques such as the HITS algorithm.\nLink farms.\nLink farms are tightly-knit networks of websites that link to each other for the sole purpose of exploiting the search engine ranking algorithms. These are also known facetiously as \"mutual admiration societies\". Use of links farms has greatly reduced with the launch of Google's first Panda Update in February 2011, which introduced significant improvements in its spam-detection algorithm.\nPrivate blog networks.\nBlog networks (PBNs) are a group of authoritative websites used as a source of contextual links that point to the owner's main website to achieve higher search engine ranking. Owners of PBN websites use expired domains or auction domains that have backlinks from high-authority websites. Google targeted and penalized PBN users on several occasions with several massive deindexing campaigns since 2014.\nHidden links.\nPutting hyperlinks where visitors will not see them is used to increase link popularity. Highlighted link text can help rank a webpage higher for matching that phrase.\nSybil attack.\nA Sybil attack is the forging of multiple identities for malicious intent, named after the famous dissociative identity disorder patient and the book about her that shares her name, \"Sybil\". A spammer may create multiple web sites at different domain names that all link to each other, such as fake blogs (known as spam blogs).\nSpam blogs.\nSpam blogs are blogs created solely for commercial promotion and the passage of link authority to target sites. Often these \"splogs\" are designed in a misleading manner that will give the effect of a legitimate website but upon close inspection will often be written using spinning software or be very poorly written with barely readable content. They are similar in nature to link farms.\nGuest blog spam.\nGuest blog spam is the process of placing guest blogs on websites for the sole purpose of gaining a link to another website or websites. Unfortunately, these are often confused with legitimate forms of guest blogging with other motives than placing links. This technique was made famous by Matt Cutts, who publicly declared \"war\" against this form of link spam.\nBuying expired domains.\nSome link spammers utilize expired domain crawler software or monitor DNS records for domains that will expire soon, then buy them when they expire and replace the pages with links to their pages. However, it is possible but not confirmed that Google resets the link data on expired domains. To maintain all previous Google ranking data for the domain, it is advisable that a buyer grab the domain before it is \"dropped\".\nSome of these techniques may be applied for creating a Google bomb\u2014that is, to cooperate with other users to boost the ranking of a particular page for a particular query.\nUsing world-writable pages.\nWeb sites that can be edited by users can be used by spamdexers to insert links to spam sites if the appropriate anti-spam measures are not taken.\nAutomated spambots can rapidly make the user-editable portion of a site unusable. Programmers have developed a variety of automated spam prevention techniques to block or at least slow down spambots.\nSpam in blogs.\nSpam in blogs is the placing or solicitation of links randomly on other sites, placing a desired keyword into the hyperlinked text of the inbound link. Guest books, forums, blogs, and any site that accepts visitors' comments are particular targets and are often victims of drive-by spamming where automated software creates nonsense posts with links that are usually irrelevant and unwanted.\nComment spam.\nComment spam is a form of link spam that has arisen in web pages that allow dynamic user editing such as wikis, blogs, and guestbooks. It can be problematic because agents can be written that automatically randomly select a user edited web page, such as a Wikipedia article, and add spamming links.\nWiki spam.\nWiki spam is when a spammer uses the open editability of wiki systems to place links from the wiki site to the spam site.\nReferrer log spamming.\nReferrer spam takes place when a spam perpetrator or facilitator accesses a web page (the \"referee\"), by following a link from another web page (the \"referrer\"), so that the referee is given the address of the referrer by the person's web browser.\nSome websites have a referrer log which shows which pages link to that site. By having a robot randomly access many sites enough times, with a message or specific address given as the referrer, that message or Internet address then appears in the referrer log of those sites that have referrer logs. Since some Web search engines base the importance of sites on the number of different sites linking to them, referrer-log spam may increase the search engine rankings of the spammer's sites. Also, site administrators who notice the referrer log entries in their logs may follow the link back to the spammer's referrer page.\nCountermeasures.\nBecause of the large amount of spam posted to user-editable webpages, Google proposed a \"nofollow\" tag that could be embedded with links. A link-based search engine, such as Google's PageRank system, will not use the link to increase the score of the linked website if the link carries a nofollow tag. This ensures that spamming links to user-editable websites will not raise the sites ranking with search engines. Nofollow is used by several websites, such as Wordpress, Blogger and Wikipedia.\nOther types.\nMirror websites.\nA mirror site is the hosting of multiple websites with conceptually similar content but using different URLs. Some search engines give a higher rank to results where the keyword searched for appears in the URL.\nURL redirection.\nURL redirection is the taking of the user to another page without their intervention, \"e.g.\", using META refresh tags, Flash, JavaScript, Java or Server side redirects. However, 301 Redirect, or permanent redirect, is not considered as a malicious behavior.\nCloaking.\nCloaking refers to any of several means to serve a page to the search-engine spider that is different from that seen by human users. It can be an attempt to mislead search engines regarding the content on a particular web site. Cloaking, however, can also be used to ethically increase accessibility of a site to users with disabilities or provide human users with content that search engines aren't able to process or parse. It is also used to deliver content based on a user's location; Google itself uses IP delivery, a form of cloaking, to deliver results. Another form of cloaking is \"code swapping\", \"i.e.\", optimizing a page for top ranking and then swapping another page in its place once a top ranking is achieved. Google refers to these types of redirects as \"Sneaky Redirects\".\nCountermeasures.\nPage omission by search engine.\nSpamdexed pages are sometimes eliminated from search results by the search engine.\nPage omission by user.\nUsers can employ search operators for filtering. For Google, a keyword preceded by \"-\" (minus) will omit sites that contains the keyword in their pages or in the URL of the pages from search result. As an example, the search \"-&lt;unwanted site&gt;\" will eliminate sites that contains word \"&lt;unwanted site&gt;\" in their pages and the pages whose URL contains \"&lt;unwanted site&gt;\".\nUsers could also use the Google Chrome extension \"Personal Blocklist (by Google)\", launched by Google in 2011 as part of countermeasures against content farming. Via the extension, users could block a specific page, or set of pages from appearing in their search results. As of 2021, the original extension appears to be removed, although similar-functioning extensions may be used.\nPossible solutions to overcome search-redirection poisoning redirecting to illegal internet pharmacies include notification of operators of vulnerable legitimate domains. Further, manual evaluation of SERPs, previously published link-based and content-based algorithms as well as tailor-made automatic detection and classification engines can be used as benchmarks in the effective identification of pharma scam campaigns.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43653", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43653", "title": "Control-flow graph", "text": "Graphical representation of a computer program or algorithm\nIn computer science, a control-flow graph (CFG) is a representation, using graph notation, of all paths that might be traversed through a function during its execution. The control-flow graph was conceived by Frances E. Allen, who noted that Reese T. Prosser used boolean connectivity matrices for flow analysis before.\nThe CFG is essential to many compiler optimizations and static-analysis tools.\nDefinition.\nA control flow graph is the directed graph of the basic blocks of the function (the nodes of the graph) and the control flow between them (the edges of the graph).\nThe exact details vary between representations. Typically, a basic block consists of a straight-line sequence of instructions or statements. Only the last instruction or statement in each block can perform control flow, and control flow can only be directed to the first instruction or statement in a block.\nIn most CFG representations, there are two specially designated blocks: the \"entry block\", through which control enters into the function, and the \"exit block\", through which all control exits the function (typically by returning). Some representations permit multiple exit blocks, especially if there are different kinds of exit, or permit the exit block to be omitted if it is not reachable &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nIf there is a control-flow edge from block A to block B, then A is called a \"predecessor\" of B, and B is called a \"successor\" of A.\nExamples.\nAs a simple example, consider the following C function definition:\nvoid print_within_parentheses(const char *p) {\n printf(\"(\"); // 1\n if (p != NULL) { // 1\n printf(\"%s\", p); // 2\n } // 2\n printf(\")\"); // 3\nThis function has three basic blocks:\nThe nested structure of the source program makes it a little hard to see the basic blocks. As an alternative representation that makes the blocks more obvious, we can flatten that structure into a sequence of labeled blocks. To make the control flow explicit, we will require each block to end in either codice_6, an codice_2/codice_8 of codice_6s, or codice_5 (only in the exit block).\nvoid print_within_parentheses(const char *p) {\n block1: {\n printf(\"(\");\n block2: {\n printf(\"%s\", p);\n goto block3;\n block3: {\n printf(\")\");\n return;\nThis is a source-level representation of the CFG. The basic blocks consist of sequences of C statements taken directly from the source program. Only the structured control flow has been eliminated.\nNow consider a more complex example which includes a loop:\nvoid print_as_ordered_tuple(const char * const *p) {\n printf(\"(\"); // 1\n bool first = true; // 1\n for (; *p != NULL; ++p) { // 2\n if (!first) { // 3\n printf(\",\"); // 4\n } // 4\n first = false; // 5\n printf(\"%s\", *p); // 5\n } // 5\n printf(\")\"); // 6\nThis function has six basic blocks, which can be clearly seen in our source-level representation of the CFG:\nvoid print_as_ordered_tuple(const char *p) {\n bool first;\n block1: {\n printf(\"(\");\n first = true;\n goto block2;\n block2: {\n block3: {\n block4: {\n printf(\",\");\n goto block 5;\n block5: {\n first = false;\n printf(\"%s\", *p);\n ++p;\n goto block2;\n block6: {\n printf(\")\");\n return;\nThis style of statement-level CFG representation is not commonly used, and it is shown here only for illustrative purposes. Not all programs can be easily represented this way, even in C. Notice how the local variable declaration has been raised to the top of function, and its initialization in codice_11 has been turned into an assignment. This would cause difficulties for scope-driven features such as shadowing and variable-length arrays. Statements would also need to be significantly rewritten to deal with expression-level control flow, such as is introduced by the codice_12, codice_13, and codice_14 operators.\nMost practical CFG representations use something other than complete source statements as the components of their basic blocks. For example, compiler frameworks such as LLVM use a CFG in which basic blocks consist of abstract static single-assignment instructions as their primary IR. Here is the above function translated into LLVM IR:\ndefine void @print_as_ordered_tuple(ptr %0) {\nblock1:\n %p = alloca ptr\n %first = alloca i1\n store ptr %0, ptr %p\n call i32 (ptr, ...) @printf(ptr @\"(\")\n store i1 1, ptr %first\n br label %block2\nblock2:\n %1 = load ptr, ptr %p\n %2 = load ptr, ptr %1\n %3 = icmp ne ptr %2, null\n br i1 %1, label %block3, label %block4\nblock3:\n %4 = load i1, ptr %first\n br i1 %4, label %block4, label %block5\nblock4:\n call i32 (ptr, ...) @printf(ptr @\",\")\n br label %block5\nblock5:\n store i1 0, ptr %first\n %5 = load ptr, ptr %p\n %6 = load ptr, ptr %5\n call i32 (ptr, ...) @printf(ptr @\"%s\", ptr %6)\n %7 = load ptr, ptr %p\n %8 = getelementptr inbounds ptr, ptr %7, i32 1\n store ptr %8, ptr %p\n br label %block2\nblock6:\n call i32 (ptr, ...) @printf(ptr @\")\")\n ret void\nNotice how the block structure is the same in the source-level and the LLVM CFGs. In both representations, the functions have the same basic semantics, performing the same sequence of operations and control flow. Only the representation of the individual operations is different.\nConstruction.\nA very explicit control flow graph can be obtained from a source function by placing each statement into its own basic block. If the statement is not a control-flow statement, a \"fall-through\" jump to the block for the next statement is added to the block. Unfortunately, this tends to create a large number of unnecessary basic blocks and fall-through jumps, which makes subsequent analysis more cumbersome and expensive. It is usually desirable that successive statements be placed in the same basic block whenever possible. Another way to say this is that, across the entire CFG, every edge A\u2192B should have the property that:\n outdegree(A) &gt; 1 or indegree(B) &gt; 1 (or both).\nSuch a graph can be derived from the one-statement-per-block CFG by performing an edge contraction for every edge that falsifies the predicate above, which is to say, by merging two blocks whenever the source block always jumps to the destination block and the destination block can only be jumped to by the source block. However, this contraction-based algorithm is of little practical importance except as a visualization aid for understanding CFG construction because of the expense of building the initial form. In typical implementations, the CFG is built directly from the program in a way that minimizes unnecessary blocks by construction, such as by scanning the program for necessary boundaries between basic blocks.\nReachability.\nReachability is a graph property useful in optimization. If a block cannot be reached by any path from the entry block, then it cannot possibly be executed, in which case it is called unreachable code. Unreachable code can usually be removed from the control flow graph without any negative consequences.\nIf the exit block cannot be reached by any path from the entry block, then control flow cannot leave the graph normally. This indicates the presence of either an infinite loop or, in representations that directly support these features, an abnormal exit or termination of the program. The exit block being reachable by some path does not mean that the program will necessarily reach it, and it is impossible to prove that it will be reached in a general graph; see Halting problem.\nOptimization can reveal unreachable code and infinite loops that were not apparent in the original program. For example, consider the following LLVM function:\ndefine void @double_until_odd(ptr %p) {\nblock1:\n br label %block2\nblock2:\n %0 = load i32, ptr %p ; Load the current value from %p\n %1 = mul i32 %0, 2 ; Multiply it by 2\n store i32 %1, ptr %p ; Store that back into %p\n %2 = and i32 %1, 1 ; Mask off the low bit of the product\n %3 = icmp eq i32 %2, 0 ; Check if that's 0\n br i1 %3, label %block2, label %block3 ; Loop if so\nblock3:\n ret void\nIn this form, the loop in this function is not an infinite loop because there is a path which leaves the loop: if codice_15 is false, the program will branch to codice_16 and return. However, a numerical analysis can prove that the product of any number and 2 will be even, which means that codice_17 is always zero and codice_15 can never be false. This function can therefore be optimized into this form:\ndefine void @double_until_odd(ptr %p) {\nblock1:\n br label %block2\nblock2:\n %0 = load i32, ptr %p ; Load the current value from %p\n %1 = mul i32 %0, 2 ; Multiply it by 2\n store i32 %1, ptr %p ; Store that back into %p\n br label %block2\nblock3: ; unreachable\n ret void\nThere is now an infinite loop in the control flow graph, and the exit block can no longer be reached. Note that this optimization did not change the behavior of the program: it was always true that the loop would never exit. All that has changed is that the control flow graph is more accurately reflecting that truth.\nDominance relationships.\nA block M \"dominates\" a block N if every path from the entry that reaches block N also has to visit block M. The entry block dominates all blocks. M is said to \"properly dominate\" N if M dominates N and they are different blocks. Furthermore, an individual statement or instruction X is said to properly dominate a statement or instruction Y if the block containing X dominates the block containing Y and, if those are the same block, X strictly precedes Y in the block.\nIt is said that a block M \"immediately dominates\" block N if M dominates N, and there is no intervening block P such that M dominates P and P dominates N. In other words, M is the last dominator on all paths from entry to N. Every reachable block has a unique immediate dominator except for the entry block, which has none.\nThe \"dominator tree\" is a directed graph representing the dominance relationships in the function. The nodes of the graph are the reachable basic blocks of the function, and there is an edge from block M to block N if M is an immediate dominator of N. Since each non-entry reachable block has a unique immediate dominator, this is a tree rooted at the entry block. The dominator tree can be calculated efficiently using Lengauer\u2013Tarjan's algorithm.\nIn the reverse direction, block M \"post-dominates\" block N if every path from N to the exit also has to visit block M. (This is sometimes written without a hyphen: M \"postdominates\" N.) The exit block post-dominates all blocks. M is said to \"properly post-dominate\" N if it post-dominates N and they are different blocks. M is an \"immediate post-dominator\" of N if it post-dominates N and there is no block P such that M post-dominates P and P post-dominates N. Every block from which the exit block is reachable has a unique immediate post-dominator except for the exit block, which has none. This gives rise to a \"post-dominator tree\", rooted at the exit block, over the blocks from which the exit block is reachable.\nThe standard definition of dominance includes unreachable blocks, and the standard definition of post-dominance includes blocks from which the exit block cannot be reached. However, such blocks have unique properties under these relationships: an unreachable block is dominated by all blocks, and a block from which the exit cannot be reached is post-dominated by all blocks. Most analyses relying on dominance or post-dominance will want to ignore them, and they are not included in dominator or post-dominator trees. Some representations require the addition of \"impossible edges\" to prevent these blocks from existing, at least formally.\nSpecial edges.\nA \"critical edge\" is an edge which is neither the only edge leaving its source block, nor the only edge entering its destination block. Some optimizations must \"split\" critical edges in order to insert instructions along the edge without affecting other paths through the program. An edge is split by creating a new block that contains only a jump to the destination block, then replacing the original branch destination with the new block.\nA \"retreating edge\" is an edge for which there exists a simple path from the entry block to the source block of the edge (such as might be found by a depth-first traversal of the graph) which includes the destination block. A retreating edge indicates the presence of a cycle in the control flow graph. A retreating edge is called a \"back edge\" if the destination block is present on all possible paths to the source block, which is to say, if the destination block dominates the source block.\nAn \"abnormal edge\" is an edge whose destination is unknown. Exception handling constructs can produce them. These edges tend to inhibit optimization.\nAn \"impossible edge\" (also known as a \"fake edge\") is an edge which cannot actually be traversed during execution and is only added to the graph to preserve some useful property. For example, some representations require the addition of impossible edges to ensure that the exit block is always reachable and post-dominates all blocks.\nStrongly-connected components.\nA strongly-connected component (SCC) of a control flow graph is a set of basic blocks which are all reachable from one another. The blocks that are part of a loop are always part of the same strongly-connected component. A block that is not part of a cycle is always in a strongly-connected component by itself. In particular, the entry and exit blocks are always their own strongly-connected components.\nThe strongly-connected components of a CFG form a directed acyclic graph called the \"SCC tree\", where component A has an edge to component B if any block in A has an edge to any block in B. The SCC tree is isomorphic to the control flow graph if there are no cycles in the CFG; if there is a cycle, the SCC tree essentially collapses all blocks and edges in it into a single node. This can be useful for analyses that wish to treat all of the blocks in a cycle as equivalent. For example, when trying to find an object lifetime that covers a set of use-points as narrowly as possible, if one of those use-points is within a cyclic SCC, the lifetime must fully cover every block in that component.\nLoop management.\nA \"loop header\" (sometimes called the \"entry point\" of the loop) is a dominator that is the target of a loop-forming back edge. The loop header dominates all blocks in the loop body. A block may be a loop header for more than one loop. A loop may have multiple entry points, in which case it has no \"loop header\".\nSuppose block M is a dominator with several incoming edges, some of them being back edges (so M is a loop header). It is advantageous to several optimization passes to break M up into two blocks Mpre and Mloop. The contents of M and back edges are moved to Mloop, the rest of the edges are moved to point into Mpre, and a new edge from Mpre to Mloop is inserted (so that Mpre is the immediate dominator of Mloop). In the beginning, Mpre would be empty, but passes like loop-invariant code motion could populate it. Mpre is called the \"loop pre-header\", and Mloop would be the loop header.\nReducibility.\nA control flow graph is called \"reducible\" if all its retreating edges are back edges. The other edges in such a CFG are called \"forward edges\". The forward edges form a directed acyclic graph, and the back edges always lead to a basic block that control flow has already passed through. Reducible CFGs generally have stronger static properties and can be more easily analyzed and optimized. For example, many loop optimizations are designed to work only on reducible CFGs.\nStructured programming languages are often designed such that all CFGs they produce are reducible, and common structured programming statements such as IF, FOR, WHILE, BREAK, and CONTINUE reliably produce reducible graphs. To directly produce an irreducible graph, statements such as GOTO are needed that can jump to an arbitrary point in the program, although not all uses of GOTO produce irreducible CFGs. Irreducible CFGs can also be produced by some compiler optimizations, such as jump threading. Irreducible CFGs can be converted to reducible CFGs, but this often requires duplicating code or introducing new variables to the program.\nLoop connectedness.\nThe loop connectedness of a CFG is defined with respect to a given depth-first search tree (DFST) of the CFG. This DFST should be rooted at the start node and cover every node of the CFG.\nIn this context, edges in the CFG which run from a node to one of its DFST ancestors (including itself) are called back edges. This does not necessarily coincide with the usual definition of a back edge because a DFST ancestor need not dominate the source node of the edge.\nThe loop connectedness is the largest number of back edges found in any cycle-free path of the CFG. In a reducible CFG, the loop connectedness is independent of the DFST chosen.\nLoop connectedness has been used to reason about the time complexity of data-flow analysis.\nInter-procedural control-flow graph.\nWhile control-flow graphs represent the control flow of a single procedure, inter-procedural control-flow graphs represent the control flow of whole programs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43655", "revid": "1305681557", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43655", "title": "Daniel Chodowiecki", "text": "German painter and printmaker (1726\u20131801)\nDaniel Niklaus Chodowiecki (16 October 1726 \u2013 7 February 1801) was a German painter and printmaker of Huguenot and Polish ancestry, who is most famous as an etcher. He spent most of his life in Berlin, and became the director of the Berlin Academy of Art.\nFamily.\nHe was born in the city of Danzig (Gda\u0144sk) in Poland, he kept close to the Huguenot scene, due to his ancestry.\nAccording to Chodowiecki himself, his Polish nobleman paternal ancestor Bart\u0142omiej Chodowiecki lived in the 16th century in Greater Poland, though this is not confirmed by independent records. Gottfried Chodowiecki, Daniel's father, was a tradesman in Danzig and his mother, Henriette Ayrer, of Swiss ancestry, was a Huguenot. Daniel's grandfather Christian was also a Danzig tradesman, who had moved his business there from Toru\u0144. When his father died, both Daniel (aged 16) and his younger brother Gottfried Chodowiecki went to live with their uncle in Berlin, who offered to educate them. In Germany Daniel received artistic training from the painter Haid in Augsburg. His brother also became a painter.\nHe and his wife Jeanne Barez (1726\u20131785) had three daughters, Jeannette (b. 1761, married the French reformed preacher Jacques Papin), Suzanne (1763\u20131819) and Henriette (1770\u20131880). Jeannette's daughter Marianne Gretschel n\u00e9e Chodowiecka Papin (1794\u20131870) and her son Heinrich Papin (1786\u20131839) also became artists.\nArt.\nSoon Daniel was able to earn a living by painting. He was admitted to the Berlin Academy in 1764 and became vice-director under Bernhard Rode in 1788. He found his true calling and became the most famous German graphic artist of his time. His works include several thousand etchings, usually rather small, and many drawings and paintings. His book illustrations embrace almost all the great classics. His prints represent in great detail the life of the bourgeoisie during the \"Zopfstil\" period, a time between Rococo and Classicism. In 1797 Chodowiecki was appointed director of the Academy of Arts in Berlin, where he died on 7 February 1801. The bulk of his work was in illustrating scientific books by Basedow, Buffon, Lavater, Pestalozzi and others. He also painted many portraits of Polish nobility and was interested in Huguenot and Polish history as well, making some paintings on the subjects. \nHe was in tune with the developing spirit of the age, and many works reflect the cult of sensibility, and then the revolutionary and German nationalist feelings of the end of the century.\nIn printmaking, he is credited with the invention of the deliberate \"remarque\", a small sketch on a plate lying outside the main image. These were originally little sketches or doodles by artists, not really meant to be seen, but Chodowiecki turned them into \"bonus items\" for collectors.\nChodowiecki, though speaking only French and German (due to his offices in the Huguenot French community in Berlin he often spoke French), many times also declared his Polish allegiance and had his son Isaac Heinrich, born in Berlin, painted as a very young child with a Polish outfit and haircut. After the Partitions of Poland Chodowiecki wrote to Gr\u00e4fin Solms-Laubach: \"From my father's side I am Polish, a descendant of a brave nation which will soon vanish\". In a letter to , a Polish astronomer, he wrote: \"I consider it an honour to be a genuine Pole, even though I am now living in Germany\". Because of his mother's and his wife's Huguenot descent he was very close to the Huguenots of Berlin. Nearly all his life and career was spent in Germany, writing in German and living in Berlin from the age of almost 17.\n Chodowiecki depicted on a 1 million papiermark note (1923)\nOne of his most popular books is the \"Journey from Berlin to Danzig\" (, 1773) with many illustrations. He purchased a horse rather than going by stage coach. This was his first return after 30 years absence and he went specifically to see his elderly mother and sisters in Danzig again. He made only one more trip to Danzig afterwards, to his mother's funeral. He describes and illustrates towns and people in Pomerania and Prussia on the way.\nChodowiecki is buried at the \"Franz\u00f6sischer Friedhof\" cemetery in Berlin."}
{"id": "43659", "revid": "1313261680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43659", "title": "Jimmy Sturr", "text": "American musician (born 1941)\nJames W. Sturr Jr. (born September 25, 1941), commonly known as Jimmy Sturr, is an American polka musician, trumpeter, clarinetist, saxophonist and leader of Jimmy Sturr &amp; His Orchestra. Media outlets have often dubbed him the \"King of Polka,\" with his recordings having won 18 out of the 24 Grammy Awards given for Best Polka Album. Sturr's orchestra is on the Top Ten List of the All-Time Grammy Awards, and has acquired more Grammy nominations than anyone in the history of musical polka awards.\nCareer.\nSturr and his orchestra have performed at Carnegie Hall, Lincoln Center in New York City, Yankee Stadium and the Palace of Culture in Warsaw, Poland. When touring, the band rides in Jimmy's 45-foot customized tour bus, previously owned by Billy Ray Cyrus. The band has crossed genres and collaborated with numerous prominent musicians such as Willie Nelson, Brenda Lee, Arlo Guthrie, Boots Randolph, The Oak Ridge Boys, Mel Tillis, and Charlie Daniels.\nA significant highlight for Jimmy Sturr &amp; His Orchestra was when they were invited to appear on the Grand Ole Opry, the only polka group (and the only group with brass instruments) to do so.\nSturr hosts a syndicated radio show on stations including WTBQ in his hometown of Florida, New York, the station he once owned. He also has a weekly radio show on the Rural Radio channel on SirusXM. In addition to radio shows, he also owns and operates United Polka Artists, Starr Record Company, Jimmy Sturr Travel Agency, and a publishing company.\nBand members.\nBand Members\nReoccurring members\nPast members\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43661", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43661", "title": "Cadenza", "text": "Improvised solo between musical sections\nIn music, a cadenza (from , meaning cadence; plural, \"cadenze\" ) is, generically, an improvised or written-out ornamental passage played or sung by a soloist(s), usually in a \"free\" rhythmic style, and often allowing virtuosic display. During this time, the accompaniment will rest or sustain a note or chord. Thus, an improvised cadenza is indicated in written notation by a fermata in all parts. A cadenza will usually occur over either the final or penultimate note in a piece, the lead-in (), or the final or penultimate note in an important subsection of a piece. A cadenza can also be found before a final coda or ritornello.\nOrigin.\nInitially, cadenzas were more simple and structured - a performer would add small embellishments such as trills to the end of cadences. These small embellishments of the early cadenza did not affect meter. However, as the improvised embellishments continued, they became longer and more thought out. This made way for the 'composed' cadenza which ultimately progressed into the 'free' metered feel that is more commonly associated with cadenzas today. Performers are able to play without being tied to meter or a strict time, and accompanists in orchestra await their entrance.\nIn concerti.\nThe term \"cadenza\" often refers to a portion of a concerto in which the orchestra stops playing, leaving the soloist to play alone in free time (without a strict, regular pulse) and can be written or improvised, depending on what the composer specifies. Sometimes, a cadenza will include small parts for other instruments besides the soloist; an example is in Sergei Rachmaninoff's Piano Concerto No. 3, where a solo flute, clarinet and horn are used over rippling arpeggios in the piano. A cadenza normally occurs near the end of the first movement, though it can be at any point in a concerto. An example is Tchaikovsky's First Piano Concerto, where in the first five minutes a cadenza is used. The cadenza is usually the most elaborate and virtuosic part that the solo instrument plays during the whole piece. At the end of the cadenza, the orchestra re-enters, and generally finishes off the movement on their own, or, less often, with the solo instrument.\nCadential trill.\nTypically during the classical period, a solo cadenza in a concerto would end with a trill, usually on the supertonic, preceding the re-entry of the orchestra for the movement's coda. Extended cadential trills were frequent in Mozart's piano concerti; they may also be found in violin concerti and concerti for stringed instruments of the period up to the early 19th century (see illustration at head of this article).\nAs a vocal flourish.\nThe cadenza was originally, and remains, a vocal flourish improvised by a performer to elaborate a cadence in an aria. It was later used in instrumental music, and soon became a standard part of the concerto. Cadenzas for voice and wind instruments were to be performed in one breath, and they should not use distant keys. Originally, it was improvised in this context as well, but during the 19th century, composers began to write cadenzas out in full. Third parties also wrote cadenzas for works in which it was intended by the composer to be improvised, so the soloist could have a well formed solo that they could practice in advance. Some of these have become so widely played and sung that they are effectively part of the standard repertoire, as is the case with Joseph Joachim's cadenza for Johannes Brahms' Violin Concerto, Beethoven's set of cadenzas for Mozart's Piano Concerto no. 20, and Estelle Liebling's edition of cadenzas for operas such as Donizetti's \"La fille du r\u00e9giment\" and \"Lucia di Lammermoor\".\nIn jazz.\nPerhaps the most notable deviations from this tendency towards written (or absent) cadenzas are to be found in jazz, most often at the end of a ballad, though cadenzas in this genre are usually brief. Saxophonist John Coltrane, however, usually improvised an extended cadenza when performing \"I Want To Talk About You\", in which he showcased his predilections for scalar improvisation and multiphonics. The recorded examples of \"I Want To Talk About You\" (\"Live at Birdland\" and \"Afro Blue Impressions\") are approximately 8 minutes in length, with Coltrane's unaccompanied cadenza taking up approximately 3 minutes. More sardonically, jazz critic Martin Williams once described Coltrane's improvisations on \"Africa/Brass\" as \"essentially extended cadenzas to pieces that never get played.\" Equally noteworthy is saxophonist Sonny Rollins' shorter improvised cadenza at the close of \"Three Little Words\" (\"Sonny Rollins on Impulse!\").\nCadenzas are also found in instrumental solos with piano or other accompaniment, where they are placed near the beginning or near the end or sometimes in both places (e.g. the cornet solo \"The Maid of the Mist\" by Herbert L. Clarke, or the end of \"Think of Me\" in Andrew Lloyd Webber's \"The Phantom of the Opera\", where Christine Daa\u00e9 sings a short but involved cadenza).\nNotable examples.\nComposed cadenzas.\nComposers who have written cadenzas for other performers in works not their own include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43664", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43664", "title": "1580s BC", "text": "The 1580s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1589 BC to December 31, 1580 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43667", "revid": "50944916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43667", "title": "Georg Forster", "text": "German naturalist, ethnologist, travel writer, journalist, and revolutionary\nJohann George Adam Forster, also known as Georg Forster (; 27 November 1754 \u2013 10 January 1794), was a German-Polish geographer, naturalist, ethnologist, travel writer, journalist and revolutionary. At an early age, he accompanied his father, Johann Reinhold Forster, on several scientific expeditions, including James Cook's second voyage to the Pacific. His report of that journey, \"A Voyage Round the World\", contributed significantly to the ethnology of the people of Polynesia and remains a respected work. As a result of the report, Forster, who was admitted to the Royal Society at the early age of twenty-two, came to be considered one of the founders of modern scientific travel literature.\nAfter returning to continental Europe, Forster turned toward academia. He taught natural history at the Collegium Carolinum in the Ottoneum, Kassel (1778\u201384), and later at the Academy of Vilna (Vilnius University) (1784\u201387). In 1788, he became head librarian at the University of Mainz. Most of his scientific work during this time consisted of essays on botany and ethnology, but he also prefaced and translated many books about travel and exploration, including a German translation of Cook's diaries.\nForster was a central figure of the Enlightenment in Germany, and corresponded with most of its adherents, including his close friend Georg Christoph Lichtenberg. His ideas, travelogues and personality influenced Alexander von Humboldt, one of the great scientists of the 19th century who hailed Forster as the founder of both comparative ethnology (\"V\u00f6lkerkunde\") and regional geography (\"L\u00e4nderkunde\").\nWhen the French took control of Mainz in 1792, Forster played a leading role in the Mainz Republic, the earliest republican state in Germany. During July 1793 and while he was in Paris as a delegate of the young Mainz Republic, Prussian and Austrian coalition forces regained control of the city and Forster was declared an outlaw. Unable to return to Germany and separated from his friends and family, he died in Paris of illness in early 1794, not yet 40.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Botanist/styles.css\"/&gt;The standard author abbreviation G.Forst. is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.\nEarly life.\nGeorg Forster was born in Nassenhuben (now Mokry Dw\u00f3r, Poland), a small village near Danzig, on 27 November 1754. Georg was the oldest of seven surviving children of Johann Reinhold Forster, a Reformed Protestant pastor and scholar, and his wife Justina Elisabeth, n\u00e9e\u00a0Nicolai. From an early age, Georg was interested in the study of nature, and his father first learned natural history from the books of Carl Linnaeus and then taught his son biology as well as Latin, French, and religion. In 1765, Reinhold obtained a commission by the Russian government to inspect the recently founded colonies near Saratov on the Volga River, which were mostly settled by German colonists. Ten-year old Georg accompanied his father on the journey, which reached the Kalmyk Steppe and Lake Elton, and collected hundreds of specimens of plants, helping his father with naming and identification. From October 1765, he attended Saint Peter's School in St Petersburg, while his father prepared a report about the state of the colony. Reinhold's report was critical of the voivode of Saratov and of the conditions in the colony, and the Forsters left Russia without payment amidst quarrel with Grigory Orlov. After a sea journey from Kronstadt, during which Georg learned English and practiced Russian, they arrived in London on 4 October 1766. Twelve-year old Georg competently translated Lomonosov's history of Russia into English and continued it until the present, and the printed book was presented to the Society of Antiquaries on 21 May 1767. His father took up a teaching position at Warrington Academy in June 1767, succeeding Joseph Priestley, leaving Georg behind in London as apprentice with a London merchant until the rest of the family arrived in England in September 1767. In Warrington, Georg learned classics and religion from John Aikin, mathematics from John Holt and French and natural history from his father.\nAround the world with Captain Cook.\nThe Forsters moved back to London in 1770, where Reinhold Forster cultivated scientific contacts and became a member of the Royal Society in 1772. After the withdrawal of Joseph Banks, he was invited by the British Admiralty to join James Cook's second expedition to the Pacific (1772\u201375). Georg Forster joined his father in the expedition again and was appointed as a draughtsman to his father. Johann Reinhold Forster's task was to work on a scientific report of the journey's discoveries that was to be published after their return.\nThey embarked HMS \"Resolution\" on 13 July 1772, in Plymouth. The ship's route led first to the South Atlantic, then through the Indian Ocean and the Southern Ocean to the islands of Polynesia and finally around Cape Horn back to England, returning on 30 July 1775. During the three-year journey, the explorers visited New Zealand, the Tonga islands, New Caledonia, Tahiti, the Marquesas Islands and Easter Island. They went further south than anybody before them, almost discovering Antarctica. The journey conclusively disproved the \"Terra Australis Incognita\" theory, which claimed there was a big, habitable continent in the South.\nSupervised by his father, Georg Forster first undertook studies of the zoology and botanics of the southern seas, mostly by drawing animals and plants. However, Georg also pursued his own interests, which led to completely independent explorations in comparative geography and ethnology. He quickly learned the languages of the Polynesian islands. His reports on the people of Polynesia are well regarded today, as they describe the inhabitants of the southern islands with empathy, sympathy and largely without Western or Christian bias.\nUnlike Louis Antoine de Bougainville, whose reports from a journey to Tahiti a few years earlier had initiated uncritical \"noble savage\" romanticism, Forster developed a sophisticated picture of the societies of the South Pacific islands. He described various social structures and religions that he encountered on the Society Islands, Easter Island and in Tonga and New Zealand, and ascribed this diversity to the difference in living conditions of these people. At the same time, he also observed that the languages of these fairly widely scattered islands were similar. About the inhabitants of the Nomuka islands (in the Ha'apai island group of present-day Tonga), he wrote that their languages, vehicles, weapons, furniture, clothes, tattoos, style of beard, in short all of their being matched perfectly with what he had already seen while studying tribes on Tongatapu. However, he wrote, \"we could not observe any subordination among them, though this had strongly characterised the natives of Tonga-Tabboo, who seemed to descend even to servility in their obeisance to the king.\"\nThe journey was rich in scientific results. However, the relationship between the Forsters and Cook and his officers was often problematic, due to the elder Forster's fractious temperament as well as Cook's refusal to allow more time for botanical and other scientific observation. Cook refused scientists on his third journey after his experiences with the Forsters.\nFounder of modern travel literature.\nThese conflicts continued after the journey with the problem of who should write the official account of the travels. Lord Sandwich, although willing to pay the promised money, was irritated with Johann Reinhold Forster's opening chapter and tried to have it edited. However, Forster did not want to have his writing corrected \"like a theme of a School-boy\", and stubbornly refused any compromise. As a result, the official account was written by Cook, and the Forsters were deprived of the right to compile the account and did not obtain payment for their work. During the negotiations, the younger Forster decided to release an unofficial account of their travels. In 1777, his book \"A Voyage Round the World in His Britannic Majesty's Sloop Resolution, Commanded by Capt. James Cook, during the Years, 1772, 3, 4, and 5\" was published. This report was the first account of Cook's second voyage (it appeared six weeks before the official publication) and was intended for the general public. The English version and his own translation into German (published 1778\u201380) earned the young author real fame. The poet Christoph Martin Wieland praised the book as the most important one of his time, and even today it remains one of the most important journey descriptions ever written. The book also had a significant impact on German literature, culture and science, influencing such scientists as Alexander von Humboldt and it inspired many ethnologists of later times.\nForster wrote well-polished German prose, which was not only scientifically accurate and objective, but also exciting and easy to read. This differed from conventional travel literature of the time, insofar as it presented more than a mere collection of data \u2013 it also demonstrated coherent, colourful and reliable ethnographical facts that resulted from detailed and sympathetic observation. He often interrupted the description to enrich it with philosophical remarks about his observations. His main focus was always on the people he encountered: their behavior, customs, habits, religions and forms of social organization. In \"A Voyage Round the World\" he even presented the songs sung by the people of Polynesia, complete with lyrics and notation. The book is one of the most important sources concerning the societies of the Southern Pacific from the times before European influence had become significant.\nBoth Forsters also published descriptions of their South Pacific travels in the Berlin-based \"Magazin von merkw\u00fcrdigen neuen Reisebeschreibungen\" (\"\"Magazine of strange new travel accounts\"), and Georg published a translation of \"A Voyage to the South Sea, by Lieutenant William Bligh, London 1792\"\" in 1791\u201393.\nForster at universities.\nThe publication of \"A Voyage Round the World\" brought Forster scientific recognition all over Europe. The respectable Royal Society made him a member on 9 January 1777, though he was not even 23 years old. He was granted similar titles from academies ranging from Berlin to Madrid. These appointments, however, were unpaid.\nHe travelled to Paris to seek out a discussion with the American revolutionary Benjamin Franklin in 1777. In 1778, he went to Germany to take a teaching position as a Natural History professor at the Collegium Carolinum in Kassel, where he met Therese Heyne, the daughter of classicist Christian Gottlob Heyne. They married in 1785 (which was after he left Kassel) and had two surviving children, Therese Forster and Clara Forster, but an unhappy marriage. She would eventually leave him for Ludwig Ferdinand Huber and became one of the first independent female writers in Germany. . From his time in Kassel on, Forster actively corresponded with important figures of the Enlightenment, including Lessing, Herder, Wieland and Goethe. He also initiated cooperation between the Carolinum in Kassel and the University of G\u00f6ttingen where his friend Georg Christoph Lichtenberg worked. Together, they founded and published the scientific and literary journal \"G\u00f6ttingisches Magazin der Wissenschaften und Litteratur\". Forster's closest friend, Samuel Thomas von S\u00f6mmering, arrived in Kassel shortly after Forster, and both were soon involved with the Rosicrucians in Kassel, where Forster took the secret name \"Amadeus Sragorisinus Segenitor\".\nHowever, by 1783 Forster saw that his involvement with the Rosicrucians not only led him away from real science, but also deeper into debt (it is said he was not good at money); for these reasons Forster was happy to accept a proposal by the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth Commission of National Education and became Chair of Natural History at Vilnius University in 1784. Initially, he was accepted well in Vilnius, but he felt more and more isolated with time. Most of his contacts were still with scientists in Germany; especially notable is his dispute with Immanuel Kant about the definition of race. In 1785, Forster traveled to Halle where he submitted his thesis on the plants of the South Pacific for a doctorate in medicine. Back in Vilnius, Forster's ambitions to build a real natural history scientific centre could not get appropriate financial support from the authorities in Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. Moreover, his famous speech on natural history in 1785 went almost unnoticed and was not printed until 1843. These events led to high tensions between him and the local community. Eventually, he broke the contract six years short of its completion as Catherine II of Russia had offered him a place on a journey around the world (the Mulovsky expedition) for a high honorarium and a position as a professor in Saint Petersburg. This resulted in a conflict between Forster and the influential Polish scientist J\u0119drzej \u015aniadecki. However, the Russian proposal was withdrawn and Forster left Vilnius. He then settled in Mainz, where he became head librarian of the University of Mainz, a position held previously by his friend Johannes von M\u00fcller, who made sure Forster would succeed him when M\u00fcller moved to the administration of Elector Friedrich Karl Josef von Erthal.\nForster regularly published essays on contemporary explorations and continued to be a very prolific translator; for instance, he wrote about Cook's third journey to the South Pacific, and about the \"Bounty\" expedition, as well as translating Cook's and Bligh's diaries from these journeys into German. From his London years, Forster was in contact with Sir Joseph Banks, the initiator of the Bounty expedition and a participant in Cook's first journey. While at the University of Vilnius he wrote the article \"Neuholland und die brittische Colonie in Botany-Bay\", published in the \"Allgemeines historisches Taschenbuch\" (Berlin, December 1786), an essay on the future prospects of the English colony founded in New South Wales in 1788.\nAnother interest of his was indology \u2013 one of the main goals of his failed expedition to be financed by Catherine II had been to reach India. He translated the Sanskrit play \"Shakuntala\" using a Latin version provided by Sir William Jones; this strongly influenced Johann Gottfried Herder, and triggered German interest in the culture of India.\n\"Views from the Lower Rhine\".\nIn the second quarter of 1790, Forster and the young Alexander von Humboldt started from Mainz on a long journey through the Southern Netherlands, the United Provinces, and England, eventually finishing in Paris. The impressions from the journey were described in a three volume publication \"Ansichten vom Niederrhein, von Brabant, Flandern, Holland, England und Frankreich im April, Mai und Juni 1790\" (\"Views of the Lower Rhine, from Brabant, Flanders, Holland, England, and France in April, May and June 1790\"), published 1791\u201394. Goethe said about the book: \"One wants, after one has finished reading, to start it over, and wishes to travel with such a good and knowledgeable observer.\" The book includes comments on the history of art that were as influential for the discipline as \"A Voyage Round the world\" was for ethnology. Forster was, for example, one of the first writers who gave just treatment to the Gothic architecture of Cologne Cathedral, which was widely perceived as \"barbarian\" at that time. The book conformed well to the early Romantic intellectual movements in German-speaking Europe.\nForster's main interest, however, was again focused on the social behavior of people, as 15 years earlier in the Pacific. The national uprisings in Flanders and Brabant and the revolution in France sparked his curiosity. The journey through these regions, together with the Netherlands and England, where citizens' freedoms were equally well developed, in the end helped him to resolve his own political opinions. From that time on he was to be a confident opponent of the ancien r\u00e9gime. With other German scholars, he welcomed the outbreak of the revolution as a clear consequence of the Enlightenment. As early as 30 July 1789, shortly after he heard about the Storming of the Bastille, he wrote to his father-in-law, philologist Christian Gottlob Heyne, that it was beautiful to see what philosophy had nurtured in people's minds and then had realized in the state. To educate people about their rights in this way, he wrote, was after all the surest way; the rest would then result as if by itself.\nLife as a revolutionary.\nFoundation of the Mainz Republic.\nThe French revolutionary army under General Custine gained control over Mainz on 21 October 1792. Two days later, Forster joined others in establishing a Jacobin Club called \"Freunde der Freiheit und Gleichheit\" (\"Friends of Freedom and Equality\") in the Electoral Palace. From early 1793 he was actively involved in organizing the Mainz Republic. This first republic located on German soil was constituted on the principles of democracy, and encompassed areas on the left bank of the Rhine between Landau and Bingen. Forster became vice-president of the republic's temporary administration and a candidate in the elections to the local parliament, the (\"Rhenish-German National Convention\"). From January to March 1793, he was an editor of (\"The new Mainz newspaper or The People's Friend\"), a name chosen in reference to Marat's . In his first article he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Die Pressefreiheit herrscht endlich innerhalb dieser Mauern, wo die Buchdruckerpresse erfunden ward.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The freedom of the press finally reigns within these walls where the printing press was invented.\nThis freedom did not last long, though. The Mainz Republic existed only until the retreat of the French troops in July 1793 after the siege of Mainz.\nForster was not present in Mainz during the siege. As representatives of the Mainz National Convention, he and Adam Lux had been sent to Paris to apply for Mainz \u2013 which was unable to exist as an independent state \u2013 to become a part of the French Republic. The application was accepted, but had no effect, since Mainz was conquered by Prussian and Austrian troops, and the old order was restored. Forster lost his library and collections and decided to remain in Paris.\nDeath in revolutionary Paris.\nBased on a decree by Emperor Francis II inflicting punishments on German subjects who collaborated with the French revolutionary government, Forster was declared an outlaw and placed under the Imperial ban; a prize of 100 ducats was set on his head and he could not return to Germany. Devoid of all means of making a living and without his wife, who had stayed in Mainz with their children and her later husband Ludwig Ferdinand Huber, he remained in Paris. At this point the revolution in Paris had entered the Reign of Terror introduced by the Committee of Public Safety under the rule of Maximilien Robespierre. Forster had the opportunity to experience the difference between the promises of the revolution of happiness for all and its cruel practice. In contrast to many other German supporters of the revolution, like for instance Friedrich Schiller, Forster did not turn back from his revolutionary ideals under the pressure of the terror. He viewed the events in France as a force of nature that could not be slowed and that had to release its own energies to avoid being even more destructive.\nBefore the reign of terror reached its climax, Forster died after a rheumatic illness in his small attic apartment at Rue des Moulins in Paris on 10 January 1794, at the age of thirty-nine. At the time, he was making plans to visit India.\nViews on nations and their culture.\nForster had partial Scottish roots and was born in Polish Royal Prussia, and therefore was by birth a Polish subject. He worked in Russia, England, Poland and in several German countries of his time. Finally, he finished his life in France. He worked in different milieus and traveled a lot from his youth on. It was his view that this, together with his scientific upbringing based on the principles of the Enlightenment, gave him a wide perspective on different ethnic and national communities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All peoples of the earth have equal claims to my good will\u00a0... and my praise and blame are independent of national prejudice.\nIn his opinion all human beings have the same abilities with regard to reason, feelings and imagination, but these basic ingredients are used in different ways and in different environments, which gives rise to different cultures and civilizations. According to him it is obvious that the culture on Tierra del Fuego is at a lower level of development than European culture, but he also admits that the conditions of life there are much more difficult and this gives people very little chance to develop a higher culture. Based on these opinions he was classified as one of the main examples of 18th-century German cosmopolitanism.\nIn contrast to the attitude expressed in these writings and to his Enlightenment background, he used insulting terms expressing prejudice against Poles in his private letters during his stay in Vilnius and in a diary from the journey through Poland, but he never published any manifestation of this attitude. These insults only became known after his death, when his private correspondence and diaries were released to the public. Since Forster's published descriptions of other nations were seen as impartial scientific observations, Forster's disparaging description of Poland in his letters and diaries was often taken at face value in Imperial and Nazi Germany, where it was used as a means of science-based support for a purported German superiority. The spreading of the \"Polnische Wirtschaft\" (Polish economy) stereotype is most likely due to the influence of his letters.\nForster's attitude brought him into conflict with the people of the different nations he encountered and made him welcome nowhere, as he was too revolutionary and antinational for Germans, proud and opposing in his dealings with Englishmen, too unconcerned about Polish science for Poles, and too insignificant politically and ignored while in France.\nLegacy.\nAfter Forster's death, his works were mostly forgotten, except in professional circles. This was partly due to his involvement in the French revolution. However, his reception changed with the politics of the times, with different periods focusing on different parts of his work. In the period of rising nationalism after the Napoleonic era he was regarded in Germany as a \"traitor to his country\", overshadowing his work as an author and scientist. This attitude rose even though the philosopher Karl Wilhelm Friedrich Schlegel wrote about Forster at the beginning of the 19th century:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSome interest in Forster's life and revolutionary actions was revived in the context of the liberal sentiments leading up to the 1848 revolution. But he was largely forgotten in the Germany of Wilhelm II and more so in Nazi Germany, where interest in Forster was limited to his stance on Poland from his private letters. Interest in Forster resumed in the 1960s in East Germany, where he was interpreted as a champion of class struggle. The GDR research station in Antarctica that was opened on 25 October 1987, was named after him. In West Germany, the search for democratic traditions in German history also led to a more diversified picture of him in the 1970s. The Alexander von Humboldt foundation named a scholarship program for foreign scholars from developing countries after him. His reputation as one of the first and most outstanding German ethnologists is indisputable, and his works are seen as crucial in the development of ethnology in Germany into a separate branch of science.\nThe ethnographical items collected by Georg and Johann Reinhold Forster are now presented as the \"Cook-Forster-Sammlung\" (Cook\u2013Forster Collection) in the Sammlung f\u00fcr V\u00f6lkerkunde anthropological collection in G\u00f6ttingen. Another collection of items collected by the Forsters is on display at the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Botanist/styles.css\"/&gt;The standard author abbreviation G.Forst. is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43673", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43673", "title": "Johannes Daniel Falk", "text": "German publisher and poet\nJohannes Daniel Falk (28 October 1768 Danzig \u2013 14 February 1826 Weimar) was a German publisher and poet.\nFalk was born in Danzig (Gda\u0144sk) in the Polish province of Royal Prussia, where he received his first education against the wishes of his father, who wanted to employ the child in his business as wig maker. The Danzig city council granted Falk a theology stipendium at Halle, but he did not become a preacher and frequented literary circles of Schiller and Goethe instead.\nIn late 1815 or early 1816, he wrote the German text \"O du fr\u00f6hliche\" that became a popular Christmas carol, to the melody of the Catholic hymn \"O Sanctissima\".\nFalk was the founder of the \"Falk'sche Institute\", a public education place for orphans in Weimar. He died in that city in 1826.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43675", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43675", "title": "Laurence Olivier", "text": "English actor and director (1907\u20131989)\nLaurence Kerr Olivier, Baron Olivier ( ; 22 May 1907 \u2013 11 July 1989) was an English actor and director. He and his contemporaries Ralph Richardson and John Gielgud made up a trio of male actors who dominated the British stage of the mid-20th century. He also worked in films throughout his career, playing more than fifty cinema roles. Late in his career he had considerable success in television roles.\nOlivier's family had no theatrical connections, but his father, a clergyman, decided that his son should become an actor. After attending a drama school in London, Olivier learned his craft in a succession of acting jobs during the late 1920s. In 1930 he had his first important West End success in No\u00ebl Coward's \"Private Lives\", and he appeared in his first film. In 1935 he played in a celebrated production of \"Romeo and Juliet\" alongside Gielgud and Peggy Ashcroft, and by the end of the decade he was an established star. In the 1940s, together with Richardson and John Burrell, Olivier was the co-director of the Old Vic, building it into a highly respected company. There his most celebrated roles included Shakespeare's \"Richard III\" and Sophocles's \"Oedipus\".\nIn the 1950s Olivier was an independent actor-manager, but his stage career had stagnated until he joined the \"avant-garde\" English Stage Company in 1957 to play the title role in \"The Entertainer\", a part he later reprised on film. From 1963 to 1973 he was the founding director of Britain's National Theatre, running a resident company that fostered many future stars. His own parts there included the title role in \"Othello\" (1965), and Shylock in \"The Merchant of Venice\" (1970).\nAmong Olivier's films are \"Wuthering Heights\" (1939), \"Rebecca\" (1940) and a trilogy of Shakespeare films as actor/director: \"Henry V\" (1944), \"Hamlet\" (1948) and \"Richard III\" (1955). His later films included \"Spartacus\" (1960), \"The Shoes of the Fisherman\" (1968), \"Sleuth\" (1972), \"Marathon Man\" (1976) and \"The Boys from Brazil\" (1978). His television appearances included an adaptation of \"The Moon and Sixpence\" (1960), \"Long Day's Journey into Night\" (1973), \"Love Among the Ruins\" (1975), \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\" (1976), \"A Little Romance\" (1979), \"Brideshead Revisited\" (1981) and \"King Lear\" (1983).\nOlivier's honours included a knighthood (1947), a life peerage (1970) and the Order of Merit (1981). For his on-screen work he received an Academy Award, five British Academy Film Awards, five Emmy Awards and four Golden Globe Awards in addition to nominations for a Tony Award, two British Academy Television Awards and a Grammy Award. Olivier was awarded with two non-competitive Academy Honorary Awards in 1947 and 1979, the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award in 1983 and a BAFTA Fellowship in 1976. The National Theatre's largest auditorium is named in his honour, and he is commemorated in the Laurence Olivier Awards, given annually by the Society of London Theatre. He was married three times, to the actresses Jill Esmond from 1930 to 1940, Vivien Leigh from 1940 to 1960, and Joan Plowright from 1961 until his death.\nLife and career.\n1907\u20131924: Early life and education.\nOlivier was born in Dorking, Surrey, the youngest of the three children of the Reverend Gerard Kerr Olivier and Agnes Louise (\"n\u00e9e\" Crookenden). He had two older siblings: Sybille and Gerard Dacres \"Dickie\". His great-great-grandfather was of French Huguenot descent, and Olivier came from a long line of Protestant clergymen. Gerard Olivier had begun a career as a schoolmaster, but in his thirties he discovered a strong religious vocation and was ordained as a priest of the Church of England. He belonged to the high church, ritualist wing of Anglicanism and was known as \"Father Olivier\". Some Anglican congregations did not like this style, and the only church posts he was offered were temporary, usually deputising for regular incumbents in their absence. This meant a nomadic existence, and for Laurence's first few years, he never lived in one place long enough to make friends.\nIn 1912, when Olivier was five, his father secured a permanent appointment as assistant rector at St Saviour's, Pimlico. He held the post for six years, and a stable family life was at last possible. Olivier was devoted to his mother, but not to his father, whom he found a cold and remote parent, though he learned a great deal of the art of performing from him. As a young man Gerard Olivier had considered a stage career and was a dramatic and effective preacher. Olivier wrote that his father knew \"when to drop the voice, when to bellow about the perils of hellfire, when to slip in a gag, when suddenly to wax sentimental\u00a0... The quick changes of mood and manner absorbed me, and I have never forgotten them.\"\nIn 1916, after attending a series of preparatory schools, Olivier passed the singing examination for admission to the choir school of All Saints, Margaret Street, in central London. His elder brother was already a pupil and Olivier gradually settled in, though he felt himself to be something of an outsider. The church's style of worship was (and remains) Anglo-Catholic, with emphasis on ritual, vestments and incense. The theatricality of the services appealed to Olivier, and the vicar encouraged the students to develop a taste for secular as well as religious drama. In a school production of \"Julius Caesar\" in 1917, the ten-year-old Olivier's performance as Brutus impressed an audience that included Lady Tree, the young Sybil Thorndike and Ellen Terry, who wrote in her diary, \"The small boy who played Brutus is already a great actor.\" He later won praise in other schoolboy productions, as Maria in \"Twelfth Night\" (1918) and Katherine in \"The Taming of the Shrew\" (1922).\nFrom All Saints, Olivier went on to St Edward's School, Oxford, from 1921 to 1924. He made little mark until his final year, when he played Puck in the school's production of \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\"; his performance was a tour de force that won him popularity among his fellow pupils. In January 1924, his brother left England to work in India as a rubber planter. Olivier missed him greatly and asked his father how soon he could follow. He recalled in his memoirs that his father replied, \"Don't be such a fool, you're not going to India, you're going on the stage.\"\n1924\u20131929: Early acting career.\nIn 1924 Gerard Olivier, a habitually frugal man, told his son that he must gain not only admission to the Central School of Speech Training and Dramatic Art, but also a scholarship with a bursary to cover his tuition fees and living expenses. Olivier's sister had been a student there and was a favourite of Elsie Fogerty, the founder and principal of the school. Olivier later speculated that it was on the strength of this connection that Fogerty agreed to award him the bursary.\nOne of Olivier's contemporaries at the school was Peggy Ashcroft, who observed he was \"rather uncouth in that his sleeves were too short and his hair stood on end but he was intensely lively and great fun\". By his own admission he was not a very conscientious student, but Fogerty liked him and later said that he and Ashcroft stood out among her many pupils.\nAfter leaving the Central School in 1925, Olivier worked for small theatrical companies; his first stage appearance was in a sketch called \"The Unfailing Instinct\" at the Brighton Hippodrome in August 1925. Later that year, he was taken on by Sybil Thorndike (the daughter of a friend of Olivier's father) and her husband Lewis Casson as a bit-part player, understudy and assistant stage manager for their London company. Olivier modelled his performing style on that of Gerald du Maurier, of whom he said, \"He seemed to mutter on stage but had such perfect technique. When I started I was so busy doing a du Maurier that no one ever heard a word I said. The Shakespearean actors one saw were terrible hams like Frank Benson.\" Olivier's concern with speaking naturally and avoiding what he called \"singing\" Shakespeare's verse was the cause of much frustration in his early career, as critics regularly decried his delivery.\nIn 1926, on Thorndike's recommendation, Olivier joined the Birmingham Repertory Company. His biographer Michael Billington describes the Birmingham company as \"Olivier's university\", where in his second year he was given the chance to play a wide range of important roles, including Tony Lumpkin in \"She Stoops to Conquer\", the title role in \"Uncle Vanya\", and Parolles in \"All's Well That Ends Well\". Billington adds that the engagement led to \"a lifelong friendship with his fellow actor Ralph Richardson that was to have a decisive effect on the British theatre.\"\nWhile playing the juvenile lead in \"Bird in Hand\" at the Royalty Theatre in June 1928, Olivier began a relationship with Jill Esmond, the daughter of the actors Henry V. Esmond and Eva Moore. Olivier later recounted that he thought \"she would most certainly do excellent well for a wife\u00a0... I wasn't likely to do any better at my age and with my undistinguished track-record, so I promptly fell in love with her.\"\nIn 1928 Olivier created the role of Stanhope in R.\u00a0C. Sherriff's \"Journey's End\", in which he scored a great success at its single Sunday night premiere. He was offered the part in the West End production the following year, but turned it down in favour of the more glamorous role of Beau Geste in a stage adaptation of P. C. Wren's 1929 novel of the same name. \"Journey's End\" became a long-running success; \"Beau Geste\" failed. \"The Manchester Guardian\" commented, \"Mr.\u00a0Laurence Olivier did his best as Beau, but he deserves and will get better parts. Mr.\u00a0Olivier is going to make a big name for himself\". For the rest of 1929 Olivier appeared in seven plays, all of which were short-lived. Billington ascribes this failure rate to poor choices by Olivier rather than mere bad luck.\n1930\u20131935: Rising star.\nIn 1930, with his impending marriage in mind, Olivier earned some extra money with small roles in two films. In April he travelled to Berlin to film the English-language version of \"The Temporary Widow\", a crime comedy with Lilian Harvey, and in May he spent four nights working on another comedy, \"Too Many Crooks\". During work on the latter film, for which he was paid \u00a360 (), he met Laurence Evans, who became his personal manager. Olivier did not enjoy working in film, which he dismissed as \"this anaemic little medium which could not stand great acting\", but financially it was much more rewarding than his theatre work.\nOlivier and Esmond married on 25 July 1930 at All Saints, Margaret Street, although within weeks both realised they had erred. Olivier later recorded that the marriage was \"a pretty crass mistake. I insisted on getting married from a pathetic mixture of religious and animal promptings.\u00a0... She had admitted to me that she was in love elsewhere and could never love me as completely as I would wish.\" Their son, (Simon) Tarquin, was born in August 1936. Olivier later recounted that following the wedding he did not keep a diary for ten years and never followed religious practices again, although he considered those facts to be \"mere coincidence\", unconnected to the nuptials.\nIn 1930 No\u00ebl Coward cast Olivier as Victor Prynne in his new play \"Private Lives\", which opened at the new Phoenix Theatre in London in September. Coward and Gertrude Lawrence played the lead roles, Elyot Chase and Amanda Prynne. Victor is a secondary character, along with Sybil Chase; the author called them \"extra puppets, lightly wooden ninepins, only to be repeatedly knocked down and stood up again\". To make them credible spouses for Amanda and Elyot, Coward was determined that two outstandingly attractive performers should play the parts. Olivier played Victor in the West End and then on Broadway; Adrianne Allen was Sybil in London, but could not go to New York, where the part was taken by Esmond. In addition to giving the 23-year-old Olivier his first successful West End role, Coward became something of a mentor. In the late 1960s Olivier told Sheridan Morley:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He gave me a sense of balance, of right and wrong. He would make me read; I never used to read anything at all. I remember he said, \"Right, my boy, \"Wuthering Heights\", \"Of Human Bondage\" and \"The Old Wives' Tale\" by Arnold Bennett. That'll do, those are three of the best. Read them\". I did.\u00a0... No\u00ebl also did a priceless thing, he taught me not to giggle on the stage. Once already I'd been fired for doing it, and I was very nearly sacked from the Birmingham Rep. for the same reason. No\u00ebl cured me; by trying to make me laugh outrageously, he taught me how not to give in to it. My great triumph came in New York when one night I managed to break No\u00ebl up on the stage without giggling myself.\"\nIn 1931 RKO Pictures offered Olivier a two-film contract at $1,000 a week (); he discussed the possibility with Coward, who, irked, told Olivier \"You've no artistic integrity, that's your trouble; this is how you cheapen yourself.\" He accepted and moved to Hollywood, despite some misgivings. His first film was the drama \"Friends and Lovers\", in a supporting role, before RKO loaned him to Fox Studios for his first film lead, a British journalist in a Russia under martial law in \"The Yellow Ticket\", alongside Elissa Landi and Lionel Barrymore. The cultural historian Jeffrey Richards describes Olivier's look as an attempt by Fox Studios to produce a likeness of Ronald Colman, and Colman's moustache, voice and manner are \"perfectly reproduced\". Olivier returned to RKO to complete his contract with the 1932 drama \"Westward Passage\", which was a commercial failure. Olivier's initial foray into American films had not provided the breakthrough he hoped for; disillusioned with Hollywood, he returned to London, where he appeared in two British films, \"Perfect Understanding\" with Gloria Swanson and \"No Funny Business\"\u2014in which Esmond also appeared. He was tempted back to Hollywood in 1933 to appear opposite Greta Garbo in \"Queen Christina\", but was replaced after two weeks of filming because of a lack of chemistry between the two.\nOlivier's stage roles in 1934 included Bothwell in Gordon Daviot's \"Queen of Scots\", which was only a moderate success for him and for the play, but led to an important engagement for the same management (Bronson Albery) shortly afterwards. In the interim he had a great success playing a thinly disguised version of the American actor John Barrymore in George S. Kaufman and Edna Ferber's \"Theatre Royal\". His success was vitiated by his breaking an ankle two months into the run, in one of the athletic, acrobatic stunts with which he liked to enliven his performances.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMr Olivier was about twenty times as much in love with Peggy Ashcroft as Mr Gielgud is. But Mr Gielgud spoke most of the poetry far better than Mr Olivier\u00a0... Yet\u2014I must out with it\u2014the fire of Mr Olivier's passion carried the play along as Mr Gielgud's doesn't quite.\n Herbert Farjeon on the rival Romeos\nIn 1935, under Albery's management, John Gielgud staged \"Romeo and Juliet\" at the New Theatre, co-starring with Peggy Ashcroft, Edith Evans and Olivier. Gielgud had seen Olivier in \"Queen of Scots\", spotted his potential, and gave him a major step up in his career. For the first weeks of the run Gielgud played Mercutio and Olivier played Romeo, after which they exchanged roles. The production broke all box-office records for the play, running for 189 performances. Olivier was enraged at the notices after the first night, which praised the virility of his performance but fiercely criticised his speaking of Shakespeare's verse, contrasting it with his co-star's mastery of the poetry. The friendship between the two men was prickly, on Olivier's side, for the rest of his life.\n1936\u20131938: Old Vic and Vivien Leigh.\nIn May 1936 Olivier and Richardson jointly directed and starred in a new piece by J.\u00a0B. Priestley, \"Bees on the Boatdeck\". Both actors won excellent notices, but the play, an allegory of Britain's decay, did not attract the public and closed after four weeks. Later in the same year Olivier accepted an invitation to join the Old Vic company. The theatre, in an unfashionable location south of the Thames, had offered inexpensive tickets for opera and drama under its proprietor Lilian Baylis since 1912. Her drama company specialised in the plays of Shakespeare, and many leading actors had taken very large cuts in their pay to develop their Shakespearean techniques there. Gielgud had been in the company from 1929 to 1931 and Richardson from 1930 to 1932. \nAmong the actors whom Olivier joined in late 1936 were Edith Evans, Ruth Gordon, Alec Guinness and Michael Redgrave. In January 1937 Olivier took the title role in an uncut version of \"Hamlet\" in which once again his delivery of the verse was unfavourably compared with that of Gielgud, who had played the role on the same stage seven years previously to enormous acclaim. \"The Observer\"'s Ivor Brown praised Olivier's \"magnetism and muscularity\" but missed \"the kind of pathos so richly established by Mr Gielgud\". The reviewer in \"The Times\" found the performance \"full of vitality\", but at times \"too light\u00a0... the character slips from Mr Olivier's grasp\".\nAfter \"Hamlet\", the company presented \"Twelfth Night\" in what the director, Tyrone Guthrie, summed up as \"a baddish, immature production of mine, with Olivier outrageously amusing as Sir Toby and a very young Alec Guinness outrageous and more amusing as Sir Andrew\". \"Henry V\" was the next play, presented in May to mark the Coronation of George VI. A pacifist, as he then was, Olivier was as reluctant to play the warrior king as Guthrie was to direct the piece, but the production was a success and Baylis had to extend the run from four to eight weeks.\nFollowing Olivier's success in Shakespearean stage productions, he made his first foray into Shakespeare on film in 1936, as Orlando in \"As You Like It\", directed by Paul Czinner, \"a charming if lightweight production\", according to Michael Brooke of the British Film Institute's (BFI's) Screenonline. The following year Olivier appeared alongside Vivien Leigh in the historical drama \"Fire Over England\". He had first met Leigh briefly at the Savoy Grill and then again when she visited him during the run of \"Romeo and Juliet\", probably early in 1936, and the two had begun an affair sometime that year. Of the relationship, Olivier later said that \"I couldn't help myself with Vivien. No man could. I hated myself for cheating on Jill, but then I had cheated before, but this was something different. This wasn't just out of lust. This was love that I really didn't ask for but was drawn into.\" While his relationship with Leigh continued he conducted an affair with the actress Ann Todd, and possibly had a brief affair with the actor Henry Ainley, according to the biographer Michael Munn.\nIn June 1937 the Old Vic company took up an invitation to perform \"Hamlet\" in the courtyard of the castle at Elsinore, where Shakespeare located the play. Olivier secured the casting of Leigh to replace Cherry Cottrell as Ophelia. Because of torrential rain the performance had to be moved from the castle courtyard to the ballroom of a local hotel, but the tradition of playing Hamlet at Elsinore was established, and Olivier was followed by, among others, Gielgud (1939), Redgrave (1950), Richard Burton (1954), Christopher Plummer (1964), Derek Jacobi (1979), Kenneth Branagh (1988) and Jude Law (2009). Back in London, the company staged \"Macbeth\", with Olivier in the title role. The stylised production by Michel Saint-Denis was not well liked, but Olivier had some good notices among the bad. On returning from Denmark, Olivier and Leigh told their respective spouses about the affair and that their marriages were over; Esmond moved out of the marital house and in with her mother. After Olivier and Leigh made a tour of Europe in mid-1937 they returned to separate film projects\u2014\"A Yank at Oxford\" for her and \"The Divorce of Lady X\" for him\u2014and moved into a property together in Iver, Buckinghamshire.\nOlivier returned to the Old Vic for a second season in 1938. For \"Othello\" he played Iago, with Richardson in the title role. Guthrie wanted to experiment with the theory that Iago's villainy is driven by a suppressed love for Othello. Olivier was willing to co-operate, but Richardson was not; audiences and most critics failed to spot the supposed motivation of Olivier's Iago, and Richardson's Othello seemed underpowered. After that comparative failure, the company had a success with \"Coriolanus\" starring Olivier in the title role. The notices were laudatory, mentioning him alongside great predecessors such as Edmund Kean, William Macready and Henry Irving. The actor Robert Speaight described it as \"Olivier's first incontestably great performance\". This was Olivier's last appearance on a London stage for six years.\n1938\u20131944: Hollywood and war years.\nIn 1938 Olivier joined Richardson to film the spy thriller \"Q Planes\", released the following year. Frank Nugent, the critic for \"The New York Times\", thought Olivier was \"not quite so good\" as Richardson, but was \"quite acceptable\". In late 1938, lured by a salary of $50,000 (), the actor travelled to Hollywood to take the part of Heathcliff in the 1939 film \"Wuthering Heights\", alongside Merle Oberon and David Niven. In less than a month Leigh had joined him, explaining that her trip was \"partially because Larry's there and partially because I intend to get the part of Scarlett O'Hara\"\u2014the role in \"Gone with the Wind\" in which she was eventually cast. Olivier did not enjoy making \"Wuthering Heights\", and his approach to film acting, combined with a dislike for Oberon, led to tensions on set. The director, William Wyler, was a hard taskmaster, and Olivier learned to remove what Billington described as \"the carapace of theatricality\" to which he was prone, replacing it with \"a palpable reality\". The resulting film was a commercial and critical success that earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor and created his screen reputation. Caroline Lejeune, writing for \"The Observer\", considered that \"Olivier's dark, moody face, abrupt style, and a certain fine arrogance towards the world in his playing are just right\" in the role, while the reviewer for \"The Times\" wrote that Olivier \"is a good embodiment of Heathcliff\u00a0... impressive enough on a more human plane, speaking his lines with real distinction, and always both romantic and alive.\"\nAfter returning to London briefly in mid-1939, the couple returned to America, Leigh to film the final takes for \"Gone with the Wind\", and Olivier to prepare for filming of Alfred Hitchcock's \"Rebecca\"\u2014although the couple had hoped to appear in it together. Instead, Joan Fontaine was selected for the role of Mrs de Winter, as the producer David O. Selznick thought that not only was she more suitable for the role, but that it was best to keep Olivier and Leigh apart until their divorces came through. Olivier followed \"Rebecca\" with \"Pride and Prejudice\", in the role of Mr. Darcy. To his disappointment Elizabeth Bennet was played by Greer Garson rather than Leigh. He received good reviews for both films and showed a more confident screen presence than he had in his early work. In January 1940 Olivier and Esmond were granted their divorce. In February, following another request from Leigh, her husband also applied for their marriage to be terminated.\nOn stage, Olivier and Leigh starred in \"Romeo and Juliet\" on Broadway. It was an extravagant production, but a commercial failure. In \"The New York Times\" Brooks Atkinson praised the scenery but not the acting: \"Although Miss Leigh and Mr Olivier are handsome young people they hardly act their parts at all.\" The couple had invested almost all their savings in the project, and its failure was a grave financial blow. They were married in August 1940, at the San Ysidro Ranch in Santa Barbara.\nThe war in Europe had been under way for a year and was going badly for Britain. After his wedding Olivier wanted to help the war effort. He telephoned Duff Cooper, the Minister of Information under Winston Churchill, hoping to get a position in Cooper's department. Cooper advised him to remain where he was and speak to the film director Alexander Korda, who was based in the US at Churchill's behest, with connections to British Intelligence. Korda\u2014with Churchill's support and involvement\u2014directed \"That Hamilton Woman\", with Olivier as Horatio Nelson and Leigh in the title role. Korda saw that the relationship between the couple was strained. Olivier was tiring of Leigh's suffocating adulation, and she was drinking to excess. The film, in which the threat of Napoleon paralleled that of Hitler, was seen by critics as \"bad history but good British propaganda\", according to the BFI.\nOlivier's life was under threat from the Nazis and pro-German sympathisers. The studio owners were concerned enough that Samuel Goldwyn and Cecil B. DeMille both provided support and security to ensure his safety. On the completion of filming, Olivier and Leigh returned to Britain. He had spent the previous year learning to fly and had completed nearly 250 hours by the time he left America. He intended to join the Royal Air Force but instead made another propaganda film, \"49th Parallel\", narrated short pieces for the Ministry of Information, and joined the Fleet Air Arm because Richardson was already in the service. Richardson had gained a reputation for crashing aircraft, which Olivier rapidly eclipsed. Olivier and Leigh settled in a cottage just outside RNAS Worthy Down, where he was stationed with a training squadron; No\u00ebl Coward visited the couple and thought Olivier looked unhappy. Olivier spent much of his time taking part in broadcasts and making speeches to build morale, and in 1942 he was invited to make another propaganda film, \"The Demi-Paradise\", in which he played a Soviet engineer who helps improve British-Russian relationships.\nIn 1943, at the behest of the Ministry of Information, Olivier began working on \"Henry V\". Originally he had no intention of taking the directorial duties, but ended up directing and producing, in addition to taking the title role. He was assisted by an Italian internee, Filippo Del Giudice, who had been released to produce propaganda for the Allied cause. The decision was made to film the battle scenes in neutral Ireland, where it was easier to find the 650 extras. John Betjeman, the press attach\u00e9 at the British embassy in Dublin, played a key liaison role with the Irish government in making suitable arrangements. The film was released in November 1944. Brooke, writing for the BFI, considers that it \"came too late in the Second World War to be a call to arms as such, but formed a powerful reminder of what Britain was defending.\" The music for the film was written by William Walton, \"a score that ranks with the best in film music\", according to the music critic Michael Kennedy. Walton also provided the music for Olivier's next two Shakespearean adaptations, \"Hamlet\" (1948) and \"Richard III\" (1955). \"Henry V\" was warmly received by critics. The reviewer for \"The Manchester Guardian\" wrote that the film combined \"new art hand-in-hand with old genius, and both superbly of one mind\", in a film that worked \"triumphantly\". The critic for \"The Times\" considered that Olivier \"plays Henry on a high, heroic note and never is there danger of a crack\", in a film described as \"a triumph of film craft\". There were Oscar nominations for the film, including Best Picture and Best Actor, but it won none and Olivier was instead presented with a \"Special Award\". He was unimpressed, and later commented that \"this was my first absolute fob-off, and I regarded it as such.\"\n1944\u20131948: Co-directing the Old Vic.\nThroughout the war Tyrone Guthrie had striven to keep the Old Vic company going, even after German bombing in 1942 left the theatre a near-ruin. A small troupe toured the provinces, with Sybil Thorndike at its head. By 1944, with the tide of the war turning, Guthrie felt it time to re-establish the company in a London base and invited Richardson to head it. Richardson made it a condition of accepting that he should share the acting and management in a triumvirate. Initially he proposed Gielgud and Olivier as his colleagues, but the former declined, saying, \"It would be a disaster, you would have to spend your whole time as referee between Larry and me.\" It was finally agreed that the third member would be the stage director John Burrell. The Old Vic governors approached the Royal Navy to secure the release of Richardson and Olivier; the Sea Lords consented, with, as Olivier put it, \"a speediness and lack of reluctance which was positively hurtful.\"\nThe triumvirate secured the New Theatre for their first season and recruited a company. Thorndike was joined by, among others, Harcourt Williams, Joyce Redman and Margaret Leighton. It was agreed to open with a repertory of four plays: \"Peer Gynt\", \"Arms and the Man\", \"Richard III\" and \"Uncle Vanya\". Olivier's roles were the Button Moulder, Sergius, Richard and Astrov; Richardson played Peer, Bluntschli, Richmond and Vanya. The first three productions met with acclaim from reviewers and audiences; \"Uncle Vanya\" had a mixed reception, although \"The Times\" thought Olivier's Astrov \"a most distinguished portrait\" and Richardson's Vanya \"the perfect compound of absurdity and pathos\". In \"Richard III\", according to Billington, Olivier's triumph was absolute: \"so much so that it became his most frequently imitated performance and one whose supremacy went unchallenged until Antony Sher played the role forty years later\". In 1945 the company toured Germany, where they were seen by many thousands of Allied servicemen; they also appeared at the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise theatre in Paris, the first foreign company to be given that honour. The critic Harold Hobson wrote that Richardson and Olivier quickly \"made the Old Vic the most famous theatre in the Anglo-Saxon world.\"\nThe second season, in 1945, featured two double bills. The first consisted of \"Henry IV, Parts 1 and 2\". Olivier played the warrior Hotspur in the first and the doddering Justice Shallow in the second. He received good notices, but by general consent the production belonged to Richardson as Falstaff. In the second double bill it was Olivier who dominated, in the title roles of \"Oedipus Rex\" and \"The Critic\". In the two one-act plays his switch from searing tragedy and horror in the first half to farcical comedy in the second impressed most critics and audience members, though a minority felt that the transformation from Sophocles's bloodily blinded hero to Sheridan's vain and ludicrous Mr Puff \"smacked of a quick-change turn in a music hall\". After the London season the company played both the double bills and \"Uncle Vanya\" in a six-week run on Broadway.\nThe third, and final, London season under the triumvirate was in 1946\u201347. Olivier played King Lear, and Richardson took the title role in \"Cyrano de Bergerac\". Olivier would have preferred the roles to be reversed, but Richardson did not wish to attempt Lear. Olivier's Lear received good but not outstanding reviews. In his scenes of decline and madness towards the end of the play some critics found him less moving than his finest predecessors in the role. The influential critic James Agate suggested that Olivier used his dazzling stage technique to disguise a lack of feeling, a charge that the actor strongly rejected, but which was often made throughout his later career. During the run of \"Cyrano\", Richardson was knighted, to Olivier's undisguised envy. The younger man received the accolade six months later, by which time the days of the triumvirate were numbered. The high profile of the two star actors did not endear them to the new chairman of the Old Vic governors, Lord Esher. He had ambitions to be the first head of the National Theatre and had no intention of letting actors run it. He was encouraged by Guthrie, who, having instigated the appointment of Richardson and Olivier, had come to resent their knighthoods and international fame.\nIn January 1947 Olivier began working on his second film as a director, \"Hamlet\" (1948), in which he also took the lead role. The original play was heavily cut to focus on the relationships, rather than the political intrigue. The film became a critical and commercial success in Britain and abroad, although Lejeune, in \"The Observer\", considered it \"less effective than [Olivier's] stage work.\u00a0... He speaks the lines nobly, and with the caress of one who loves them, but he nullifies his own thesis by never, for a moment, leaving the impression of a man who cannot make up his own mind; here, you feel rather, is an actor-producer-director who, in every circumstance, knows exactly what he wants, and gets it\". Campbell Dixon, the critic for \"The Daily Telegraph\" thought the film \"brilliant\u00a0... one of the masterpieces of the stage has been made into one of the greatest of films.\" \"Hamlet\" became the first non-American film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture, while Olivier won the Award for Best Actor.\nIn 1948 Olivier led the Old Vic company on a six-month tour of Australia and New Zealand. He played Richard\u00a0III, Sir Peter Teazle in Sheridan's\" The School for Scandal\" and Antrobus in Thornton Wilder's \"The Skin of Our Teeth\", appearing alongside Leigh in the latter two plays. While Olivier was on the Australian tour and Richardson was in Hollywood, Esher terminated the contracts of the three directors, who were said to have \"resigned\". Melvyn Bragg in a 1984 study of Olivier, and John Miller in the authorised biography of Richardson, both comment that Esher's action put back the establishment of a National Theatre for at least a decade. Looking back in 1971, Bernard Levin wrote that the Old Vic company of 1944 to 1948 \"was probably the most illustrious that has ever been assembled in this country\". \"The Times\" said that the triumvirate's years were the greatest in the Old Vic's history; as \"The Guardian\" put it, \"the governors summarily sacked them in the interests of a more mediocre company spirit\".\n1948\u20131951: Post-war work.\nBy the end of the Australian tour, both Leigh and Olivier were exhausted and ill, and he told a journalist, \"You may not know it, but you are talking to a couple of walking corpses.\" Later he would comment that he \"lost Vivien\" in Australia, a reference to Leigh's affair with the Australian actor Peter Finch, whom the couple met during the tour. Shortly afterwards Finch moved to London, where Olivier auditioned him and put him under a long-term contract with Laurence Olivier Productions. Finch and Leigh's affair continued on and off for several years.\nAlthough it was common knowledge that the Old Vic triumvirate had been dismissed, they refused to be drawn on the matter in public, and Olivier even arranged to play a final London season with the company in 1949, as Richard\u00a0III, Sir Peter Teazle, and Chorus in his own production of Anouilh's \"Antigone\" with Leigh in the title role. After that, he was free to embark on a new career as an actor-manager. In partnership with Binkie Beaumont he staged the English premiere of Tennessee Williams's \"A Streetcar Named Desire\", with Leigh in the central role of Blanche DuBois.\nThe play was condemned by most critics, but the production was a considerable commercial success, and led to Leigh's casting as Blanche in the 1951 film version. Gielgud, who was a devoted friend of Leigh's, doubted whether Olivier was wise to let her play the demanding role of the mentally unstable heroine: \"[Blanche] was so very like her, in a way. It must have been a most dreadful strain to do it night after night. She would be shaking and white and quite distraught at the end of it.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI think I'm a fairly good manager now.\u00a0... I ran the St. James's theatre for eight years. I didn't run that at all well.\u00a0... I made mistake after mistake, but I dare say those mistakes taught me something.\nOlivier talking to Kenneth Tynan in 1966\nThe production company set up by Olivier took a lease on the St James's Theatre. In January 1950 he produced, directed and starred in Christopher Fry's verse play \"Venus Observed\". The production was popular, despite poor reviews, but the expensive production did little to help the finances of Laurence Olivier Productions. After a series of box-office failures, the company balanced its books in 1951 with productions of Shaw's \"Caesar and Cleopatra\" and Shakespeare's \"Antony and Cleopatra\" which the Oliviers played in London and then took to Broadway. Olivier was thought by some critics to be under par in both his roles, and some suspected him of playing deliberately below his usual strength so that Leigh might appear his equal. Olivier dismissed the suggestion, regarding it as an insult to his integrity as an actor. In the view of the critic and biographer W.\u00a0A. Darlington, he was simply miscast both as Caesar and Antony, finding the former boring and the latter weak. Darlington comments, \"Olivier, in his middle forties when he should have been displaying his powers at their very peak, seemed to have lost interest in his own acting\". Over the next four years Olivier spent much of his time working as a producer, presenting plays rather than directing or acting in them. His presentations at the St James's included seasons by Ruggero Ruggeri's company giving two Pirandello plays in Italian, followed by a visit from the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise playing works by Moli\u00e8re, Racine, Marivaux and Musset in French. Darlington considers a 1951 production of \"Othello\" starring Orson Welles as the pick of Olivier's productions at the theatre.\n1951\u20131954: Independent work.\nWhile Leigh made \"Streetcar\" in 1951, Olivier joined her in Hollywood to film \"Carrie\", based on the controversial novel \"Sister Carrie\". Although the film was plagued by troubles, Olivier received warm reviews and a BAFTA nomination. Olivier began to notice a change in Leigh's behaviour, and he later recounted that \"I would find Vivien sitting on the corner of the bed, wringing her hands and sobbing, in a state of grave distress; I would naturally try desperately to give her some comfort, but for some time she would be inconsolable.\" \nAfter a holiday with Coward in Jamaica, she seemed to have recovered, but Olivier later recorded, \"I am sure that\u00a0... [the doctors] must have taken some pains to tell me what was wrong with my wife; that her disease was called manic depression and what that meant\u2014a possibly permanent cyclical to-and-fro between the depths of depression and wild, uncontrollable mania.\" He recounted the years of problems he had experienced because of Leigh's illness, writing, \"throughout her possession by that uncannily evil monster, manic depression, with its deadly ever-tightening spirals, she retained her own individual canniness\u2014an ability to disguise her true mental condition from almost all except me, for whom she could hardly be expected to take the trouble.\"\nIn January 1953, Leigh travelled to Ceylon, now Sri Lanka, to film \"Elephant Walk\" with Peter Finch. Shortly after filming started she suffered a breakdown, and returned to Britain where, between periods of incoherence, she told Olivier that she was in love with Finch, and had been having an affair with him. She gradually recovered over a period of several months. As a result of the breakdown, many of the Oliviers' friends learned of her problems. Niven said she had been \"quite, quite mad\", and in his diary, Coward expressed the view that \"things had been bad and getting worse since 1948 or thereabouts.\"\nFor the Coronation season of 1953, Olivier and Leigh starred in the West End in Terence Rattigan's Ruritanian comedy, \"The Sleeping Prince\". It ran for eight months but was widely regarded as a minor contribution to the season, in which other productions included Gielgud in \"Venice Preserv'd\", Coward in \"The Apple Cart\" and Ashcroft and Redgrave in \"Antony and Cleopatra\".\nin September 1954, Olivier directed his third Shakespeare film, \"Richard III\" (1955), which he co-produced with Korda. The presence of four theatrical knights in the one film\u2014Olivier was joined by Cedric Hardwicke, Gielgud and Richardson\u2014led an American reviewer to dub it \"An-All-Sir-Cast\". The critic for \"The Manchester Guardian\" described the film as a \"bold and successful achievement\", but it was not a box-office success, which accounted for Olivier's subsequent failure to raise the funds for a planned film of \"Macbeth\". He won a BAFTA award for the role and was nominated for the Best Actor Academy Award, which Yul Brynner won.\n1955\u20131956: Last productions with Leigh.\nIn 1955 Olivier and Leigh were invited to play leading roles in three plays at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, Stratford. They began with \"Twelfth Night\", directed by Gielgud, with Olivier as Malvolio and Leigh as Viola. Rehearsals were difficult, with Olivier determined to play his conception of the role despite the director's view that it was vulgar. Gielgud later commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe next production was \"Macbeth\". Reviewers were lukewarm about the direction by Glen Byam Shaw and the designs by Roger Furse, but Olivier's performance in the title role attracted superlatives. To J. C. Trewin, Olivier's was \"the finest Macbeth of our day\"; to Darlington it was \"the best Macbeth of our time\". Leigh's Lady Macbeth received mixed but generally polite notices, although to the end of his life Olivier believed it to have been the best Lady Macbeth he ever saw.\nIn their third production of the 1955 Stratford season, Olivier played the title role in \"Titus Andronicus\", with Leigh as Lavinia. Her notices in the part were damning, but the production by Peter Brook and Olivier's performance as Titus received the greatest ovation in Stratford history from the first-night audience, and the critics hailed the production as a landmark in post-war British theatre. Olivier and Brook revived the production for a continental tour in June 1957; its final performance, which closed the old Stoll Theatre in London, was the last time Leigh and Olivier acted together.\nLeigh became pregnant in 1956 and withdrew from the production of Coward's comedy \"South Sea Bubble\". The day after her final performance in the play she miscarried and entered a period of depression that lasted for months. In the same year Olivier directed and co-starred with Marilyn Monroe in a film version of \"The Sleeping Prince\", retitled \"The Prince and the Showgirl\". Although the filming was challenging because of Monroe's behaviour, the film was appreciated by the critics.\n1957\u20131963: Royal Court and Chichester.\nDuring the production of \"The Prince and the Showgirl\", Olivier, Monroe and her husband, the American playwright Arthur Miller, went to see the English Stage Company's production of John Osborne's \"Look Back in Anger\" at the Royal Court. Olivier had seen the play earlier in the run and disliked it, but Miller was convinced that Osborne had talent, and Olivier reconsidered. He was ready for a change of direction; in 1981 he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I had reached a stage in my life that I was getting profoundly sick of\u2014not just tired\u2014sick. Consequently the public were, likely enough, beginning to agree with me. My rhythm of work had become a bit deadly: a classical or semi-classical film; a play or two at Stratford, or a nine-month run in the West End, etc etc. I was going mad, desperately searching for something suddenly fresh and thrillingly exciting. What I felt to be my image was boring me to death.\nOsborne was already at work on a new play, \"The Entertainer\", an allegory of Britain's post-colonial decline, centred on a seedy variety comedian, Archie Rice. Having read the first act\u2014all that was completed by then\u2014Olivier asked to be cast in the part. He had for years maintained that he might easily have been a third-rate comedian called \"Larry Oliver\", and would sometimes play the character at parties. Behind Archie's brazen fa\u00e7ade there is a deep desolation, and Olivier caught both aspects, switching, in the words of the biographer Anthony Holden, \"from a gleefully tacky comic routine to moments of the most wrenching pathos\". \nIn September 1957, Tony Richardson's production for the English Stage Company transferred from the Royal Court to the Palace Theatre. After that it toured and returned to the Palace. The role of Archie's daughter Jean was taken by three actresses during the various runs. The second of them was Joan Plowright, with whom Olivier began a relationship that endured for the rest of his life. Olivier said that playing Archie \"made me feel like a modern actor again\". In finding an \"avant-garde\" play that suited him, he was, as Osborne remarked, far ahead of Gielgud and Ralph Richardson, who did not successfully follow his lead for more than a decade. Their first substantial successes in works by any of Osborne's generation were Alan Bennett's \"Forty Years On\" (Gielgud in 1968) and David Storey's \"Home\" (Richardson and Gielgud in 1970).\nOlivier received another BAFTA nomination for his supporting role in 1959's \"The Devil's Disciple\". The same year, after a gap of two decades, Olivier returned to the role of Coriolanus, in a Stratford production directed by the 28-year-old Peter Hall. Olivier's performance received strong praise from the critics for its fierce athleticism combined with an emotional vulnerability. In 1960 he made his second appearance for the Royal Court company in Ionesco's absurdist play \"Rhinoceros\". The production was chiefly remarkable for the star's quarrels with the director, Orson Welles, who according to the biographer Francis Beckett suffered the \"appalling treatment\" that Olivier had inflicted on Gielgud at Stratford five years earlier. Olivier again ignored his director and undermined his authority. In 1960 and 1961 Olivier appeared in Anouilh's \"Becket\" on Broadway, first in the title role, with Anthony Quinn as the king, and later exchanging roles with his co-star.\nTwo films featuring Olivier were released in 1960. The first\u2014filmed in 1959\u2014was \"Spartacus\", in which he portrayed the Roman general, Marcus Licinius Crassus. His second was \"The Entertainer\", shot while he was appearing in \"Coriolanus\". The film was well received by the critics, but not as warmly as the stage show had been. The reviewer for \"The Guardian\" thought the performances were good, and wrote that Olivier \"on the screen as on the stage, achieves the tour de force of bringing Archie Rice\u00a0... to life\". For his performance, Olivier was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor. He also made an adaptation of \"The Moon and Sixpence\" in 1960, winning an Emmy Award.\nThe Oliviers' marriage was disintegrating in the late 1950s. While directing Charlton Heston in the 1960 play \"The Tumbler\", Olivier divulged that \"Vivien is several thousand miles away, trembling on the edge of a cliff, even when she's sitting quietly in her own drawing room\", at a time when she was threatening suicide. In May 1960 divorce proceedings started. Leigh reported the fact to the press and informed reporters of Olivier's relationship with Plowright. The decree \"nisi\" was issued in December 1960, which enabled him to marry Plowright in March 1961. A son, Richard, was born in December 1961; two daughters followed, Tamsin Agnes Margaret\u2014born in January 1963\u2014and actress Julie-Kate, born in July 1966.\nIn 1961, Olivier accepted the directorship of a new theatrical venture, the Chichester Festival. In 1962, for the opening season he directed two neglected 17th-century English plays, John Fletcher's 1638 comedy \"The Chances\" and John Ford's 1633 tragedy \"The Broken Heart\", followed by \"Uncle Vanya\". The company he recruited was forty strong and included Thorndike, Casson, Redgrave, Athene Seyler, John Neville and Plowright. The first two plays were politely received; the Chekhov production attracted rapturous notices. \"The Times\" commented, \"It is doubtful if the Moscow Arts Theatre itself could improve on this production.\" In 1963, the second Chichester season consisted of a revival of \"Uncle Vanya\" and two new productions\u2014Shaw's \"Saint Joan\" and John Arden's \"The Workhouse Donkey\". In 1963 Olivier received another BAFTA nomination for his leading role as a schoolteacher accused of sexually molesting a student in the film \"Term of Trial\".\nNational Theatre.\n1963\u20131968.\nAt around the time the Chichester Festival opened, plans for the creation of the National Theatre were coming to fruition. The British government agreed to release funds for a new building on the South Bank of the Thames. Lord Chandos was appointed chairman of the National Theatre Board in 1962, and in August Olivier accepted its invitation to be the company's first director. As his assistants, he recruited the directors John Dexter and William Gaskill, with Kenneth Tynan as literary adviser or \"dramaturge\". Pending the construction of the new theatre, the company was based at the Old Vic. With the agreement of both organisations, Olivier remained in overall charge of the Chichester Festival during the first three seasons of the National; he used the festivals of 1964 and 1965 to give preliminary runs to plays he hoped to stage at the Old Vic.\nThe opening production of the National Theatre was \"Hamlet\" in October 1963, starring Peter O'Toole and directed by Olivier. O'Toole was a guest star, one of occasional exceptions to Olivier's policy of casting productions from a regular company. Among those who made a mark during Olivier's directorship were Michael Gambon, Maggie Smith, Alan Bates, Derek Jacobi and Anthony Hopkins. It was widely remarked that Olivier seemed reluctant to recruit his peers to perform with his company. Evans, Gielgud and Paul Scofield guested only briefly, and Ashcroft and Richardson never appeared at the National during Olivier's time. Robert Stephens, a member of the company, observed, \"Olivier's one great fault was a paranoid jealousy of anyone who he thought was a rival\".\nIn his decade in charge of the National, Olivier acted in thirteen plays and directed eight. Several of the roles he played were minor characters, including a crazed butler in Feydeau's \"A Flea in Her Ear\" and a pompous solicitor in Maugham's \"Home and Beauty\"; the vulgar soldier Captain Brazen in Farquhar's 1706 comedy \"The Recruiting Officer\" was a larger role but not the leading one.\nApart from his Astrov in the \"Uncle Vanya\", familiar from Chichester, his first leading role for the National was Othello, directed by Dexter in 1964. The production was a box-office success and was revived regularly over the next five seasons. His performance divided opinion. Most of the reviewers and theatrical colleagues praised it highly; Franco Zeffirelli called it \"an anthology of everything that has been discovered about acting in the past three centuries.\" Dissenting voices included \"The Sunday Telegraph\", which called it \"the kind of bad acting of which only a great actor is capable\u00a0... near the frontiers of self-parody\"; the director Jonathan Miller thought it \"a condescending view of an Afro Caribbean person\". \nThe burden of playing this demanding part at the same time as managing the new company and planning for the move to the new theatre took its toll on Olivier. To add to his load, he felt obliged to take over as Solness in \"The Master Builder\" when the ailing Redgrave withdrew from the role in November 1964. For the first time Olivier began to suffer from stage fright, which plagued him for several years. The National Theatre production of \"Othello\" was released as a film in 1965, which earned four Academy Award nominations, including another for Best Actor for Olivier.\nIn 1965, Olivier concentrated on management, directing one production (\"The Crucible\"), taking the comic role of the foppish Tattle in Congreve's \"Love for Love\", and making one film, \"Bunny Lake is Missing\", in which he and Coward were on the same bill for the first time since \"Private Lives\". In 1966, his one play as director was \"Juno and the Paycock\". \"The Times\" commented that the production \"restores one's faith in the work as a masterpiece\". In the same year Olivier portrayed the Mahdi, opposite Heston as General Gordon, in the film \"Khartoum\".\nIn 1967 Olivier was caught in the middle of a confrontation between Chandos and Tynan over the latter's proposal to stage Rolf Hochhuth's \"Soldiers\". As the play speculatively depicted Churchill as complicit in the assassination of the Polish prime minister W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sikorski, Chandos regarded it as indefensible. At his urging the board unanimously vetoed the production. Tynan considered resigning over this interference with the management's artistic freedom, but Olivier himself stayed firmly in place, and Tynan also remained. At about this time Olivier began a long struggle against a succession of illnesses. He was treated for prostate cancer and, during rehearsals for his production of Chekhov's \"Three Sisters\" he was hospitalised with pneumonia. He recovered enough to take the heavy role of Edgar in Strindberg's \"The Dance of Death\", the finest of all his performances other than in Shakespeare, in Gielgud's view.\n1968\u20131974.\nOlivier had intended to step down from the directorship of the National Theatre at the end of his first five-year contract, having, he hoped, led the company into its new building. By 1968 because of bureaucratic delays construction work had not even begun, and he agreed to serve for a second five-year term. His next major role, and his last appearance in a Shakespeare play, was as Shylock in \"The Merchant of Venice\", his first appearance in the work. He had intended Guinness or Scofield to play Shylock, but stepped in when neither was available. The production by Jonathan Miller, and Olivier's performance, attracted a wide range of responses. Two different critics reviewed it for \"The Guardian\": one wrote \"this is not a role which stretches him, or for which he will be particularly remembered\"; the other commented that the performance \"ranks as one of his greatest achievements, involving his whole range\".\nIn 1969 Olivier appeared in two war films, portraying military leaders. He played Field Marshal French in the First World War film \"Oh! What a Lovely War\", for which he won another BAFTA award, followed by Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding in \"Battle of Britain\". In June 1970 he became the first actor to be created a peer for services to the theatre. Although he initially declined the honour, Harold Wilson, the incumbent prime minister, wrote to him, then invited him and Plowright to dinner, and persuaded him to accept.\nAfter this Olivier played three more stage roles: James Tyrone in Eugene O'Neill's \"Long Day's Journey into Night\" (1971\u201372), Antonio in Eduardo de Filippo's \"Saturday, Sunday, Monday\" and John Tagg in Trevor Griffiths's \"The Party\" (both 1973\u201374). Among the roles he hoped to play, but could not because of ill-health, was Nathan Detroit in the musical \"Guys and Dolls\". In 1972 he took leave of absence from the National to star opposite Michael Caine in Joseph L. Mankiewicz's film of Anthony Shaffer's \"Sleuth\", which \"The Illustrated London News\" considered to be \"Olivier at his twinkling, eye-rolling best\"; both he and Caine were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor, losing to Marlon Brando in \"The Godfather\".\nThe last two stage plays Olivier directed were Jean Giraudoux's \"Amphitryon\" (1971) and Priestley's \"Eden End\" (1974). By the time of \"Eden End\", he was no longer director of the National Theatre; Peter Hall took over on 1 November 1973. The succession was tactlessly handled by the board, and Olivier felt that he had been eased out\u2014although he had declared his intention to go\u2014and that he had not been properly consulted about the choice of successor. The largest of the three theatres within the National's new building was named in his honour, but his only appearance on the stage of the Olivier Theatre was at its official opening by the Queen in October 1976, when he made a speech of welcome, which Hall privately described as the most successful part of the evening.\n1975\u20131989: Later years and death.\nOlivier spent the last 15 years of his life securing his finances and dealing with deteriorating health, which included thrombosis and dermatomyositis, a degenerative muscle disorder. Professionally, and to provide financial security, he made a series of advertisements for Polaroid cameras in 1972, although he stipulated that they must never be shown in Britain; he also took a number of cameo film roles, which were in \"often undistinguished films\", according to Billington. Olivier's move from leading parts to supporting and cameo roles came about because his poor health meant he could not get the necessary long insurance for larger parts, with only short engagements in films available.\nOlivier's dermatomyositis meant he spent the last three months of 1974 in hospital, and he spent early 1975 slowly recovering and regaining his strength. When strong enough, he was contacted by the director John Schlesinger, who offered him the role of a Nazi torturer in the 1976 film \"Marathon Man\". Olivier shaved his pate and wore oversized glasses to enlarge the look of his eyes, in a role that the critic David Robinson, writing for \"The Times\", thought was \"strongly played\", adding that Olivier was \"always at his best in roles that call for him to be seedy or nasty or both\". Olivier was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, and won the Golden Globe of the same category.\nIn the mid-1970s Olivier became increasingly involved in television work, a medium of which he was initially dismissive; Olivier later said \"I have stood out stiffly and coldly and pompously about TV for too long\". In 1973 he provided the narration for a 26-episode documentary, \"The World at War\", which chronicled the events of the Second World War, and won a second Emmy Award for \"Long Day's Journey into Night\" (1973). In 1975 he won another Emmy for \"Love Among the Ruins\". In 1976, he appeared in adaptations of Tennessee Williams's \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\" and Harold Pinter's \"The Collection\". Olivier portrayed the Pharisee Nicodemus in Franco Zeffirelli's 1977 miniseries \"Jesus of Nazareth\". In 1978 he appeared in the film \"The Boys from Brazil\", playing the role of Ezra Lieberman, an ageing Nazi hunter; he received his eleventh Academy Award nomination. Although he did not win the Oscar, he was presented with an Honorary Award for his lifetime achievement.\nOlivier continued working in film into the 1980s, with roles in \"The Jazz Singer\" (1980), \"Inchon\" (1981), \"The Bounty\" (1984) and \"Wild Geese II\" (1985). He continued to work in television; in 1981 he appeared as Lord Marchmain in \"Brideshead Revisited\", winning another Emmy. In 1982, he received his tenth and last BAFTA nomination in the television adaptation of John Mortimer's stage play \"A Voyage Round My Father\". In 1983, he played his last Shakespearean role as Lear in \"King Lear\", for Granada Television, earning his fifth Emmy. He thought the role of Lear much less demanding than other tragic Shakespearean heroes: \"No, Lear is easy. He's like all of us, really: he's just a stupid old fart.\" When the production was first shown on American television, the critic Steve Vineberg wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Olivier seems to have thrown away technique this time\u2014his is a breathtakingly pure Lear. In his final speech, over Cordelia's lifeless body, he brings us so close to Lear's sorrow that we can hardly bear to watch, because we have seen the last Shakespearean hero Laurence Olivier will ever play. But what a finale! In this most sublime of plays, our greatest actor has given an indelible performance. Perhaps it would be most appropriate to express simple gratitude.\nThe same year he also appeared in a cameo alongside Gielgud and Richardson in \"Wagner\", with Burton in the title role. His final screen appearance was as an elderly wheelchair-using soldier in Derek Jarman's 1989 film \"War Requiem\".\nFollowing a decline of health, Olivier died on 11 July 1989 aged 82 at his home in the village of Ashurst, near Steyning, West Sussex. His cremation was held three days later. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on October 20. His ashes were later buried in Poets' Corner.\nAwards and honours.\nOlivier was appointed Knight Bachelor in the 1947 Birthday Honours for services to the stage and to films. A life peerage as Baron Olivier, of Brighton in the County of Sussex, followed in the 1970 Birthday Honours for services to the theatre. (He had declined a similar offer in 1967.) Olivier was later appointed to the Order of Merit in 1981. He also received honours from foreign governments. In 1949, he was made Commander of the Danish Order of the Dannebrog; France appointed him , Legion of Honour, in 1953; the Italian government created him , Order of Merit of the Italian Republic, in 1953; and in 1971 he was granted the Order of Yugoslav Flag with Golden Wreath.\nFrom academic and other institutions, Olivier received honorary doctorates from Tufts University in Massachusetts (1946), Oxford (1957) and Edinburgh (1964). He was also awarded the Danish Sonning Prize in 1966, the Gold Medallion of the Royal Swedish Academy of Letters, History and Antiquities in 1968; and the Albert Medal of the Royal Society of Arts in 1976.\nFor his work in films, Olivier received three Academy Awards: an honorary award for \"Henry V\" (1947), a Best Actor award for \"Hamlet\" (1948), and a second honorary award in 1979 to recognise his lifetime of contribution to the art of film. As the producer for \"Hamlet\" he also collected the award for Best Picture at the 1949 ceremony. In total, he was nominated for ten acting Oscars and one for the direction of \" Hamlet\". He also won two British Academy Film Awards out of ten nominations, five Emmy Awards out of nine nominations, and three Golden Globe Awards out of six nominations. He was nominated once for a Tony Award (for best actor, as Archie Rice) but did not win.\nIn February 1960, for his contribution to the film industry, Olivier was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame, with a star at 6319 Hollywood Boulevard; he is included in the American Theater Hall of Fame. In 1977, Olivier was awarded a British Film Institute Fellowship.\nIn addition to the naming of the National Theatre's largest auditorium in Olivier's honour, he is commemorated in the Laurence Olivier Awards, bestowed annually since 1984 by the Society of London Theatre. In 1991, Gielgud unveiled a memorial stone commemorating Olivier in Poets' Corner at Westminster Abbey. In 2007, the centenary of Olivier's birth, a life-sized statue of him was unveiled on the South Bank, outside the National Theatre; the same year the BFI held a retrospective season of his film work.\nTechnique and reputation.\nOlivier's acting technique was minutely crafted, and he was known for changing his appearance considerably from role to role. By his own admission, he was addicted to extravagant make-up, and unlike Richardson and Gielgud, he excelled at different voices and accents. His own description of his technique was \"working from the outside in\"; he said, \"I can never act as myself, I have to have a pillow up my jumper, a false nose or a moustache or wig... I cannot come on looking like me and be someone else.\" Rattigan described how at rehearsals Olivier \"built his performance slowly and with immense application from a mass of tiny details\". This attention to detail had its critics: Agate remarked, \"When I look at a watch it is to see the time and not to admire the mechanism. I want an actor to tell me Lear's time of day and Olivier doesn't. He bids me watch the wheels go round.\"\nTynan remarked to Olivier, \"you aren't really a contemplative or philosophical actor\"; Olivier was known for the strenuous physicality of his performances in some roles. He told Tynan this was because he was influenced as a young man by Douglas Fairbanks, Ramon Navarro and John Barrymore in films, and Barrymore on stage as Hamlet: \"tremendously athletic. I admired that greatly, all of us did.\u00a0... One thought of oneself, idiotically, skinny as I was, as a sort of Tarzan.\" According to Morley, Gielgud was widely considered \"the best actor in the world from the neck up and Olivier from the neck down.\" Olivier described the contrast thus: \"I've always thought that we were the reverses of the same coin... the top half John, all spirituality, all beauty, all abstract things; and myself as all earth, blood, humanity.\"\nOlivier, a classically trained actor, was known to have been distrustful of method acting. In his memoir, \"On Acting\", he exhorts actors to \"have Stanislavski with you in your study or in your limousine... but don't bring him onto the film set.\" During production of \"The Prince and the Showgirl\", he quarrelled with Marilyn Monroe, who was trained under Lee Strasberg's method, over her acting process. Similarly, an anecdote casts him as offering Dustin Hoffman, enduring physical travails while playing in \"Marathon Man\", a curt suggestion: \"why don't you just try acting?\" Hoffman disputes the details of this account, which he claims was distorted by a journalist: he had been up all night at the Studio 54 nightclub for personal rather than professional reasons and Olivier, who understood this, was joking.\nTogether with Richardson and Gielgud, Olivier was internationally recognised as one of the \"great trinity of theatrical knights\" who dominated the British stage during the middle and later decades of the 20th century. In an obituary tribute in \"The Times\", Bernard Levin wrote, \"What we have lost with Laurence Olivier is \"glory\". He reflected it in his greatest roles; indeed he walked clad in it\u2014you could practically see it glowing around him like a nimbus... no one will ever play the roles he played as he played them; no one will replace the splendour that he gave his native land with his genius.\" Billington commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Olivier] elevated the art of acting in the twentieth century\u00a0... principally by the overwhelming force of his example. Like Garrick, Kean, and Irving before him, he lent glamour and excitement to acting so that, in any theatre in the world, an Olivier night raised the level of expectation and sent spectators out into the darkness a little more aware of themselves and having experienced a transcendent touch of ecstasy. That, in the end, was the true measure of his greatness.\nAfter Olivier's death, Gielgud reflected, \"He followed in the theatrical tradition of Kean and Irving. He respected tradition in the theatre, but he also took great delight in breaking tradition, which is what made him so unique. He was gifted, brilliant, and one of the great controversial figures of our time in theatre, which is a virtue and not a vice at all.\"\nOlivier said in 1963 that he believed he was born to be an actor, but his colleague Peter Ustinov disagreed; he commented that although Olivier's great contemporaries were clearly predestined for the stage, \"Larry could have been a notable ambassador, a considerable minister, a redoubtable cleric. At his worst, he would have acted the parts more ably than they are usually lived.\" The director David Ayliff agreed that acting did not come instinctively to Olivier as it did to his great rivals. He observed, \"Ralph [Richardson] was a natural actor, he couldn't stop being a perfect actor; Olivier did it through sheer hard work and determination.\" The American actor William Redfield had a similar view:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ironically enough, Laurence Olivier is less gifted than Marlon Brando. He is even less gifted than Richard Burton, Paul Scofield, Ralph Richardson and John Gielgud. But he is still the definitive actor of the twentieth century. Why? Because he wanted to be. His achievements are due to dedication, scholarship, practice, determination and courage. He is the bravest actor of our time.\nIn comparing Olivier and the other leading actors of his generation, Ustinov wrote, \"It is of course vain to talk of who is and who is not the greatest actor. There is simply no such thing as a greatest actor, or painter or composer\". Nonetheless, some colleagues, particularly film actors such as Spencer Tracy, Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall, came to regard Olivier as the finest of his peers. Peter Hall, though acknowledging Olivier as the head of the theatrical profession, thought Richardson the greater actor. Olivier's claim to theatrical greatness lay not only in his acting, but as, in Hall's words, \"the supreme man of the theatre of our time\", pioneering Britain's National Theatre. As Melvyn Bragg identified, \"no one doubts that the National is perhaps his most enduring monument\".\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43697", "revid": "33971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43697", "title": "Country dance", "text": "Type of social dance\nA country dance is any of a very large number of social dances of a type that originated in England in the British Isles; it is the repeated execution of a predefined sequence of figures, carefully designed to fit a fixed length of music, performed by a group of people, usually in couples, in one or more sets. The figures involve interaction between partners and with other dancers, usually with a progression so that each participant dances with everyone in the set. It is common in modern times to have a \"caller\" who teaches the dance and then calls the figures during the dance. Country dances are done in many different styles.\nAs a written in or time, the contredanse was used by Beethoven and Mozart.\nBeethoven's 6 Ecosaises WoO83 are dated to 1806. Mozart's 6 L\u00e4ndlerische T\u00e4nze, K.606 are dated to 1791.\nIntroduced to South America by French immigrants, country dance had great influence upon Latin American music as contradanza.\nThe \"Anglais\" (from the French word meaning 'English') or \"Angloise\" is another term for the English country dance. A Scottish country dance may be termed an . Irish set dance is also related.\nCharacteristics.\nA \"set\" is a formation of dancers. The most common formations are \"longways for as many as will\", i.e. couples in long lines, and \"squares\", consisting of four couples. The longways formation occurs in more than 12,000 modern contra dances; it was also the most popular formation in all the dance publications of the 18th and early 19th centuries. In 2003, Burleson's Square Dancer's Encyclopedia listed 5125 calls or figures. Circles and fixed-length longways sets are also very common, but the possible formations are limited only by the imagination of the choreographer.\nThomas Wilson, in 1808, wrote, \"A Country Dance is composed of an indefinite number of persons, not less than six, but as many more as chuse, but six are sufficient to perform any figure in the treatise.\" Wilson was writing about his own period. In fact, there are numerous dances for two couples, and quite a few for three or five dancers.\nA \"figure\" is a pattern that the dancers trace along the floor, simple ones such as Circle Left are intuitive and can be danced with no prior knowledge, while complex moves such as Strip the willow need to be taught. The stepping and style of dancing varies by region and by period.\nWilson in 1820 wrote, \"Country Dance Figures are certain Movements or Directions formed in Circular, Half Circular, Serpentine, Angular, Straight Lines, etc. etc. drawn out into different Lengths, adapted to the various \"Strains\" of Country Dance Music.\" . Again, the possible figures are limited only by the imagination of the choreographer. Examples of some of the figures are provided in the Glossary of country dance terms.\nThe music most commonly associated with country dancing is folk/country/traditional/historical music, however, modern bands are experimenting with countless other genres.\nWhile some dances may have originated on village greens, the vast majority were, and still are, written by dancing masters and choreographers.\nEach dance consists of a series of figures, hopefully smoothly linked together, designed to fit to the chosen music. The most common form of music is 32 bar jigs or reels, but any music suitable for dancing can be used. In most dances the dancers will progress to a new position so that the next time through the music they are dancing with different people.\nWhile English folk dance clubs generally embrace all types of country dance, American English country dance groups tend to exclude modern contra dances and square dances.\nCountry dancing is intended for general participation, unlike folk dances such as clogging, which are primarily concert dances, and ballroom dances in which dancers dance with their partners independently of others. Bright, rhythmic and simple, country dances have appeal as a refreshing finale to an evening of stately dances such as the minuet.\nHistorically, the term \"contra dance\" is another name for a country dance. Howe, in 1858, wrote that \"The term 'Country Dance' is the one invariably used in all books on dancing that have been published in England during the last three centuries, while all works issued in France within the same period employ the term Contra Dance, or in French \"Contre Danse\". As the authority is equally good in both cases, either term is therefore correct. The Country or Contra Dance has been one of the most popular amusements in the British Isles, France, and other continental countries from time immemorial\". However, \"contra dance\" is most commonly used today to refer to a specific American genre called contra dance.\nHistory.\nCountry dances began to influence courtly dance in the 15th century and became particularly popular at the court of Elizabeth I of England. Many references to country dancing and titles shared with known 17th-century dances appear from this time, though few of these can be shown to refer to English country dance. While some early features resemble the morris dance and other early styles, the influence of the courtly dances of Continental Europe, especially those of Renaissance Italy, may also be seen, and it is probable that English country dance was affected by these at an early date. Little is known of these dances before the mid-17th century.\nJohn Playford's \"The English Dancing Master\" (1651) listed over a hundred tunes, each with its own figures. This was enormously popular, reprinted constantly for 80 years and much enlarged. Playford and his successors had a practical monopoly on the publication of dance manuals until 1711, and ceased publishing around 1728. During this period English country dances took a variety of forms including finite sets for two, three and four couples as well as circles and squares.\nThe country dance was introduced to the court of Louis XIV of France, where it became known as \"contredanse\", and later to Germany and Italy. Andr\u00e9 Lorin, who visited the English court in the late 17th century, presented a manuscript of dances in the English manner to Louis XIV on his return to France. In 1706 Raoul Auger Feuillet published his \"Rec\u00fceil de Contredances\", a collection of \"contredanses anglaises\" presented in a simplified form of Beauchamp-Feuillet notation and including some dances invented by the author as well as authentic English dances. This was subsequently translated into English by John Essex and published in England as \"For the Further Improvement of Dancing\".\nBy the 1720s the term \"contradanse\" had come to refer to longways sets divided into groups of three or two couples, which would remain normative until English country dance's eclipse. The earliest French works refer only to the longways form as \"contradanse\", which allowed the false etymology of \"a dance in which lines dance opposite one another\". The square-set type also had its vogue in France and spread to much of Europe, Russia and North America during the later 18th century as the quadrille and the cotillion. These usually require a group of eight people, a couple along each side. \"Les Lanciers\", a descendant of the \"quadrille\", and the \"Eightsome Reel\" are examples of this kind of dance. Dancing in square sets still survives in Ireland, under the name \"set dancing\" or \"figure dancing\".\nFor some time English publishers issued annual collections of these dances in popular pocket-books. Jane Austen, Charles Dickens and Thomas Hardy all loved country dancing and put detailed descriptions into their novels. But the vogue for the waltz and the quadrille ousted the country dance from English ballrooms in the early 19th century, though Scottish country dance remained popular.\nInfluence.\nThe English country dance and the French \"contredanse\", arriving independently in the American colonies, became the New England contra dance, which experienced a resurgence in the mid-20th century. The quadrille evolved into square dance in the United States while in Ireland it contributed to the development of modern Irish set dance. English country dance in Scotland developed its own flavour and became the separate Scottish country dance. English c\u00e9ilidh is a special case, being a convergence of English, Irish and Scottish forms. In addition certain English country dances survived independently in the popular repertoire. One such is the Virginia Reel, which is almost exactly the same as the \"Sir Roger de Coverley\".\nThe \"contradanza\", the Spanish and Spanish-American version of the French \"contradanse\", became an internationally popular style of music and dance in the 18th century. The \"contradanza\" was popular in Spain and spread throughout Spanish America during the 18th century, where it took on folkloric forms that still exist in Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, Peru, Panama and Ecuador. In Cuba during the 19th century the \"contradanza\" became an important genre, the ancestor of danzon, mambo and cha cha cha. Haitians fleeing the Haitian Revolution of 1791 brought to the Cuban version a Creole influence and a new syncopation.\nThe \"Engelska\" (Swedish for \"English\") or Danish \"Engelsk\" is a 16-bar Scandinavian folk dance in . Its name comes from the adoption in Scandinavia of English country dances and contra dances in the early 19th century. In Denmark the description \"Engelsk\" was used for both line and square dances of English origin.\nRevival.\nOnly due to the efforts of Cecil Sharp, Mary Neal and the English Folk Dance and Song Society in the late 19th and early 20th century did a revival take place, so that for some time schoolchildren were taught country dances. In the early 20th century, traditional and historical dances began to be revived in England. Neal, one of the first to do so, was principally known for her work in ritual dances, but Cecil Sharp, in the six volumes of his \"Country Dance Book\", published between 1909 and 1922, attempted to reconstruct English country dance as it was performed at the time of Playford, using the surviving traditional English village dances as a guide, as the manuals defined almost none of the figures described. Sharp and his students were, however, almost wholly concerned with English country dances as found in the early dance manuals: Sharp published 160 dances from the Playford manuals and 16 traditional village country dances. Sharp believed that the Playford dances, especially those with irregular forms, represented the original \"folk\" form of English country dance and that all later changes in the dance's long history were corruptions. \nThe first collection of modern English country dances since the 1820s, \"Maggot Pie\", was published in 1932, though only in the late 20th century did modern compositions become fully accepted. Reconstructions of historical dances and new compositions continue. Interpreters and composers of the 20th century include Douglas and Helen Kennedy, Pat Shaw, Tom Cook, Ken Sheffield, Charles Bolton, Michael Barraclough, Colin Hume, Gary Roodman, and Andrew Shaw.\nThe modern English country dance community in the United States consists primarily of liberal white professionals.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43699", "revid": "38788892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43699", "title": "Peter Minuit", "text": "3rd Director of New Netherland (1626\u201331)\nPeter Minuit (French: \"Pierre Minuit\", Dutch: \"Peter Minnewit\"; c.\u20091580\u00a0\u2013 August 5, 1638) was a Walloon merchant and politician who was the 3rd Director of the Dutch North American colony of New Netherland from 1626 until 1631, and 3rd Governor of New Netherland. He founded the Swedish colony of New Sweden on the Delaware Peninsula in 1638.\nMinuit was born in Wesel, in present-day northwestern Germany. He is generally credited with orchestrating the purchase of Manhattan Island for the Dutch West India Company from representatives of the Lenape, the area's indigenous people. Manhattan later became the site of the Dutch city of New Amsterdam, and the borough of Manhattan of modern-day New York City. A letter written by Dutch merchant Peter Schaghen to directors of the Dutch East India Company stated that Manhattan was purchased for \"60 guilders worth of trade\", an amount worth ~$1,143 U.S. dollars as of 2020.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nPeter Minuit was born in Wesel, Germany between 1580 and 1585 into a Calvinist family that had moved from the city of Tournai (presently part of Wallonia, Belgium) in the Southern Netherlands controlled by Spain, in order to avoid Spanish Catholic authorities, who were not favorably disposed toward Protestants. His surname means \"midnight\" in French.\nHis father, Johann Minuit, died in 1609 and Peter took over management of the household and his father's business. Peter had a good reputation in Wesel, attested by the fact that he was several times appointed a guardian. He also assisted the poor during the Spanish occupation of 1614\u20131619.\nMinuit married Gertrude Raedts from Cleve on August 20, 1613. Gertrude was from a wealthy family and she probably helped Peter Minuit establish himself as a broker. A will drawn up in 1615 in the Dutch city of Utrecht, mentions \"Peter Minnewit\" as a diamond cutter. Whether he traded in other items is unknown. He spelled his own surname as \"Minuit\", but the spelling \"Minnewit\" shows the pronunciation. Thus in some old books \"Minnewit\" is used. \nBy 1624, the city was in an economic decline and in 1625, he had left Wesel and like others, went to Holland. At first, Gertrude went to stay with her relatives in Cleve.\nAs director of New Netherland.\nMinuit joined the Dutch West India Company, probably in the mid-1620s, and was sent with his family to New Netherland in 1625 to search for tradable goods other than the animal pelts that then were the major product coming from New Netherland. He returned in the same year, and in 1626 was appointed the new director of New Netherland, taking over from Willem Verhulst. He sailed to North America and arrived in the colony on May 4, 1626. \nMinuit is credited with purchasing the island of Manhattan from Native Americans in exchange for traded goods valued at 60 guilders. The figure of 60 guilders comes from a letter by a representative of the Dutch States-General and member of the board of the Dutch West India Company, Pieter Janszoon Schagen, to the States-General in November 1626. In 1844, New York historian John Romeyn Brodhead converted the figure of Fl 60 (or 60 guilders) to US$24. By 2006 sixty guilders in 1626 was worth approximately $1,000 in current dollars, according to the Institute for Social History of Amsterdam.\nAccording to researchers at the National Library of the Netherlands, \"The original inhabitants of the area were unfamiliar with the European notions and definitions of ownership rights. For the Indians, water, air and land could not be traded. Such exchanges would also be difficult in practical terms because many groups migrated between their summer and winter quarters. It can be concluded that both parties probably went home with totally different interpretations of the sales agreement.\"\nA contemporary purchase of rights in nearby Staten Island, to which Minuit also was party, involved duffel cloth, iron kettles, axe heads, hoes, wampum, drilling awls, \"Jew's harps\", and \"diverse other wares\". \"If similar trade goods were involved in the Manhattan arrangement\", Burrows and Wallace surmise, \"then the Dutch were engaged in high-end technology transfer, handing over equipment of enormous usefulness in tasks ranging from clearing land to drilling wampum.\"\nMinuit conducted politics in a measure of democracy in the colony during his time in New Netherland. He was highest judge in the colony, but in both civil and criminal affairs he was assisted by a council of five colonists. This advisory body would advise the director and jointly with him would develop, administer, and adjudicate a body of laws to help govern the colony. In addition there was a schout-fiscal, half-sheriff, half-attorney-general, and the customs officer. During Minuit's administration, several mills were built, trade grew exponentially, and the population grew to almost 300.\nIn 1632, the Dutch West India Company (WIC) suspended Minuit from his post for reasons that are unclear, but probably for (perhaps unintentionally) abetting the landowning patroons who were engaging in illegal fur trade and otherwise enriching themselves against the interests and orders of the West India Company. He arrived back in Europe in August 1632 to explain his actions, but was dismissed and was succeeded as director by Wouter van Twiller. It is possible that Minuit had become the victim of the internal disputes over the rights that the board of directors had given to the patroons.\nEstablishing the New Sweden colony.\nAfter having lived in Emmerich (Duchy of Cleves) for several years, Minuit made arrangements with Samuel Blommaert and the Swedish government in 1637 to create the first Swedish colony in the New World. Located on the lower Delaware River within territory earlier claimed by the Dutch, it was called New Sweden. Minuit and his company arrived on the \"Fogel Grip\" and \"Kalmar Nyckel\" at Swedes' Landing, which is present-day Wilmington, Delaware, on 29 March, 1638. Minuit left the colony on 20 May, 1638 and sailed to the Caribbean island of St. Christopher, where he arrived on 15 June to barter salt, a ship's cargo of wine and liquor for tobacco to make the voyage profitable.\nDeath.\nDuring this voyage, Minuit drowned when the ship he was visiting (at the invitation of its Dutch captain, a friend of Minuit), \"The Flying Deer\", was lost with all hands during a hurricane near St. Kitts. One ship sank near the Azores, another arrived without mast. The losses suffered, such as goods and Minuit, caused irreversible damage to Sweden's colonization attempts. Two years later, Swedish Lt. M\u00e5ns Nilsson Kling, whose rank was raised to captain, replaced Minuit as governor. Nine expeditions to the colony were carried out before the Dutch captured it in 1655.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43700", "revid": "1302343109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43700", "title": "Flintstone", "text": "Flintstone may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43701", "revid": "42195518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43701", "title": "Flint", "text": "Cryptocrystalline form of the mineral quartz\nFlint, occasionally flintstone, is a sedimentary cryptocrystalline form of the mineral quartz, categorized as the variety of chert that occurs in chalk or marly limestone. Historically, flint was widely used to make stone tools and start fires.\nFlint occurs chiefly as nodules and masses in sedimentary rocks, such as chalks and limestones. Inside the nodule, flint is usually dark grey or black, green, white, or brown in colour, and has a glassy or waxy appearance. A thin, oxidised layer on the outside of the nodules is usually different in colour, typically white and rough in texture. The nodules can often be found along streams and beaches.\nFlint breaks and chips into sharp-edged pieces, making it useful in constructing a variety of cutting tools, such as knife blades and scrapers. The use of flint to make stone tools dates back more than three million years; flint's extreme durability has made it possible to accurately date its use over this time. Flint is one of the primary materials used to define the Stone Age.\nDuring the Stone Age, access to flint was so important for survival that people would travel or trade long distances to obtain the stone. Grime's Graves was an important source of flint traded across Europe. Flint Ridge in Ohio was another important source of flint, and Native Americans extracted the flint from hundreds of quarries along the ridge. This \"Ohio Flint\" was traded across the eastern United States, and has been found as far west as the Rocky Mountains and south around the Gulf of Mexico.\nWhen struck against steel, flint will produce enough sparks to ignite a fire with the correct tinder, or gunpowder used in weapons, namely the flintlock firing mechanism. Although it has been superseded in these uses by different processes (the percussion cap), or materials (ferrocerium), \"flint\" has lent its name as generic term for a fire starter.\nOrigin.\nThe exact mode of formation of flint is not yet clear, but it is thought that it occurs as a result of chemical changes in compressed sedimentary rock formations during the process of diagenesis. One hypothesis is that a gelatinous material fills cavities in the sediment, such as holes bored by crustaceans or molluscs, and that this becomes silicified. This hypothesis would explain the complex shapes of flint nodules that are found. The source of dissolved silica in the porous media could be the spicules of silicious sponges (demosponges). Certain types of flint, such as that from the south coast of England and its counterpart on the French side of the Channel, contain trapped fossilised marine flora. Pieces of coral and vegetation have been found preserved inside the flint, similar to the way insects and plant parts are preserved within amber. Thin slices of the stone often reveal this effect.\nFlint sometimes occurs in large flint fields in Jurassic or Cretaceous beds, for example, in Europe. Puzzling giant flint formations known as paramoudra and flint circles are found around Europe, but especially in Norfolk, England, on the beaches at Beeston Bump and West Runton.\nThe \"Ohio flint\" is the official gemstone of Ohio state. It is formed from limey debris that was deposited at the bottom of inland Paleozoic seas hundreds of millions of years ago that hardened into limestone and later became infused with silica. The flint from Flint Ridge is found in many hues, including red, green, pink, blue, white, and grey, with the colour variations caused by minute impurities of iron compounds.\nFlint can be sandy brown, medium to dark grey, black, reddish brown or an off-white grey in colour.\nUses.\nTools or cutting edges.\nFlint was used in the manufacture of tools during the Stone Age, as it splits into thin, sharp splinters called flakes or blades (depending on the shape) when struck by another hard object (such as a hammerstone made of another material). This process is referred to as knapping.\nFlint mining is attested since the Paleolithic, but became more common since the Neolithic (notably among the Michelsberg culture and Funnelbeaker culture). In Europe, some of the best toolmaking flint has come from Belgium (Obourg, flint mines of Spiennes), the coastal chalks of the English Channel, the Paris Basin, Thy in Jutland (flint mine at Hov), the Sennonian deposits of R\u00fcgen, Grimes Graves in England, the Upper Cretaceous chalk formation of Dobruja and the lower Danube (Balkan flint), the Cenomanian chalky marl formation of the Moldavian Plateau (Miorcani flint), and the Jurassic deposits of the Krak\u00f3w area and Krzemionki in Poland, as well as of the L\u00e4gern (silex) in the Jura Mountains of Switzerland.\nIn 1938, a project of the Ohio Historical Society, under the leadership of H. Holmes Ellis began to study the knapping methods and techniques of Native Americans. Like past studies, this work involved experimenting with actual knapping techniques by creation of stone tools through the use of techniques like direct freehand percussion, freehand pressure and pressure using a rest. Other scholars who have conducted similar experiments and studies include William Henry Holmes, Alonzo W. Pond, Francis H. S. Knowles and Don Crabtree.\nTo reduce susceptibility to fragmentation, flint/chert may be heat-treated, being slowly brought up to a temperature of for 24 hours, then slowly cooled to room temperature. This makes the material more homogeneous and thus more knappable and produces tools with a cleaner, sharper cutting edge. Heat treating was known to Stone Age artisans.\nTo ignite fire or gunpowder.\nWhen struck against steel, a flint edge produces sparks. The hard flint edge shaves off a particle of the steel that exposes iron, which reacts with oxygen from the atmosphere and can ignite the proper tinder. \nPrior to the wide availability of steel, rocks of pyrite (FeS2) would be used along with the flint, in a similar (but more time-consuming) way. These methods remain popular in woodcraft, bushcraft, and amongst people practising traditional fire-starting skills.\nFlintlocks.\nA later, major use of flint and steel was in the flintlock mechanism, used primarily in flintlock firearms, but also used on dedicated fire-starting tools. A piece of flint held in the jaws of a spring-loaded hammer, when released by a trigger, strikes a hinged piece of steel (\"frizzen\") at an angle, creating a shower of sparks and exposing a charge of priming powder. The sparks ignite the priming powder and that flame, in turn, ignites the main charge, propelling the ball, bullet, or shot through the barrel. While the military use of the flintlock declined after the adoption of the percussion cap from the 1840s onward, flintlock rifles and shotguns remain in use amongst recreational shooters.\nComparison with ferrocerium.\nFlint and steel used to strike sparks were superseded in the 20th century by ferrocerium (sometimes referred to as \"flint\", although not true flint, \"mischmetal\", \"hot spark\", \"metal match\", or \"fire steel\"). This human-made material, when scraped with any hard, sharp edge, produces sparks that are much hotter than obtained with natural flint and steel, allowing use of a wider range of tinders. Because it can produce sparks when wet and can start fires when used correctly, ferrocerium is commonly included in survival kits. Ferrocerium is used in many lighters, where it is referred to as \"a flint\".\nFragmentation.\nFlint's utility as a fire starter is hampered by its property of uneven expansion under heating, causing it to fracture, sometimes violently, during heating. This tendency is enhanced by the impurities found in most samples of flint that may expand to a greater or lesser degree than the surrounding stone, and is similar to the tendency of glass to shatter when exposed to heat, and can become a drawback when flint is used as a building material.\nAs a building material.\nFlint, knapped or unknapped, has been used from antiquity (for example at the Late Roman fort of Burgh Castle in Norfolk) up to the present day as a material for building stone walls, using lime mortar, and often combined with other available stone or brick rubble. It was most common in the parts of southern England where no good building stone was available locally, and where brick-making was not widespread until the late Middle Ages. It is especially associated with East Anglia, but also used in chalky areas stretching through Hampshire, Sussex, Surrey and Kent to Somerset.\nFlint was used in the construction of many churches, houses, and other buildings, for example, the large stronghold of Framlingham Castle. Many different decorative effects have been achieved by using different types of knapping or arrangement and combinations with stone (flushwork), especially in the 15th and early 16th centuries. Because knapping flints to a relatively flush surface and size is a highly skilled process with a high level of wastage, flint finishes typically indicate high status buildings.\nDuring World War I, in the chalky-soil country of France, the British filled sandbags with flint and used these sandbags as breastworks.\nCeramics.\nFlint pebbles are used as the media in ball mills to grind glazes and other raw materials for the ceramics industry. The pebbles are hand-selected based on colour; those having a tint of red, indicating high iron content, are discarded. The remaining blue-grey stones have a low content of chromophoric oxides and so are less deleterious to the colour of the ceramic composition after firing.\nUntil recently calcined flint was also an important raw material in clay-based ceramic bodies produced in the UK. In clay bodies, calcined flint attenuates the shrinkage whilst drying, and modifies the fired thermal expansion. Flint can also be used in glazes as a network former.\nSee also.\nMineralogy\nArchaeology\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43704", "revid": "26972029", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43704", "title": "Edwin Beard Budding", "text": "English engineer (1796-1846)\nEdwin Beard Budding (25 August 1796 \u2013 25 September 1846), an engineer born in Eastington, Stroud, Gloucestershire, was the English inventor of the lawnmower (1830) and adjustable spanner (1842).\nLawnmower.\nBudding had the idea of the lawnmower after seeing a machine in a local cloth mill that used a cutting cylinder (or bladed reel) mounted on a bench to trim the irregular nap from the surface of woolen cloth and give a smooth finish.\nBudding's mower was designed primarily to cut the lawn on sports grounds and extensive gardens, as a superior alternative to the scythe, and was granted a British patent on 31 August 1830. It took ten more years and further innovations to create a machine that could be worked by animals, and sixty years before a steam-powered lawn mower was built. \nThe first machine produced was 19 inches in width with a frame made of wrought iron. The mower was pushed from behind with motive power coming from the rear land roller which drove gears to transfer the drive to the knives on the cutting cylinder; the ratio was 16:1. There was another roller placed in between the cutting cylinder and the land roller which was adjustable to alter the height of cut. On cutting, the grass clippings were hurled forward into a tray-like box. It was soon realized, however, that an extra handle was needed in front of the machine which could be used to help pull it along. Two of the earliest Budding machines sold went to Regent's Park Zoological Gardens in London and the Oxford Colleges. \nIn an agreement between John Ferrabee and Edwin Budding, dated 18 May 1830, Ferrabee paid the costs of development, obtained letters of patent and acquired rights to manufacture, sell and license other manufacturers in the production of lawn mowers. Budding realized that a similar device could be used to cut grass if the mechanism was mounted in a wheeled frame to make the blades rotate close to the lawn's surface. Budding went into partnership with a local engineer, John Ferrabee, and together they made mowers in a factory at Thrupp near Stroud.\nExamples of the early Budding type mowers can be seen in Stroud Museum, the London Science Museum and at Milton Keynes Museum.\nAdjustable spanner.\nBudding is also credited with the invention of the screw adjustable spanner (adjustable crescent wrench) in 1842.\nFirearms.\nBudding's engineering and manufacturing skills also extended to the production of a five-shot percussion revolver having brass manually-rotated barrels in about 1830.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43705", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43705", "title": "Cryptocrystalline", "text": "Type of rock texture\nCryptocrystalline is a rock texture made up of such minute crystals that its crystalline nature is only vaguely revealed even microscopically in thin section by transmitted polarized light. Among the sedimentary rocks, chert and flint are cryptocrystalline. Carbonado, a form of diamond, is also cryptocrystalline. Volcanic rocks, especially of the felsic type such as felsites and rhyolites, may have a cryptocrystalline groundmass as distinguished from pure obsidian (felsic) or tachylyte (mafic), which are natural rock glasses. Agate and onyx are examples of cryptocrystalline silica (chalcedony). The quartz crystals in chalcedony are so tiny that they cannot be distinguished with the naked eye.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43706", "revid": "11368244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43706", "title": "Sill", "text": "Sill may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43707", "revid": "45135949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43707", "title": "Duct tape", "text": "Type of adhesive tape\nDuct tape or duck tape is cloth- or scrim-backed pressure-sensitive tape, often coated with polyethylene. A variety of constructions exist using different backings and adhesives, and the term \"duct tape\" has been genericized to refer to all of them. A variation is heat-resistant foil tape useful for sealing heating and cooling ducts, produced because standard duct tape fails when used on heating ducts. \nDuct tape is generally silvery gray in color, but also available in other colors and printed designs, from whimsical yellow ducks to practical camouflage patterns. It is often confused with gaffer tape which is designed to be non-reflective and cleanly removed, unlike duct tape.\nDuring World War II, Revolite (then a division of Johnson &amp; Johnson) developed an adhesive tape made from a rubber-based adhesive applied to a durable duck cloth backing. This tape resisted water and was used to seal some ammunition cases during that period.\n\"Duck tape\" is recorded in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" as having been in use since 1899 and \"duct tape\" (described as \"perhaps an alteration of earlier duck tape\") since 1965.\nHistory.\nThe first material called \"duck tape\" was long strips of plain non-adhesive cotton duck cloth used in making shoes stronger, for decoration on clothing, and for wrapping steel cables or electrical conductors to protect them from corrosion or wear. For instance, in 1902, steel cables supporting the Manhattan Bridge were first covered in linseed oil then wrapped in duck tape before being laid in place. In the 1910s, certain boots and shoes used canvas duck fabric for the upper or for the insole, and duck tape was sometimes sewn in for reinforcement. In 1936, the US-based Insulated Power Cables Engineers Association specified a wrapping of duck tape as one of many methods used to protect rubber-insulated power cables. In 1942, Gimbel's department store offered venetian blinds that were held together with vertical strips of duck tape. \nGlue backed or impregnated adhesive tapes of various sorts were in use by the 1910s, including rolls of cloth tape with adhesive coating one side. White adhesive tape made of cloth soaked in rubber and zinc oxide was used in hospitals to bind wounds, but other tapes such as friction tape or electrical tape could be substituted in an emergency. In 1930, the magazine \"Popular Mechanics\" described how to make adhesive tape at home using plain cloth tape soaked in a heated liquid mixture of rosin and rubber from inner tubes.\nIn 1923, tape pioneer Richard Gurley Drew at 3M invented masking tape, a paper-based tape with a mildly sticky adhesive intended to be temporarily used and removed rather than left in place permanently. In 1925, this became the \"Scotch\" brand masking tape. In 1930, Drew developed a transparent cellophane-based tape, dubbed Scotch tape. This tape was widely used beginning in the Great Depression to repair household items. Neither of these inventions was based on cloth tape.\nThe ultimate wide-scale adoption of duck tape, today generally referred to as duct tape, came from ordnance worker Vesta Stoudt. Stoudt was worried that problems with ammunition box seals could cost soldiers precious time in battle, so she wrote to President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1943 with the idea to seal the boxes with a fabric tape prototype which she had tested. The letter was forwarded to the War Production Board, which put Johnson &amp; Johnson on the job. The Revolite division of Johnson &amp; Johnson had made medical adhesive tapes based on duck cloth from 1927, and a team headed by Revolite's Johnny Denoye and Johnson &amp; Johnson's Bill Gross developed the new adhesive tape, designed to be ripped by hand, not cut with scissors.\nTheir new unnamed product was made of thin cotton duck coated in waterproof polyethylene (plastic) with a layer of rubber-based gray adhesive (branded as \"Polycoat\") bonded to one side. It was easy to apply and remove and was soon adapted to repair military equipment quickly, including vehicles and weapons. This tape, colored in army-standard matte olive drab, was widely used by the soldiers.\nAfter the war, the duck tape product was sold in hardware stores for household repairs. The Melvin A. Anderson Company of Cleveland, Ohio, acquired the rights to the tape in 1950. It was commonly used in construction to wrap air ducts. Following this application, the name \"duct tape\" came into use in the 1950s, along with tape products that were colored silvery gray like tin ductwork. Specialized heat- and cold-resistant tapes were developed for heating and air-conditioning ducts. By 1960, a St. Louis, Missouri, HVAC company, Albert Arno, Inc., trademarked the name \"Ductape\" for their \"flame-resistant\" duct tape, capable of holding together at .\nIn 1971, Jack Kahl bought the Anderson firm and renamed it Manco. In 1975, Kahl rebranded the duct tape made by his company. He was able to trademark the brand \"Duck Tape\" and market his product complete with a yellow cartoon duck logo. Manco chose the term \"Duck\", the tape's original name, as \"a play on the fact that people often refer to duct tape as 'duck tape'\", and as a marketing differentiation to stand out against other sellers of duct tape. In 1979, the Duck Tape marketing plan involved sending out greeting cards with the duck branding, four times a year, to 32,000 hardware managers. This mass of communication combined with colorful, convenient packaging helped Duck Tape become popular. From a near-zero customer base, Manco eventually controlled 40% of the duct tape market in the US. Acquired by Henkel in 1998, Duck Tape was sold to Shurtape Technologies in 2009.\nShurtape introduced a strong, weather-resistant version called \"T-Rex Tape\". \"Ultimate Duck\", which had been Henkel's top-of-the-line variety, is still sold in the United Kingdom. Ultimate Duck, T-Rex Tape, and the competing Gorilla Tape all advertise \"three-layer technology\".\nAfter profiting from Scotch Tape in the 1930s, 3M had produced military materiel during World War II and by 1946 had developed the first practical vinyl electrical tape. By 1977, the company was selling a heat-resistant duct tape for heating ducts. In the late 1990s, 3M's tape division had an annual turnover of $300\u00a0million and was the US industry leader. In 2004, 3M released a semi-transparent duct tape, with a clear polyethylene film and white fiberglass mesh.\nManufacture.\nModern duct tape is made variously from cotton, polyester, nylon, rayon, or fiberglass mesh fabric to provide strength. The fabric, a very thin gauze called \"scrim\", is laminated to a backing of low-density polyethylene (LDPE). The color of the LDPE is provided by various pigments; the usual gray color comes from powdered aluminum mixed into the LDPE. Two tape widths are common: and . Other widths are also offered. The largest commercial rolls of duct tape were made in 2005 for Henkel, with width, a roll diameter of and weighing .\nCommon uses.\nDuct tape is commonly used in situations that require a strong, flexible, and very sticky tape. Some have a long-lasting adhesive and resistance to weathering.\nA specialized version, gaffer tape, which does not leave a sticky residue when removed, is preferred by gaffers in the theatre, motion picture and television industries.\nDuctwork.\nThe product now commonly called duct tape has largely been displaced in HVAC uses with specialized foil tapes designed for sealing heating and ventilation ducts (sometimes referred to erroneously as \"duct tapes\"). \nCommon duct tape carries no safety certifications such as UL or Proposition 65, which means the tape may burn violently, producing toxic smoke; it may cause ingestion and contact toxicity, it can have irregular mechanical strength, and its adhesive may have low life expectancy. Its use in ducts has been prohibited by the state of California and by building codes in many other places.\nResearch was conducted in 1998 on standard duct tape at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Environmental Energy Technologies Division, which concluded that under challenging but realistic conditions duct tape becomes brittle, fails, and may even fall off completely.\nSpaceflight.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Interviewer: And duct tape works in the vacuum of space as well as it does here?&lt;br&gt;\nWalker: Oh, yes. Yes, it does. It sticks.\u2014\u200a\nAccording to NASA engineer Jerry Woodfill duct tape had been stowed on board every mission since early in the Gemini program.\nNASA engineers and astronauts have used duct tape in their work, including in some emergency situations. One such usage occurred in 1970 when Woodfill was working in Mission Control, when the square carbon dioxide filters from Apollo 13's failed command module had to be modified to fit round receptacles in the lunar module, which was being used as a lifeboat after an explosion en route to the Moon. A workaround used duct tape and other items on board Apollo 13, with the ground crew relaying instructions to the flight crew. The lunar module's CO2 scrubbers started working again, saving the lives of the three astronauts on board.\nEd Smylie, who designed the scrubber modification in just two days, said later that he knew the problem was solvable when it was confirmed that duct tape was on the spacecraft: \"I felt like we were home free,\" he said in 2005. \"One thing a Southern boy will never say is, 'I don't think duct tape will fix it.'\"\nDuct tape, referred to as \"...good old-fashioned American gray tape...\" was used by the Apollo 17 astronauts on the Moon to improvise a repair to a damaged fender on the lunar rover, preventing possible damage from the spray of lunar dust as they drove.\nMilitary.\nIn the US submarine fleet, an adhesive cloth tape is called \"EB Green,\" as the duct tape used by Electric Boat was green. It is also called \"duck tape\", \"riggers' tape\", \"hurricane tape\", or \"100-mph tape\"; a name that comes from the use of a specific variety of duct tape that was supposed to withstand up to winds. The tape is so named because it was used during the Vietnam War to repair or balance helicopter rotor blades.\nAlternative uses.\nDuct tape occlusion therapy (DTOT) is a method intended to treat warts by covering them with duct tape for an extended period. The evidence for its effectiveness is poor; thus, it is not recommended as routine treatment. However, other studies suggest the duct tape treatment is more effective than existing medical options. Duct tape is often used in shoe repair due to its resiliency.\nDuct tape has been used to temporarily fix Apple's iPhone 4 dropped call issue, as an alternative to Apple's own rubber case.\nIn popular culture.\nThe sitcom \"The Red Green Show\"'s title character often used duct tape (which he dubbed \"the handyman's secret weapon\") as both a shortcut to proper fastening as well as for unconventional uses. The series sometimes showcased fan duct tape creations. The series had a feature film based on it entitled \"Duct Tape Forever\" and several VHS/DVD compilations of the show's use of the tape have been released. Since 2000, series star Steve Smith (as \"Red Green\") has been the \"Ambassador of Scotch Duct Tape\" for 3M.\nThe Discovery Channel series \"MythBusters\" featured duct tape in a number of myths that involve non-traditional uses. Confirmed myths include suspending a car for a period of time, building a functional cannon, a two-person sailboat, a two-person canoe (with duct tape paddles), a two-person raft, Roman sandals, a chess set, a leak proof water canister, rope, a hammock that can support the weight of an adult male, holding a car in place, a bridge that spanned the width of a dry dock, and a full-scale functional trebuchet with duct tape as the only binder. In the episode \"Duct Tape Plane\", the MythBusters repaired (and eventually replaced) the skin of a lightweight airplane with duct tape and flew it a few meters above a runway.\nGarrison Keillor's radio show \"A Prairie Home Companion\" included comedic fictional commercials sponsored by the \"American Duct Tape Council\".\nIn 2019 Italian artist Maurizio Cattelan created a concept art piece titled \"Comedian\" involving taping a banana to a wall using silver duct tape. The piece was exhibited briefly at the Art Basel in Miami.\nDuct tape alert.\nThe term \"duct tape alert\" refers to the recommendations made by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security on February 10, 2003, that Americans should prepare for a biological, chemical, or radiological terrorist attack by assembling a \"disaster supply kit\", including duct tape and plastic (presumably to attempt to seal one's home against nuclear, chemical, and biological contaminants), among other items. The recommendations followed an increase in the Department's official threat level to \"orange\", or \"high risk\", citing \"recent intelligence reports\". According to press reports, the recommendations caused a surge in demand for duct tape.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43708", "revid": "51070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43708", "title": "Servlet", "text": ""}
{"id": "43709", "revid": "18572107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43709", "title": "Radiation pressure", "text": "Pressure exerted upon any surface exposed to electromagnetic radiation\nRadiation pressure (also known as light pressure) is mechanical pressure exerted upon a surface due to the exchange of momentum between the object and the electromagnetic field. This includes the momentum of light or electromagnetic radiation of any wavelength that is absorbed, reflected, or otherwise emitted (e.g. black-body radiation) by matter on any scale (from macroscopic objects to dust particles to gas molecules). The associated force is called the radiation pressure force, or sometimes just the force of light.\nThe forces generated by radiation pressure are generally too small to be noticed under everyday circumstances; however, they are important in some physical processes and technologies. This particularly includes objects in outer space, where it is usually the main force acting on objects besides gravity, and where the net effect of a tiny force may have a large cumulative effect over long periods of time. For example, had the effects of the Sun's radiation pressure on the spacecraft of the \"Viking\" program been ignored, the spacecraft would have missed Mars orbit by about . Radiation pressure from starlight is crucial in a number of astrophysical processes as well. The significance of radiation pressure increases rapidly at extremely high temperatures and can sometimes dwarf the usual gas pressure, for instance, in stellar interiors and thermonuclear weapons. Furthermore, large lasers operating in space have been suggested as a means of propelling sail craft in beam-powered propulsion.\nRadiation pressure forces are the bedrock of laser technology and the branches of science that rely heavily on lasers and other optical technologies. That includes, but is not limited to, biomicroscopy (where light is used to irradiate and observe microbes, cells, and molecules), quantum optics, and optomechanics (where light is used to probe and control objects like atoms, qubits and macroscopic quantum objects). Direct applications of the radiation pressure force in these fields are, for example, laser cooling (the subject of the 1997 Nobel Prize in Physics), quantum control of macroscopic objects and atoms (2012 Nobel Prize in Physics), interferometry (2017 Nobel Prize in Physics) and optical tweezers (2018 Nobel Prize in Physics).\nRadiation pressure can equally well be accounted for by considering the momentum of a classical electromagnetic field or in terms of the momenta of photons, particles of light. The interaction of electromagnetic waves or photons with matter may involve an exchange of momentum. Due to the law of conservation of momentum, any change in the total momentum of the waves or photons must involve an equal and opposite change in the momentum of the matter it interacted with (Newton's third law of motion), as is illustrated in the accompanying figure for the case of light being perfectly reflected by a surface. This transfer of momentum is the general explanation for what we term radiation pressure.\nDiscovery.\nJohannes Kepler put forward the concept of radiation pressure in 1619 to explain the observation that a tail of a comet always points away from the Sun.\nThe assertion that light, as electromagnetic radiation, has the property of momentum and thus exerts a pressure upon any surface that is exposed to it was published by James Clerk Maxwell in 1862, and proven experimentally by Russian physicist Pyotr Lebedev in 1900 and by Ernest Fox Nichols and Gordon Ferrie Hull in 1901. The pressure is very small, but can be detected by allowing the radiation to fall upon a delicately poised vane of reflective metal in a Nichols radiometer (this should not be confused with the Crookes radiometer, whose characteristic motion is \"not\" caused by radiation pressure but by air flow caused by temperature differentials.)\nTheory.\nRadiation pressure can be viewed as a consequence of the conservation of momentum given the momentum attributed to electromagnetic radiation. That momentum can be equally well calculated on the basis of electromagnetic theory or from the combined momenta of a stream of photons, giving identical results as is shown below.\nRadiation pressure from momentum of an electromagnetic wave.\nAccording to Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism, an electromagnetic wave carries momentum. Momentum will be transferred to any surface it strikes that absorbs or reflects the radiation.\nConsider the momentum transferred to a perfectly absorbing (black) surface. The energy flux (irradiance) of a plane wave is calculated using the Poynting vector , which is the cross product of the electric field vector \"E\" and the magnetic field's auxiliary field vector (or \"magnetizing field\") \"H\". The magnitude, denoted by \"S\", divided by the speed of light is the density of the linear momentum per unit area (pressure) of the electromagnetic field. So, dimensionally, the Poynting vector is \"S\" = = =, which is the speed of light, \"c\" = \u0394\"x\" / \u0394\"t\", times pressure, \u0394\"F\" / area. That pressure is experienced as radiation pressure on the surface:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is pressure (usually in pascals), formula_3 is the incident irradiance (usually in W/m2) and formula_4 is the speed of light in vacuum. Here, \u2248.\nIf the surface is planar at an angle \"\u03b1\" to the incident wave, the intensity across the surface will be geometrically reduced by the cosine of that angle and the component of the radiation force against the surface will also be reduced by the cosine of \"\u03b1\", resulting in a pressure:\nformula_5\nThe momentum from the incident wave is in the same direction of that wave. But only the component of that momentum normal to the surface contributes to the pressure on the surface, as given above. The component of that force tangent to the surface is not called pressure.\nRadiation pressure from reflection.\nThe above treatment for an incident wave accounts for the radiation pressure experienced by a black (totally absorbing) body. If the wave is specularly reflected, then the recoil due to the reflected wave will further contribute to the radiation pressure. In the case of a perfect reflector, this pressure will be identical to the pressure caused by the incident wave:\nformula_6\nthus \"doubling\" the net radiation pressure on the surface:\nformula_7\nFor a partially reflective surface, the second term must be multiplied by the reflectivity (also known as the reflection coefficient of intensity), so that the increase is less than double. For a diffusely reflective surface, the details of the reflection and geometry must be taken into account, again resulting in an increased net radiation pressure of less than double.\nIf a reflection rate is formula_8 then the net radiation pressure on the surface:\nformula_9\nRadiation pressure by emission.\nJust as a wave reflected from a body contributes to the net radiation pressure experienced, a body that emits radiation of its own (rather than reflected) obtains a radiation pressure again given by the irradiance of that emission \"in the direction normal to the surface\" \"I\"e:\nformula_10\nThe emission can be from black-body radiation or any other radiative mechanism. Since all materials emit black-body radiation (unless they are totally reflective or at absolute zero), this source for radiation pressure is ubiquitous but usually tiny. However, because black-body radiation increases rapidly with temperature (as the fourth power of temperature, given by the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law), radiation pressure due to the temperature of a very hot object (or due to incoming black-body radiation from similarly hot surroundings) can become significant. This is important in stellar interiors.\nRadiation pressure in terms of photons.\nElectromagnetic radiation can be viewed in terms of particles rather than waves; these particles are known as photons. Photons do not have a rest-mass; however, photons are never at rest (they move at the speed of light) and acquire a momentum nonetheless which is given by:\nformula_11\nwhere \"p\" is momentum, \"h\" is the Planck constant, \"\u03bb\" is wavelength, and \"c\" is speed of light in vacuum. And \"Ep\" is the energy of a single photon given by: \nformula_12\nThe radiation pressure again can be seen as the transfer of each photon's momentum to the opaque surface, plus the momentum due to a (possible) recoil photon for a (partially) reflecting surface. Since an incident wave of irradiance \"If\" over an area \"A\" has a power of \"IfA\", this implies a flux of \"If\"/\"Ep\" photons per second per unit area striking the surface. Combining this with the above expression for the momentum of a single photon, results in the same relationships between irradiance and radiation pressure described above using classical electromagnetics. And again, reflected or otherwise emitted photons will contribute to the net radiation pressure identically.\nCompression in a uniform radiation field.\nIn general, the pressure of electromagnetic waves can be obtained from the vanishing of the trace of the electromagnetic stress tensor: since this trace equals 3\"P\" \u2212 \"u\", we get\nformula_13\nwhere \"u\" is the radiation energy per unit volume.\nThis can also be shown in the specific case of the pressure exerted on surfaces of a body in thermal equilibrium with its surroundings, at a temperature \"T\": the body will be surrounded by a uniform radiation field described by the Planck black-body radiation law and will experience a compressive pressure due to that impinging radiation, its reflection, and its own black-body emission. From that it can be shown that the resulting pressure is equal to one third of the total radiant energy per unit volume in the surrounding space.\nBy using Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law, this can be expressed as\nformula_14\nwhere formula_15 is the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann constant.\nSolar radiation pressure.\nSolar radiation pressure is due to the Sun's radiation at closer distances, thus especially within the Solar System. While it acts on all objects, its net effect is generally greater on smaller bodies, since they have a larger ratio of surface area to mass. All spacecraft experience such a pressure, except when they are behind the shadow of a larger orbiting body.\nSolar radiation pressure on objects near the Earth may be calculated using the Sun's irradiance at 1\u00a0AU, known as the solar constant, or \"G\"SC, whose value is set at 1361\u00a0W/m2 as of 2011.\nAll stars have a spectral energy distribution that depends on their surface temperature. The distribution is approximately that of black-body radiation. This distribution must be taken into account when calculating the radiation pressure or identifying reflector materials for optimizing a solar sail, for instance.\nMomentary or hours long solar pressures can indeed escalate due to release of solar flares and coronal mass ejections, but effects remain essentially immeasureable in relation to Earth's orbit. However these pressures persist over eons, such that cumulatively they have produced a measurable movement on the Earth-Moon system's orbit.\nPressures of absorption and reflection.\nSolar radiation pressure at the Earth's distance from the Sun, may be calculated by dividing the solar constant \"G\"SC (above) by the speed of light \"c\". For an absorbing sheet facing the Sun, this is simply:\nformula_16\nThis result is in pascals, equivalent to N/m2 (newtons per square meter). For a sheet at an angle \"\u03b1\" to the Sun, the effective area \"A\" of a sheet is reduced by a geometrical factor resulting in a force \"in the direction of the sunlight\" of:\nformula_17\nTo find the component of this force normal to the surface, another cosine factor must be applied resulting in a pressure \"P\" on the surface of:\nformula_18\nNote, however, that in order to account for the net effect of solar radiation on a spacecraft for instance, one would need to consider the \"total\" force (in the direction away from the Sun) given by the preceding equation, rather than just the component normal to the surface that we identify as \"pressure\".\nThe solar constant is defined for the Sun's radiation at the distance to the Earth, also known as one astronomical unit (au). Consequently, at a distance of \"R\" astronomical units (\"R\" thus being dimensionless), applying the inverse-square law, we would find:\nformula_19\nFinally, considering not an absorbing but a perfectly reflecting surface, the pressure is \"doubled\" due to the reflected wave, resulting in:\nformula_20\nNote that unlike the case of an absorbing material, the resulting force on a reflecting body is given exactly by this pressure acting normal to the surface, with the tangential forces from the incident and reflecting waves canceling each other. In practice, materials are neither totally reflecting nor totally absorbing, so the resulting force will be a weighted average of the forces calculated using these formulas.\nRadiation pressure perturbations.\nSolar radiation pressure is a source of orbital perturbations. It significantly affects the orbits and trajectories of small bodies including all spacecraft. For example, solar radiation pressure on the sun shield of the James Webb Telescope creates a torque, which is counteracted by its reaction wheels. This causes the wheels to accumulate angular momentum, which is dumped periodically by firing thrusters.\nSolar radiation pressure affects bodies throughout much of the Solar System. Small bodies are more affected than large ones because of their lower mass relative to their surface area. Spacecraft are affected along with natural bodies (comets, asteroids, dust grains, gas molecules).\nThe radiation pressure results in forces and torques on the bodies that can change their translational and rotational motions. Translational changes affect the orbits of the bodies. Rotational rates may increase or decrease. Loosely aggregated bodies may break apart under high rotation rates. Dust grains can either leave the Solar System or spiral into the Sun.\nA whole body is typically composed of numerous surfaces that have different orientations on the body. The facets may be flat or curved. They will have different areas. They may have optical properties differing from other aspects.\nAt any particular time, some facets are exposed to the Sun, and some are in shadow. Each surface exposed to the Sun is reflecting, absorbing, and emitting radiation. Facets in shadow are emitting radiation. The summation of pressures across all of the facets defines the net force and torque on the body. These can be calculated using the equations in the preceding sections.\nThe Yarkovsky effect affects the translation of a small body. It results from a face leaving solar exposure being at a higher temperature than a face approaching solar exposure. The radiation emitted from the warmer face is more intense than that of the opposite face, resulting in a net force on the body that affects its motion.\nThe YORP effect is a collection of effects expanding upon the earlier concept of the Yarkovsky effect, but of a similar nature. It affects the spin properties of bodies.\nThe Poynting\u2013Robertson effect applies to grain-size particles. From the perspective of a grain of dust circling the Sun, the Sun's radiation appears to be coming from a slightly forward direction (aberration of light). Therefore, the absorption of this radiation leads to a force with a component against the direction of movement. (The angle of aberration is tiny, since the radiation is moving at the speed of light, while the dust grain is moving many orders of magnitude slower than that.) The result is a gradual spiral of dust grains into the Sun. Over long periods of time, this effect cleans out much of the dust in the Solar System.\nWhile rather small in comparison to other forces, the radiation pressure force is inexorable. Over long periods of time, the net effect of the force is substantial. Such feeble pressures can produce marked effects upon minute particles like gas ions and electrons, and are essential in the theory of electron emission from the Sun, of cometary material, and so on.\nBecause the ratio of surface area to volume (and thus mass) increases with decreasing particle size, dusty (micrometre-size) particles are susceptible to radiation pressure even in the outer Solar System. For example, the evolution of the outer rings of Saturn is significantly influenced by radiation pressure.\nAs a consequence of light pressure, Einstein in 1909 predicted the existence of \"radiation friction\", which would oppose the movement of matter. He wrote: \"radiation will exert pressure on both sides of the plate. The forces of pressure exerted on the two sides are equal if the plate is at rest. However, if it is in motion, more radiation will be reflected on the surface that is ahead during the motion (front surface) than on the back surface. The backward acting force of pressure exerted on the front surface is thus larger than the force of pressure acting on the back. Hence, as the resultant of the two forces, there remains a force that counteracts the motion of the plate and that increases with the velocity of the plate. We will call this resultant 'radiation friction' in brief.\"\nSolar sails.\nSolar sailing, an experimental method of spacecraft propulsion, uses radiation pressure from the Sun as a motive force. The idea of interplanetary travel by light was mentioned by Jules Verne in his 1865 novel \"From the Earth to the Moon\".\nA sail reflects about 90% of the incident radiation. The 10% that is absorbed is radiated away from both surfaces, with the proportion emitted from the unlit surface depending on the thermal conductivity of the sail. A sail has curvature, surface irregularities, and other minor factors that affect its performance.\nThe Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) has successfully unfurled a solar sail in space, which has already succeeded in propelling its payload with the IKAROS project.\nCosmic effects of radiation pressure.\nRadiation pressure has had a major effect on the development of the cosmos, from the birth of the universe to ongoing formation of stars and shaping of clouds of dust and gasses on a wide range of scales.\nEarly universe.\nThe photon epoch is a phase when the energy of the universe was dominated by photons, between 10 seconds and 380,000 years after the Big Bang.\nGalaxy formation and evolution.\nThe process of galaxy formation and evolution began early in the history of the cosmos. Observations of the early universe strongly suggest that objects grew from bottom-up (i.e., smaller objects merging to form larger ones). As stars are thereby formed and become sources of electromagnetic radiation, radiation pressure from the stars becomes a factor in the dynamics of remaining circumstellar material.\nClouds of dust and gases.\nThe gravitational compression of clouds of dust and gases is strongly influenced by radiation pressure, especially when the condensations lead to star births. The larger young stars forming within the compressed clouds emit intense levels of radiation that shift the clouds, causing either dispersion or condensations in nearby regions, which influences birth rates in those nearby regions.\nClusters of stars.\nStars predominantly form in regions of large clouds of dust and gases, giving rise to star clusters. Radiation pressure from the member stars eventually disperses the clouds, which can have a profound effect on the evolution of the cluster.\nMany open clusters are inherently unstable, with a small enough mass that the escape velocity of the system is lower than the average velocity of the constituent stars. These clusters will rapidly disperse within a few million years. In many cases, the stripping away of the gas from which the cluster formed by the radiation pressure of the hot young stars reduces the cluster mass enough to allow rapid dispersal.\nStar formation.\nStar formation is the process by which dense regions within molecular clouds in interstellar space collapse to form stars. As a branch of astronomy, star formation includes the study of the interstellar medium and giant molecular clouds (GMC) as precursors to the star formation process, and the study of protostars and young stellar objects as its immediate products. Star formation theory, as well as accounting for the formation of a single star, must also account for the statistics of binary stars and the initial mass function.\nStellar planetary systems.\nPlanetary systems are generally believed to form as part of the same process that results in star formation. A protoplanetary disk forms by gravitational collapse of a molecular cloud, called a solar nebula, and then evolves into a planetary system by collisions and gravitational capture. Radiation pressure can clear a region in the immediate vicinity of the star. As the formation process continues, radiation pressure continues to play a role in affecting the distribution of matter. In particular, dust and grains can spiral into the star or escape the stellar system under the action of radiation pressure.\nStellar interiors.\nIn stellar interiors the temperatures are very high. Stellar models predict a temperature of 15\u00a0MK in the center of the Sun, and at the cores of supergiant stars the temperature may exceed 1\u00a0GK. As the radiation pressure scales as the fourth power of the temperature, it becomes important at these high temperatures. In the Sun, radiation pressure is still quite small when compared to the gas pressure. In the heaviest non-degenerate stars, radiation pressure is the dominant pressure component.\nComets.\nSolar radiation pressure strongly affects comet tails. Solar heating causes gases to be released from the comet nucleus, which also carry away dust grains. Radiation pressure and solar wind then drive the dust and gases away from the Sun's direction. The gases form a generally straight tail, while slower moving dust particles create a broader, curving tail.\nLaser applications of radiation pressure.\nOptical tweezers.\nLasers can be used as a source of monochromatic light with wavelength formula_21. With a set of lenses, one can focus the laser beam to a point that is formula_21 in diameter (or formula_23).\nThe radiation pressure of a \"P\" = 30\u00a0mW laser with \"\u03bb\" = 1064\u00a0nm can therefore be computed as follows.\nArea:\nformula_24\nforce:\nformula_25\npressure:\nformula_26\nThis is used to trap or levitate particles in optical tweezers.\nLight\u2013matter interactions.\nThe reflection of a laser pulse from the surface of an elastic solid can give rise to various types of elastic waves that propagate inside the solid or liquid. In other words, the light can excite and/or amplify motion of, and in, materials. This is the subject of study in the field of optomechanics. The weakest waves are generally those that are generated by the radiation pressure acting during the reflection of the light. Such light-pressure-induced elastic waves have for example observed inside an ultrahigh-reflectivity dielectric mirror. These waves are the most basic fingerprint of a light-solid matter interaction on the macroscopic scale. In the field of \"cavity\" optomechanics, light is trapped and resonantly enhanced in optical cavities, for example between mirrors. This serves the purpose of gravely enhancing the power of the light, and the radiation pressure it can exert on objects and materials. Optical control (that is, manipulation of the motion) of a plethora of objects has been realized: from kilometers long beams (such as in the LIGO interferometer) to clouds of atoms, and from micro-engineered trampolines to superfluids.\nOpposite to exciting or amplifying motion, light can also damp the motion of objects. Laser cooling is a method of cooling materials very close to absolute zero by converting some of material's motional energy into light. Kinetic energy and thermal energy of the material are synonyms here, because they represent the energy associated with Brownian motion of the material. Atoms traveling towards a laser light source perceive a doppler effect tuned to the absorption frequency of the target element. The radiation pressure on the atom slows movement in a particular direction until the Doppler effect moves out of the frequency range of the element, causing an overall cooling effect.\nAn other active research area of laser\u2013matter interaction is the radiation pressure acceleration of ions or protons from thin\u2013foil targets. High ion energy beams can be generated for medical applications (for example in ion beam therapy) by the radiation pressure of short laser pulses on ultra-thin foils.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43710", "revid": "13266769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43710", "title": "Silicon dioxide", "text": "Oxide of silicon\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nSilicon dioxide, also known as silica, is an oxide of silicon with the chemical formula , commonly found in nature as quartz. In many parts of the world, silica is the major constituent of sand. Silica is one of the most complex and abundant families of materials, existing as a compound of several minerals and as a synthetic product. Examples include fused quartz, fumed silica, opal, and aerogels. It is used in structural materials, microelectronics, and as components in the food and pharmaceutical industries. All forms are white or colorless, although impure samples can be colored.\nSilicon dioxide is a common fundamental constituent of glass.\nStructure.\nIn the majority of silicon dioxides, the silicon atom shows tetrahedral coordination, with four oxygen atoms surrounding a central Si atom (http://). Thus, SiO2 forms 3-dimensional network solids in which each silicon atom is covalently bonded in a tetrahedral manner to 4 oxygen atoms. In contrast, CO2 is a linear molecule. The starkly different structures of the dioxides of carbon and silicon are a manifestation of the double bond rule.\nBased on the crystal structural differences, silicon dioxide can be divided into two categories: crystalline and non-crystalline (amorphous). In crystalline form, this substance can be found naturally occurring as quartz, tridymite (high-temperature form), cristobalite (high-temperature form), stishovite (high-pressure form), and coesite (high-pressure form). On the other hand, amorphous silica can be found in nature as opal and diatomaceous earth. Quartz glass is a form of intermediate state between these structures.\nAll of these distinct crystalline forms always have the same local structure around Si and O. In \u03b1-quartz the Si\u2013O bond length is 161 pm, whereas in \u03b1-tridymite it is in the range 154\u2013171 pm. The Si\u2013O\u2013Si angle also varies between a low value of 140\u00b0 in \u03b1-tridymite, up to 180\u00b0 in \u03b2-tridymite. In \u03b1-quartz, the Si\u2013O\u2013Si angle is 144\u00b0.\nPolymorphism.\nAlpha quartz is the most stable form of solid SiO2 at room temperature. The high-temperature minerals, cristobalite and tridymite, have both lower densities and indices of refraction than quartz. The transformation from \u03b1-quartz to beta-quartz takes place abruptly at 573\u00a0\u00b0C. Since the transformation is accompanied by a significant change in volume, it can easily induce fracturing of ceramics or rocks passing through this temperature limit. The high-pressure minerals, seifertite, stishovite, and coesite, though, have higher densities and indices of refraction than quartz. Stishovite has a rutile-like structure where silicon is 6-coordinate. The density of stishovite is 4.287\u00a0g/cm3, which compares to \u03b1-quartz, the densest of the low-pressure forms, which has a density of 2.648\u00a0g/cm3. The difference in density can be ascribed to the increase in coordination as the six shortest Si\u2013O bond lengths in stishovite (four Si\u2013O bond lengths of 176 pm and two others of 181 pm) are greater than the Si\u2013O bond length (161 pm) in \u03b1-quartz.\nThe change in the coordination increases the ionicity of the Si\u2013O bond.\nFaujasite silica, another polymorph, is obtained by the dealumination of a low-sodium, ultra-stable Y zeolite with combined acid and thermal treatment. The resulting product contains over 99% silica, and has high crystallinity and specific surface area (over 800 m2/g). Faujasite-silica has very high thermal and acid stability. For example, it maintains a high degree of long-range molecular order or crystallinity even after boiling in concentrated hydrochloric acid.\nMolten SiO2.\nMolten silica exhibits several peculiar physical characteristics that are similar to those observed in liquid water: negative temperature expansion, density maximum at temperatures ~5000\u00a0\u00b0C, and a heat capacity minimum. Its density decreases from 2.08\u00a0g/cm3 at 1950\u00a0\u00b0C to 2.03\u00a0g/cm3 at 2200\u00a0\u00b0C.\nMolecular SiO2.\nThe molecular SiO2 has a linear structure like CO2. It has been produced by combining silicon monoxide (SiO) with oxygen in an argon matrix. \nThe dimeric silicon dioxide, (SiO2)2 has been obtained by reacting O2 with matrix isolated dimeric silicon monoxide, (Si2O2). In dimeric silicon dioxide there are two oxygen atoms bridging between the silicon atoms with an Si\u2013O\u2013Si angle of 94\u00b0 and bond length of 164.6 pm and the terminal Si\u2013O bond length is 150.2 pm. The Si\u2013O bond length is 148.3\u00a0pm, which compares with the length of 161\u00a0pm in \u03b1-quartz. The bond energy is estimated at 621.7 kJ/mol.\nNatural occurrence.\nGeology.\n is most commonly encountered in nature as quartz, which comprises more than 10% by mass of the Earth's crust. Quartz is the only polymorph of silica stable at the Earth's surface. Metastable occurrences of the high-pressure forms coesite and stishovite have been found around impact structures and associated with eclogites formed during ultra-high-pressure metamorphism. The high-temperature forms of tridymite and cristobalite are known from silica-rich volcanic rocks. In many parts of the world, silica is the major constituent of sand.\nBiology.\nEven though it is poorly soluble, silica occurs in many plants such as rice. Plant materials with high silica phytolith content appear to be of importance to grazing animals, from chewing insects to ungulates. Silica accelerates tooth wear, and high levels of silica in plants frequently eaten by insects may have developed as a defense mechanism against predation.\nSilica is also the primary component of rice husk ash, which is used, for example, in filtration and as supplementary cementitious material (SCM) in cement and concrete manufacturing.\nSilicification in and by cells has been common in the biological world and it occurs in bacteria, protists, plants, and animals (invertebrates and vertebrates).\nProminent examples include:\nUses.\nStructural use.\nAbout 95% of the commercial use of silicon dioxide (sand) is in the construction industry, e.g. in the production of concrete (Portland cement concrete).\nCertain deposits of silica sand, with desirable particle size and shape and desirable clay and other mineral content, were important for sand casting of metallic products. The high melting point of silica enables it to be used in such applications such as iron casting; modern sand casting sometimes uses other minerals for other reasons.\nCrystalline silica is used in hydraulic fracturing of formations which contain tight oil and shale gas.\nPrecursor to glass and silicon.\nSilica is the primary ingredient in the production of most glass. As other minerals are melted with silica, the principle of freezing point depression lowers the melting point of the mixture and increases fluidity. The glass transition temperature of pure SiO2 is about 1475 K. When molten silicon dioxide SiO2 is rapidly cooled, it does not crystallize, but solidifies as a glass. Because of this, most ceramic glazes have silica as the main ingredient.\nThe structural geometry of silicon and oxygen in glass is similar to that in quartz and most other crystalline forms of silicon and oxygen, with silicon surrounded by regular tetrahedra of oxygen centres. The difference between the glass and crystalline forms arises from the connectivity of the tetrahedral units: Although there is no long-range periodicity in the glassy network, ordering remains at length scales well beyond the SiO bond length. One example of this ordering is the preference to form rings of 6-tetrahedra.\nThe majority of optical fibers for telecommunications are also made from silica. It is a primary raw material for many ceramics such as earthenware, stoneware, and porcelain.\nSilicon dioxide is used to produce elemental silicon. The process involves carbothermic reduction in an electric arc furnace:\n&lt;chem&gt;SiO2 + 2 C -&gt; Si + 2 CO&lt;/chem&gt;\nFumed silica.\nFumed silica, also known as pyrogenic silica, is prepared by burning SiCl4 in an oxygen-rich hydrogen flame to produce a \"smoke\" of SiO2. \n&lt;chem&gt;SiCl4 + 2 H2 + O2 -&gt; SiO2 + 4 HCl&lt;/chem&gt;\nIt can also be produced by vaporizing quartz sand in a 3000\u00a0\u00b0C electric arc. Both processes result in microscopic droplets of amorphous silica fused into branched, chainlike, three-dimensional secondary particles which then agglomerate into tertiary particles, a white powder with extremely low bulk density (0.03-0.15 g/cm3) and thus high surface area. The particles act as a thixotropic thickening agent, or as an anti-caking agent, and can be treated to make them hydrophilic or hydrophobic for either water or organic liquid applications.\nSilica fume is an ultrafine powder collected as a by-product of the silicon and ferrosilicon alloy production. It consists of amorphous (non-crystalline) spherical particles with an average particle diameter of 150\u00a0nm, without the branching of the pyrogenic product. The main use is as pozzolanic material for high performance concrete. Fumed silica nanoparticles can be successfully used as an anti-aging agent in asphalt binders.\nFood, cosmetic, and pharmaceutical applications.\nSilica, either colloidal, precipitated, or pyrogenic fumed, is a common additive in food production. It is used primarily as a flow or anti-caking agent in powdered foods such as spices and non-dairy coffee creamer, or powders to be formed into pharmaceutical tablets. It can adsorb water in hygroscopic applications. Colloidal silica is used as a fining agent for wine, beer, and juice, with the E number reference E551.\nIn cosmetics, silica is useful for its light-diffusing properties and natural absorbency.\nDiatomaceous earth, a mined product, has been used in food and cosmetics for centuries. It consists of the silica shells of microscopic diatoms; in a less processed form it was sold as tooth powder. Manufactured or mined hydrated silica is used as the hard abrasive in toothpaste.\nSemiconductors.\nSilicon dioxide is widely used in the semiconductor technology:\nBecause silicon dioxide is a native oxide of silicon it is more widely used compared to other semiconductors like gallium arsenide or indium phosphide.\nSilicon dioxide could be grown on a silicon semiconductor surface. Silicon oxide layers could protect silicon surfaces during diffusion processes, and could be used for diffusion masking.\nSurface passivation is the process by which a semiconductor surface is rendered inert, and does not change semiconductor properties as a result of interaction with air or other materials in contact with the surface or edge of the crystal. The formation of a thermally grown silicon dioxide layer greatly reduces the concentration of electronic states at the silicon surface. SiO2 films preserve the electrical characteristics of p\u2013n junctions and prevent these electrical characteristics from deteriorating by the gaseous ambient environment. Silicon oxide layers could be used to electrically stabilize silicon surfaces. The surface passivation process is an important method of semiconductor device fabrication that involves coating a silicon wafer with an insulating layer of silicon oxide so that electricity could reliably penetrate to the conducting silicon below. Growing a layer of silicon dioxide on top of a silicon wafer enables it to overcome the surface states that otherwise prevent electricity from reaching the semiconducting layer.\nThe process of silicon surface passivation by thermal oxidation (silicon dioxide) is critical to the semiconductor industry. It is commonly used to manufacture metal\u2013oxide\u2013semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) and silicon integrated circuit chips (with the planar process).\nOther.\nHydrophobic silica is used as a defoamer component.\nIn its capacity as a refractory, it is useful in fiber form as a high-temperature thermal protection fabric.\nSilica is used in the extraction of DNA and RNA due to its ability to bind to the nucleic acids under the presence of chaotropes.\nSilica aerogel was used in the Stardust spacecraft to collect extraterrestrial particles.\nPure silica (silicon dioxide), when cooled as fused quartz into a glass with no true melting point, can be used as a glass fibre for fibreglass.\nProduction.\nSilicon dioxide is mostly obtained by mining, including sand mining and purification of quartz. \nQuartz is suitable for many purposes, while chemical processing is required to make a purer or otherwise more suitable (e.g. more reactive or fine-grained) product.\nPrecipitated silica.\nPrecipitated silica or amorphous silica is produced by the acidification of solutions of sodium silicate. The gelatinous precipitate or silica gel, is first washed and then dehydrated to produce colorless microporous silica. The idealized equation involving a trisilicate and sulfuric acid is:\n&lt;chem&gt;Na2Si3O7 + H2SO4 -&gt; 3 SiO2 + Na2SO4 + H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nApproximately one billion kilograms/year (1999) of silica were produced in this manner, mainly for use for polymer composites \u2013 tires and shoe soles.\nOn microchips.\nThin films of silica grow spontaneously on silicon wafers via thermal oxidation, producing a very shallow layer of about 1 nm or 10 \u00c5 of so-called native oxide.\nHigher temperatures and alternative environments are used to grow well-controlled layers of silicon dioxide on silicon, for example at temperatures between 600 and 1200\u00a0\u00b0C, using so-called dry oxidation with O2\n&lt;chem&gt;Si + O2 -&gt; SiO2&lt;/chem&gt;\nor wet oxidation with H2O.\n&lt;chem&gt;Si + 2 H2O -&gt; SiO2 + 2 H2&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe native oxide layer is beneficial in microelectronics, where it acts as electric insulator with high chemical stability. It can protect the silicon, store charge, block current, and even act as a controlled pathway to limit current flow.\nLaboratory or special methods.\nFrom organosilicon compounds.\nMany routes to silicon dioxide start with an organosilicon compound, e.g., HMDSO, TEOS. Synthesis of silica is illustrated below using tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS). Simply heating TEOS at 680\u2013730\u00a0\u00b0C results in the oxide:\n&lt;chem&gt;Si(OC2H5)4 -&gt; SiO2 + 2 O(C2H5)2&lt;/chem&gt;\nSimilarly TEOS combusts around 400\u00a0\u00b0C:\n&lt;chem&gt;Si(OC2H5)4 + 12 O2 -&gt; SiO2 + 10 H2O + 8 CO2&lt;/chem&gt;\nTEOS undergoes hydrolysis via the so-called sol-gel process. The course of the reaction and nature of the product are affected by catalysts, but the idealized equation is:\n&lt;chem&gt;Si(OC2H5)4 + 2 H2O -&gt; SiO2 + 4 HOCH2CH3&lt;/chem&gt;\nOther methods.\nBeing highly stable, silicon dioxide arises from many methods. Conceptually simple, but of little practical value, combustion of silane gives silicon dioxide. This reaction is analogous to the combustion of methane:\n&lt;chem&gt;SiH4 + 2 O2 -&gt; SiO2 + 2 H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nHowever the chemical vapor deposition of silicon dioxide onto crystal surface from silane had been used using nitrogen as a carrier gas at 200\u2013500\u00a0\u00b0C.\nChemical reactions.\nSilicon dioxide is a relatively inert material (hence its widespread occurrence as a mineral). Silica is often used as inert containers for chemical reactions. At high temperatures, it is converted to silicon by reduction with carbon.\nFluorine reacts with silicon dioxide to form SiF4 and O2 whereas the other halogen gases (Cl2, Br2, I2) are unreactive.\nMost forms of silicon dioxide are attacked (\"etched\") by hydrofluoric acid (HF) to produce hexafluorosilicic acid:\nStishovite does not react to HF to any significant degree. \nHF is used to remove or pattern silicon dioxide in the semiconductor industry.\nSilicon dioxide acts as a Lux\u2013Flood acid, being able to react with bases under certain conditions. As it does not contain any hydrogen, non-hydrated silica cannot directly act as a Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid. While silicon dioxide is only poorly soluble in water at low or neutral pH (typically, 2 \u00d7 10\u22124 M for quartz up to 10\u22123 M for cryptocrystalline chalcedony), strong bases react with glass and easily dissolve it. Therefore, strong bases have to be stored in plastic bottles to avoid jamming the bottle cap, to preserve the integrity of the recipient, and to avoid undesirable contamination by silicate anions.\nSilicon dioxide dissolves in hot concentrated alkali or fused hydroxide, as described in this idealized equation:\n&lt;chem&gt;SiO2 + 2 NaOH -&gt; Na2SiO3 + H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nSilicon dioxide will neutralise basic metal oxides (e.g. sodium oxide, potassium oxide, lead(II) oxide, zinc oxide, or mixtures of oxides, forming silicates and glasses as the Si-O-Si bonds in silica are broken successively). As an example the reaction of sodium oxide and SiO2 can produce sodium orthosilicate, sodium silicate, and glasses, dependent on the proportions of reactants:\n&lt;chem&gt;2 Na2O + SiO2 -&gt; Na4SiO4;&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt;Na2O + SiO2 -&gt; Na2SiO3;&lt;/chem&gt;\nformula_1 &lt;chem&gt;Na2O + SiO2 -&gt; glass&lt;/chem&gt;.\nExamples of such glasses have commercial significance, e.g. soda\u2013lime glass, borosilicate glass, lead glass. In these glasses, silica is termed the network former or lattice former. The reaction is also used in blast furnaces to remove sand impurities in the ore by neutralisation with calcium oxide, forming calcium silicate slag.\nSilicon dioxide reacts in heated reflux under dinitrogen with ethylene glycol and an alkali metal base to produce highly reactive, pentacoordinate silicates which provide access to a wide variety of new silicon compounds. The silicates are essentially insoluble in all polar solvent except methanol.\nSilicon dioxide reacts with elemental silicon at high temperatures to produce SiO:\n&lt;chem&gt;SiO2 + Si -&gt; 2 SiO&lt;/chem&gt;\nWater solubility.\nThe solubility of silicon dioxide in water strongly depends on its crystalline form and is three to four times higher for amorphous silica than quartz; as a function of temperature, it peaks around . This property is used to grow single crystals of quartz in a hydrothermal process where natural quartz is dissolved in superheated water in a pressure vessel that is cooler at the top. Crystals of 0.5\u20131\u00a0 kg can be grown for 1\u20132 months. These crystals are a source of very pure quartz for use in electronic applications. Above the critical temperature of water and a pressure of or higher, water is a supercritical fluid and solubility is once again higher than at lower temperatures.\nHealth effects.\nSilica ingested orally is essentially nontoxic, with an LD50 of 5000\u00a0mg/kg (5\u00a0g/kg). A 2008 study following subjects for 15 years found that higher levels of silica in water appeared to decrease the risk of dementia. An increase of 10\u00a0mg/day of silica in drinking water was associated with a reduced risk of dementia of 11%.\nInhaling finely divided crystalline silica dust can lead to silicosis, bronchitis, or lung cancer, as the dust becomes lodged in the lungs and continuously irritates the tissue, reducing lung capacities. When fine silica particles are inhaled in large enough quantities (such as through occupational exposure), it increases the risk of systemic autoimmune diseases such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis compared to expected rates in the general population.\nOccupational hazard.\nSilica is an occupational hazard for people who do sandblasting or work with powdered crystalline silica products. Amorphous silica, such as fumed silica, may cause irreversible lung damage in some cases but is not associated with the development of silicosis. Children, asthmatics of any age, those with allergies, and the elderly (all of whom have reduced lung capacity) can be affected in less time.\nCrystalline silica is an occupational hazard for those working with stone countertops because the process of cutting and installing the countertops creates large amounts of airborne silica. Crystalline silica used in hydraulic fracturing presents a health hazard to workers.\nPathophysiology.\nIn the body, crystalline silica particles do not dissolve over clinically relevant periods. Silica crystals inside the lungs can activate the NLRP3 inflammasome inside macrophages and dendritic cells and thereby result in production of interleukin, a highly pro-inflammatory cytokine in the immune system.\nRegulation.\nRegulations restricting silica exposure 'with respect to the silicosis hazard' specify that they are concerned only with silica, which is both crystalline and dust-forming.\nIn 2013, the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration reduced the exposure limit to 50 \u03bcg/m3 of air. Prior to 2013, it had allowed 100\u00a0\u03bcg/m3 and in construction workers even 250\u00a0\u03bcg/m3.\nIn 2013, OSHA also required the \"green completion\" of fracked wells to reduce exposure to crystalline silica and restrict the exposure limit.\nCrystalline forms.\nSiO2, more so than almost any material, exists in many crystalline forms. These forms are called polymorphs.\nSafety.\nInhaling finely divided crystalline silica can lead to severe inflammation of the lung tissue, silicosis, bronchitis, lung cancer, and systemic autoimmune diseases, such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. Inhalation of amorphous silicon dioxide, in high doses, leads to non-permanent short-term inflammation, where all effects heal.\nOther names.\nThis extended list enumerates synonyms for silicon dioxide; all of these values are from a single source; values in the source were presented capitalized.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43711", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43711", "title": "Nichols radiometer", "text": "Tool for measuring radiation pressure\nA Nichols radiometer was the apparatus used by Ernest Fox Nichols and Gordon Ferrie Hull in 1901 for the measurement of radiation pressure. \nIt consisted of a pair of small silvered glass mirrors suspended in the manner of a torsion balance by a fine quartz fibre within an enclosure in which the air pressure could be regulated. The torsion head to which the fiber was attached could be turned from the outside using a magnet. A beam of light was directed first on one mirror and then on the other, and the opposite deflections observed with mirror and scale. By turning the mirror system around to receive the light on the unsilvered side, the influence of the air in the enclosure could be ascertained. This influence was found to be of almost negligible value at an air pressure of about . The radiant energy of the incident beam was deduced from its heating effect upon a small blackened silver disk, which was found to be more reliable than the bolometer when it was first used. With this apparatus, the experimenters were able to obtain an agreement between observed and computed radiation pressures within about 0.6%.\nThe original apparatus is at the Smithsonian Institution.\nThis apparatus is sometimes confused with the Crookes radiometer of 1873.\nThe original papers, with their historical context, have been re-printed in a chapter of the book \"Quantum Photonics: Pioneering Advances and Emerging Applications\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43712", "revid": "49527600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43712", "title": "Parsis", "text": "Zoroastrian community in the Indian subcontinent\nThe Parsis or Parsees () are a Zoroastrian ethnic group in the Indian subcontinent. They are descended from Persian refugees who migrated to the Indian subcontinent during and after the Arab-Islamic conquest of Iran in the 7th century, when Zoroastrians were persecuted by the early Muslims. Representing the elder of the Indian subcontinent's two Zoroastrian communities, the Parsi people are culturally, linguistically, and socially distinct from the Iranis, whose Zoroastrian ancestors migrated to British-ruled India from Qajar-era Iran. The word \"Parsi\" is derived from the Persian language, and literally translates to \"Persian\" ().\nAccording to the 16th-century Parsi epic \"Qissa-i Sanjan\", fleeing persecution, the Zarthushti (Zoroastrian) Persians, citizens of the Sassanian empire sought refuge in the Indian subcontinent. This migration from different parts of the Sassanian empire continued between the 8th century and the 10th century. The earliest of these migrants settled among the Hindus of present-day Gujarat after being granted refuge by Rajput King Jadhav Rana, the king of Sanjan.\nZoroastrianism (Zarathushti Pantha) had served as Iran's state religion since at least the time of the Achaemenid Empire. However, the conquest of the Sasanian Empire by the Rashidun Caliphate marked the beginning of the Islamisation of Iran, which prompted much of the Zoroastrian-majority population to either convert to Islam or flee, though a number of Iranian figures stayed in active revolt against the Rashidun army and the later Islamic caliphates for almost 500 years after the collapse of the Sasanian Empire. Nevertheless, Zoroastrianism continued to decline, and most Iranians had become Muslims by the 10th century, shifting the concentration of the religion's followers away from the Iranian plateau for the first time in recorded history.\nThe Gujarati-speaking Parsi community accounts for the oldest sustained presence of Zoroastrianism in India, and is legally differentiated from the Dari-speaking Irani community on the basis of their origin (Sanjan and Navsari in Central Asia) and the era of their migration to the country. Despite this legal distinction, the terms \"Parsi\" and \"Zoroastrian\" are commonly used interchangeably to denote both communities, which make up the world's largest Zoroastrian population. Notably, no substantial differences exist between Parsi and Irani religious principles, convictions, and customs.\nDefinition and identity.\nAccording to the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\",Parsi, also spelled Parsee, member of a group of followers in India of the Persian prophet Zoroaster. The Parsis, whose name means \"Persians\", are descended from Persian Zoroastrians who emigrated to India to avoid religious persecution by the Muslims. They live chiefly in Mumbai and in a few towns and villages mostly to the south of Mumbai, but also a few minorities nearby in Karachi (Pakistan) and Chennai. There is a sizeable Parsee population in Pune as well in Bangalore. A few Parsee families also reside in Kolkata and Hyderabad. Although they are not, strictly speaking, a caste, since they are not Hindus, they form a well-defined community. The exact date of the Parsi migration is unknown. According to tradition, the Parsis initially settled at Hormuz on the Persian Gulf but finding themselves still persecuted they set sail for India, arriving in the 8th century. The migration may, in fact, have taken place as late as the 10th century, or in both. They settled first at Diu in Kathiawar but soon moved to South Gujar\u0101t, where they remained for about 800 years as a small agricultural community.\nThe term \"P\u0101rsi\", which in the Persian language is a demonym meaning \"inhabitant of P\u0101rs\" and hence \"ethnic Persian\", is not attested in Indian Zoroastrian texts until the 17th century. Until that time, such texts consistently use the Persian-origin terms \"Zartoshti\" \"Zoroastrian\" or \"Vehdin\" \"[of] the good religion\". The 12th-century \"Sixteen Shlokas\", a Sanskrit text in praise of the Parsis, is the earliest attested use of the term as an identifier for Indian Zoroastrians.\nThe first reference to the Parsis in a European language is from 1322, when a French monk, Jordanus, briefly refers to their presence in Thane and Bharuch. Subsequently, the term appears in the journals of many European travelers, first French and Portuguese, later English, all of whom used a Europeanized version of an apparently local language term. For example, Portuguese physician Garcia de Orta observed in 1563 that \"there are merchants ... in the kingdom of Cambaia ... known as Esparcis. We Portuguese call them Jews, but they are not so. They are Gentios.\" In an early 20th-century legal ruling (see self-perceptions, below), Justices Davar and Beaman asserted (1909:540) that \"Parsi\" was also a term used in Iran to refer to Zoroastrians. notes that in much the same way as the word \"Hindu\" was used by Iranians to refer to anyone from the Indian subcontinent, \"Parsi\" was used by the Indians to refer to anyone from Greater Iran, irrespective of whether they were actually ethnic Persian people. In any case, the term \"Parsi\" itself is \"not necessarily an indication of their Iranian or 'Persian' origin, but rather as indicator \u2013 manifest as several properties \u2013 of ethnic identity\". Moreover, if heredity were the only factor in a determination of ethnicity, the Parsis would count as Parthians according to the \"Qissa-i Sanjan\".\nThe term \"Parseeism\" or \"Parsiism\", is attributed to Abraham Hyacinthe Anquetil-Duperron, who in the 1750s, when the word \"Zoroastrianism\" had yet to be coined, made the first detailed report of the Parsis and of Zoroastrianism, therein mistakenly assuming that the Parsis were the only remaining followers of the religion.\nSome older texts also refer to Parsis as \"Persees\".\nIn addition to above, the term \"Parsi\" (Persian) existed even before they moved to India:\nOrigin.\nIn ancient Persia, Zarathushtra taught that good (Ohrmazd) and evil (Angra Mainyu) were opposite forces and the battle between them is more or less evenly matched. A person should always be vigilant to align with forces of light. According to the \"asha\" or the righteousness and \"druj\" or the wickedness, the person has chosen in their life they will be judged at the Chinvat bridge to grant passage to Paradise, Hammistagan (A limbo area) or Hell by the bridge remaining wide for a righteous soul and turning narrow as a sword for the wicked. A personified form of the soul that represents the person's deeds takes the adjudged to their destination and they will abide there until the final apocalypse. After the final battle between good and evil, every soul's walk through a river of fire ordeal for burning of their dross and together they receive a post resurrection paradise. The Zoroastrian holy book, called the \"Avesta\", was written in the Avestan language, which is closely related to Vedic Sanskrit.\nThe \"Qissa-i Sanjan\" is a tale of the journey of the Parsis to India from Iran. It says they fled for reasons of religious freedom and they were allowed to settle in India thanks to the goodwill of a local prince. However, the Parsi community had to abide by three rules: they had to speak the local language, follow local marriage customs, and not carry any weapons. After showing the many similarities between their faith and local beliefs, the early community was granted a plot of land on which to build a fire temple.\nAs an ethnic community.\nOver the centuries since the first Zoroastrians arrived in India, the Parsis have integrated themselves into Indian society while simultaneously maintaining or developing their own distinct customs and traditions (and thus ethnic identity). This in turn has given the Parsi community a rather peculiar standing: they are mostly Indians in terms of national affiliation, language and history, but not typically Indian in terms of consanguinity or ethnicity, cultural, behavioural and religious practices. \nSelf-perceptions.\nThe definition of who is, and is not, a Parsi is a matter of great contention within the Zoroastrian community in India. It is generally accepted that a Parsi is a person who:\n(a) is directly descended from the original Persian refugees, and\n(b) has been formally admitted into the Zoroastrian religion, through the navjote ceremony.\nIn this sense, \"Parsi\" is an ethno-religious designator, whose definition is of contention among its members, similar to the identity question among Jews.\nSome members of the community additionally contend that a child must have a Parsi father to be eligible for introduction into the faith, but this assertion is considered by most to be a violation of the Zoroastrian tenets of gender equality and may be a remnant of an old legal definition of the term Parsi.\nAn oft-quoted legal definition of Parsi is based on a 1909 ruling (since nullified) that not only stipulated that a person could not become a Parsi by converting to the Zoroastrian faith but also noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the Parsi community consists of: a) Parsis who are descended from the original Persian emigrants and who are born of both Zoroastrian parents and who profess the Zoroastrian religion; b) Iranis [here meaning Iranians, not the other group of Indian Zoroastrians] professing the Zoroastrian religion; c) the children of Parsi fathers by alien mothers who have been duly and properly admitted into the religion.\nThis definition was overturned several times. The equality principles of the Indian Constitution void the patrilineal restrictions expressed in the third clause. The second clause was contested and overturned in 1948. On appeal in 1950, the 1948 ruling was upheld and the entire 1909 definition was deemed an obiter dictum \u2013 a collateral opinion and not legally binding (re-affirmed in 1966).\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2011 census of India, there are 57,264 Parsis in India. According to the National Commission for Minorities, there are a \"variety of causes that are responsible for this steady decline in the population of the community\", the most significant of which were childlessness and migration.\nIf Demographic trends project that by 2020 the Parsis will number only 23,000. The Parsis will then cease to be called a community and will be labeled a 'tribe'. The Parsi population went up by 233 since 2013, adjusting the 2011 estimate to ~57,497 by early 2020.\nOne-fifth of the decrease in population is attributed to migration. There are sizeable Parsi communities in the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, and the United States. A slower birthrate than deathrate accounts for the rest: as of 2001, Parsis over the age of 60 make up for 31% of the community. Only 4.7% of the Parsi community are under 6 years of age, which translates to 7 births per year per 1,000 individuals. Concerns have been raised in recent years over the rapidly declining population of the Parsi community in India.\nTies to modern-day Iran.\nParsis have also been migrating to the traditional homeland of Iran and while the number of Parsis who have returned to Iran is small compared to the overall Zoroastrian community in Iran, their presence has helped to strengthen the ties between the Iranian and Indian Zoroastrian communities. The Parsis played a significant role in the modernization of Iran, particularly in the 20th century. They served as a reminder of Iran's ancient heritage, which was crucial to Iranians. The Parsis also demonstrated to Iranians that it was possible to be both modern and culturally authentic, and that the revival of Zoroastrianism could be a way of modernizing Iranian culture while retaining its original identity.\nBoth Reza Shah and Muhammad Reza Shah played an active role in encouraging Parsis to invest in Iran and contribute to its economic development by inviting them to return to their homeland. During the Pahlavi dynasty in Iran, the relationship between Zoroastrianism and Iranian national identity was blurred. This was exemplified by Reza Shah's adoption of Zoroastrian calendar names and placement of the Fravahar symbol on prominent government buildings. Additionally, he maintained a close relationship with the Zoroastrian parliamentary representative, Keikhosrow Shahrokh, who was entrusted by him with important governmental tasks.\nReza Shah was also sympathetic to Indian Zoroastrians (Parsis) and actively encouraged their return to Iran to invest and help develop the country's economy. In 1932, he invited Dinshah Irani, a Parsi leader and founder of the Iranian Zoroastrian Anjoman and the Iran League in India, to visit Iran as part of a Parsi delegation. Irani was awarded honors by Reza Shah and entrusted with a message to take back to the Parsi community in India.\"You Parsis are as much the children of this soil as any other Iranis, and so you are as much entitled to have your proper share in its development as any other nationals.\"\n\"We estimate Our Empire's resources to be even greater than those of America, and in tapping them you can take your proper part. We do not want you to come all bag and baggage; just wait a little and watch.\"\n\"If you find the proposition beneficial both to yourselves and to this land, then do come and We shall greet you with open arms, as We might.\"\n\"Our dear brothers and sisters.\"\n\"Iran is a vast country pregnant with many advantages and fresh fields waiting for development. We suggest that the Parsis, who are still the sons of Iran, though separated from her, should look upon this country of to-day as their own, and differentiate it from its immediate past, and strive to derive benefit from her developments.\"In the 1930s, Parsis discussed the idea of buying land in Iran to create a Parsi colony. Sir Hormusji C. Adenwala proposed raising funds in Bombay for this purpose, with support from the Iranian government and Reza Shah. Some Parsis had already resettled in Iran earlier since the time of Maneckji Hataria. The Iran League Quarterly provided information on legal and economic aspects of land purchase. Land near Bandar-e Shapur was suggested as particularly valuable due to government plans for the port. Similar plans were considered for other Parsi colonies in Iran, including Yazd and Kerman. Textile manufacturing was seen as a potential area for Parsi investment, leading to the establishment of the Khorsovi Textile Mill in Mashhad (based on joint Parsi and Iranian ownership agreements). There was also discussion of combining industrial and agricultural ventures in such colonies.\nOther demographic statistics.\nThe gender ratio among Parsis is unusual: as of 2001, the ratio of males to females was 1,000 males to 1,050 females (up from 1,024 in 1991), due primarily to the high median age of the population (elderly women are more common than elderly men). As of 2001 the national average in India was 1,000 males to 933 females.\nParsis have a high literacy rate; as of 2001, the literacy rate is 99.1%, the highest of any Indian community (the national average was 78.5%). 97.1% of Parsis reside in urban areas (the national average is 27.8%). Parsis mother tongue is Gujarati.\nIn the Greater Mumbai area, where the density of Parsis is highest, about 13% of Parsi females and about 24% of Parsi males do not marry.\nHistory.\nArrival in the Indian subcontinent.\nAccording to the Qissa-i Sanjan, the only existing account of the early years of Zoroastrian refugees in India composed at least six centuries after their tentative date of arrival, the first group of immigrants originated from Greater Khorasan. This historical region of Central Asia is in part in northeastern Iran, where it constitutes modern Khorasan province, part of western/northern Afghanistan, and in part in three Central-Asian republics namely Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.\nAccording to the \"Qissa\", the immigrants were granted permission to stay by the local ruler, Jadi Rana, on the condition that they adopt the local language (Gujarati) and that their women adopt local dress (the \"sari\"). The refugees accepted the conditions and founded the settlement of Sanjan, which is said to have been named after the city of their origin (Sanjan, near Merv, modern Turkmenistan). This first group was followed by a second group from Greater Khorasan within five years of the first, and this time having religious implements with them (the \"alat\"). In addition to these \"Khorasani\"s or \"Kohistani\"s \"mountain folk\", as the two initial groups are said to have been initially called, at least one other group is said to have come overland from Sari, Iran.\nAlthough the Sanjan group are believed to have been the first permanent settlers, the precise date of their arrival is a matter of conjecture. All estimates are based on the \"Qissa\", which is vague or contradictory with respect to some elapsed periods. Consequently, three possible dates \u2013 716, 765, and 936 \u2013 have been proposed as the year of landing, and the disagreement has been the cause of \"many an intense battle ... amongst Parsis\". Since dates are not specifically mentioned in Parsi texts prior to the 18th century, any date of arrival is perforce a matter of speculation. The importance of the \"Qissa\" lies in any case not so much in its reconstruction of events than in its depiction of the Parsis \u2013 in the way they have come to view themselves \u2013 and in their relationship to the dominant culture. As such, the text plays a crucial role in shaping Parsi identity. But, \"even if one comes to the conclusion that the chronicle based on verbal transmission is not more than a legend, it still remains without doubt an extremely informative document for Parsee historiography.\"\nThe Sanjan Zoroastrians were certainly not the first Zoroastrians on the subcontinent. Sindh touching Balochistan, the easternmost periphery of the Iranian world, too had once been under coastal administration of the Sasanian Empire (226-651), which consequently maintained outposts there. Even following the loss of Sindh, the Iranians continued to play a major role in the trade links between the east and west. The 9th-century Arab historiographer Al-Masudi briefly notes Zoroastrians with fire temples in al-Hind and in al-Sindh. There is evidence of individual Parsis residing in Sindh in the tenth and twelfth centuries, but the current modern community is thought to date from British arrival in Sindh. Moreover, for the Iranians, the harbours of Gujarat lay on the maritime routes that complemented the overland Silk Road and there were extensive trade relations between the two regions. The contact between Iranians and Indians was already well established even prior to the Common Era, and both the Puranas and the \"Mahabharata\" use the term \"Parasikas\" to refer to the peoples west of the Indus River.\n\"Parsi legends regarding their ancestors' migration to India depict a beleaguered band of religious refugees escaping the new rule post the Muslim conquests in order to preserve their ancient faith.\" However, while Parsi settlements definitely arose along the western coast of the Indian subcontinent following the Arab conquest of Iran, it is not possible to state with certainty that these migrations occurred as a result of religious persecution against Zoroastrians. If the \"traditional\" 8th century date (as deduced from the \"Qissa\") is considered valid, it must be assumed \"that the migration began while Zoroastrianism was still the predominant religion in Iran and economic factors predominated the initial decision to migrate.\" This would have been particularly the case if \u2013 as the \"Qissa\" suggests \u2013 the first Parsis originally came from the north-east (i.e. Central Asia) and had previously been dependent on Silk Road trade. Even so, in the 17th century, Henry Lord, a chaplain with the English East India Company, noted that the Parsis came to India seeking \"liberty of conscience\" but simultaneously arrived as \"merchantmen bound for the shores of India, in course of trade and merchandise.\"\nEarly years.\nThe \"Qissa\" has little to say about the events that followed the establishment of Sanjan, and restricts itself to a brief note on the establishment of the \"Fire of Victory\" (Middle Persian: \"Atash Bahram\") at Sanjan and its subsequent move to Navsari. According to Dhalla, the next several centuries were \"full of hardships\" (\"sic\") before Zoroastrianism \"gained a real foothold in India and secured for its adherents some means of livelihood in this new country of their adoption\".\nTwo centuries after their landing, the Parsis began to settle in other parts of Gujarat, which led to \"difficulties in defining the limits of priestly jurisdiction\". These problems were resolved by 1290 through the division of Gujarat into five \"panthak\"s (districts), each under the jurisdiction of one priestly family and their descendants. (Continuing disputes regarding jurisdiction over the \"Atash Bahram\" led to the fire being moved to Udvada in 1742, where today jurisdiction is shared in rotation among the five \"panthak\" families.)\nInscriptions at the Kanheri Caves near Mumbai suggest that at least until the early 11th century, Middle Persian was still the literary language of the hereditary Zoroastrian priesthood. Nonetheless, aside from the \"Qissa\" and the Kanheri inscriptions, there is little evidence of the Parsis until the 12th and 13th century, when \"masterly\" Sanskrit translations and transcriptions of the Avesta and its commentaries began to be prepared. From these translations Dhalla infers that \"religious studies were prosecuted with great zeal at this period\" and that the command of Middle Persian and Sanskrit among the clerics \"was of a superior order\".\nFrom the 13th century to the late 16th century, the Zoroastrian priests of Gujarat sent (in all) twenty-two requests for religious guidance to their co-religionists in Iran, presumably because they considered the Iranian Zoroastrians \"better informed on religious matters than themselves, and must have preserved the old-time tradition more faithfully than they themselves did\". These transmissions and their replies \u2013 assiduously preserved by the community as the \"rivayat\"s (epistles) \u2013 span the years 1478\u20131766 and deal with both religious and social subjects. From a superficial 21st century point of view, some of these \"ithoter\" (\"questions\") are remarkably trivial \u2013 for instance, \"Rivayat\" 376: whether ink prepared by a non-Zoroastrian is suitable for copying Avestan language texts \u2013 but they provide a discerning insight into the fears and anxieties of the early modern Zoroastrians. Thus, the question of the ink is symptomatic of the fear of assimilation and the loss of identity, a theme that dominates the questions posed and continues to be an issue into the 21st century. So also the question of conversion of \"Juddin\"s (non-Zoroastrians) to Zoroastrianism, to which the reply (R237, R238) was: acceptable, even meritorious.\nNonetheless, \"the precarious condition in which they lived for a considerable period made it impracticable for them to keep up their former proselytizing zeal. The instinctive fear of disintegration and absorption in the vast multitudes among whom they lived created in them a spirit of exclusiveness and a strong desire to preserve the racial characteristics and distinctive features of their community. Living in an atmosphere surcharged with the Hindu caste system, they felt that their own safety lay in encircling their fold by rigid caste barriers\". Even so, at some point (possibly shortly after their arrival in India), the Zoroastrians \u2013 perhaps determining that the social stratification that they had brought with them was unsustainable in the small community \u2013 did away with all but the hereditary priesthood (called the \"asronih\" in Sassanid Iran). The remaining estates \u2013 the \"(r)atheshtarih\" (nobility, soldiers, and civil servants), \"vastaryoshih\" (farmers and herdsmen), \"hutokshih\" (artisans and labourers) \u2013 were folded into an all-comprehensive class today known as the \"behdini\" (\"followers of \"daena\"\", for which \"good religion\" is one translation). This change would have far reaching consequences. For one, it opened the gene pool to some extent since until that time inter-class marriages were exceedingly rare (this would continue to be a problem for the priesthood until the 20th century). For another, it did away with the boundaries along occupational lines, a factor that would endear the Parsis to the 18th- and 19th-century colonial authorities who had little patience for the unpredictable complications of the Hindu caste system (such as when a clerk from one caste would not deal with a clerk from another).\nAge of opportunity.\nFollowing the commercial treaty in the early 17th century between Mughal emperor Jahangir and James I of England, the East India Company obtained the exclusive rights to reside and build factories in Surat and other areas. Many Parsis, who until then had been living in farming communities throughout Gujarat, moved to the English-run settlements to take the new jobs offered. In 1668 the English East India Company leased the Seven Islands of Bombay from Charles II of England. The company found the deep harbour on the east coast of the islands to be ideal for setting up their first port in the sub-continent, and in 1687 they transferred their headquarters from Surat to the fledgling settlement. The Parsis followed and soon began to occupy posts of trust in connection with government and public works.\nWhere literacy had previously been the exclusive domain of the priesthood, in the era of the British Raj, the British schools in India provided the new Parsi youth with the means not only to learn to read and write but also to be educated in the greater sense of the term and become familiar with the quirks of the British establishment. These capabilities were enormously useful to Parsis since they allowed them to \"represent themselves as being like the British,\" which they did \"more diligently and effectively than perhaps any other South Asian community\". While the colonial authorities often saw the other Indians \"as passive, ignorant, irrational, outwardly submissive but inwardly guileful\", the Parsis were seen to have the traits that the authorities tended to ascribe to themselves. Johan Albrecht de Mandelslo (1638) saw them as \"diligent\", \"conscientious\", and \"skillful\" in their mercantile pursuits. Similar observations would be made by James Mackintosh, Recorder of Bombay from 1804 to 1811, who noted that \"the Parsees are a small remnant of one of the mightiest nations of the ancient world, who, flying from persecution into India, were for many ages lost in obscurity and poverty, till at length they met a just government under which they speedily rose to be one of the most popular mercantile bodies in Asia\".\nOne of these was an enterprising agent named Rustom Maneck. In 1702, Maneck, who had probably already amassed a fortune under the Dutch and Portuguese, was appointed the first broker to the East India Company (acquiring the name \"Seth\" in the process), and in the following years \"he and his Parsi associates widened the occupational and financial horizons of the larger Parsi community\". Thus, by the mid-18th century, the brokerage houses of the Bombay Presidency were almost all in Parsi hands. As James Forbes, the Collector of Broach (now Bharuch), would note in his \"Oriental Memoirs\" (1770): \"many of the principal merchants and owners of ships at Bombay and Surat are Parsees.\" \"Active, robust, prudent and persevering, they now form a very valuable part of the Company's subjects on the western shores of Hindustan where they are highly esteemed\".In the 18th century, Parsis with their skills in ship building and trade greatly benefited with trade between India and China. The trade was mainly in timber, silk, cotton and opium. For example Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy acquired most of his wealth through trade in cotton and opium Gradually certain families \"acquired wealth and prominence (Sorabji, Modi, Cama, Wadia, Jeejeebhoy, Readymoney, Dadyseth, Petit, Patel, Mehta, Allbless, Tata, etc.), many of which would be noted for their participation in the public life of the city, and for their various educational, industrial, and charitable enterprises.\").\nThrough his largesse, Maneck helped establish the infrastructure that was necessary for the Parsis to set themselves up in Bombay and in doing so \"established Bombay as the primary centre of Parsi habitation and work in the 1720s\". Following the political and economic isolation of Surat in the 1720s and 1730s that resulted from troubles between the (remnant) Mughal authorities and the increasingly dominant Marathas, a number of Parsi families from Surat migrated to the new city. While in 1700 \"fewer than a handful of individuals appear as merchants in any records; by mid-century, Parsis engaged in commerce constituted one of important commercial groups in Bombay\". Maneck's generosity is incidentally also the first documented instance of Parsi philanthropy. In 1689, Anglican chaplain John Ovington reported that in Surat the family \"assist the poor and are ready to provide for the sustenance and comfort of such as want it. Their universal kindness, either employing such as are ready and able to work, or bestowing a seasonable bounteous charity to such as are infirm and miserable, leave no man destitute of relief, nor suffer a beggar in all their tribe\".\nIn 1728 Rustom's eldest son Naoroz (later Naorojee) founded the Bombay Parsi Panchayet (in the sense of an instrument for self-governance and not in the sense of the trust it is today) to assist newly arriving Parsis in religious, social, legal and financial matters. Using their vast resources, the Maneck Seth family gave their time, energy and not inconsiderable financial resources to the Parsi community, with the result that by the mid-18th century, the Panchayat was the accepted means for Parsis to cope with the exigencies of urban life and the recognized instrument for regulating the affairs of the community. Nonetheless, by 1838 the Panchayat was under attack for impropriety and nepotism. In 1855 the \"Bombay Times\" noted that the Panchayat was utterly without the moral or legal authority to enforce its statutes (the \"Bundobusts\" or codes of conduct) and the council soon ceased to be considered representative of the community. In the wake of a July 1856 ruling by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council that it had no jurisdiction over the Parsis in matters of marriage and divorce, the Panchayat was reduced to little more than a Government-recognized \"Parsi Matrimonial Court\". Although the Panchayat would eventually be reestablished as the administrator of community property, it ultimately ceased to be an instrument for self-governance.\nAt about the same time as the role of the Panchayat was declining, a number of other institutions arose that would replace the Panchayat's role in contributing to the sense of social cohesiveness that the community desperately sought. By the mid-19th century, the Parsis were keenly aware that their numbers were declining and saw education as a possible solution to the problem. In 1842 Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy established the Parsi Benevolent Fund with the aim of improving, through education, the condition of the impoverished Parsis still living in Surat and its environs. In 1849 the Parsis established their first school (co-educational, which was a novelty at the time, but would soon be split into separate schools for boys and girls) and the education movement quickened. The number of Parsi schools multiplied, but other schools and colleges were also freely attended. Accompanied by better education and social cohesiveness, the community's sense of distinctiveness grew, and in 1854 Dinshaw Maneckji Petit founded the Persian Zoroastrian Amelioration Fund with the aim of improving conditions for his less fortunate co-religionists in Iran. The fund succeeded in convincing a number of Iranian Zoroastrians to emigrate to India (where they are known today as Iranis) and the efforts of its emissary Maneckji Limji Hataria were instrumental in obtaining a remission of the jizya for their co-religionists in 1882.\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries, the Parsis had emerged as \"the foremost people in India in matters educational, industrial, and social. They came in the vanguard of progress, amassed vast fortunes, and munificently gave away large sums in charity\". Near the end of the 19th century, the total number of Parsis in colonial India was 85,397, of which 48,507 lived in Bombay, constituting around 6.7% of the total population of the city, according to the 1881 census. This would be the last time that the Parsis would be considered a numerically significant minority in the city.\nNonetheless, the legacy of the 19th century was a sense of self-awareness as a community. The typically Parsi cultural symbols of the 17th and 18th centuries such as language (a Parsi variant of Gujarati), arts, crafts, and sartorial habits developed into Parsi theatre, literature, newspapers, magazines, and schools. The Parsis now ran community medical centres, ambulance corps, Scouting troops, clubs, and Masonic Lodges. They had their own charitable foundations, housing estates, legal institutions, courts, and governance. They were no longer weavers and petty merchants, but now were established and ran banks, mills, heavy industry, shipyards, and shipping companies. Moreover, even while maintaining their own cultural identity they did not fail to recognize themselves as nationally Indian, as Dadabhai Naoroji, the first Asian to occupy a seat in the British Parliament would note: \"Whether I am a Hindu, a Mohammedan, a Parsi, a Christian, or of any other creed, I am above all an Indian. Our country is India; our nationality is Indian\". While having an outsized role in the Indian independence movement, the majority of Parsis opposed the partition of undivided India.\nIndian Air Force Service.\nParsis have made significant contributions to India's defence services, particularly the Indian Air Force. Notable officers such as Air Vice Marshal Minoo Merwan Engineer, Air Marshal Aspy Engineer, and Air VMarshal Adi Rustom Ghandhi exemplify the community's presence across ranks, from combat pilots to senior leadership. The cultural symbolism of the Faravahar, associated with Zoroastrianism, has been metaphorically linked to the community's affinity for flight.\nChange in religious education.\nIn the 1860s and 1870s, the linguist Martin Haug interpreted Zoroastrian scripture in Christian terms, and compared the \"yazata\"s to the angels of Christianity. In this scheme, the Amesha Spentas are the arch-angel retinue of Ahura Mazda, with the \"hamkars\" as the supporting host of lesser angels.\nAt the time Haug wrote his translations, the Parsi (i.e. Indian Zoroastrian) community was under intense pressure from English and American missionaries, who severely criticized the Zoroastrians for\u2014as John Wilson portrayed it in 1843\u2014\"polytheism\", which the missionaries argued was of much lesser worth than their own \"monotheism\". At the time, Zoroastrianism lacked theologians of its own, and so the Zoroastrians were poorly equipped to make their own case. In this situation, Haug's counter-interpretation came as a welcome relief, and was (by-and-large) gratefully accepted as legitimate.\nHaug's interpretations were subsequently disseminated as Zoroastrian ones, which then eventually reached the west where they were seen to corroborate Haug. Like most of Haug's interpretations, this comparison is today so well entrenched that a gloss of 'yazata' as 'angel' is almost universally accepted; both in publications intended for a general audience as well as in (non-philological) academic literature.\nThe migration of Parsis to India caused a lack of religious knowledge, which led to doubts in several matters, which made them send men to Iran during the Muslim rule in order to learn the religion from the Zoroastrians in Iran. However, according to the orientalist Arthur Christensen and several Arab historians, the Zoroastrian doctrine changed after the fall of the Sassanid state because the Zoroastrian clerics tried to save their religion from extinction by modifying it to resemble the religion of the Muslims. So that the Zoroastrians would not have a reason to convert to Islam, but this did not succeed in preventing the Zoroastrians from converting to Islam, and it also caused the emergence of a new version of Zoroastrianism that resembled Islam and differed from Zoroastrianism in the Sassanid era.\nThe main components of Zoroastrianism as practiced by the Parsi community are the concepts of purity and pollution (nasu), initiation (navjot), daily prayers, worship at Fire Temples, marriage, funerals, and general worship via practicing good thoughts, words and deeds.\nReligious practices.\nPurity and pollution.\nThe balance between good and evil is correlated to the idea of purity and pollution. Purity is held to be of the very essence of godliness. Pollution's very point is to destroy purity through the death of a human. In order to adhere to purity it is the duty of Parsis to continue to preserve purity within their body as God created them. A Zoroastrian priest spends his entire life dedicated to following a holy life.\nFasting.\nFasting in Zoroastrianism is considered forbidden because it weakens the body and that is sin in Zoroastrianism, and many followers hate fasting, but the Parsees were influenced by the Hindus, who took the idea of fasting at a funeral.\n\"Navjote\".\nZoroastrians are not initiated by infant baptism. Children are initiated into the faith when they are old enough to recite some required prayers along with the priest at the time of the navjote ceremony, ideally before they reach puberty. Though there is no actual age by which a child must be initiated into the faith (preferably after seven years), Navjote cannot be performed on an adult. While the Parsi traditionally do not do adult Navjote (except in cases where it is performed for descendants of Parsi wanting to join the faith), the Iranian Zoroastrian equivalent, the sedreh-pushti can be done at any age for those wanting to convert.\nThe initiation begins with a ritual bath, then a spiritual cleansing prayer; the child changes into white pajama pants, a shawl, and a small cap. Following introductory prayers, the child is given the sacred items that are associated with Zoroastrianism: a sacred shirt and cord, sudre, and kusti. The child then faces the main priest and fire is brought in to represent God. Once the priest finishes with the prayers, the child's initiation is complete and he or she has become part of the community and religion.\nMarriage.\nMarriage is very important to the members of the Parsi community, believing that in order to continue the expansion of God's kingdom they must procreate. Up until the mid-19th century child marriages were common even though the idea of child marriage was not part of the religious doctrine. Consequently, when social reform started happening in India, the Parsi community discontinued the practice. There are, however, rising problems over the availability of brides. More and more women in the Parsi community are becoming well educated and are therefore either delaying marriage or not partaking at all. Women within the Parsi community in India are 97% literate; 42% have completed high school or college and 29% have an occupation in which they earn a substantial amount of money. The wedding ceremony begins much like the initiation with a cleansing bath. The bride and groom then travel to the wedding in florally decorated cars. The priests from both families facilitate the wedding. The couple begin by facing one another with a sheet to block their view of each another. Wool is passed over the two seven times to bind them together. The two are then supposed to throw rice to their partner symbolizing dominance. The religious element comes in next when the two sit side by side to face the priest.\nFunerals.\nThe pollution that is associated with death has to be handled carefully. A separate part of the home is designated to house the corpse for funeral proceedings before being taken away. The priest comes to say prayers that are for the cleansing of sins and to affirm the faith of the deceased. Fire is brought to the room and prayers are begun. The body is washed and inserted clean within a sudre and kusti. The ceremony then begins, and a circle is drawn around the body into which only the bearers may enter. As they proceed to the cemetery they walk in pairs and are connected by white fabric. A dog is essential in the funeral process because it is able to see death. The body is taken to the tower of death where the vultures feed on it. Once the bones are bleached by the sun they are pushed into the circular opening in the center. The mourning process is four days long, and rather than creating graves for the dead, charities are established in honor of the person.\nTemples.\nZoroastrian festivals were originally held outside in the open air; temples were not common until later. Most of the temples were built by wealthy Parsis who needed centers that housed purity. As stated before, fire is considered to represent the presence of Ahura Mazda, and there are two distinct differences for the types of fire for the different temples. The first type of temple is the Atash Behram, which is the highest level of fire. The fire is prepared for an entire year before it can be installed, and once it is, it is cared for to the highest possible degree. There are only eight such temples located within India. The second type of fire temple is called a Dar-i Mihr, and the preparation process is not as intense. There are about 160 of these located throughout India.\nFactions within the community.\nCalendrical differences.\nUntil about the 12th century, all Zoroastrians followed the same 365-day religious calendar, which had remained largely unmodified since the calendar reforms of Ardashir I (\"r.\" 226-241 AD). Since that calendar did not compensate for the fractional days that go to make up a full solar year, with time it was no longer accordant with the seasons.\nSometime between 1125 and 1250 (\"cf.\" ), the Parsis inserted an embolismic month to level out the accumulating fractional days. However, the Parsis were the only Zoroastrians to do so (and did it only once), with the result that, from then on, the calendar in use by the Parsis and the calendar in use by Zoroastrians elsewhere diverged by a matter of thirty days. The calendars still had the same name, \"Shahenshahi\" (imperial), presumably because none were aware that the calendars were no longer the same.\nIn 1745 the Parsis in and around Surat switched to the \"Kadmi\" or \"Kadimi\" calendar on the recommendation of their priests who were convinced that the calendar in use in the ancient homeland must be correct. Moreover, they denigrated the \"Shahenshahi\" calendar as being \"royalist\".\nIn 1906 attempts to bring the two factions together resulted in the introduction of a third calendar based on an 11th-century Seljuk model: the \"Fasili\", or \"Fasli\", calendar had leap days intercalated every four years and it had a New Year's day that fell on the day of the vernal equinox. Although it was the only calendar always in harmony with the seasons, most members of the Parsi community rejected it on the grounds that it was not in accord with the injunctions expressed in Zoroastrian tradition (\"D\u0113nkard\" 3.419).\nToday the majority of Parsis are adherents of the Parsi version of the \"Shahenshahi\" calendar although the \"Kadmi\" calendar does have its adherents among the Parsi communities of Surat and Bharuch. The \"Fasli\" calendar does not have a significant following among Parsis, but, by virtue of being compatible with the \"Bastani\" calendar (an Iranian development with the same salient features as the \"Fasli\" calendar), it is predominant among the Zoroastrians of Iran.\nEffect of the calendar disputes.\nSince some of the Avesta prayers contain references to the names of the months, and some other prayers are used only at specific times of the year, the issue of which calendar is \"correct\" also has theological ramifications.\nTo further complicate matters, in the late 18th century (or early 19th century) a highly influential head-priest and staunch proponent of the \"Kadmi\" calendar, Phiroze Kaus Dastur of the Dadyseth Atash-Behram in Bombay, became convinced that the pronunciation of prayers as recited by visitors from Iran was correct, while the pronunciation as used by the Parsis was not. He accordingly went on to alter some (but not all) of the prayers, which in due course came to be accepted by all adherents of the \"Kadmi\" calendar as the more ancient (and thus presumably correct). However, scholars of Avestan language and linguistics attribute the difference in pronunciation to a vowel-shift that occurred only in Iran and that the Iranian pronunciation as adopted by the \"Kadmi\"s is actually more recent than the pronunciation used by the non-\"Kadmi\" Parsis.\nThe calendar disputes were not always purely academic, either. In the 1780s, emotions over the controversy ran so high that violence occasionally erupted. In 1783 a \"Shahenshahi\" resident of Bharuch named Homaji Jamshedji was sentenced to death for kicking a young \"Kadmi\" woman and so causing her to miscarry.\nOf the eight Atash-Behrams (the highest grade of fire temple) in India, three follow the \"Kadmi\" pronunciation and calendar, the other five are \"Shahenshahi\". The \"Fassali\"s do not have their own Atash-Behram.\n\"Ilm-e-Khshnoom\".\nThe \"Ilm-e-Kshnoom\" ('science of ecstasy', or 'science of bliss') is a school of Parsi-Zoroastrian philosophy based on a mystic and esoteric, rather than literal, interpretation of religious texts. According to adherents of the sect, they are followers of the Zoroastrian faith as preserved by a clan of 2,000 individuals called the \"Saheb-e-Dilan\" ('Masters of the Heart') who are said to live in complete isolation in the mountainous recesses of the Caucasus (alternatively, in the Alborz range, around Mount Damavand).\nThere are few obvious indications that a Parsi might be a follower of the Kshnoom. Although their \"Kusti\" prayers are very similar to those used by the \"Fassali\"s, like the rest of the Parsi community the followers of Kshnoom are divided with respect to which calendar they observe. There are also other minor differences in their recitation of the liturgy, such as repetition of some sections of the longer prayers. Nonetheless, the Kshnoom are extremely conservative in their ideology and prefer isolation even with respect to other Parsis.\nThe largest community of followers of the Kshnoom lives in Jogeshwari, a suburb of Bombay, where they have their own fire temple (Behramshah Nowroji Shroff Daremeher), their own housing colony (Behram Baug) and their own newspaper (\"Parsi Pukar\"). There is a smaller concentration of adherents in Surat, where the sect was founded in the last decades of the 19th century.\nIssues relating to the deceased.\nIt has been traditional, in Mumbai and Karachi at least, for dead Parsis to be taken to the Towers of Silence where the corpses are quickly eaten by the city's vultures. The reason given for this practice is that earth, fire, and water are considered sacred elements which should not be defiled by the dead. Therefore, burial and cremation have always been prohibited in Parsi culture. However, in modern day Mumbai and Karachi the population of vultures has drastically reduced due to extensive urbanization and the unintended consequence of treating humans and livestock with antibiotics, and the anti-inflammatory diclofenac, which harm vultures and have led to the Indian vulture crisis. As a result, the bodies of the deceased are taking much longer to decompose. Solar panels have been installed in the Towers of Silence to speed up the decomposition process, but this has been only partially successful especially during monsoons. In Peshawar, a Parsi graveyard was established in the late 19th century, which still exists; this cemetery is unique as there is no Tower of Silence. Nevertheless, the majority of Parsis still use the traditional method of disposing of their loved ones and consider this as the last act of charity by the deceased on earth.\nThe Tower of Silence in Mumbai is located at Doongerwadi at Malabar Hill. In Karachi, the Tower of Silence is located in Parsi Colony, near the Chanesar Goth and Mehmoodabad localities.\nArchaeogenetics.\nGenealogical DNA tests have brought mixed results. Some studies support the Parsi contention that they have maintained their Persian roots by avoiding intermarriage with local populations.\nA study published in \"Genome Biology\" based on high density SNP data has shown that the Parsis are genetically closer to Iranian populations than to their South Asian neighbours. They also share the highest number of haplotypes with present-day Iranians; the admixture of the Parsis with Indian populations was estimated to have occurred approximately 1,200 years ago. It is also found that Parsis are genetically closer to Neolithic Iranians than to modern Iranians who had recently received some genes from the Near East.\nIn that 2002 study of the Y-chromosome (patrilineal) DNA of the Parsis of Pakistan, it was determined that Parsis are genetically closer to Iranians than to their neighbours. A 2023 study was the first to delve deeply into maternal ancestry with high-resolution mitochondrial markers. They conducted a detailed phylogenetic analysis to infer their maternal genetic affinity. This revealed the Parsi mitogenomes, characterized by the mtDNA haplogroup M3a1 + 204, share a clade with both Middle Eastern and South Asian modern individuals in both the Maximum Likelihood tree and Bayesian phylogenetic tree. This haplogroup was also prevalent among the medieval Swat valley population and was observed in two Roopkund A individuals. In the phylogenetic network, these samples share a haplotype with both South Asian and Middle Eastern samples. Thus, the maternal ancestry of the first Parsi settlers includes genetic components similar to South Asian and Middle Eastern populations.\nIn 2017, a research study discovered that Parsis exhibit a stronger genetic affinity with Neolithic Iranians than with modern Iranians, who have experienced more recent admixture from the Near East. The study also identified 48% of South-Asian-specific mitochondrial lineages in ancient samples, which could be attributed to the assimilation of local females during the initial settlement or may be representative of mitochondrial lineages that have become extinct in Iran. That would make the population genetics of Parsis about 3/4 Iranian and 1/4 Indian.\nThe genetic studies of Parsis of Pakistan show sharp contrast between genetic data obtained from mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and Y-chromosome DNA (Y-DNA), different from most populations. Historical records suggest that they had moved from Iran to India, first to Gujarat and then to Mumbai and Karachi. According to Y-DNA, they resemble the Iranian population, which supports historical records. When the mtDNA pool is compared to Iranians and Gujaratis (their putative parental populations), it contrasted Y-DNA data. Parsis have a high frequency of haplogroup M (55%), similar to Indians, which is just 1.7% in the combined Iranian sample. According to the research findings, there is a noticeable contrast between the maternal and paternal components of the Parsi population. Despite their small population size, the high diversity observed in both the Y-DNA and mtDNA lineages suggests that a strong drift effect is improbable. The studies suggest a male-mediated migration of Parsi ancestors from Iran to Gujarat where they admixed with the local female population during initial settlements, which ultimately resulted in loss of Iranian mtDNA.\nThe absence of lung cancer-related DNA mutational signals among Parsis both point to the community's distinctive non-smoking social practises, which have been practised for millennia. Additionally, Parsis have high prevalence of longevity as a genetic feature. Parsis have however been shown to have high rates of breast cancer, bladder cancer, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and Parkinson's disease.\nNotable Parsi people.\nD. L. Sheth, the former director of the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS), lists Indian communities that constituted the middle class and were traditionally \"urban and professional\" (following professions such as doctors, lawyers, teachers, engineers, etc.) immediately after Indian partition in 1947. This list included the Kashmiri Pandits, the Nagar Brahmins from Gujarat, the Brahmins from Southern India, the Punjabi Khatris and Kayastha from northern India, the Chitpavans and CKPs from Maharashtra; Bengali Probasis and Bhadraloks, the Parsis, as well as the upper echelons of the Indian Muslim and Indian Christian communities throughout the country. According to Pavan K. Varma, \"Education was a common thread that bound together this pan-Indian elite\"; almost all of the members of these communities could read and write in English and were educated beyond regular schooling institutions.\nThe Parsis have made considerable contributions to the history and development of India, all the more remarkable considering their small numbers. As the maxim \"Parsi, thy name is charity\" alludes to, their most prominent contribution is their philanthropy.\nAlthough their people's name Parsi comes from the Persian-language word for a Persian person, in Sanskrit the term means \"one who gives alms\".\nMahatma Gandhi would note in a much misquoted statement, \"I am proud of my country, India, for having produced the splendid Zoroastrian stock, in numbers beneath contempt, but in charity and philanthropy perhaps unequaled and certainly unsurpassed.\"\nSeveral landmarks in Mumbai are named after Parsis, including Nariman Point. The Malabar Hill in Mumbai, is a home to several prominent Parsis. Parsis prominent in the Indian independence movement include Pherozeshah Mehta, Dadabhai Naoroji, and Bhikaiji Cama.\nParticularly notable Parsis in the fields of science and industry include physicist Homi J. Bhabha, nuclear scientist Homi N. Sethna, industrialists J. R. D. Tata and Jamsetji Tata, regarded as the \"Father of Indian Industry\", and construction tycoon Pallonji Mistry. The families Godrej, Mistry family, Tata, Petit, Cowasjee, Poonawalla, and Wadia are important industrial Parsi families.\nOther notable Parsi business persons include Ratan Tata, Cyrus Mistry, Ratanji Dadabhoy Tata, Dinshaw Maneckji Petit, Ness Wadia, Neville Wadia, Jehangir Wadia and Nusli Wadia\u2014all of them related through marriage to Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan. Mohammad Ali Jinnah's wife Rattanbai Petit, was born into two of the Parsi Petit\u2013Tata families, and their daughter Dina Jinnah was married to Parsi industrialist Neville Wadia, the scion of the Wadia family. Other notable businessmen include Cyrus Poonawalla and his son Adar Poonawalla. The husband of Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and son-in-law of Jawaharlal Nehru, Feroze Gandhi, was a Parsi with ancestral roots in Bharuch.\nThe Parsi community has given India several distinguished military officers. Field Marshal Sam Hormusji Framji Jamshedji Manekshaw, Military Cross, the architect of India's victory in the 1971 war, was the first officer of the Indian Army to be appointed a Field Marshal. Admiral Jal Cursetji was the first Parsi to be appointed Chief of the Naval Staff of the Indian Navy. Air Marshal Aspy Engineer served as India's second Chief of Air Staff, post-independence, and Air Chief Marshal Fali Homi Major served as the 18th Chief of Air Staff. Vice Admiral RF Contractor served as the 17th Chief of the Indian Coast Guard. Lieutenant Colonel Ardeshir Burjorji Tarapore was killed in action in the 1965 Indo-Pakistan war and was posthumously awarded the Param Vir Chakra, India's highest military award for gallantry in action.\nThe Parsi community has produced several notable sports figures who have made significant contributions to their respective fields. In cricket, Nari Contractor, Rusi Modi, Farokh Engineer and Polly Umrigar were renowned for their exceptional skills and leadership. In music, rock musician Freddie Mercury; composer Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji; conductor Zubin Mehta.\nIn literature and journalism, they boast authors Rohinton Mistry, Firdaus Kanga, Bapsi Sidhwa, Ardashir Vakil, and investigative journalists Ardeshir Cowasjee, Russi Karanjia, and Behram Contractor. The film industry features screenwriter and photographer Sooni Taraporevala, actors Boman Irani, Erick Avari, actresses Nina Wadia and Persis Khambatta, and Thailand's cinematic pioneer Rattana Pestonji.\nEducational and legal achievements include educator Jamshed Bharucha, suffragist, cultural studies theorist Homi K. Bhabha, and first female barrister Mithan Jamshed Lam, Pakistan's first Parsi Supreme Court Justice Dorab Patel, and constitutional experts Fali S. Nariman and Nani Ardeshir Palkhivala, along with former Attorney-General of India Soli Sorabjee, and Supreme Court Justice Rohinton F. Nariman, India's first female photojournalist, Homai Vyarawalla, also hails from this community, as does Naxalite leader and intellectual Kobad Ghandy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43713", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43713", "title": "Parsee", "text": ""}
{"id": "43715", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43715", "title": "John McCain", "text": "American politician and naval officer (1936\u20132018)\nJohn Sidney McCain III (August 29, 1936\u00a0\u2013 August 25, 2018) was an American politician and naval officer who represented Arizona in the United States Congress for over 35 years, first as a U.S. representative from 1983 to 1987, then as a U.S. senator from 1987 until his death in 2018. A member of the Republican Party, he was the party's nominee in the 2008 presidential election.\nBorn into the prominent McCain family in the Panama Canal Zone, McCain graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy in 1958 and received a commission in the U.S. Navy. He became a naval aviator and flew ground-attack aircraft from aircraft carriers. During the Vietnam War, he almost died in the 1967 USS \"Forrestal\" fire. While on a bombing mission during Operation Rolling Thunder over Hanoi in October 1967, McCain was shot down, seriously injured, and captured by the North Vietnamese. He was a prisoner of war until 1973. McCain experienced episodes of torture and refused an out-of-sequence early release. He sustained wounds that left him with lifelong physical disabilities. McCain retired from the Navy as a captain in 1981 and moved to Arizona.\nIn 1982, McCain was elected to the House of Representatives, where he served two terms. Four years later, he was elected to the Senate, where he served six terms. While generally adhering to conservative principles, McCain also gained a reputation as a \"maverick\" for his willingness to break from his party on certain issues, including LGBT rights, gun regulations, and campaign finance reform where his stances were more moderate than those of the party's base. McCain was investigated and largely exonerated in a political influence scandal of the 1980s as one of the Keating Five. He then made regulating the financing of political campaigns one of his signature concerns, which eventually resulted in the passage of the McCain\u2013Feingold Act in 2002. With Russ Feingold, McCain would receive the 1999 John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Award. He was also known for his work in the 1990s to restore diplomatic relations with Vietnam. McCain chaired the Senate Commerce Committee from 1997 to 2001 and 2003 to 2005, where he opposed pork barrel spending and earmarks. He belonged to the bipartisan \"Gang of 14\", which played a key role in alleviating a crisis over judicial nominations.\nMcCain entered the race for the 2000 Republican presidential nomination, but lost a heated primary season contest to George W. Bush. He secured the 2008 Republican presidential nomination, beating fellow candidates Mitt Romney and Mike Huckabee, though he lost the general election to Barack Obama. McCain subsequently adopted more orthodox conservative stances and attitudes and largely opposed actions of the Obama administration, especially with regard to foreign policy matters. In 2015, he became Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee. He refused to support Donald Trump in the 2016 presidential election and later became a vocal critic of the first Trump administration. While McCain opposed the Obama-era Affordable Care Act (ACA), he cast the deciding vote against the American Health Care Act of 2017, which would have partially repealed the ACA. After being diagnosed with glioblastoma in 2017, he reduced his role in the Senate to focus on treatment, dying from the disease in 2018.\nEarly life and military career (1936\u20131981).\nEarly life and education.\nJohn Sidney McCain III was born on August 29, 1936, at Coco Solo Naval Air Station in the Panama Canal Zone, to naval officer John S. McCain Jr. and Roberta Wright McCain. He had an older sister, Sandy, and a younger brother, Joe. At that time, the Panama Canal was under U.S. control.\nHis father and his paternal grandfather, John S. McCain Sr., were also Naval Academy graduates and both became four-star admirals in the United States Navy. In addition, his grand-uncle William A. McCain and great grand-uncle Henry Pinckney McCain served as general officers in the United States Army. The McCain family moved with their father as he took various naval postings in the United States and in the Pacific. As a result, the younger McCain attended a total of about 20 schools. In 1951, the family settled in Northern Virginia, and McCain attended Episcopal High School, a private preparatory boarding school in Alexandria. He excelled at wrestling and graduated in 1954. He referred to himself as an Episcopalian as recently as June 2007, after which date he said he came to identify as a Baptist.\nFollowing in the footsteps of his father and grandfather, McCain entered the United States Naval Academy, where he was a friend and informal leader for many of his classmates and sometimes stood up for targets of bullying. He also fought as a lightweight boxer. He earned the nickname \"John Wayne\" \"for his attitude and popularity with the opposite sex.\" McCain did well in academic subjects that interested him, such as literature and history, but studied only enough to pass subjects that gave him difficulty, such as mathematics. He came into conflict with higher-ranking personnel and did not always obey the rules. \"He collected demerits the way some people collect stamps.\" His class rank (894 of 899) was not indicative of his intelligence nor his Intelligence quotient (IQ), which had been tested to be 128 and 133. McCain graduated in 1958.\nNaval training, first marriage, and Vietnam War assignment.\nMcCain began his early military career when he was commissioned as an ensign, and started two and a half years of training at Pensacola to become a naval aviator. While there, he earned a reputation as a man who partied. He completed flight school in 1960, and became a naval pilot of ground-attack aircraft; he was assigned to A-1 Skyraider squadrons aboard the aircraft carriers and in the Caribbean and Mediterranean Seas. McCain began as a sub-par flier who was at times careless and reckless; during the early to mid-1960s, two of his flight missions crashed, and a third mission collided with power lines, but he received no major injuries. His aviation skills improved over time, and he was seen as a good pilot, albeit one who tended to \"push the envelope\" in his flying.\nOn July 3, 1965, McCain was 28 when he married Carol Shepp, who had worked as a runway model and secretary. McCain adopted her two young children, Douglas and Andrew. He and Carol then had a daughter, Sidney. The same year, he was a one-day champion on the game show \"Jeopardy\"!\nMcCain requested a combat assignment, and was assigned to the aircraft carrier flying A-4 Skyhawks. His combat duty began in mid-1967, when \"Forrestal\" was assigned to a bombing campaign, Operation Rolling Thunder, during the Vietnam War. Stationed in the Gulf of Tonkin, McCain and his fellow pilots became frustrated by micromanagement from Washington; he later wrote, \"In all candor, we thought our civilian commanders were complete idiots who didn't have the least notion of what it took to win the war.\"\nOn July 29, 1967, McCain was a lieutenant commander when he was near the center of the USS \"Forrestal\" fire. He escaped from his burning jet and was trying to help another pilot escape when a bomb exploded; McCain was struck in the legs and chest by fragments. The ensuing fire killed 134\u00a0sailors. With the \"Forrestal\" out of commission, McCain volunteered for assignment with the , another carrier employed in Operation Rolling Thunder. There, he was awarded the Navy Commendation Medal and the Bronze Star Medal for missions flown over North Vietnam.\nPrisoner of war.\nMcCain was taken prisoner of war on October 26, 1967. He was flying his 23rd bombing mission over North Vietnam when his A-4E Skyhawk was shot down by a missile over Hanoi. McCain fractured both arms and a leg when he ejected from the aircraft, and nearly drowned after he parachuted into Tr\u00fac B\u1ea1ch Lake. Some North Vietnamese pulled him ashore, then others crushed his shoulder with a rifle butt and bayoneted him. McCain was then transported to Hanoi's main H\u1ecfa L\u00f2 Prison, nicknamed the \"Hanoi Hilton\".\nAlthough McCain was seriously wounded and injured, his captors refused to treat him. They beat and interrogated him and he was given medical care only when the North Vietnamese discovered that his father was an admiral. His status as a prisoner of war (POW) made the front pages of major American newspapers.\nMcCain spent six weeks in the hospital, where he received marginal care. He had lost , he was in a chest cast, and his gray hair had turned white. McCain was sent to a different camp on the outskirts of Hanoi. In December 1967, McCain was placed in a cell with two other Americans, who did not expect him to live more than a week. In March 1968, McCain was placed in solitary confinement, where he remained for two years.\nIn mid-1968, his father John S. McCain Jr. was named commander of all U.S. forces in the Vietnam theater, and the North Vietnamese offered McCain early release because they wanted to appear merciful for propaganda purposes, and also to show other POWs that elite prisoners were willing to be treated preferentially. Such early release was prohibited by the POWs' interpretation of the military Code of Conduct, which states in Article III: \"I will accept neither parole nor special favors from the enemy.\" McCain refused repatriation unless every man taken in before him was also released. To prevent the enemy from using prisoners for propaganda, officers were to agree to be released in the order in which they were captured.\nBeginning in August 1968, McCain was subjected to severe torture. He was bound and beaten every two hours, and he was suffering from heat exhaustion and dysentery. Further injuries brought McCain to \"the point of suicide\", but his preparations were interrupted by guards. Eventually, McCain made an anti-U.S. propaganda \"confession\". He had always felt that his statement was dishonorable, but as he later wrote: \"I had learned what we all learned over there: every man has his breaking point. I had reached mine.\" Many U.S. POWs were tortured and maltreated to extract \"confessions\" and propaganda statements; virtually all eventually yielded something. McCain received two to three beatings weekly because of his continued refusal to sign additional statements.\nMcCain refused to meet various anti-war groups seeking peace in Hanoi, wanting to give neither them nor the North Vietnamese a propaganda victory. From late 1969, treatment of McCain and many of the other POWs became more tolerable, while McCain continued to resist the camp authorities. McCain and other prisoners cheered the U.S. \"Christmas Bombing\" campaign of December 1972, viewing it as a forceful measure to push North Vietnam to terms.\nMcCain was a prisoner of war in North Vietnam for five and a half years, until his release on March 14, 1973, along with 108 other prisoners of war. His wartime injuries left him permanently incapable of raising his arms above his head. After the war, McCain, accompanied by his family, returned to the site on a few occasions.\nCommanding officer, liaison to Senate, and second marriage.\nMcCain was reunited with his family when he returned to the United States. His wife Carol had been severely injured by an automobile accident in December 1969. She was then four inches shorter, in a wheelchair or on crutches, and substantially heavier than when he had last seen her. As a returned POW, he became a celebrity of sorts.\nMcCain underwent treatment for his injuries that included months of physical therapy. He attended the National War College at Fort McNair in Washington, D.C., during 1973\u20131974. He was rehabilitated by late 1974, and his flight status was reinstated. In 1976, he became Commanding Officer of a training squadron stationed in Florida. He improved the unit's flight readiness and safety records, and won the squadron its first-ever Meritorious Unit Commendation. During this period in Florida, he had extramarital affairs, and his marriage began to falter, about which he later stated: \"The blame was entirely mine\".\nMcCain served as the Navy's liaison to the U.S. Senate beginning in 1977. In retrospect, he said that this represented his \"real entry into the world of politics, and the beginning of my second career as a public servant.\" His key behind-the-scenes role gained congressional financing for a new supercarrier against the wishes of the Carter administration.\nIn April 1979, McCain met Cindy Lou Hensley, a teacher from Phoenix, Arizona, whose father had founded a large beer distributorship. They began dating, and he urged his wife, Carol, to grant him a divorce, which she did in February 1980; the uncontested divorce took effect in April 1980. The settlement included two houses and financial support for her ongoing medical treatments due to her 1969 car accident; they remained on good terms. McCain and Hensley were married on May 17, 1980, with Senators William Cohen and Gary Hart attending as groomsmen. McCain's children did not attend, and several years passed before they reconciled. John and Cindy McCain entered into a prenuptial agreement that kept most of her family's assets under her name; they kept their finances separate and filed separate income tax returns.\nMcCain decided to leave the Navy. It was doubtful whether he would ever be promoted to the rank of full admiral, as he had poor annual physicals and had not been given a major sea command. His chances of being promoted to rear admiral were better, but he declined that prospect, as he had already made plans to run for Congress and said he could \"do more good there.\"\nMcCain retired from the Navy as a captain on April 1, 1981. He was designated as disabled and awarded a disability pension. Upon leaving the military, he moved to Arizona. His numerous military decorations and awards include: the Silver Star, two Legion of Merits, Distinguished Flying Cross, three Bronze Star Medals, two Purple Hearts, two Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medals, and the Prisoner of War Medal.\nHouse and Senate elections and career (1982\u20132000).\nU.S. Representative.\nMcCain set his sights on becoming a representative because he was interested in current events, was ready for a new challenge, and had developed political ambitions. Living in Phoenix, he went to work for his new father-in-law's large Anheuser-Busch beer distributorship. As vice president of public relations at the distributorship, he gained political support among the local business community, meeting powerful figures such as banker Charles Keating Jr., real estate developer Fife Symington III (later Governor of Arizona) and newspaper publisher Darrow \"Duke\" Tully. In 1982, McCain ran as a Republican for an open seat in Arizona's 1st congressional district, which was being vacated by 30-year incumbent Republican John Jacob Rhodes. A newcomer to the state, McCain was termed a carpetbagger. McCain responded to a voter making that charge with what a \"Phoenix Gazette\" columnist later described as \"the most devastating response to a potentially troublesome political issue I've ever heard\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMcCain won a highly contested primary election with the assistance of local political endorsements, his Washington connections, and money that his wife lent to his campaign. He then easily won the general election in the heavily Republican district.\nIn 1983, McCain was elected to lead the incoming group of Republican representatives, and was assigned to the House Committee on Interior Affairs. Also that year, he opposed creation of a federal Martin Luther King Jr. Day, but admitted in 2008: \"I was wrong and eventually realized that, in time to give full support [in 1990] for a state holiday in Arizona.\"\nAt this point, McCain's politics were mainly in line with those of President Ronald Reagan; this included support for Reaganomics, and he was active on Indian Affairs bills. He supported most aspects of the foreign policy of the Reagan administration, including its hardline stance against the Soviet Union and policy towards Central American conflicts, such as backing the Contras in Nicaragua. McCain opposed keeping U.S. Marines deployed in Lebanon, citing unattainable objectives, and subsequently criticized President Reagan for pulling out the troops too late; in the interim, the 1983 Beirut barracks bombing killed hundreds. McCain won re-election to the House easily in 1984, and gained a spot on the House Foreign Affairs Committee. In 1985, he made his first return trip to Vietnam, and also traveled to Chile where he met with its military junta ruler, General Augusto Pinochet.\nGrowing family.\nIn 1984, McCain and Cindy had their first child, daughter Meghan, followed two years later by son John IV and in 1988 by son James. In 1991, Cindy brought an abandoned three-month-old girl needing medical treatment to the U.S. from a Bangladeshi orphanage run by Mother Teresa. The McCains decided to adopt her and named her Bridget.\nFirst two terms in the U.S. Senate.\nMcCain's Senate career began in January 1987, after he defeated his Democratic opponent, former state legislator Richard Kimball, by 20\u00a0percentage points in the 1986 election. McCain succeeded Arizona native, conservative icon, and the 1964 Republican presidential nominee Barry Goldwater upon Goldwater's retirement as U.S. senator from Arizona for 30 years. In January 1988, McCain voted in favor of the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987, and voted to override President Reagan's veto of that legislation the following March.\nSenator McCain became a member of the Armed Services Committee, with which he had formerly done his Navy liaison work; he also joined the Commerce Committee and the Indian Affairs Committee. He continued to support the Native American agenda. As first a House member and then a senator\u2014and as a lifelong gambler with close ties to the gambling industry\u2014McCain was one of the main authors of the 1988 Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, which codified rules regarding Native American gambling enterprises. McCain was also a strong supporter of the Gramm\u2013Rudman legislation that enforced automatic spending cuts in the case of budget deficits.\nMcCain soon gained national visibility. He delivered a well-received speech at the 1988 Republican National Convention, was mentioned by the press as a short list vice-presidential running mate for Republican nominee George H. W. Bush, and was named chairman of Veterans for Bush.\nKeating Five.\nMcCain became embroiled in a scandal during the 1980s, as one of five United States senators comprising the so-called Keating Five. Between 1982 and 1987, McCain had received $112,000 in lawful political contributions from Charles Keating Jr. and his associates at Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, along with trips on Keating's jets that McCain belatedly repaid, in 1989. In 1987, McCain was one of the five senators whom Keating contacted to prevent the government's seizure of Lincoln, and McCain met twice with federal regulators to discuss the government's investigation of Lincoln. In 1999, McCain said: \"The appearance of it was wrong. It's a wrong appearance when a group of senators appear in a meeting with a group of regulators, because it conveys the impression of undue and improper influence. And it was the wrong thing to do.\" In the end, McCain was cleared by the Senate Ethics Committee of acting improperly or violating any law or Senate rule, but was mildly rebuked for exercising \"poor judgment\".\nIn his 1992 re-election bid, the Keating Five affair was not a major issue, and he won handily, gaining 56\u00a0percent of the vote to defeat Democratic community and civil rights activist Claire Sargent and independent former governor, Evan Mecham.\nPolitical independence.\nMcCain developed a reputation for independence during the 1990s. He took pride in challenging party leadership and establishment forces, becoming difficult to categorize politically.\nAs a member of the 1991\u20131993 Senate Select Committee on POW/MIA Affairs, chaired by fellow Vietnam War veteran and Democrat, John Kerry, McCain investigated the Vietnam War POW/MIA issue, to determine the fate of U.S. service personnel listed as missing in action during the Vietnam War. The committee's unanimous report stated there was \"no compelling evidence that proves that any American remains alive in captivity in Southeast Asia.\" Helped by McCain's efforts, in 1995 the U.S. normalized diplomatic relations with Vietnam. McCain was vilified by some POW/MIA activists who, despite the committee's unanimous report, believed many Americans were still held against their will in Southeast Asia. From January 1993 until his death, McCain was Chairman of the International Republican Institute, an organization that supports the emergence of political democracy worldwide.\nIn 1993 and 1994, McCain voted to confirm President Clinton's nominees to the U.S. Supreme Court, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer, whom he considered qualified. He later explained that \"under our Constitution, it is the president's call to make.\" McCain had also voted to confirm nominees of presidents Ronald Reagan and George H.\u00a0W. Bush, including Robert Bork and Clarence Thomas.\nCampaign finance reform.\nMcCain attacked what he saw as the corrupting influence of large political contributions\u2014from corporations, labor unions, other organizations, and wealthy individuals\u2014and he made this his signature issue. Starting in 1994, he worked with Democratic Wisconsin Senator Russ Feingold on campaign finance reform; their McCain\u2013Feingold bill attempted to put limits on \"soft money\". The efforts of McCain and Feingold were opposed by some of the moneyed interests targeted, by incumbents in both parties, by those who felt spending limits impinged on free political speech and might be unconstitutional as well, and by those who wanted to counterbalance the power of what they saw as media bias. Despite sympathetic coverage in the media, initial versions of the McCain\u2013Feingold Act were filibustered and never came to a vote.\nThe term \"maverick Republican\" was frequently applied to McCain, and he also used it himself. In 1993, McCain opposed military operations in Somalia. Another target of his was pork barrel spending by Congress, and he actively supported the Line Item Veto Act of 1996, which gave the president power to veto individual spending items but was ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in 1998.\nIn the 1996 presidential election, McCain was again on the short list of possible vice-presidential picks, this time for Republican nominee Bob Dole. While Dole instead selected Jack Kemp, he chose McCain to deliver the nominating speech for him in the presidential roll call vote at the 1996 Republican National Convention. The following year, \"Time\" magazine named McCain as one of the \"25 Most Influential People in America\".\nIn 1997, McCain became chairman of the powerful Senate Commerce Committee; he was criticized for accepting funds from corporations and businesses under the committee's purview, but in response said the small contributions he received were not part of the big-money nature of the campaign finance problem. McCain took on the tobacco industry in 1998, proposing legislation to increase cigarette taxes to fund anti-smoking campaigns, discourage teenage smokers, increase money for health research studies, and help states pay for smoking-related health care costs. Supported by the Clinton administration but opposed by the industry and most Republicans, the bill failed to gain cloture.\nStart of third term in the U.S. Senate.\nIn November 1998, McCain won re-election to a third Senate term in a landslide over his Democratic opponent, environmental lawyer Ed Ranger. In the February 1999 Senate trial following the impeachment of Bill Clinton, McCain voted to convict the president on both the perjury and obstruction of justice counts, saying Clinton had violated his sworn oath of office. In March 1999, McCain voted to approve the NATO bombing campaign against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, saying that the ongoing genocide of the Kosovo War must be stopped and criticizing past Clinton administration inaction. Later in 1999, McCain shared the Profile in Courage Award with Feingold for their work in trying to enact their campaign finance reform, although the bill was still failing repeated attempts to gain cloture.\nIn August 1999, McCain's memoir \"Faith of My Fathers\", co-authored with Mark Salter, was published; a reviewer observed that its appearance \"seems to have been timed to the unfolding Presidential campaign.\" The most successful of his writings, it received positive reviews, became a bestseller, and was later made into a TV film. The book traces McCain's family background and childhood, covers his time at Annapolis and his service before and during the Vietnam War, concluding with his release from captivity in 1973. According to one reviewer, it describes \"the kind of challenges that most of us can barely imagine. It's a fascinating history of a remarkable military family.\"\n2000 presidential campaign.\nMcCain announced his candidacy for president on September 27, 1999, in Nashua, New Hampshire, saying he was staging \"a fight to take our government back from the power brokers and special interests, and return it to the people and the noble cause of freedom it was created to serve\". The frontrunner for the Republican nomination was Texas Governor George W. Bush, who had the political and financial support of most of the party establishment, whereas McCain was supported by many moderate Republicans and some conservative Republicans.\nMcCain focused on the New Hampshire primary, where his message appealed to independents. He traveled on a campaign bus called the Straight Talk Express. He held many town hall meetings, answering every question voters asked, in a successful example of \"retail politics\", and he used free media to compensate for his lack of funds. One reporter later recounted that, \"McCain talked all day long with reporters on his Straight Talk Express bus; he talked so much that sometimes he said things that he shouldn't have, and that's why the media loved him.\" On February 1, 2000, he won New Hampshire's primary with 49\u00a0percent of the vote to Bush's 30\u00a0percent. The Bush campaign and the Republican establishment feared that a McCain victory in the crucial South Carolina primary might give his campaign unstoppable momentum.\n\"The Arizona Republic\" wrote that the McCain\u2013Bush primary contest in South Carolina \"has entered national political lore as a low-water mark in presidential campaigns\", while \"The New York Times\" called it \"a painful symbol of the brutality of American politics\". A variety of interest groups, which McCain had challenged in the past, ran negative ads. Bush borrowed McCain's earlier language of reform, and declined to dissociate himself from a veterans activist who accused McCain (in Bush's presence) of having \"abandoned the veterans\" on POW/MIA and Agent Orange issues.\nIncensed, McCain ran ads accusing Bush of lying and comparing the governor to Bill Clinton, which Bush said was \"about as low a blow as you can give in a Republican primary\". An anonymous smear campaign began against McCain, delivered by push polls, faxes, e-mails, flyers, and audience plants. The smears claimed that McCain had fathered a black child out of wedlock (the McCains' dark-skinned daughter was adopted from Bangladesh), that his wife Cindy was a drug addict, that he was a homosexual, and that he was a \"Manchurian Candidate\" who was either a traitor or mentally unstable from his POW days. The Bush campaign strongly denied any involvement with the attacks.\nMcCain lost South Carolina on February 19, with 42\u00a0percent of the vote to Bush's 53\u00a0percent, in part because Bush mobilized the state's evangelical voters and outspent McCain. The win allowed Bush to regain lost momentum. McCain said of the rumor spreaders, \"I believe that there is a special place in hell for people like those.\" According to one acquaintance, the South Carolina experience left him in a \"very dark place\".\nMcCain's campaign never completely recovered from his South Carolina defeat, although he did rebound partially by winning in Arizona and Michigan a few days later. He made a speech in Virginia Beach that criticized Christian leaders, including Pat Robertson and Jerry Falwell, as divisive conservatives, declaring \"we embrace the fine members of the religious conservative community. But that does not mean that we will pander to their self-appointed leaders.\" McCain lost the Virginia primary on February 29, and on March7 lost nine of the thirteen primaries on Super Tuesday to Bush. With little hope of overcoming Bush's delegate lead, McCain withdrew from the race on March 9, 2000. He endorsed Bush two months later.\nSenate career (2000\u20132008).\nRemainder of third Senate term.\nMcCain began 2001 by breaking with the new administration on a number of matters, including HMO reform, climate change, and gun control legislation; McCain\u2013Feingold was opposed by Bush as well. In May 2001, McCain was one of only two Senate Republicans to vote against the Bush tax cuts. Besides the differences with Bush on ideological grounds, there was considerable antagonism between the two remaining from the previous year's campaign. When a Republican senator, Jim Jeffords, became an Independent, thereby throwing control of the Senate to the Democrats, McCain defended Jeffords against \"self-appointed enforcers of party loyalty\". Indeed, there was speculation at the time, and in years since, about McCain himself leaving the Republican Party, but McCain had always adamantly denied that he ever considered doing so. Beginning in 2001, McCain used political capital gained from his presidential run, as well as improved legislative skills and relationships with other members, to become one of the Senate's most influential members.\nAfter the September 11 attacks in 2001, McCain supported Bush and the U.S.-led war in Afghanistan. He and Democratic senator Joe Lieberman wrote the legislation that created the 9/11 Commission, while he and Democratic senator Fritz Hollings co-sponsored the Aviation and Transportation Security Act that federalized airport security.\nIn March 2002, McCain\u2013Feingold, officially known as the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002, passed in both Houses of Congress and was signed into law. It was McCain's greatest legislative achievement.\nMeanwhile, in discussions over proposed U.S. action against Iraq, McCain was a strong supporter of the Bush administration's position. He stated that Iraq was \"a clear and present danger\" to the U.S., and voted for the Iraq War Resolution in October 2002. He predicted that U.S. forces would be treated as liberators by many Iraqi people. In May 2003, McCain voted against the second round of Bush tax cuts, saying it was unwise at a time of war. By November 2003, after a trip to Iraq, he was publicly questioning Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, saying that more U.S. troops were needed; the following year, McCain announced that he had lost confidence in Rumsfeld.\nIn October 2003, McCain and Lieberman co-sponsored the Climate Stewardship Act that would have introduced a cap and trade system aimed at returning greenhouse gas emissions to 2000 levels; the bill was defeated with 55\u00a0votes to 43 in the Senate. They reintroduced modified versions of the Act two additional times, for the final time in January 2007 with the co-sponsorship of Barack Obama, among others.\nIn the 2004 U.S. presidential election campaign, McCain was frequently mentioned for the vice-presidential slot, only this time as part of the Democratic ticket under nominee John Kerry. McCain said that Kerry had never formally offered him the position and that he would not have accepted it. At the 2004 Republican National Convention, McCain supported Bush for re-election, praising Bush's management of the war on terror since the September 11 attacks. At the same time, he defended Kerry's Vietnam War record. By August 2004, McCain had the best favorable-to-unfavorable rating (55\u00a0percent to 19\u00a0percent) of any national politician; he campaigned for Bush much more than he had four years previously, though the two remained situational allies rather than friends.\nMcCain was also up for re-election as senator, in 2004. He defeated little-known Democratic schoolteacher Stuart Starky with his biggest margin of victory, garnering 77\u00a0percent of the vote.\nStart of fourth Senate term.\nIn May 2005, McCain led the so-called Gang of 14 in the Senate, which established a compromise that preserved the ability of senators to filibuster judicial nominees, but only in \"extraordinary circumstances\". The compromise took the steam out of the filibuster movement, but some Republicans remained disappointed that the compromise did not eliminate filibusters of judicial nominees in all circumstances. McCain subsequently cast Supreme Court confirmation votes in favor of John Roberts and Samuel Alito, calling them \"two of the finest justices ever appointed to the United States Supreme Court.\"\nBreaking from his 2001 and 2003 votes, McCain supported the Bush tax cut extension in May 2006, saying not to do so would amount to a tax increase. Working with Democratic Senator Ted Kennedy, McCain was a strong proponent of comprehensive immigration reform, which would involve legalization, guest worker programs, and border enforcement components. The Secure America and Orderly Immigration Act was never voted on in 2005, while the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2006 passed the Senate in May 2006 but failed in the House. In June 2007, President Bush, McCain, and others made the strongest push yet for such a bill, the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2007, but it aroused intense grassroots opposition among talk radio listeners and others, some of whom furiously characterized the proposal as an \"amnesty\" program, and the bill twice failed to gain cloture in the Senate.\nBy the middle of the 2000s (decade), the increased Indian gaming that McCain had helped bring about was a $23\u00a0billion industry. He was twice chairman of the Senate Indian Affairs Committee, in 1995\u20131997 and 2005\u20132007, and his Committee helped expose the Jack Abramoff Indian lobbying scandal. By 2005 and 2006, McCain was pushing for amendments to the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act which would have limited creation of off-reservation casinos, and also limited the movement of tribes across state lines to build casinos.\nOwing to his time as a POW, McCain was recognized for his sensitivity to the detention and interrogation of detainees in the war on terror. An opponent of the Bush administration's use of torture and detention without trial at Guant\u00e1namo Bay, saying: \"some of these guys are terrible, terrible killers and the worst kind of scum of humanity. But, one, they deserve to have some adjudication of their cases... even Adolf Eichmann got a trial\". In October 2005, McCain introduced the McCain Detainee Amendment to the Defense Appropriations bill for 2005, and the Senate voted 90\u20139 to support the amendment. It prohibits inhumane treatment of prisoners, including prisoners at Guant\u00e1namo, by confining military interrogations to the techniques in the U.S. Army Field Manual on Interrogation. Although Bush had threatened to veto the bill if McCain's amendment was included, the President announced in December 2005 that he accepted McCain's terms and would \"make it clear to the world that this government does not torture and that we adhere to the international convention of torture, whether it be here at home or abroad\". This stance, among others, led to McCain being named by \"Time\" magazine in 2006 as one of America's 10 Best Senators. McCain voted in February 2008 against a bill containing a ban on waterboarding, which provision was later narrowly passed and vetoed by Bush. However, the bill in question contained other provisions to which McCain objected, and his spokesman stated: \"This wasn't a vote on waterboarding. This was a vote on applying the standards of the [Army] field manual to CIA personnel.\"\nMeanwhile, McCain continued questioning the progress of the war in Iraq. In September 2005, he remarked upon Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Richard Myers' optimistic outlook on the war's progress: \"Things have not gone as well as we had planned or expected, nor as we were told by you, General Myers.\" In August 2006, he criticized the administration for continually understating the effectiveness of the insurgency: \"We [have] not told the American people how tough and difficult this could be.\" From the beginning, McCain strongly supported the Iraq troop surge of 2007. The strategy's opponents labeled it \"McCain's plan\" and University of Virginia political science professor Larry Sabato said, \"McCain owns Iraq just as much as Bush does now.\" The surge and the war were unpopular during most of the year, even within the Republican Party, as McCain's presidential campaign was underway; faced with the consequences, McCain frequently responded, \"I would much rather lose a campaign than a war.\" In March 2008, McCain credited the surge strategy with reducing violence in Iraq, as he made his eighth trip to that country since the war began.\n2008 presidential campaign.\nMcCain formally announced his intention to run for President of the United States on April 25, 2007, in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. He stated that: \"I'm not running for president to be somebody, but to do something; to do the hard but necessary things, not the easy and needless things.\"\nMcCain's oft-cited strengths as a presidential candidate for 2008 included national name recognition, sponsorship of major lobbying and campaign finance reform initiatives, his ability to reach across the aisle, his well-known military service and experience as a POW, his experience from the 2000 presidential campaign, and an expectation that he would capture Bush's top fundraisers. During the 2006 election cycle, McCain had attended 346\u00a0events and helped raise more than $10.5\u00a0million on behalf of Republican candidates. McCain also became more willing to ask business and industry for campaign contributions, while maintaining that such contributions would not affect any official decisions he would make. Despite being considered the front-runner for the nomination by pundits as 2007 began, McCain was in second place behind former Mayor of New York City Rudy Giuliani in national Republican polls as the year progressed.\nMcCain had fundraising problems in the first half of 2007, due in part to his support for the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2007, which was unpopular among the Republican base electorate. Large-scale campaign staff downsizing took place in early July, but McCain said that he was not considering dropping out of the race. Later that month, the candidate's campaign manager and campaign chief strategist both departed. McCain slumped badly in national polls, often running third or fourth with 15\u00a0percent or less support.\nThe Arizona senator subsequently resumed his familiar position as a political underdog, riding the Straight Talk Express and taking advantage of free media such as debates and sponsored events. By December 2007, the Republican race was unsettled, with none of the top-tier candidates dominating the race and all of them possessing major vulnerabilities with different elements of the Republican base electorate. McCain was showing a resurgence, in particular with renewed strength in New Hampshire\u2014the scene of his 2000 triumph\u2014and was bolstered further by the endorsements from \"The Boston Globe\", the \"New Hampshire Union Leader\", and almost two dozen other state newspapers, as well as from Senator Lieberman (now an Independent Democrat). McCain decided not to campaign significantly in the January 3, 2008, Iowa caucuses, which saw a win by former Governor of Arkansas Mike Huckabee.\nMcCain's comeback plan paid off when he won the New Hampshire primary on January 8, defeating former Governor of Massachusetts Mitt Romney in a close contest, to once again become one of the front-runners in the race. In mid-January, McCain placed first in the South Carolina primary, narrowly defeating Mike Huckabee. Pundits credited the third-place finisher, Tennessee's former U.S. Senator Fred Thompson, with drawing votes from Huckabee in South Carolina, thereby giving a narrow win to McCain.\nA week later, McCain won the Florida primary, beating Romney again in a close contest; Giuliani then dropped out and endorsed McCain.\nOn February 5, McCain won both the majority of states and delegates in the Super Tuesday Republican primaries, giving him a commanding lead toward the Republican nomination. Romney departed from the race on February7. McCain's wins in the March4 primaries clinched a majority of the delegates, and he became the presumptive Republican nominee.\nHad he been elected, he would have become the first president physically born outside the United States. This raised a potential legal issue, since the United States Constitution requires the president to be a natural-born citizen. A bipartisan legal review, and a unanimous but non-binding Senate resolution, both concluded that he was a natural-born citizen. However, other legal scholars came to the opposite conclusion that although he was a citizen, at the time of his birth he was not a natural-born citizen, because the 1937 law that made him a citizen was passed one year after his birth.\nIf inaugurated in 2009 at the age of 72\u00a0years and 144\u00a0days, he would have been the oldest person to become president. McCain addressed concerns about his age and past health issues, stating in 2005 that his health was \"excellent\". He had been treated for melanoma and an operation in 2000 for that condition left a noticeable mark on the left side of his face. McCain's prognosis appeared favorable, according to independent experts, especially because he had already survived without a recurrence for more than seven years. In May 2008, McCain's campaign briefly let the press review his medical records, and he was described as appearing cancer-free, having a strong heart, and in general being in good health.\nMcCain clinched enough delegates for the nomination and his focus shifted toward the general election, while Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton fought a prolonged battle for the Democratic nomination. McCain introduced various policy proposals, and sought to improve his fundraising. Cindy McCain, who accounted for most of the couple's wealth with an estimated net worth of $100\u00a0million, made part of her tax returns public in May. After facing criticism about lobbyists on staff, the McCain campaign issued new rules in May 2008 to avoid conflicts of interest, causing five top aides to leave.\nWhen Obama became the Democrats' presumptive nominee in early June, McCain proposed joint town hall meetings, but Obama instead requested more traditional debates for the fall. In July, a staff shake-up put Steve Schmidt in full operational control of the McCain campaign. Rick Davis remained as campaign manager but with a reduced role. Davis had also managed McCain's 2000 presidential campaign; in 2005 and 2006, U.S. intelligence warned McCain's Senate staff about Davis's Russian links but gave no further warnings.\nThroughout the summer of 2008, Obama typically led McCain in national polls by single-digit margins, and also led in several key swing states. McCain reprised his familiar underdog role, which was due at least in part to the overall challenges Republicans faced in the election year. McCain accepted public financing for the general election campaign, and the restrictions that go with it, while criticizing his Democratic opponent for becoming the first major party candidate to opt out of such financing for the general election since the system was implemented in 1976. The Republican's broad campaign theme focused on his experience and ability to lead, compared to Obama's.\nOn August 29, 2008, McCain revealed Alaska Governor Sarah Palin as his surprise choice for a running mate. McCain was only the second U.S. major-party presidential nominee (after Walter Mondale, who chose Geraldine Ferraro) to select a woman as his running mate and the first Republican to do so. On September 3, 2008, McCain and Palin became the Republican Party's presidential and vice presidential nominees at the 2008 Republican National Convention in Saint Paul, Minnesota. McCain surged ahead of Obama in national polls following the convention, as the Palin pick energized core Republican voters who had previously been wary of him. However, by the campaign's own later admission, the rollout of Palin to the national media went poorly, and voter reactions to Palin grew increasingly negative, especially among independents and other voters concerned about her qualifications.\nMcCain's decision to choose Sarah Palin as his running mate was criticized; \"The New York Times\" journalist David Brooks said that \"he took a disease that was running through the Republican party \u2013 anti-intellectualism, disrespect for facts \u2013 and he put it right at the centre of the party\". Laura McGann in \"Vox\" says that McCain gave the \"reality TV politics\" and Tea Party movement more political legitimacy, as well as solidifying \"the Republican Party's comfort with a candidate who would say absurdities... unleashing a political style and a values system that animated the Tea Party movement and laid the groundwork for a Trump presidency.\" Although McCain later expressed regret for not choosing the independent Senator Joe Lieberman (who had previously been Al Gore's running mate in 2000, while still elected as a Democrat) as his VP candidate instead, he consistently defended Palin's performances at his events.\nOn September 24, McCain said he was temporarily suspending his campaign activities, called on Obama to join him, and proposed delaying the first of the general election debates with Obama, to work on the proposed U.S. financial system bailout before Congress, which was targeted at addressing the subprime mortgage crisis and the 2008 financial crisis. McCain's intervention helped to give dissatisfied House Republicans an opportunity to propose changes to the plan that was otherwise close to agreement. After Obama declined McCain's suspension suggestion, McCain went ahead with the debate on September 26. On October 1, McCain voted in favor of a revised $700\u00a0billion rescue plan. Another debate was held on October 7; like the first one, polls afterward suggested that Obama had won it. A final presidential debate occurred on October 15. Down the stretch, McCain was outspent by Obama by a four-to-one margin.\nDuring and after the final debate, McCain compared Obama's proposed policies to socialism and often invoked \"Joe the Plumber\" as a symbol of American small business dreams that would be thwarted by an Obama presidency. He barred using the Jeremiah Wright controversy in ads against Obama, but the campaign did frequently criticize Obama regarding his purported relationship with Bill Ayers. McCain's rallies became increasingly vitriolic, with attendees denigrating Obama and displaying a growing anti-Muslim and anti-African-American sentiment. During a campaign rally in Minnesota, Gayle Quinnell, a McCain supporter, told him she did not trust Obama because \"he's an Arab\". McCain replied, \"No ma'am. He's a decent family man, citizen, that I just happen to have disagreements with on fundamental issues.\" McCain's response was considered one of the finer moments of the campaign and was still being viewed several years later as a marker for civility in American politics, particularly in light of the anti-Muslim and anti-immigrant animus of the Donald Trump presidency. Meghan McCain said that she cannot \"go a day without someone bringing up (that) moment,\" and noted that at the time \"there were a lot of people really trying to get my dad to go (against Obama) with... you're a Muslim, you're not an American aspect of that,\" but that her father had refused. \"I can remember thinking that it was a morally amazing and beautiful moment, but that maybe there would be people in the Republican Party that would be quite angry,\" she said.\nThe election took place on November 4, and Barack Obama was declared the projected winner at about 11:00\u00a0pm Eastern Standard Time; McCain delivered his concession speech in Phoenix, Arizona, about twenty minutes later. In it, he noted the historic and special significance of Obama being elected the nation's first African American president. McCain remarked, \"Whatever our differences, we are fellow Americans; and please believe me when I say, no association has ever meant more to me than that.\" In the end, McCain won 173 electoral votes to Obama's 365; McCain failed to win most of the battleground states and lost some traditionally Republican ones. McCain gained 46\u00a0percent of the nationwide popular vote, compared to Obama's 53\u00a0percent.\nSenate career after 2008.\nRemainder of fourth Senate term.\nFollowing his defeat, McCain returned to the Senate amid varying views about what role he might play there. McCain indicated that he intended to run for re-election to his Senate seat in 2010. As the inauguration neared, Obama consulted with McCain on a variety of matters, to an extent rarely seen between a president-elect and his defeated rival, and President Obama's inauguration speech contained an allusion to McCain's theme of finding a purpose greater than oneself.\nNevertheless, McCain emerged as a leader of the Republican opposition to the Obama economic stimulus package of 2009, saying it incorporated federal policy changes that had nothing to do with near-term job creation and would expand the growing federal budget deficit. McCain also voted against Obama's Supreme Court nomination of Sonia Sotomayor\u2014saying that while undeniably qualified, \"I do not believe that she shares my belief in judicial restraint\"\u2014and by August 2009 was siding more often with his Republican Party on closely divided votes than ever before in his senatorial career. McCain reasserted that the War in Afghanistan was winnable and criticized Obama for a slow process in deciding whether to send additional troops there.\nMcCain also harshly criticized Obama for scrapping construction of the U.S. missile defense complex in Poland, declined to enter negotiations over climate change legislation similar to what he had proposed in the past, and strongly opposed the Obama health care plan. McCain led a successful filibuster of a measure that would allow repeal of the military's \"Don't ask, don't tell\" policy towards gays. Factors involved in McCain's new direction included Senate staffers leaving, a renewed concern over national debt levels and the scope of federal government, a possible Republican primary challenge from conservatives in 2010, and McCain's campaign edge being slow to wear off. As one longtime McCain advisor said, \"A lot of people, including me, thought he might be the Republican building bridges to the Obama Administration. But he's been more like the guy blowing up the bridges.\"\nIn early 2010, a primary challenge from radio talk show host and former U.S. Congressman J. D. Hayworth materialized in the Senate election in Arizona and drew support from some but not all elements of the Tea Party movement. With Hayworth using the campaign slogan \"The Consistent Conservative\", McCain said\u2014despite his own past use of the term on a number of occasions\u2014\"I never considered myself a maverick. I consider myself a person who serves the people of Arizona to the best of his abilities.\" The primary challenge coincided with McCain reversing or muting his stance on some issues such as the bank bailouts, closing of the Guant\u00e1namo Bay detention camp, campaign finance restrictions, and gays in the military.\nWhen the health care plan, now called the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, passed Congress and became law in March 2010, McCain strongly opposed the landmark legislation not only on its merits but also on the way it had been handled in Congress. As a consequence, he warned that congressional Republicans would not work with Democrats on anything else: \"There will be no cooperation for the rest of the year. They have poisoned the well in what they've done and how they've done it.\" McCain became a vocal defender of Arizona SB 1070, the April 2010 tough anti-illegal immigration state law that aroused national controversy, saying that the state had been forced to take action given the federal government's inability to control the border. In the August 24 primary, McCain beat Hayworth by a 56 to 32\u00a0percent margin. McCain easily defeated Democratic Tucson city councilman Rodney Glassman in the general election.\nIn the lame duck session of the 111th Congress, McCain voted for the compromise Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010, but against the DREAM Act (which he had once sponsored) and the New START Treaty. Most prominently, he continued to lead the eventually losing fight against \"Don't ask, don't tell\" repeal. In his opposition, he sometimes fell into anger or hostility on the Senate floor, and called its passage \"a very sad day\" that would compromise the battle effectiveness of the military.\nFifth Senate term.\nWhile control of the House of Representatives went over to the Republicans in the 112th Congress, the Senate stayed Democratic and McCain continued to be the ranking member of the Senate Armed Services Committee. As the Arab Spring took center stage, McCain urged that the embattled Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak, step down and thought the U.S. should push for democratic reforms in the region despite the associated risks of religious extremists gaining power. McCain was an especially vocal supporter of the 2011 military intervention in Libya. In April of that year he visited the Anti-Gaddafi forces and National Transitional Council in Benghazi, the highest-ranking American to do so, and said that the rebel forces were \"my heroes\". In June, he joined with Senator Kerry in offering a resolution that would have authorized the military intervention, and said: \"The administration's disregard for the elected representatives of the American people on this matter has been troubling and counterproductive.\" In August, McCain voted for the Budget Control Act of 2011 that resolved the U.S. debt ceiling crisis. In November, McCain and Senator Carl Levin were leaders in efforts to codify in the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012 that terrorism suspects, no matter where captured, could be detained by the U.S. military and its tribunal system; following objections by civil libertarians, some Democrats, and the White House, McCain and Levin agreed to language making it clear that the bill would not pertain to U.S. citizens.\nIn the 2012 Republican Party presidential primaries, McCain endorsed former 2008 rival Mitt Romney and campaigned for him, but compared the contest to a Greek tragedy due to its drawn-out nature with massive super PAC-funded attack ads damaging all the contenders. He labeled the Supreme Court's 2010 \"Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission\" decision as \"uninformed, arrogant, na\u00efve\", and, decrying its effects and the future scandals he thought it would bring, said it would become considered the court's \"worst decision... in the 21st century\". McCain took the lead in opposing the defense spending sequestrations brought on by the Budget Control Act of 2011 and gained attention for defending State Department aide Huma Abedin against charges brought by a few House Republicans that she had ties to the Muslim Brotherhood.\nMcCain continued to be one of the most frequently appearing guests on the Sunday morning news talk shows.\nHe became one of the most vocal critics of the Obama administration's handling of the 2012 attack on the U.S. diplomatic mission in Benghazi, saying it was a \"debacle\" that featured either \"a massive cover-up or incompetence that is not acceptable\" and that it was worse than the Watergate scandal. As an outgrowth of this strong opposition, he and a few other senators were successful in blocking the planned nomination of Ambassador to the UN Susan Rice to succeed Hillary Rodham Clinton as U.S. Secretary of State; McCain's friend John Kerry was nominated instead.\nRegarding the Syrian civil war that had begun in 2011, McCain repeatedly argued for the U.S. intervening militarily in the conflict on the side of the anti-government forces. He staged a visit to rebel forces inside Syria in May 2013, the first senator to do so, and called for arming the Free Syrian Army with heavy weapons and for the establishment of a no-fly zone over the country. Following reports that two of the people he posed for pictures with had been responsible for the kidnapping of eleven Lebanese Shiite pilgrims the year before, McCain disputed one of the identifications and said he had not met directly with the other. Following the 2013 Ghouta chemical weapons attack, McCain argued again for strong American military action against the government of the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, and in September 2013 cast a Foreign Relations committee vote in favor of Obama's request to Congress that it authorize a military response. McCain took the lead in criticizing a growing non-interventionist movement within the Republican Party, exemplified by his March 2013 comment that Senators Rand Paul and Ted Cruz and Representative Justin Amash were \"wacko birds\".\nDuring 2013, McCain was a member of a bi-partisan group of senators, the \"Gang of Eight\", which announced principles for another try at comprehensive immigration reform. The resulting Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013 passed the Senate by a 68\u201332 margin, but faced an uncertain future in the House. In July 2013, McCain was at the forefront of an agreement among senators to drop filibusters against Obama administration executive nominees without Democrats resorting to the \"nuclear option\" that would disallow such filibusters altogether. However, the option would be imposed later in the year anyway, to the senator's displeasure. These developments and some other negotiations showed that McCain had become the leader of a power center in the Senate for cutting deals in an otherwise bitterly partisan environment. They also led some observers to conclude that the \"maverick\" McCain had returned.\nMcCain was publicly skeptical about the Republican strategy that precipitated the U.S. federal government shutdown of 2013 and U.S. debt-ceiling crisis of 2013 to defund or delay the Affordable Care Act; in October 2013 he voted in favor of the Continuing Appropriations Act, 2014, which resolved them and said, \"Republicans have to understand we have lost this battle, as I predicted weeks ago, that we would not be able to win because we were demanding something that was not achievable.\" He was one of nine Republican senators who voted for the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013 at the end of the year. By early 2014, McCain's apostasies were enough that the Arizona Republican Party formally censured him for having what they saw as a liberal record that had been \"disastrous and harmful\". McCain remained stridently opposed to many aspects of Obama's foreign policy, however, and in June 2014, following major gains by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the 2014 Northern Iraq offensive, decried what he saw as a U.S. failure to protect its past gains in Iraq and called on the president's entire national security team to resign. McCain said, \"Could all this have been avoided?... The answer is absolutely yes. If I sound angry it's because I am angry.\"\nMcCain was a supporter of the Euromaidan protests against Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych and his government, and appeared in Independence Square in Kyiv in December 2013. Following the overthrow of Yanukovych and subsequent 2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine, McCain became a vocal supporter of providing arms to Ukrainian military forces, saying the sanctions imposed against Russia were not enough. In 2014, McCain led the opposition to the appointments of Colleen Bell, Noah Mamet, and George Tsunis to the ambassadorships in Hungary, Argentina, and Norway, respectively, arguing they were unqualified. Unlike many Republicans, McCain supported the release and contents of the Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture in December 2014, saying \"The truth is sometimes a hard pill to swallow. It sometimes causes us difficulties at home and abroad. It is sometimes used by our enemies in attempts to hurt us. But the American people are entitled to it, nonetheless.\" He added that the CIA's practices following the September 11 attacks had \"stained our national honor\" while doing \"much harm and little practical good\" and that \"Our enemies act without conscience. We must not.\" He opposed the Obama administration's December 2014 decision to normalize relations with Cuba.\nThe 114th United States Congress assembled in January 2015 with Republicans in control of the Senate, and McCain achieved one of his longtime goals when he became chairman of the Armed Services Committee. In this position, he led the writing of proposed Senate legislation that sought to modify parts of the Goldwater\u2013Nichols Act of 1986 to return responsibility for major weapons systems acquisition back to the individual armed services and their secretaries and away from the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics. As chair, McCain tried to maintain a bipartisan approach and forged a good relationship with ranking member Jack Reed. In April 2015, McCain announced that he would run for a sixth term in Arizona's 2016 Senate election. During 2015, McCain strongly opposed the Obama administration's proposed comprehensive agreement on the Iranian nuclear program (later finalized as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)), saying that Secretary of State Kerry was \"delusional\" and \"giv[ing] away the store\" in negotiations with Iran. McCain supported the Saudi Arabian-led military intervention in Yemen against the Houthis and forces loyal to former president Ali Abdullah Saleh.\nMcCain accused President Obama of being \"directly responsible\" for the Orlando nightclub shooting \"because when he pulled everybody out of Iraq, al-Qaeda went to Syria, became ISIS, and ISIS is what it is today thanks to Barack Obama's failures.\"\nDuring the 2016 Republican primaries, McCain said he would support the Republican nominee even if it was Donald Trump, in spite of his personal disagreements with Trump.\nHowever, following Mitt Romney's 2016 anti-Trump speech, McCain endorsed the sentiments expressed in that speech, saying he had serious concerns about Trump's \"uninformed and indeed dangerous statements on national security issues\". Relations between the two had been fraught since early in Trump's 2016 presidential campaign, when McCain referred to a room full of Trump supporters as \"crazies\", and the real estate mogul then said of McCain: \"He insulted me, and he insulted everyone in that room... He is a war hero because he was captured. I like people who weren't captured... perhaps he was a war hero, but right now he's said a lot of very bad things about a lot of people.\" This was widely condemned by much of the Republican Party, with Senator Marco Rubio referring to Trump's comments as \"offensive rantings\", commentator Rick Santorum tweeting that \"@SenJohnMcCain is an American hero, period\", and Governor Scott Walker using the comments as the basis for his denunciation of Trump in a campaign event in Sioux City. Following Trump becoming the presumptive nominee of the party on May 3, McCain said that Republican voters had spoken and he would support Trump.\nMcCain himself faced a primary challenge from Kelli Ward, a fervent Trump supporter, and then was expected to face a potentially strong challenge from Democratic Congresswoman Ann Kirkpatrick in the general election. The senator privately expressed worry over the effect that Trump's unpopularity among Hispanic voters might have on his own chances but also was concerned with more conservative pro-Trump voters; he thus kept his endorsement of Trump in place but tried to speak of him as little as possible given their disagreements. However McCain defeated Ward in the primary by a double-digit percentage point margin and gained a similar lead over Kirkpatrick in general election polls, and when the Donald Trump \"Access Hollywood\" controversy broke, he felt secure enough to on October8 withdraw his endorsement of Trump. McCain stated that Trump's \"demeaning comments about women and his boasts about sexual assaults\" made it \"impossible to continue to offer even conditional support\" and added that he would not vote for Hillary Clinton, but would instead \"write in the name of some good conservative Republican who is qualified to be president.\" McCain defeated Kirkpatrick, securing a sixth term as United States Senator from Arizona.\nIn November 2016, McCain obtained a copy of a dossier regarding the Trump presidential campaign's links to Russia compiled by Christopher Steele. In December 2016, McCain passed on the dossier to FBI Director James Comey. McCain later wrote that he felt the dossier's \"allegations were disturbing\" but unverifiable by himself, so he let the FBI investigate.\nSixth and final Senate term.\nMcCain chaired the January 5, 2017, hearing of the Senate Armed Services Committee where Republican and Democratic senators and intelligence officers, including James R. Clapper Jr., the Director of National Intelligence, Michael S. Rogers, the head of the National Security Agency and United States Cyber Command presented a \"united front\" that \"forcefully reaffirmed the conclusion that the Russian government used hacking and leaks to try to influence the presidential election.\"\nMcCain visited the American missile destroyer USS John S McCain, which docked in Vietnam on 2 June 2017.\nIn June 2017, McCain voted to support President Trump's controversial arms deal with Saudi Arabia.\nRepeal and replacement of Obamacare was a centerpiece of McCain's 2016 re-election campaign, and in July 2017, he said, \"Have no doubt: Congress must replace Obamacare, which has hit Arizonans with some of the highest premium increases in the nation and left 14 of Arizona's 15 counties with only one provider option on the exchanges this year.\"\nIn September 2017, as the Rohingya crisis in Myanmar became ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya Muslim minority, McCain announced moves to scrap planned future military cooperation with Myanmar.\nIn October 2017, McCain praised President Trump's decision to decertify Iran's compliance with the Iran nuclear deal (JCPOA) while not yet withdrawing the U.S. from the agreement, saying that the Obama-era policy failed \"to meet the multifaceted threat Iran poses. The goals President Trump presented in his speech today are a welcomed long overdue change.\"\nBrain tumor diagnosis and surgery.\nOn July 14, 2017, McCain underwent a minimally invasive craniotomy at Mayo Clinic Hospital in Phoenix, Arizona, to remove a blood clot above his left eye. His absence prompted Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell to delay a vote on the Better Care Reconciliation Act. Five days later, Mayo Clinic doctors announced the presence of a glioblastoma, which is a very aggressive cancerous brain tumor. Even with treatment, average survival time is approximately 14 months. McCain was a survivor of previous cancers, including melanoma.\nPresident Donald Trump publicly wished Senator McCain well, as did many others, including former president Obama. On July 19, McCain's senatorial office issued a statement that he \"appreciates the outpouring of support he has received over the last few days. He is in good spirits as he continues to recover at home ... and is confident that any future treatment will be effective.\"\nReturn to the Senate.\nMcCain returned to the Senate on July 25, less than two weeks after brain surgery. He cast a deciding vote allowing the Senate to begin consideration of bills to replace the Affordable Care Act. He delivered a speech criticizing the party-line voting process and urged a \"return to regular order\" using the usual committee hearings and deliberations. On July 28, he cast the decisive vote against the Republicans' final proposal that month, the so-called \"skinny repeal\" option, which failed 49\u201351. McCain supported the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.\nMcCain did not vote in the Senate after December 2017, remaining in Arizona to undergo cancer treatment. On April 15, 2018, he underwent surgery for an infection relating to diverticulitis.\nDeath and funeral.\nOn August 24, 2018, McCain's family announced that he would no longer receive treatment for his cancer. He died the following day at his home in Cornville, Arizona.\nMcCain lay in state in the Arizona State Capitol in Phoenix on August 29, which would have been his 82nd birthday. This was followed by a service at North Phoenix Baptist Church on August 30. His remains were then moved to Washington, D.C., to lie in state in the United States Capitol rotunda on August 31, which was followed by a service at the Washington National Cathedral on September 1. He was a \"lifelong Episcopalian\" who attended, but did not join, a Southern Baptist church for at least 17 years; memorial services were scheduled in both denominations.\nPrior to his death, McCain requested that former presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama deliver eulogies at his funeral and asked that neither President Donald Trump nor his former running mate Sarah Palin attend any of the services. McCain himself planned the funeral arrangements and selected his pallbearers for the service in Washington, including former vice president and former Delaware Senator (and future president) Joe Biden, former Wisconsin Senator Russ Feingold, former Secretary of Defense William Cohen, actor Warren Beatty, and Russian dissident Vladimir Kara-Murza.\nMultiple foreign leaders attended McCain's service: Secretary General of NATO Jens Stoltenberg, President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, Speaker of Taiwan's Congress Su Jia-chyuan, National Defense Minister of Canada Harjit Sajjan, defense minister J\u00fcri Luik and foreign minister Sven Mikser of Estonia, Foreign Minister of Latvia Edgars Rink\u0113vi\u010ds, Foreign Minister of Lithuania Linas Antanas Linkevi\u010dius, and Foreign Affairs Minister of Saudi Arabia Adel al-Jubeir.\nDignitaries who gave eulogies at the Memorial Service in Washington National Cathedral included Barack Obama, George W. Bush, Henry Kissinger, Joe Lieberman, and his daughter Meghan McCain. \"The New Yorker\" described the service as the biggest meeting of anti-Trump figures during his presidency.\nThose who attended the funeral included former United States presidents Barack Obama, George W. Bush, Bill Clinton; First Ladies Michelle Obama, Laura Bush, Hillary Clinton; and former vice presidents Joe Biden, Dick Cheney, Al Gore, and Dan Quayle. Former president Jimmy Carter and former vice president Walter Mondale did not attend; former president George H. W. Bush was too ill to attend the service; and President Trump was not invited. Other attendees included Tom Brokaw, Charlie Rose, Bob Dole, Madeleine Albright, John Kerry, Mitch McConnell, Paul Ryan, Nancy Pelosi, Chuck Schumer, Mitt Romney, Lindsey Graham, Warren Beatty, Elizabeth Warren, Jay Leno, and Kamala Harris. President Trump's daughter and son-in-law Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner attended to the displeasure of Meghan McCain.\nOn September 2, the funeral cortege traveled from Washington, D.C., through Annapolis, Maryland, to the Naval Academy. A private service was held at the Naval Academy Chapel and McCain was buried at the United States Naval Academy Cemetery.\nSenate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-NY) announced that he would introduce a resolution to rename the Russell Senate Office Building after McCain. A quarter peal of Grandsire Caters in memory of McCain was rung by the bellringers of Washington National Cathedral the day following his death. Another memorial quarter peal was rung on September6 on the Bells of Congress at the Old Post Office in Washington.\nPresident Trump reportedly rejected the White House's plans to release a statement praising McCain's life and initially said nothing about McCain himself in a tweet that extended condolences to McCain's family. The flag at the White House, which had been lowered to half-staff the day of McCain's death (August 25), was raised back to full-staff at 12:01\u00a0a.m. on August 27. Trump reportedly felt that media coverage of McCain's death was excessive given that McCain was never elected president. Following public backlash from the American Legion and AMVETS, Trump ordered the White House flag back to half-staff later on August 27. Trump issued a statement praising McCain's service to the country, and he signed a proclamation ordering flags to be flown at half-staff until McCain's interment.\nPolitical positions.\nVarious advocacy groups have given McCain scores or grades as to how well his votes align with the positions of each group. CrowdPac, which rates politicians based on donations made and received, gave Senator McCain a score of 4.3C with 10C being the most conservative and 10L being the most liberal.\nThe non-partisan \"National Journal\" rates a Senator's votes by what percentage of the Senate voted more liberally than them, and what percentage more conservatively, in three policy areas: economic, social, and foreign. For 2005\u20132006 (as reported in the 2008 \"Almanac of American Politics\"), McCain's average ratings were as follows: economic policy: 59\u00a0percent conservative and 41\u00a0percent liberal; social policy: 54\u00a0percent conservative and 38\u00a0percent liberal; and foreign policy: 56\u00a0percent conservative and 43\u00a0percent liberal. In 2012, the \"National Journal\" gave McCain a composite score of 73 percent conservative and 27 percent liberal, while in 2013 he received a composite score of 60 percent conservative and 40 percent liberal.\nColumnists such as Robert Robb and Matthew Continetti used a formulation devised by William F. Buckley Jr. to describe McCain as \"conservative\" but not \"a conservative\", meaning that while McCain usually tended towards conservative positions, he was not \"anchored by the philosophical tenets of modern American conservatism\". Following his 2008 presidential election loss, McCain began adopting more orthodox conservative views; the magazine \"National Journal\" rated McCain along with seven of his colleagues as the \"most conservative\" Senators for 2010 and he achieved a 100 percent rating from the American Conservative Union for that year. During Barack Obama's presidency, McCain was one of the top five Republicans most likely to vote with Obama's position on significant votes; McCain voted with Obama's position on such votes more than half the time in 2013 and was \"censured by the Arizona Republican party for a so-called 'liberal' voting record\".\nFrom the late 1990s until 2008, McCain was a board member of Project Vote Smart which was set up by Richard Kimball, his 1986 Senate opponent. The project provides non-partisan information about the political positions of McCain and other candidates for political office. Additionally, McCain used his Senate website to describe his political positions.\nIn his 2008 speech to the CPAC McCain stated that he believed in \"small government; fiscal discipline; low taxes; a strong defense, judges who enforce, and not make, our laws; the social values that are the true source of our strength; and, generally, the steadfast defense of our rights to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.\"\nIn his 2018 memoir \"The Restless Wave\" he described himself as \"a proponent of lower taxes, less government, free markets, free trade, defense readiness, and democratic internationalism.\"\nCultural and political image.\nMcCain's personal character was a dominant feature of his public image. This image includes the military service of both himself and his family, the circumstances and tensions surrounding the end of his first marriage and beginning of his second, his maverick political persona, his temper, his admitted problem of occasional ill-considered remarks, and his close ties to his children from both his marriages. Perhaps the most egregious of McCain's \"occasional ill-considered remarks\" was his widely condemned 2000 comment that, \"I hate the gooks. I will hate them as long as I live.\" Although McCain claimed he was referring only to his captors and guards, his comments were poorly received by the Asian-American community. His use of a racial slur was also seen as a continuation of a long history of anti-Asian sentiment in America. In his years as a Senator, McCain took more than 20 trips to Vietnam, repeatedly visiting the place of his captivity. After his death, former Vietnamese ambassador to the United States Ph\u1ea1m Quang Vinh described him as \"a great friend to Vietnam.\"\n Public opinion of John McCain\nMcCain's political appeal was more nonpartisan and less ideological compared to many other national politicians. His stature and reputation stemmed partly from his service in the Vietnam War. He also carried physical vestiges of his war wounds, as well as his melanoma surgery. When campaigning, he quipped: \"I am older than dirt and have more scars than Frankenstein.\"\nWriters often extolled McCain for his courage not just in war but in politics, and wrote sympathetically about him. McCain's shift of political stances and attitudes during and especially after the 2008 presidential campaign, including his self-repudiation of the maverick label, left many writers expressing sadness and wondering what had happened to the McCain they thought they had known. By 2013, some aspects of the older McCain had returned, and his image became that of a kaleidoscope of contradictory tendencies, including as a Republican in Name Only or a \"traitor\" to his party and, as one writer listed, \"the maverick, the former maverick, the curmudgeon, the bridge builder, the war hero bent on transcending the call of self-interest to serve a cause greater than himself, the sore loser, old bull, last lion, loose cannon, happy warrior, elder statesman, lion in winter.\"\nIn his own estimation, McCain was straightforward and direct, but impatient. His other traits included a penchant for lucky charms, and a sense of humor that sometimes backfired spectacularly, as when he made a joke in 1998 about the Clintons that was widely deemed not fit to print in newspapers: \"Do you know why Chelsea Clinton is so ugly?\u00a0\u2013 Because Janet Reno is her father.\" McCain subsequently apologized profusely, and the Clinton White House accepted his apology. McCain did not shy away from addressing his shortcomings, and he apologized for them. He was known for sometimes being prickly and hot-tempered with Senate colleagues, but his relations with his own Senate staff were more cordial, and inspired loyalty towards him. He formed a strong bond with two senators, Joe Lieberman and Lindsey Graham, over hawkish foreign policy and overseas travel, and they became dubbed the \"Three Amigos\".\nMcCain acknowledged having said intemperate things in years past, though he also said that many stories have been exaggerated. One psychoanalytic comparison suggested that McCain was not the first presidential candidate to have a temper, and cultural critic Julia Keller argued that voters want leaders who are passionate, engaged, fiery, and feisty. McCain employed both profanity and shouting on occasion, although such incidents became less frequent over the years. Lieberman made this observation: \"It is not the kind of anger that is a loss of control. He is a very controlled person.\" Senator Thad Cochran, who knew McCain for decades and had battled him over earmarks, expressed concern about a McCain presidency: \"He is erratic. He is hotheaded. He loses his temper and he worries me.\" Yet Cochran supported McCain for president when it was clear he would win the nomination. The \"Chicago Tribune\" editorial board called McCain a patriot, who although sometimes wrong was fearless, and that he deserves to be thought of among the few US senators in history, whose names are more recognizable than some presidents.\nAll McCain's family members were on good terms with him, and he defended them against some of the negative consequences of his high-profile political lifestyle. His family's military tradition extends to the latest generation: son John Sidney IV (\"Jack\") graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy in 2009, becoming the fourth generation John S. McCain to do so, and is a helicopter pilot; son James served two tours with the Marines in the Iraq War; and son Doug flew jets in the navy. His daughter Meghan became a blogging and Twittering presence in the debate about the future of the Republican Party following the 2008 elections, and showed some of his maverick tendencies. In 2017 Meghan joined the cast of the popular ABC talk show \"The View\" as a co-host. Senator McCain himself also appeared as a guest on the program.\nMcCain appeared in several television shows and films while he was a sitting senator. He made cameo appearances in \"Wedding Crashers\" and two episodes of \"Parks and Recreation\". He also made an uncredited appearance in \"24.\" McCain also hosted \"Saturday Night Live\" in 2002 and appeared in two episodes in 2008.\nAwards and honors.\nIn addition to his military honors and decorations, McCain was granted a number of civilian awards and honors. During 1997, \"Time\" magazine named McCain as one of the \"25 Most Influential People in America\". In 1999, McCain shared the Profile in Courage Award with Senator Russ Feingold for their work towards campaign finance reform. The following year, the same pair shared the Paul H. Douglas Award for Ethics in Government. In 2005, The Eisenhower Institute awarded McCain the Eisenhower Leadership Prize. The prize recognizes individuals whose lifetime accomplishments reflect Dwight D. Eisenhower's legacy of integrity and leadership. In 2006, the Bruce F. Vento Public Service Award was bestowed upon McCain by the National Park Trust. The same year, McCain was awarded the Henry M. Jackson Distinguished Service Award by the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs, in honor of Senator Henry M. \"Scoop\" Jackson. In 2007, the World Leadership Forum presented McCain with the Policymaker of the Year Award; it is given internationally to someone who has \"created, inspired or strongly influenced important policy or legislation\". In 2010, President Mikheil Saakashvili of Georgia awarded McCain the Order of National Hero, an award never previously given to a non-Georgian. In 2015, the Kyiv Patriarchate awarded McCain its own version of the Order of St. Vladimir. In 2016, Allegheny College awarded McCain, along with Vice President Joe Biden, its Prize for Civility in Public Life. In August 2016, Petro Poroshenko, the President of Ukraine, awarded McCain with the highest award for foreigners, the Order of Liberty. In 2017, Hashim Tha\u00e7i, the President of Kosovo, awarded McCain the \"Urdh\u00ebr i Liris\u00eb\" (Order of Freedom) medal for his contribution to the freedom and independence of Kosovo, and its partnership with the U.S. McCain also received the Liberty Medal from the National Constitution Center in 2017. In the spring of 2018 McCain was decorated with the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun from the Japanese Emperor for 'strengthening bilateral relations and promoting friendship between Japan and the United States'. In 2022, President Biden posthumously awarded McCain the Presidential Medal of Freedom.\nMcCain received several honorary degrees, including from Colgate University (LL.D; 2000), The Citadel (DPA; 2002), Wake Forest University (LL.D; May 20, 2002), the University of Southern California (DHL; May 2004), Northwestern University (LL.D; June 17, 2005), Liberty University (2006), The New School (2006), and the Royal Military College of Canada (D.MSc June 27, 2013). He was also made an Honorary Patron of the University Philosophical Society at Trinity College Dublin in 2005.\nOn July 11, 2018, , originally named in honor of the Senator's father and grandfather, was rededicated in the Senator's name also.\nOn November 29, 2017, the Phoenix City Council unanimously voted to name Terminal 3 at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport in Honor of the Senator which opened on January 7, 2019, after his death in August 2018.\nCommemoration.\nOn April 4, 2019, the Kyiv City Council renamed a street that had previously been named after the NKVD agent Ivan Kudria to \"John McCain Street\".\nThere is also John McCain Street in the city of Kryvyi Rih. The cities of Vinnytsia and Sumy have Senator McCain Street.\nA John McCain memorial was built in Hanoi, now a symbol of McCain's relationship with Vietnam, and the relationship of the U.S. to Vietnam.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\""}
{"id": "43716", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43716", "title": "Taliban government", "text": ""}
{"id": "43717", "revid": "50757341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43717", "title": "Prisoner's dilemma", "text": "Standard example in game theory\nThe prisoner's dilemma is a game theory thought experiment involving two rational agents, each of whom can either cooperate for mutual benefit or betray their partner (\"defect\") for individual gain. The dilemma arises from the fact that while defecting is rational for each agent, cooperation yields a higher payoff for each. The puzzle was designed by Merrill Flood and Melvin Dresher in 1950 during their work at the RAND Corporation. They invited economist Armen Alchian and mathematician John Williams to play a hundred rounds of the game, observing that Alchian and Williams often chose to cooperate. When asked about the results, John Nash remarked that rational behavior in the iterated version of the game can differ from that in a single-round version. This insight anticipated a key result in game theory: cooperation can emerge in repeated interactions, even in situations where it is not rational in a one-off interaction.\nAlbert W. Tucker later named the game the \"prisoner's dilemma\" by framing the rewards in terms of prison sentences. The prisoner's dilemma models many real-world situations involving strategic behavior. In casual usage, the label \"prisoner's dilemma\" is applied to any situation in which two entities can gain important benefits by cooperating or suffer by failing to do so, but find it difficult or expensive to coordinate their choices.\nPremise.\nThis \"typical contemporary version\" of the game is described in William Poundstone's 1993 book \"Prisoner's Dilemma\":\nTwo members of a criminal gang are arrested and imprisoned. Each prisoner is in solitary confinement with no means of speaking to or exchanging messages with the other. The police admit they don't have enough evidence to convict the pair on the principal charge. They plan to sentence both to a year in prison on a lesser charge. Simultaneously, the police offer each prisoner a Faustian bargain. If he testifies against his partner, he will go free while the partner will get three years in prison on the main charge. Oh, yes, there is a catch ... If \"both\" prisoners testify against each other, both will be sentenced to two years in jail. The prisoners are given a little time to think this over, but in no case may either learn what the other has decided until he has irrevocably made his decision. Each is informed that the other prisoner is being offered the very same deal. Each prisoner is concerned only with his own welfare\u2014with minimizing his own prison sentence.\nThis leads to three different possible outcomes for prisoners A and B:\nStrategy for the prisoner's dilemma.\nTwo prisoners are separated into individual rooms and cannot communicate with each other. It is assumed that both prisoners understand the nature of the game, have no loyalty to each other, and will have no opportunity for retribution or reward outside of the game. The normal game is shown below:\nRegardless of what the other decides, each prisoner gets a higher reward by betraying the other (\"defecting\"). The reasoning involves analyzing both players' best responses: B will either cooperate or defect. If B cooperates, A should defect, because going free is better than serving 1 year. If B defects, A should also defect, because serving 2 years is better than serving 3. So, either way, A should defect since defecting is A's best response regardless of B's strategy. Parallel reasoning will show that B should defect.\nDefection always results in a better payoff than cooperation, so it is a strictly dominant strategy for both players. Mutual defection is the only strong Nash equilibrium in the game. Since the collectively ideal result of mutual cooperation is irrational from a self-interested standpoint, this Nash equilibrium is not Pareto efficient.\nGeneralized form.\nThe structure of the traditional prisoner's dilemma can be generalized from its original prisoner setting. Suppose that the two players are represented by the colors red and blue and that each player chooses to either \"cooperate\" or \"defect\".\nIf both players cooperate, they both receive the reward formula_1 for cooperating. If both players defect, they both receive the punishment payoff formula_2. If Blue defects while Red cooperates, then Blue receives the temptation payoff formula_3, while Red receives the \"sucker's\" payoff, formula_4. Similarly, if Blue cooperates while Red defects, then Blue receives the sucker's payoff formula_4, while Red receives the temptation payoff formula_3.\nThis can be expressed in normal form:\nand to be a prisoner's dilemma game in the strong sense, the following condition must hold for the payoffs:\n&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\nThe payoff relationship &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; implies that mutual cooperation is superior to mutual defection, while the payoff relationships &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; imply that defection is the dominant strategy for both agents.\nThe iterated prisoner's dilemma.\nIf two players play the prisoner's dilemma more than once in succession, remember their opponent's previous actions, and are allowed to change their strategy accordingly, the game is called the iterated prisoner's dilemma.\nIn addition to the general form above, the iterative version also requires that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, to prevent alternating cooperation and defection giving a greater reward than mutual cooperation.\nThe iterated prisoner's dilemma is fundamental to some theories of human cooperation and trust. Assuming that the game effectively models transactions between two people that require trust, cooperative behavior in populations can be modeled by a multi-player iterated version of the game. In 1975, Grofman and Pool estimated the count of scholarly articles devoted to it at over 2,000. The iterated prisoner's dilemma is also called the \"peace-war game\". Several variants of the iterated game have been studied, including a version in which players have an exit option after each round.\nGeneral strategy.\nIf the iterated prisoner's dilemma is played a finite number of times and both players know this, then the dominant strategy and Nash equilibrium is to defect in all rounds. The proof is inductive: one might as well defect on the last turn, since the opponent will not have a chance to later retaliate. Therefore, both will defect on the last turn. Thus, the player might as well defect on the second-to-last turn, since the opponent will defect on the last no matter what is done, and so on. The same applies if the game length is unknown but has a known upper limit.\nFor cooperation to emerge between rational players, the number of rounds must be unknown or infinite. In that case, \"always defect\" may no longer be a dominant strategy. As shown by Robert Aumann in a 1959 paper, rational players repeatedly interacting for indefinitely long games can sustain cooperation. Specifically, a player may be less willing to cooperate if their counterpart did not cooperate many times, which causes disappointment. Conversely, as time elapses, the likelihood of cooperation tends to rise, owing to the establishment of a \"tacit agreement\" among participating players. In experimental situations, cooperation can occur even when both participants know how many iterations will be played.\nAccording to a 2019 experimental study in the \"American Economic Review\" that tested what strategies real-life subjects used in iterated prisoner's dilemma situations with perfect monitoring, the majority of chosen strategies were always to defect, tit-for-tat, and grim trigger. Which strategy the subjects chose depended on the parameters of the game.\nAxelrod's tournament and successful strategy conditions.\nInterest in the iterated prisoner's dilemma was kindled by Robert Axelrod in his 1984 book \"The Evolution of Cooperation\", in which he reports on a tournament that he organized of the \"N\"-step prisoner's dilemma (with \"N\" fixed) in which participants have to choose their strategy repeatedly and remember their previous encounters. Axelrod invited academic colleagues from around the world to devise computer strategies to compete in an iterated prisoner's dilemma tournament. The programs that were entered varied widely in algorithmic complexity, initial hostility, capacity for forgiveness, and so forth.\nAxelrod discovered that when these encounters were repeated over a long period of time with many players, each with different strategies, greedy strategies tended to do very poorly in the long run while more altruistic strategies did better, as judged purely by self-interest. He used this to show a possible mechanism for the evolution of altruistic behavior from mechanisms that are initially purely selfish, by natural selection.\nThe winning deterministic strategy was tit for tat, developed and entered into the tournament by Anatol Rapoport. It was the simplest of any program entered, containing only four lines of BASIC, and won the contest. The strategy is simply to cooperate on the first iteration of the game; after that, the player does what his or her opponent did on the previous move. Depending on the situation, a slightly better strategy can be \"tit for tat with forgiveness\": when the opponent defects, on the next move, the player sometimes cooperates anyway, with a small probability (around 1\u20135%, depending on the lineup of opponents). This allows for occasional recovery from getting trapped in a cycle of defections.\nAfter analyzing the top-scoring strategies, Axelrod stated several conditions necessary for a strategy to succeed:\nIn contrast to the one-time prisoner's dilemma game, the optimal strategy in the iterated prisoner's dilemma depends upon the strategies of likely opponents, how they will react to defections and cooperation, and the discounting of future payoffs. For example, if a population consists entirely of players who always defect, except for one who follows the tit-for-tat strategy, that person is at a slight disadvantage because of the loss on the first turn. In such a population, the optimal strategy is to defect every time. More generally, given a population with a certain percentage of always-defectors with the rest being tit-for-tat players, the optimal strategy depends on the percentage and number of iterations played.\nOther strategies.\nDeriving the optimal strategy is generally done in two ways:\nIn the strategy called win-stay, lose-switch, faced with a failure to cooperate, the player switches strategy the next turn. In certain circumstances, Pavlov beats all other strategies by giving preferential treatment to co-players using a similar strategy.\nAlthough tit-for-tat is considered the most robust basic strategy, a team from Southampton University in England introduced a more successful strategy at the 20th-anniversary iterated prisoner's dilemma competition. It relied on collusion between programs to achieve the highest number of points for a single program. The university submitted 60 programs to the competition, which were designed to recognize each other through a series of five to ten moves at the start. Once this recognition was made, one program would always cooperate and the other would always defect, assuring the maximum number of points for the defector. If the program realized that it was playing a non-Southampton player, it would continuously defect in an attempt to minimize the competing program's score. As a result, the 2004 Prisoners' Dilemma Tournament results show University of Southampton's strategies in the first three places (and a number of positions towards the bottom), despite having fewer wins and many more losses than the GRIM strategy. The Southampton strategy takes advantage of the fact that multiple entries were allowed in this particular competition and that a team's performance was measured by that of the highest-scoring player (meaning that the use of self-sacrificing players was a form of minmaxing).\nBecause of this new rule, this competition also has little theoretical significance when analyzing single-agent strategies as compared to Axelrod's seminal tournament. But it provided a basis for analyzing how to achieve cooperative strategies in multi-agent frameworks, especially in the presence of noise.\nLong before this new-rules tournament was played, Richard Dawkins, in his book \"The Selfish Gene\", pointed out the possibility of such strategies winning if multiple entries were allowed, but wrote that Axelrod would most likely not have allowed them if they had been submitted. Such strategies also circumvent the rule against communication between players: the Southampton programs' \"ten-move dance\" allowed them to recognize one another, reinforcing how valuable communication can be in shifting the balance of the game.\nEven without implicit collusion between software strategies, tit-for-tat is not always the absolute winner of any given tournament; more precisely, its long-run results over a series of tournaments outperform its rivals, but this does not mean it is the most successful in the short term. The same applies to tit-for-tat with forgiveness and other optimal strategies.\nThis can also be illustrated using the Darwinian ESS simulation. In such a simulation, tit-for-tat will almost always come to dominate, though nasty strategies will drift in and out of the population because a tit-for-tat population is penetrable by non-retaliating nice strategies, which in turn are easy prey for the nasty strategies. Dawkins showed that here, no static mix of strategies forms a stable equilibrium, and the system will always oscillate between bounds.\nStochastic iterated prisoner's dilemma.\nIn a stochastic iterated prisoner's dilemma game, strategies are specified in terms of \"cooperation probabilities\". In an encounter between player \"X\" and player \"Y\", \"X\"'s strategy is specified by a set of probabilities \"P\" of cooperating with \"Y\". \"P\" is a function of the outcomes of their previous encounters or some subset thereof. If \"P\" is a function of only their most recent \"n\" encounters, it is called a \"memory-n\" strategy. A memory-1 strategy is then specified by four cooperation probabilities: formula_7, where \"Pcd\" is the probability that \"X\" will cooperate in the present encounter given that the previous encounter was characterized by \"X\" cooperating and \"Y\" defecting. If each of the probabilities are either 1 or 0, the strategy is called deterministic. An example of a deterministic strategy is the tit-for-tat strategy written as formula_8, in which \"X\" responds as \"Y\" did in the previous encounter. Another is the win-stay, lose switch strategy written as formula_9. It has been shown that for any memory-n strategy there is a corresponding memory-1 strategy that gives the same statistical results, so that only memory-1 strategies need be considered.\nIf formula_2 is defined as the above 4-element strategy vector of \"X\" and formula_11 as the 4-element strategy vector of \"Y\" (where the indices are from \"Y\"'s point of view), a transition matrix \"M\" may be defined for \"X\" whose \"ij\"-th entry is the probability that the outcome of a particular encounter between \"X\" and \"Y\" will be \"j\" given that the previous encounter was \"i\", where \"i\" and \"j\" are one of the four outcome indices: \"cc\", \"cd\", \"dc\", or \"dd\". For example, from \"X\"'s point of view, the probability that the outcome of the present encounter is \"cd\" given that the previous encounter was \"cd\" is equal to formula_12. Under these definitions, the iterated prisoner's dilemma qualifies as a stochastic process and \"M\" is a stochastic matrix, allowing all of the theory of stochastic processes to be applied.\nOne result of stochastic theory is that there exists a stationary vector \"v\" for the matrix \"v\" such that formula_13. Without loss of generality, it may be specified that \"v\" is normalized so that the sum of its four components is unity. The \"ij\"-th entry in formula_14 will give the probability that the outcome of an encounter between \"X\" and \"Y\" will be \"j\" given that the encounter \"n\" steps previous is \"i\". In the limit as \"n\" approaches infinity, \"M\" will converge to a matrix with fixed values, giving the long-term probabilities of an encounter producing \"j\" independent of \"i\". In other words, the rows of formula_15 will be identical, giving the long-term equilibrium result probabilities of the iterated prisoner's dilemma without the need to explicitly evaluate a large number of interactions. It can be seen that \"v\" is a stationary vector for formula_14 and particularly formula_15, so that each row of formula_15 will be equal to \"v\". Thus, the stationary vector specifies the equilibrium outcome probabilities for \"X\". Defining formula_19 and formula_20 as the short-term payoff vectors for the {\"cc,cd,dc,dd\"} outcomes (from \"X\"'s point of view), the equilibrium payoffs for \"X\" and \"Y\" can now be specified as formula_21 and formula_22, allowing the two strategies \"P\" and \"Q\" to be compared for their long-term payoffs.\nZero-determinant strategies.\nIn 2012, William H. Press and Freeman Dyson published a new class of strategies for the stochastic iterated prisoner's dilemma called \"zero-determinant\" (ZD) strategies. The long term payoffs for encounters between \"X\" and \"Y\" can be expressed as the determinant of a matrix which is a function of the two strategies and the short term payoff vectors: formula_23 and formula_24, which do not involve the stationary vector \"v\". Since the determinant function formula_25 is linear in formula_26, it follows that formula_27 (where formula_28). Any strategies for which formula_29 are by definition a ZD strategy, and the long-term payoffs obey the relation formula_30.\nTit-for-tat is a ZD strategy which is \"fair\", in the sense of not gaining advantage over the other player. But the ZD space also contains strategies that, in the case of two players, can allow one player to unilaterally set the other player's score or alternatively force an evolutionary player to achieve a payoff some percentage lower than his own. The extorted player could defect, but would thereby hurt himself by getting a lower payoff. Thus, extortion solutions turn the iterated prisoner's dilemma into a sort of ultimatum game. Specifically, \"X\" is able to choose a strategy for which formula_31, unilaterally setting \"sy\" to a specific value within a particular range of values, independent of \"Y\"'s strategy, offering an opportunity for \"X\" to \"extort\" player \"Y\" (and vice versa). But if \"X\" tries to set \"sx\" to a particular value, the range of possibilities is much smaller, consisting only of complete cooperation or complete defection.\nAn extension of the iterated prisoner's dilemma is an evolutionary stochastic iterated prisoner's dilemma, in which the relative abundance of particular strategies is allowed to change, with more successful strategies relatively increasing. This process may be accomplished by having less successful players imitate the more successful strategies, or by eliminating less successful players from the game, while multiplying the more successful ones. It has been shown that unfair ZD strategies are not evolutionarily stable. The key intuition is that an evolutionarily stable strategy must not only be able to invade another population (which extortionary ZD strategies can do) but must also perform well against other players of the same type (which extortionary ZD players do poorly because they reduce each other's surplus).\nTheory and simulations confirm that beyond a critical population size, ZD extortion loses out in evolutionary competition against more cooperative strategies, and as a result, the average payoff in the population increases when the population is larger. In addition, there are some cases in which extortioners may even catalyze cooperation by helping to break out of a face-off between uniform defectors and win\u2013stay, lose\u2013switch agents.\nWhile extortionary ZD strategies are not stable in large populations, another ZD class called \"generous\" strategies is both stable and robust. When the population is not too small, these strategies can supplant any other ZD strategy and even perform well against a broad array of generic strategies for iterated prisoner's dilemma, including win\u2013stay, lose\u2013switch. This was proven specifically for the by Alexander Stewart and Joshua Plotkin in 2013. Generous strategies will cooperate with other cooperative players, and in the face of defection, the generous player loses more utility than its rival. Generous strategies are the intersection of ZD strategies and so-called \"good\" strategies, which were defined by Ethan Akin to be those for which the player responds to past mutual cooperation with future cooperation and splits expected payoffs equally if he receives at least the cooperative expected payoff. Among good strategies, the generous (ZD) subset performs well when the population is not too small. If the population is very small, defection strategies tend to dominate.\nContinuous iterated prisoner's dilemma.\nMost work on the iterated prisoner's dilemma has focused on the discrete case, in which players either cooperate or defect, because this model is relatively simple to analyze. However, some researchers have looked at models of the continuous iterated prisoner's dilemma, in which players are able to make a variable contribution to the other player. Le and Boyd found that in such situations, cooperation is much harder to evolve than in the discrete iterated prisoner's dilemma. In a continuous prisoner's dilemma, if a population starts off in a non-cooperative equilibrium, players who are only marginally more cooperative than non-cooperators get little benefit from assorting with one another. By contrast, in a discrete prisoner's dilemma, tit-for-tat cooperators get a big payoff boost from assorting with one another in a non-cooperative equilibrium, relative to non-cooperators. Since nature arguably offers more opportunities for variable cooperation rather than a strict dichotomy of cooperation or defection, the continuous prisoner's dilemma may help explain why real-life examples of tit-for-tat-like cooperation are extremely rare even though tit-for-tat seems robust in theoretical models.\nReal-life examples.\nMany instances of human interaction and natural processes have payoff matrices like the prisoner's dilemma's. It is therefore of interest to the social sciences, such as economics, politics, and sociology, as well as to the biological sciences, such as ethology and evolutionary biology. Many natural processes have been abstracted into models in which living beings are engaged in endless games of prisoner's dilemma.\nEnvironmental studies.\nIn environmental studies, the dilemma is evident in crises such as global climate change. It is argued all countries will benefit from a stable climate, but any single country is often hesitant to curb CO2 emissions. The immediate benefit to any one country from maintaining current behavior is perceived to be greater than the purported eventual benefit to that country if all countries' behavior was changed, therefore explaining the impasse concerning climate-change in 2007.\nAn important difference between climate-change politics and the prisoner's dilemma is uncertainty; the extent and pace at which pollution can change climate is not known. The dilemma faced by governments is therefore different from the prisoner's dilemma in that the payoffs of cooperation are unknown. This difference suggests that states will cooperate much less than in a real iterated prisoner's dilemma, so that the probability of avoiding a possible climate catastrophe is much smaller than that suggested by a game-theoretical analysis of the situation using a real iterated prisoner's dilemma.\nThomas Osang and Arundhati Nandy provide a theoretical explanation with proofs for a regulation-driven win-win situation along the lines of Michael Porter's hypothesis, in which government regulation of competing firms is substantial.\nAnimals.\nCooperative behavior of many animals can be understood as an example of the iterated prisoner's dilemma. Often animals engage in long-term partnerships; for example, guppies inspect predators cooperatively in groups, and they are thought to punish non-cooperative inspectors.\nVampire bats are social animals that engage in reciprocal food exchange. Applying the payoffs from the prisoner's dilemma can help explain this behavior.\nPsychology.\nIn addiction research and behavioral economics, George Ainslie points out that addiction can be cast as an intertemporal prisoner's dilemma problem between the present and future selves of the addict. In this case, \"defecting\" means relapsing, where not relapsing both today and in the future is by far the best outcome. The case where one abstains today but relapses in the future is the worst outcome: in some sense, the discipline and self-sacrifice involved in abstaining today have been \"wasted\" because the future relapse means that the addict is right back where they started and will have to start over. Relapsing today and tomorrow is a slightly \"better\" outcome, because while the addict is still addicted, they haven't put the effort in to trying to stop. The final case, where one engages in the addictive behavior today while abstaining tomorrow, has the problem that (as in other prisoner's dilemmas) there is an obvious benefit to defecting \"today\", but tomorrow one will face the same prisoner's dilemma, and the same obvious benefit will be present then, ultimately leading to an endless string of defections.\nIn \"The Science of Trust\", John Gottman defines good relationships as those where partners know not to enter into mutual defection behavior, or at least not to get dynamically stuck there in a loop. In cognitive neuroscience, fast brain signaling associated with processing different rounds may indicate choices at the next round. Mutual cooperation outcomes entail brain activity changes predictive of how quickly a person will cooperate in kind at the next opportunity; this activity may be linked to basic homeostatic and motivational processes, possibly increasing the likelihood of short-cutting into mutual cooperation.\nEconomics.\nThe prisoner's dilemma has been called the \"E. coli\" of social psychology, and it has been used widely to research various topics such as oligopolistic competition and collective action to produce a collective good.\nAdvertising is sometimes cited as a real example of the prisoner's dilemma. When cigarette advertising was legal in the United States, competing cigarette manufacturers had to decide how much money to spend on advertising. The effectiveness of Firm A's advertising was partially determined by the advertising conducted by Firm B. Likewise, the profit derived from advertising for Firm B is affected by the advertising conducted by Firm A. If both Firm A and Firm B chose to advertise during a given period, then the advertisement from each firm negates the other's, receipts remain constant, and expenses increase due to the cost of advertising. Both firms would benefit from a reduction in advertising. However, should Firm B choose not to advertise, Firm A could benefit greatly by advertising. Nevertheless, the optimal amount of advertising by one firm depends on how much advertising the other undertakes. As the best strategy is dependent on what the other firm chooses there is no dominant strategy, which makes it slightly different from a prisoner's dilemma. The outcome is similar, though, in that both firms would be better off were they to advertise less than in the equilibrium.\nSometimes cooperative behaviors do emerge in business situations. For instance, cigarette manufacturers endorsed the making of laws banning cigarette advertising, understanding that this would reduce costs and increase profits across the industry.\nWithout enforceable agreements, members of a cartel are also involved in a (multi-player) prisoner's dilemma. \"Cooperating\" typically means agreeing to a price floor, while \"defecting\" means selling under this minimum level, instantly taking business from other cartel members. Anti-trust authorities want potential cartel members to mutually defect, ensuring the lowest possible prices for consumers.\nSport.\nDoping in sport has been cited as an example of a prisoner's dilemma. Two competing athletes have the option to use an illegal and/or dangerous drug to boost their performance. If neither athlete takes the drug, then neither gains an advantage. If only one does, then that athlete gains a significant advantage over the competitor, reduced by the legal and/or medical dangers of having taken the drug. But if both athletes take the drug, the benefits cancel out and only the dangers remain, putting them both in a worse position than if neither had doped.\nInternational politics.\nIn international relations theory, the prisoner's dilemma is often used to demonstrate why cooperation fails in situations when cooperation between states is collectively optimal but individually suboptimal. A classic example is the security dilemma, whereby an increase in one state's security (such as increasing its military strength) leads other states to fear for their own security out of fear of offensive action. Consequently, security-increasing measures can lead to tensions, escalation or conflict with one or more other parties, producing an outcome which no party truly desires. The security dilemma is particularly intense in situations when it is hard to distinguish offensive weapons from defensive weapons, and offense has the advantage in any conflict over defense.\nThe prisoner's dilemma has frequently been used by realist international relations theorists to demonstrate the why all states (regardless of their internal policies or professed ideology) under international anarchy will struggle to cooperate with one another even when all benefit from such cooperation.\nCritics of realism argue that iteration and extending the shadow of the future are solutions to the prisoner's dilemma. When actors play the prisoner's dilemma once, they have incentives to defect, but when they expect to play it repeatedly, they have greater incentives to cooperate.\nMultiplayer dilemmas.\nMany real-life dilemmas involve multiple players. Although metaphorical, Garrett Hardin's tragedy of the commons may be viewed as an example of a multi-player generalization of the prisoner's dilemma: each villager makes a choice for personal gain or restraint. The collective reward for unanimous or frequent defection is very low payoffs and the destruction of the commons.\nThe commons are not always exploited: William Poundstone, in a book about the prisoner's dilemma, describes a situation in New Zealand where newspaper boxes are left unlocked. It is possible for people to take a paper without paying (defecting), but very few do, feeling that if they do not pay then neither will others, destroying the system. Subsequent research by Elinor Ostrom, winner of the 2009 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, hypothesized that the tragedy of the commons is oversimplified, with the negative outcome influenced by outside influences. Without complicating pressures, groups communicate and manage the commons among themselves for their mutual benefit, enforcing social norms to preserve the resource and achieve the maximum good for the group, an example of effecting the best-case outcome for prisoner's dilemma.\nAcademic settings.\nThe prisoner's dilemma has been used in various academic settings to illustrate the complexities of cooperation and competition. One notable example is the classroom experiment conducted by sociology professor Dan Chambliss at Hamilton College in the 1980s. Starting in 1981, Chambliss proposed that if no student took the final exam, everyone would receive an A, but if even one student took it, those who didn't would receive a zero. In 1988, John Werner, a first-year student, successfully organized his classmates to boycott the exam, demonstrating a practical application of game theory and the prisoner's dilemma concept.\nNearly 25 years later, a similar incident occurred at Johns Hopkins University in 2013. Professor Peter Fr\u00f6hlich's grading policy scaled final exams according to the highest score, meaning that if everyone received the same score, they would all get an A. Students in Fr\u00f6hlich's classes organized a boycott of the final exam, ensuring that no one took it. As a result, every student received an A, successfully solving the prisoner's dilemma in a mutually optimal way without iteration. These examples highlight how the prisoner's dilemma can be used to explore cooperative behavior and strategic decision-making in educational contexts.\nRelated games.\nClosed-bag exchange.\nDouglas Hofstadter suggested that people often find problems such as the prisoner's dilemma problem easier to understand when it is illustrated in the form of a simple game, or trade-off. One of several examples he used was \"closed bag exchange\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Two people meet and exchange closed bags, with the understanding that one of them contains money, and the other contains a purchase. Either player can choose to honor the deal by putting into his or her bag what he or she agreed, or he or she can defect by handing over an empty bag.\nIn game shows.\n\"Friend or Foe?\" is a game show that aired from 2002 to 2003 on the Game Show Network in the US. On the show, three pairs of people compete. When a pair is eliminated, they play a game similar to the prisoner's dilemma to determine how the winnings are split. If they both cooperate (Friend), they share the winnings 50\u201350. If one cooperates and the other defects (Foe), the defector gets all the winnings and the cooperator gets nothing. If both defect, both leave with nothing. Notice that the reward matrix is slightly different from the standard one given above, as the rewards for the \"both defect\" and the \"cooperate while the opponent defects\" cases are identical. This makes the \"both defect\" case a weak equilibrium, compared with the strict equilibrium in the standard prisoner's dilemma. If a contestant knows that their opponent will vote \"Foe\", then their own choice does not affect their winnings. In a sense, \"Friend or Foe\" has a rewards model between the prisoner's dilemma and the game of Chicken.\nThis is the rewards matrix:\nThis payoff matrix has also been used on the British television programs \"Trust Me\", \"Shafted\", \"The Bank Job\", \"Golden Balls\", and \"The Inner Circle\", and on the U.S. game show \"Take It All\", as well as for the winning couple on the reality shows \"Bachelor Pad\" and \"Love Island\". A team of economists analyzed data from \"Golden Balls\" and found that cooperation was \"surprisingly high\" for amounts of money that would be consequential in the real world but were comparatively low in the context of the game.\nThe dilemma is also a Game Mechanic on \"The Traitors\" if multiple Traitors remain in the game as finalists. This happened on the second season finale on \"The Traitors Australia\"; a three-player variation of the dilemma arose for the three Traitor Finalists. They were given a choice to \"share\" or \"steal\" the prize pot. If all three chose to share, each would receive a third of the pot. If one or two traitors chose to steal, those who shared would win nothing and the pot would be divided among those who stole. If all three chose to steal, no one would win anything.\nIterated snowdrift.\nResearchers from the University of Lausanne and the University of Edinburgh have suggested that the \"Iterated Snowdrift Game\" may more closely reflect real-world social situations, although this model is actually a chicken game. In this model, the risk of being exploited through defection is lower, and individuals always gain from taking the cooperative choice. The snowdrift game imagines two drivers who are stuck on opposite sides of a snowdrift, each of whom is given the option of shoveling snow to clear a path or remaining in their car. A player's highest payoff comes from leaving the opponent to clear all the snow by themselves, but the opponent is still nominally rewarded for their work.\nThis may better reflect real-world scenarios, the researchers giving the example of two scientists collaborating on a report, both of whom would benefit if the other worked harder. \"But when your collaborator doesn't do any work, it's probably better for you to do all the work yourself. You'll still end up with a completed project.\"\nCoordination games.\nIn coordination games, players must coordinate their strategies for a good outcome. An example is two cars that abruptly meet in a blizzard; each must choose whether to swerve left or right. If both swerve left, or both right, the cars do not collide. The local left- and right-hand traffic convention helps to co-ordinate their actions.\nSymmetrical co-ordination games include Stag hunt and Bach or Stravinsky.\nAsymmetric prisoner's dilemmas.\nA more general set of games is asymmetric. As in the prisoner's dilemma, the best outcome is cooperation, and there are motives for defection. Unlike the symmetric prisoner's dilemma, though, one player has more to lose and/or more to gain than the other. Some such games have been described as a prisoner's dilemma in which one prisoner has an alibi, hence the term \"alibi game\".\nIn experiments, players getting unequal payoffs in repeated games may seek to maximize profits, but only under the condition that both players receive equal payoffs; this may lead to a stable equilibrium strategy in which the disadvantaged player defects every X game, while the other always co-operates. Such behavior may depend on the experiment's social norms around fairness.\nSoftware.\nSeveral software packages have been created to run simulations and tournaments of the prisoner's dilemma, some of which have their source code available:\nIn fiction.\nHannu Rajaniemi set the opening scene of his \"The Quantum Thief\" trilogy in a \"dilemma prison\". The main theme of the series has been described as the \"inadequacy of a binary universe\" and the ultimate antagonist is a character called the All-Defector. The first book in the series was published in 2010, with the two sequels, \"The Fractal Prince\" and \"The Causal Angel\", published in 2012 and 2014, respectively.\nA game modeled after the iterated prisoner's dilemma is a central focus of the 2012 video game ' and a minor part in its 2016 sequel '.\nIn \"The Mysterious Benedict Society and the Prisoner's Dilemma\" by Trenton Lee Stewart, the main characters start by playing a version of the game and escaping from the \"prison\" altogether. Later, they become actual prisoners and escape once again.\nIn \"The Adventure Zone: Balance\" during \"The Suffering Game\" subarc, the player characters are twice presented with the prisoner's dilemma during their time in two liches' domain, once cooperating and once defecting.\nIn chapter 4 of the eighth novel from the author James S. A. Corey, \"Tiamat's Wrath\", Colonel Jason Ilich explains the prisoner's dilemma to Winston Duarte's 14-year-old daughter, Teresa, to train her in strategic thinking.\nThe 2008 film \"The Dark Knight\" includes a scene loosely based on the problem in which the Joker rigs two ferries, one containing prisoners and the other containing civilians, arming both groups with the means to detonate the bomb on each other's ferries, threatening to detonate them both if they hesitate.\nIn moral philosophy.\nThe prisoner's dilemma is commonly used as a thinking tool in moral philosophy as an illustration of the potential tension between the benefit of the individual and the benefit of the community.\nBoth the one-shot and the iterated prisoner's dilemma have applications in moral philosophy. Indeed, many of the moral situations, such as genocide, are not easily repeated more than once. Moreover, in many situations, the previous rounds' outcomes are unknown to the players, since they are not necessarily the same (e.g. interaction with a panhandler on the street).\nThe philosopher David Gauthier uses the prisoner's dilemma to show how morality and rationality can conflict.\nSome game theorists have criticized the use of the prisoner's dilemma as a thinking tool in moral philosophy. Kenneth Binmore argued that the prisoner's dilemma does not accurately describe the game played by humanity, which he argues is closer to a coordination game. Brian Skyrms shares this perspective. Other game theorists see the prisoner's dilemma as arising out of uncertainty over possible non-dilemma games perceived by the players.\nSteven Kuhn suggests that these views may be reconciled by considering that moral behavior can modify the payoff matrix of a game, transforming it from a prisoner's dilemma into other games.\nPure and impure prisoner's dilemma.\nA prisoner's dilemma is considered \"impure\" if a mixed strategy may give better expected payoffs than a pure strategy. This creates the interesting possibility that the moral action from a utilitarian perspective (i.e., aiming at maximizing the good of an action) may require randomization of one's strategy, such as cooperating with 80% chance and defecting with 20% chance.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43718", "revid": "22399950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43718", "title": "Iterated prisoner's dilemma", "text": ""}
{"id": "43719", "revid": "48535834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43719", "title": "Sport of athletics", "text": "Group of sporting events\nAthletics is a group of sporting events that involves competitive running, jumping and throwing. The most common types of athletics competitions are track and field, road running, cross-country running, and race walking.\nThe results of racing events are decided by finishing position (or time, where measured), while the jumps and throws are won by the athlete that achieves the highest or furthest measurement from a series of attempts. The simplicity of the competitions, and the lack of a need for expensive equipment, makes athletics one of the most common types of sports in the world. Athletics is mostly an individual sport, with the exception of relay races and competitions which combine athletes' performances for a team score, such as cross country.\nOrganized athletics are traced back to the ancient Olympic Games from 776\u00a0BC. The rules and format of the modern events in athletics were defined in Western Europe and North America in the 19th and early 20th century, and were then spread to other parts of the world. Most modern top level meetings are held under the auspices of World Athletics, the global governing body for the sport of athletics, or its member continental and national federations.\nThe athletics meeting forms the backbone of the Summer Olympics and most other major multi-sport events. The foremost international athletics meeting is the World Athletics Championships, which incorporates track and field, marathon running and race walking. Other top level competitions in athletics include the World Athletics Indoor Championships, World Athletics Cross Country Championships and the World Athletics Road Running Championships. Athletes with a physical disability compete at the Summer Paralympics and the World Para Athletics Championships.\nThe most prestigious global season-long leagues in the sport are the Diamond League for track and field athletes, and the World Marathon Majors in marathon running.\nThe word athletics is derived from the Ancient Greek (, \"combatant in public games\") from (, \"prize\") or (, \"competition\"). Initially, the term described athletic contests in general \u2013 i.e. sporting competition based primarily on human physical feats. In the 19th century, the term athletics acquired a more narrow definition in Europe and came to describe sports involving competitive running, walking, jumping and throwing. This definition continues to be prominent in the United Kingdom and the former British Empire. Related words in Germanic and Romance languages also have a similar meaning.\nIn many parts of North America, athletics is commonly understood as encompassing sports in general, aligning with its historical usage. The term \"athletics\" is seldom used specifically to denote the sport of athletics in this region. Instead, \"track and field\" is the preferred term used in the United States and Canada to describe athletics events, which include race-walking and marathon running (although cross-country running is typically categorized as a distinct sport).\nHistory.\nAncient.\nAthletic contests in running, walking, jumping and throwing are among the oldest of all sports and their roots are prehistoric. Athletics events were depicted in the Ancient Egyptian tombs in Saqqara, with illustrations of running at the Heb Sed festival and high jumping appearing in tombs from as early as of 2250\u00a0BC. The Tailteann Games were an ancient Celtic festival in Ireland, founded c.\u20091800\u00a0BC, and the thirty-day meeting included running and stone-throwing among its sporting events. The original and only event at the first Olympics in 776\u00a0BC was a stadium-length running event known as the \"stadion\". This later expanded to include throwing and jumping events within the ancient pentathlon. Athletics competitions also took place at other Panhellenic Games, which were founded later around 500\u00a0BC.\nModern era.\nThe Cotswold Olympic Games, a sports festival which emerged in 17th century England, featured athletics in the form of sledgehammer throwing contests. Annually, from 1796 to 1798, L'Olympiade de la R\u00e9publique was held in revolutionary France, and is an early forerunner to the modern Olympic Games. The premier event of this competition was a running event, but various ancient Greek disciplines were also on display. The 1796 Olympiade marked the introduction of the metric system into the sport.\nAthletics competitions were held about 1812 at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and in 1840 at the Royal Shrewsbury School Hunt. The Royal Military Academy, Woolwich held an organised competition in 1849, and a regular series of closed meetings open only to undergraduates, was held by Exeter College, Oxford, from 1850. The annual Wenlock Olympian Games, first held in 1850 in Wenlock, England, incorporated athletics events into its sports programme.\nThe first modern athletics clubs in the world were founded at the University of Cambridge in 1857, and the University of Oxford in 1860; they began an annual varsity match in 1864. The London Athletic Club became the first independent athletic club in 1863. The first modern-style indoor athletics meetings were recorded shortly after in the 1860s, including a meet at Ashburnham Hall in London which featured four running events and a triple jump competition.\nThe Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) was established in England in 1880 as the first national body for the sport of athletics and began holding its own annual athletics competition \u2013 the AAA Championships. The United States also began holding an annual national competition \u2013 the USA Outdoor Track and Field Championships \u2013 first held in 1876 by the New York Athletic Club. Athletics became codified and standardized via the English AAA and other general sports organisations in the late 19th century, such as the Amateur Athletic Union (founded in the US in 1888) and the (founded in France in 1889).\nAn athletics competition was included in the first modern Olympic Games in 1896 and it has been as one of the foremost competitions at the quadrennial multi-sport event ever since. Originally for men only, the 1928 Olympics saw the introduction of women's events in the athletics programme. Athletics is part of the Paralympic Games since the inaugural Games in 1960. Athletics has a very high-profile during major championships, especially the Olympics, even among casual sports fans, but otherwise is less popular though it maintains a dedicate fan base. Big city marathons such as New York, Boston, Chicago, London and Tokyo are major televised events in their respective cities, and often attract thousands of entrants and tens of thousands of spectators, for whom the event is usually free as it takes place on normal city roads. A small number of half marathons and road mile races, including the Great North Run, attract similar attention.\nAn international governing body, the International Amateur Athletics Federation (IAAF), was founded in 1912. It enforced amateur sport status on competitions during much of the 20th century. Professional competition continued at a low level, becoming increasingly more common as the century progressed. The International Track Association briefly formed a professional track and field circuit in the United States in the 1970s. Athletes used their increasing status to push for remuneration and the IAAF responded with the IAAF Golden Events series and the establishment an outdoor World Championships in 1983, including track and field, racewalking and a marathon event. In modern times, athletes can receive money for racing, putting an end to the so-called \"amateurism\" that existed before. The global body updated the name to the International Association of Athletics Federations in 2001, moving away from its amateur origins, before taking on its current name World Athletics in 2019. \nThe Comit\u00e9 International Sports des Sourds had been formed by 1922, to govern international deaf sports, including athletics.\nThe first organized international competitions for athletes with a physical disability (not deaf) began in 1952, when the first international Stoke Mandeville Games were organized for World War II veterans. This only included athletes in a wheelchair. This inspired the first Paralympic Games, held in 1960. Competitions would over time be expanded to include mainly athletes with amputation, cerebral palsy and visual impairment, in addition to wheelchair events.\nEvents.\nWorld Athletics, the sport's governing body, defines athletics in six disciplines: track and field, road running, race walking, cross country running, mountain running, and trail running. Mountain running was added in 2003 and trail running was added in 2015. \nAll forms of athletics are individual sports with the exception of relay races. However, athletes' performances are often tallied together by country at international championships, and, in the case of cross country and road races, finishing positions or times of the top athletes from a team may be combined to declare a team victor.\nSeveral further forms of competitive running exist outside of the governance of World Athletics. The International Skyrunning Federation (ISF) governs high-altitude mountain running, defined as skyrunning, and is affiliated with the International Climbing and Mountaineering Federation rather than World Athletics. Competitive stair climbing events, usually hosted in skyscrapers, has two common names: vertical running (as described by the ISF) and tower running (as described by the Towerrunning World Association). Snowshoe running is a winter sport governed by the World Snowshoe Federation, which is similarly to cross country running but has athletes wearing snowshoes to race over deep snow on an obstacle-free course. The International Association of Ultrarunners organises ultra running as an affiliate of World Athletics, but these long-distance forms of competition fit within World Athletics disciplines, albeit with additional distance.\nAthletics, specifically the distance running discipline, also forms a significant portion of a number of other organised sports, most notable the triathlon family of sports and modern pentathlon. In both cases, the rules of the sport broadly mirror those of World Athletics, but the details are set by the international federation of the sports themselves.\nTrack and field.\nTrack and field competitions emerged in the late 19th century and were typically contested between athletes who were representing rival educational institutions, military organisations and sports clubs. Participating athletes may compete in one or more events, according to their specialities. Men and women compete separately. Track and field comes in both indoor and outdoor formats, with most indoor competitions occurring in winter, while outdoor events are mostly held in summer. The sport is defined by the venue in which the competitions are held \u2013 the athletics stadium.\nA variety of running events are held on the track which fall into three broad distance categories: sprints, middle-distance, and long-distance track events. Relay races feature teams comprising four runners each, who must pass a baton to their teammate after a specified distance with the aim of being the first team to finish. Hurdling events and the steeplechase are a variation upon the flat running theme in that athletes must clear obstacles on the track during the race. The field events come in two types \u2013 jumping and throwing competitions. In throwing events, athletes are measured by how far they hurl an implement, with the common events being the shot put, discus, javelin, and hammer throw. There are four common jumping events: the long jump and triple jump are contests measuring the horizontal distance an athlete can jump, while the high jump and pole vault are decided on the height achieved. Combined events, which include the decathlon (typically competed by men) and heptathlon (typically competed by women), are competitions where athletes compete in a number of different track and field events, with each performance going toward a final points tally.\nThe most prestigious track and field contests occur within athletics championships and athletics programmes at multi-sport events. The Olympic athletics competition and World Championships in Athletics, and the Paralympic athletics competition and World Para Athletics Championships, are the highest and most prestigious levels of competition in track and field. Track and field events have become the most prominent part of major athletics championships and many famous athletes within the sport of athletics come from this discipline. Discrete track and field competitions are found at national championships-level and also at annual, invitational track and field meets. Meetings range from elite competitions\u00a0\u2013 such as those in the IAAF Diamond League series\u00a0\u2013 to basic all comers track meets, inter-sports club meetings and schools events, which form the grassroots of track and field.\nRoad running.\nRoad running competitions are running events (predominantly long distance) which are mainly conducted on courses of paved or tarmac roads, although major events often finish on the track of a main stadium. In addition to being a common recreational sport, the elite level of the sport\u00a0\u2013 particularly marathon races\u00a0\u2013 are one of the most popular aspects of athletics. Road racing events can be of virtually any distance, but the most common and well known are the marathon, half marathon, 10\u00a0km and 5\u00a0km. The marathon is the only road running event featured at the IAAF World Championships in Athletics and the Summer Olympics, although there is also an annual IAAF World Half Marathon Championships. The marathon is also the only road running event featured at the World Para Athletics Championships and the Summer Paralympics. The World Marathon Majors series includes the six most prestigious marathon competitions at the elite level\u00a0\u2013 the Berlin, Boston, Chicago, London, New York City and Tokyo Marathons.\nThe sport of road running finds its roots in the activities of footmen: male servants who ran alongside the carriages of aristocrats around the 18th century, and who also ran errands over distances for their masters. Foot racing competitions evolved from wagers between aristocrats, who pitted their footman against that of another aristocrat in order to determine a winner. The sport became professionalised as footmen were hired specifically on their athletic ability and began to devote their lives to training for the gambling events. The amateur sports movement in the late 19th century marginalised competitions based on the professional, gambling model. The 1896 Summer Olympics saw the birth of the modern marathon and the event led to the growth of road running competitions through annual events such as the Boston Marathon (first held in 1897) and the Lake Biwa Marathon and Fukuoka Marathons, which were established in the 1940s. The 1970s running boom in the United States made road running a common pastime and also increased its popularity at the elite level.\nEkiden contests\u00a0\u2013 which originated in Japan and remain very popular there\u00a0\u2013 are a relay race variation on the marathon, being in contrast to the typically individual sport of road running.\nCross country running.\nCross country running is the most naturalistic of the sports in athletics as competitions take place on open-air courses over surfaces such as grass, woodland trails, and earth. It is both an individual and team sport, as runners are judged on an individual basis and a points scoring method is used for teams. Competitions are typically long distance races of or more which are usually held in autumn and winter. Cross country's most successful athletes often compete in long-distance track and road events as well.\nThe Crick Run in England in 1838 was the first recorded instance of an organised cross country competition. The sport gained popularity in British, then American schools in the 19th century and culminated in the creation of the first International Cross Country Championships in 1903. The annual IAAF World Cross Country Championships was inaugurated in 1973 and this remains the highest level of competition for the sport. A number of continental cross country competitions are held, with championships taking place in Asia, Europe, North America and South America. The sport has retained its status at the scholastic level, particularly in the United Kingdom and United States. At the professional level, the foremost competitions come under the banner of the IAAF Cross Country Permit Meetings.\nWhile cross country competitions are no longer held at the Olympics, having featured in the athletics programme from 1912 to 1924, it has been present as one of the events within the modern pentathlon competition since the 1912 Summer Olympics. One variation on traditional cross country is mountain running, which incorporates significant uphill and downhill sections as an additional challenge to the course. Fell running and Orienteering are other competitive sports similar to cross country, although they feature an element of navigation which is absent from the set courses of cross country.\nRacewalking.\nRacewalking is a form of competitive walking that usually takes place on open-air roads, although running tracks are also occasionally used. Racewalking is the only sport in athletics in which judges monitor athletes on their technique. Racewalkers must always have a foot in contact with the ground and their advancing leg must be straightened, not bent at the knee\u00a0\u2013 failure to follow these rules results in disqualification from the race.\nRacewalking finds its roots in the sport of pedestrianism which emerged in the late 18th century in England. Spectators would gamble on the outcome of the walking competitions. The sport took on an endurance aspect and competitions were held over long distances or walkers would have to achieve a certain distance within a specified time frame, such as Centurion contests of walking within 24 hours. During this period, racewalking was frequently held on athletics tracks for ease of measurement, and the 1908 Summer Olympics in London saw the introduction of the 3500-metre and 10-mile walks. Racewalking was briefly dropped from the Olympic programme in 1928, but the men's 50 kilometres race walk has been held at every Olympic Games but one since 1932. The men's 20 kilometres race walk was added to the Olympic athletics schedule in 1956 and the women's event was first held in 1992. The most common events in modern competition are over 10\u00a0km, 20\u00a0km and 50\u00a0km on roads, although women's 3\u00a0km and men's 5\u00a0km are held on indoor tracks.\nThe highest level racewalking competitions occur at the IAAF World Championships in Athletics and at the Summer Olympics, although the sport also has its own separate major competition\u00a0\u2013 the IAAF World Race Walking Cup\u00a0\u2013 which has been held since 1961. The IAAF World Race Walking Challenge forms the primary seasonal competition \u2013 athletes earn points for their performances at ten selected racewalking competitions and the highest scoring walkers are entered into that year's IAAF Race Walking Challenge Final.\nCategories.\nThe significant variation in people's abilities in the sport of athletics has led to the creation of numerous competitive categories, in order that athletes are pitted against rivals of a similar kind or ability, and to include groups of people who would otherwise not be competitive in open-to-all events. The eligibility of athletes for a given category is occasionally a source of controversy among the sport's participants, officials and spectators, with disputes typically being rooted in deliberate cheating in order to gain a competitive advantage or differing cultural perspectives over the eligibility of a category.\nBeyond the primary categories based on physical attributes, some competitions have further eligibility criteria based on nationality, community membership or occupation.\nMen's and women's divisions.\nThe foremost division of this kind is by sex: in athletics, men and women almost exclusively compete against people of the same sex. In contrast to the men's division, the development of the women's division has caused regular dispute in terms of eligibility. Several intersex athletes had success in the women's division in the early 20th century, such as Stanis\u0142awa Walasiewicz and Mary Weston (later Mark), and the IAAF responded by introducing sex verification for all athletes in the women's category, beginning with the disqualification of sprinter Foekje Dillema in 1950 after she refused to be tested. Olympic champion Ewa K\u0142obukowska became the first athlete to publicly fail the test in 1967 and the humiliation she suffered as a result of the announcement led to sex tests becoming a confidential process. Hurdler Maria Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ednez-Pati\u00f1o failed a test and was disqualified in 1985, but publicly fought the ban in court and was reinstated in 1988. In 1991, the IAAF replaced the sex chromatin test with general medical tests for athletes of all divisions, due to changes in ethical and scientific viewpoints.\nThe question of eligibility for the women's division continued to be a contentious and public issue into the 21st century, with Caster Semenya and Dutee Chand bearing periods of ineligibility and taking the IAAF to the Court of Arbitration for Sport over their bans under the hyperandrogenism rules. An increasing number of trans men and trans women began to compete in the women's division in the 2010s, which caused other athletes in the division to raise questions of fairness in competition.\nThe dispute reached new heights in 2019 with the United Nations Human Rights Council issuing a statement that the IAAF was breaching \"international human rights norms and standards\" through its practice of allowing some athletes to compete in the women's division only once they had lowered their testosterone levels through medical intervention. The IAAF and several prominent women athletes, such as Paula Radcliffe, said this was required in order to prevent a situation where countries deliberately sought out athletes who were intersex, transgender or had a difference in sex development in order to succeed in women's sport. Others have argued for the abolition of gender verification testing, with academic Maren Behrensen citing the harm to tested athletes' social and emotional well-being, the inaccuracy of the medical tests, the difficulty of determining the exact performance advantage provided by a given condition, and the moral risk of \"gender-engineering\" by setting a biological definition for a female athlete.\nAge.\nAge is a significant determiner of ability to compete in athletics, with athletic ability generally increasing through childhood and adolescence, peaking in early adulthood, then gradually declining from around the age of 30 onwards. As a result, numerous age categories have been created to encourage younger and older athletes to engage in competition. At international level, there are three major categories for young athletes: under-23, under-20 (formerly junior), and under-18 (formerly youth). Beyond international rules, different youth categories are in use in the sport, often in the form of two-year or single age groupings. Age categories are more extensive for older athletes and these are commonly organised under the umbrella of masters athletics, which has age groups spanning five years for all athletes aged 35 and above. There is no limit to the number of age groupings, hence Stanis\u0142aw Kowalski holds a world record for men aged 105 years and over. For competitions where age is not taken into account, this is known as senior or open class athletics; in international rules there remain some restrictions on younger people competing in endurance events for health reasons .\nAthletes' eligibility for a competitive age grouping is typically assessed through official documentation, such as birth records or passports. Instances of age cheating have occurred at all of the IAAF's global age category championships. One prominent incident was Olympic medalist Thomas Longosiwa, who provided a falsified passport to compete at the 2006 World Junior Championships in Athletics at age 24. Age falsification for youth categories is mostly limited to less developed parts of the world, such as Africa and South Asia, which have less stringent controls on official documentation and many mature athletes engaging in high school competition due to disruptions to education. The same regions of the world also present issues with age verification in masters age categories, with examples such as Indian distance runners Dharampal Singh Gudha and Fauja Singh (both claiming to be over 100 years old) reaching mainstream attention.\nAthletes with disabilities.\nAthletes with physical disabilities have competed at separate international events since 1952. The International Paralympic Committee governs the competitions in athletics, and hosts the Paralympic Games, which have continued since 1960.\nCompetitors at elite level competitions, are classified by disability, to arrange athletes with a similar disability in the same event. A classified T12 athlete for example, is a track athlete with a visual impairment.\nOperating independently of the Paralympic movement, deaf athletes have a long-established tradition of organised athletics, with the first major world competition being included at the 1924 Deaflympics. The primary impediments to the inclusion of deaf athletes in mainstream athletics are sound based elements of the sport, such as the starter's pistol. This can be a disadvantage even in Paralympic sport, as shown in by the example of Olivia Breen who failed to hear a false start in a cerebral palsy class race at the 2012 Paralympics.\nIn wheelchair racing athletes compete in lightweight racing chairs. Most major marathons have wheelchair divisions and the elite racers consistently beat the runners on foot. The speed of wheel chair racers has caused difficulties for race organisers in properly staggering their start times compared to runners. A collision between Josh Cassidy (a wheelchair racer) and Tiki Gelana (a leading female marathoner) at the 2013 London Marathon brought the issue into the spotlight again.\nOccasionally, athletes with a disability reach a level at which they can compete against able-bodied athletes. Legally blind Marla Runyan ran in the 2000 and 2004 Olympics and won a gold medal in the 1500 metres at the 1999 Pan American Games. Oscar Pistorius, a double amputee, was a semi-finalist at the 2011 World Championships and won a silver medal as part of South Africa's 4 \u00d7 400 metres relay team. In masters athletics it is far more common to make an accommodation for athletes with a disability. Blind Ivy Granstrom set numerous Masters world records while being guided around the track.\nThe disability categories have caused dispute among athletes, with some athletes being accused of exaggerating their level of disability in order to compete in less challenging categories. Athletes with intellectual disabilities were banned from competition in all Paralympic sports in response to verification issues and cheating at the 2000 Summer Paralympics and the intellectual disability athletics programme was only restored twelve years later at the 2012 Summer Paralympics.\nVenues.\nProfessional athletics almost exclusively takes place in one of three types of venue: stadiums, set courses on grass or woodland, and road-based courses. Such venues ensure that events take place in a relatively standardised manner, as well as improving the safety of athletes and enjoyment for spectators. At a more basic level, many forms of athletics demand very little in terms of venue requirements; almost any open space or area of field can provide a suitable venue for basic running, jumping and throwing competitions.\nAthletics stadium.\nA standard outdoor track is in the shape of a stadium, 400 metres in length, and has at least eight lanes 1.22\u00a0m in width (small arenas might have six lanes). Older track facilities may have nonstandard track lengths, such as 440 yards (402.3\u00a0m; 1/4 mile) (common in the United States). Historically, tracks were covered by a dirt running surface. Modern All-weather running tracks are covered by a synthetic weather-resistant running surface, which typically consists of rubber (either black SBR or colored EPDM granules), bound by polyurethane or latex resins. Older tracks may be cinder-covered. The facilities can be called track and field stadiums or athletics stadiums.\nA standard indoor track is designed similarly to an outdoor track, but is only 200 metres in length and has between four and eight lanes, each with width between 0.90\u00a0m and 1.10\u00a0m. Often, the bends of an indoor track will be banked to compensate for the small turning radius. However, because of space limitations, indoor tracks may have other nonstandard lengths, such as 160-yard (146.3\u00a0m) indoor track at Madison Square Garden used for the Millrose Games. Because of space limitations, meetings held at indoor facilities do not hold many of athletics events typically contested outdoors.\nCross country courses.\nThere is no standardised form of cross country course and each venue is significantly defined by the environment it contains \u2013 some may be relatively flat and featureless, while others may be more challenging with natural obstacles, tight turns, and undulating ground. While a small number of purpose-built courses exist, the vast majority of cross country running courses are created by cordoning a specific area within any open natural land, typically a park, woodland or greenspace near a settlement.\nAt the elite and professional level, courses must be looped and each lap must be between 1750\u00a0m and 2000\u00a0m in length. Severe obstacles such as deep ditches, high barriers and thick undergrowth not normally present; the course should be able to be completed whilst remaining on foot throughout. In order to maintain the sport's distinction from road running, the usage of unnatural or macadamised surfaces is generally kept to a minimum or avoided entirely.\nBecause the majority of races take place on areas of grass, soil, mud or earth, weather conditions can significantly affect the difficulty of cross country courses, as snow and rain reduces traction and can create areas of standing water.\nRoad courses.\nThe surface of road races is highly important and the IAAF dictate that the courses must be along man-made roads, bicycle paths or footpaths. Courses set along major roads of cities are typical of road running events, and traffic is usually cordoned off from the area during the competition. While soft ground, such as grass, is generally avoided, races may start and finish on soft ground or within an athletics stadium. Road racing courses come in two primary types: looped and point-to-point. Courses may be measured and designed to cover a standardised distance, such as , or they may simply follow a set route between two landmarks.\nRoad running courses over 5\u00a0km usually offer drinks or refreshment stations for runners at designated points alongside the course and medical professionals are present at the courses of major races due to the health risks involved with long-distance running.\nElite road walks are conducted on closed loop courses (usually loops of 2,000 or 2,500 meters). Refreshment stations are also present over long distance walking competitions, with drinks being available on every lap for races longer than 10\u00a0km.\nOrganizations.\nIn 1912, the formation of the international governing body for athletics, the International Amateur Athletics Federation, began. In recognition of the movement of the sport from amateurism towards professionalism that began in the late 1970s, the word \"amateur\" was dropped from the name, and the organization was rebranded as the International Association of Athletics Federations in 2001. In late 2019, another rebranding began, with World Athletics as the new title of the governing body.\nWorld Athletics has 215 member nations and territories, which are divided into six continental areas (or area associations). The six association areas are for Asia, Africa, Europe, Oceania, North and Central America and Caribbean and South America. The sports within athletics do not have their own independent governing bodies at either international or continental level; instead, all fall under the athletics authorities.\nNational level athletics organisations are responsible for the regulation of the sport within their respective countries and most major competitions have some form of permit or approval from their national body.\nCompetitions.\nAthletics competitions can be broadly divided into three types: international championships, national championships, and annual meetings and races. Athletics at international championships, or Games, represent the pinnacle of competition within the sport, and they are contested between athletes representing their country or region. The organisation of these competitions is usually overseen by either a world, continental, or regional athletics governing body. Athletes gain entry into these competitions by earning selection from their national athletics governing body, which is generally done by assessing athletes via their past achievements or performances at a national selection event. National championships are annual competitions endorsed by a national governing body which serve the purpose of deciding the country's best athlete in each event. Annual one-day meetings and races form the most basic level of competition and are the most common format of athletics contests. These events are often invitational and are organised by sports organisations, sports promoters, or other institutions.\nCompetitions typically feature only one of the sports within athletics. However, major outdoor international athletics championships and athletics competitions held as part of multi-sport events usually feature a combination of track and field, road running and racewalking events\nInternational competitions.\nMulti-sport events.\nThe modern Summer Olympics was the first event at which a global athletics competition took place. All the four major sports within athletics have featured in the Olympic athletics programme since its inception in 1896, although cross country has since been dropped. The Olympic competition is the most prestigious athletics contest, and many athletics events are among the most watched events at the Summer Olympics. A total of 47 athletics events are held at the Olympics, 24 for men and 23 for women (as of London 2012). The events within the men's and women's programmes are either identical or have a similar equivalent, with the sole exception being that men contest the 50\u00a0km race walk.\nFollowing the model of the Olympics, various other multi-sport events arose during the 20th century, which included athletics as a core sport within the programme from the outset. These included the Commonwealth Games, the Central American and Caribbean Games, Universiade, and many others.\nThe Summer Paralympics include athletes with a physical disability. Track and field, and road events have featured in the Paralympic athletics programme since its inception in 1960. The Paralympic competition is the most prestigious athletics contest where athletes with a physical disability compete. Athletics at the Paralympic Games also include wheelchair racing where athletes compete in lightweight racing chairs. Athletes with a visual impairment compete with a sighted guide. At the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London, for the first time at an international athletics event, the guides received medals, such as the pilots in cycling, and the guides at the Paralympic Winter Games have done for a while.\nWorld championships.\nThe World Athletics Championships is the primary global athletics championships held by World Athletics. The biennial competition was first held in 1983 and now features an event programme which is identical to the Olympics. Thus, road running, racewalking and track and field are the sports which feature at the competition. Cross country running has its own discrete global championships \u2013 the World Athletics Cross Country Championships \u2013 which has been held annually since 1973. The World Athletics Indoor Championships is a biennial athletics championships which features solely indoor track and field events. The foremost separate road running event is the annual World Athletics Half Marathon Championships (formerly \"IAAF World Half Marathon Championships\"). While not having official world championship status, the biennial World Athletics Race Walking Team Championships fulfils a similar role for the sport of racewalking. Outdoor track and field is the only sport in athletics that does not have a its own distinct global championship which is separate from other types of athletics, although the IAAF Continental Cup (a quadrennial competition between continental teams) is composed entirely of outdoor track and field events.\nOther world championships include the World Athletics U20 Championships and the 2017 defunct World Youth Championships in Athletics, which are for athletes under-19 and under-17, respectively. World Masters Athletics conducts the World Masters Athletics Championships for athletes in 5-year age divisions over the age of 35. The now defunct IAAF World Road Relay Championships served as the global event for ekiden marathon relay races. \nElite athletes with a physical disability compete at the World Para Athletics Championships.\nArea/Continental championships.\nAfrican, Asian, European, North &amp; Central and Caribbean (NACAC), Oceania and South American Athletics Championships are held regularly in a variety of configurations. For example, the Oceania Area Championships in Athletics are combined with the Oceania U20 Athletics Championships. Most of the main regions hold separate cross-country, road-running and marathon championships.\nThere is the Pan American Combined Events Cup. Central American and Caribbean Championships are organised by the Central American and Caribbean Athletic Confederation (the CACAC)).\nCulture and media.\nAthletics, and its athletes in particular, has been artistically depicted since ancient times \u2013 one of the surviving instances include runners and high jumpers in the motifs of Ancient Egyptian tombs dating from 2250\u00a0BC. Athletics was much respected in Ancient Greece and the events within the ancient pentathlon provided inspiration for large statues such as the Discobolus and Discophoros, and for motifs on countless vase and pottery works. Aristotle discussed the significance of the pentathlon in his treatise \"Rhetoric\" and reflected on the athlete aesthetic of the period: \"a body capable of enduring all efforts, either of the racecourse or of bodily strength...This is why the athletes in the pentathlon are most beautiful\".\nFilms about athletics are overwhelmingly focused on running events: the 1962 film \"The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner\" (based on the book of the same name) explores cross country running as a means of escape. \"Chariots of Fire\", perhaps one of the most well-known athletics films, is a fictionalised account of Eric Liddell and Harold Abrahams's chase for sprint gold medals at the 1924 Olympics. Track and field has been the subject of American films such as \"Personal Best\" (1981) and \"Across the Tracks\" (1991). Biopics are found within the genre, including \"Prefontaine\" (regarding Steve Prefontaine) and \"Jim Thorpe \u2013 All-American\" (1951) featuring Burt Lancaster as Thorpe. Documentaries are also common with examples such as 2007 film \"Spirit of the Marathon\", which follows runners' preparations for the 2005 Chicago Marathon.\nBooks on the subject are predominantly non-fiction, and tend towards the forms of training manuals and historical accounts of athletics. The story of the four-minute mile has been a particularly popular subject, spawning books such as \"The Perfect Mile\" and \"\".\nAthletics journalism has spawned a number of dedicated periodicals including \"Athletics Weekly\" and \"Race Walking Record\", both of which were first published in England in the early 1940s, and \"Track &amp; Field News\" which was first published in the United States in 1948. \"Runner's World\" has been in print since 1966 and the \"Track &amp; Field Magazine of Japan\" (\"Rikujyo Kyogi Magazine\") is another long-running publication.\nAthletics events have been selected as a main motif in numerous collectors' coins. One of the recent samples is the \u20ac10 Greek Running commemorative coin, minted in 2003 to commemorate the 2004 Summer Olympics. In the obverse of the coin, a modern athlete figure appears in the foreground, shown in the starting position, while in the background two ancient runners are carved in a manner that gives the appearance of a coin that is \"worn\" by time. This scene originally appeared on a black-figure vase of the 6th century BC.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43720", "revid": "50281986", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43720", "title": "Hammer throw", "text": "Throwing event in track and field competitions\nThe hammer throw (Abbreviated as HT) is one of the four throwing events in regular outdoor track-and-field competitions, along with the discus throw, shot put and javelin.\nThe hammer used in this sport is not like any of the tools also called by that name. It consists of a metal ball attached by a steel wire to a grip. These three components are each separate and can move independently. Both the size and weight of the ball vary between men's and women's events. The men's hammer weighs for college and professional meets; the women's hammer weighs .\nHistory.\nTradition traces it to the Tailteann Games in Tara, Ireland, around the year 1830 BC. Some time later the Celtic warrior Culchulainn reputedly took a chariot axle with a wheel still attached, spun it around and hurled it a long way. The wheel was later replaced by a rock with a wooden handle attached. A sledgehammer began to be used for the sport in Scotland and England during the Middle Ages. In current times, the hammer has changed to the more modern 16 lb. ball attached to a wire and a handle, but the Scottish hammer throw as seen in Highland Games still feature the older style of hammer throw with the rock and the solid wood handle.\nWhile the men's hammer throw has been part of the Olympics since 1900, the International Association of Athletics Federations did not start ratifying women's marks until 1995. Women's hammer throw was first included in the Olympics at the 2000 summer games in Sydney, Australia, after having been included in the World Championships a year earlier.\nCompetition.\nThe men's hammer weighs and the women's weighs , with the wire in either case no more than in length. Like the other throwing events, the competition is decided by who can throw the implement the farthest.\nThe throwing motion starts with the thrower swinging the hammer back-and-forth about two times to generate momentum. The thrower then makes three, four or (rarely) five full rotations using a complex heel-toe foot movement, spinning the hammer in a circular path and increasing its angular velocity with each rotation. Rather than spinning the hammer horizontally, it is instead spun in a plane that angles up towards the direction in which it will be launched. The thrower releases the hammer as its velocity is upward and toward the target.\nThrows are made from a \"throwing circle\". The thrower is not allowed to step outside the throwing circle before the hammer has landed and may only enter and exit from the rear of the throwing circle. The hammer must land within a 34.92\u00ba \"throwing sector\" that is centered on the throwing circle. The sector angle was chosen because it provides a sector whose bounds are easy to measure and lay out on a field (10 metres out from the center of the ring, 6 metres across). A violation of the rules results in a foul and the throw not being counted.\nAs of 2025[ [update]] the men's hammer world record is held by Yuriy Sedykh, who threw 86.74\u00a0m () at the 1986 European Athletics Championships in Stuttgart, West Germany on 30 August. The world record for the women's hammer is held by Anita W\u0142odarczyk, who threw 82.98\u00a0m () during the Kamila Skolimowska Memorial on 28 August 2016. Sedykh's 1986 world record has been noted for its longevity, and for dating from \"a time when track and field was starting to realize the scale of performance-enhancing drug use\" (AP). According to Russian doping whistleblower Grigory Rodchenkov, Sedykh was a heavy user of steroids, which Sedykh denied.\nThe throwing distance depends on the velocity and height at which the hammer is released, but also on other factors that are not under the athlete's control. In particular, Earth's rotation affects it via the location's latitude (due to the centrifugal force, the hammer will fly a bit further in a location closer to the equator) and to a lesser extent also via the throw's azimuth (i.e. its compass direction, due to Coriolis forces). According to a 2023 study, such effects are large enough that the top 20 world-record rankings for both men and women at the time could somewhat change if they were adjusted for latitude and azimuth.\nSafety issues.\nHammer throwing has been described as involving \"inherent danger [...]. Athletes, coaches, and spectators participating in the event are at risk; steel hammers [...] are hurled through the air at great speeds, [travel] far distances, and [are] sometimes difficult to spot in flight.\" For example, hammer throws resulted in four deaths in Europe in 2000 alone, and have caused deaths and permanent brain damage injuries in the United States too.\nTo mitigate such risks, a C-shaped \"hammer cage\" was introduced, which is built around the throwing circle, preventing the hammer from flying off in unwanted directions. In 2004, the IAAF changed its rules to increase the mandatory height of hammer cages to 10m and reduce their \"danger zone\" angle to around 53\u00b0. The change also moved the cage gates further away from the throwing circle, thus reducing the risk of a misdirected hammer bouncing back on the thrower.\nAll-time top 25.\nWomen.\nAnnulled marks.\nThe following athletes had their performances (over 77.00 m) annulled due to doping offences:\nSeason's bests.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43721", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43721", "title": "Track and Field", "text": ""}
{"id": "43722", "revid": "10270558", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43722", "title": "Decathlon", "text": "Athletic track and field competition consisting of ten events\nThe decathlon is a combined event in athletics consisting of 10 track and field events. The word was formed in analogy to the word \"pentathlon\", from Greek ( 'ten') and ( 'contest, prize'). Events are held over two consecutive days and the winners are determined by the combined performance in all. Performance is judged not by the position achieved but rather on a \"points system\" in each event, . The decathlon is contested mainly by male athletes, while female athletes typically compete in the heptathlon.\nTraditionally, the title of \"World's Greatest Athlete\" has been given to the person who wins the decathlon. This began when Gustav V of Sweden told Jim Thorpe, \"Sir, you are the world's greatest athlete\" after Thorpe won the decathlon at the Stockholm Olympics in 1912.\nThe event is similar to the pentathlon held at the ancient Greek Olympics, and also similar to a competition called an \"all-around\", which was contested at the United States amateur championships in 1884. Another all-around was held at the 1904 Summer Olympics. The modern decathlon first appeared at the 1912 Games.\nIn modern athletics, the 10 events are: 100 metres, 400 metres, 1500 metres, 110 metre hurdles, long jump, high jump, pole vault, discus throw, javelin throw, and shotput. The current official decathlon world record holder is French athlete Kevin Mayer, who scored a total of 9126 points at the 2018 D\u00e9castar in France.\nHistorical background.\nThe decathlon developed from the ancient pentathlon competitions held at the ancient Greek Olympics. Pentathlons involved five disciplines \u2013 long jump, discus throw, javelin throw, sprint and a wrestling match. Introduced in Olympia during 708 BC, this competition was extremely popular for many centuries.\nA ten-event competition known as the \"all-around\" or \"all-round\" championship, similar to the modern decathlon, was first contested at the United States amateur championships in 1884 and reached a consistent form by 1890. While an all-around event was held at the 1904 Summer Olympics, whether it was an official Olympic event has been disputed.\nThe modern decathlon first appeared in the Olympic athletics program at the 1912 Games in Stockholm.\nFormat.\nMen's decathlon.\nThe vast majority of international and top-level men's decathlons are divided into a two-day competition, with the track and field events held in the order below. Traditionally, all decathletes who finish the event, rather than just the winner or medal-winning athletes, do a round of honour together after the competition. The current world record holder is Kevin Mayer from France with 9126 points which he set on 16 September 2018, in Talence, France.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWomen's decathlon.\nAt major championships, the women's equivalent of the decathlon is the seven-event heptathlon; before 1981 it was the five-event pentathlon. However, in 2001, the IAAF (now World Athletics) approved scoring tables for a women's decathlon; the current world record holder is Austra Skujyt\u0117 of Lithuania, with 8358 points. Women's disciplines differ from men's in the same way as for standalone events: the shot, discus, and javelin weigh less, and the sprint hurdles use lower hurdles over 100\u00a0m rather than 110\u00a0m. The points tables used are the same as for the heptathlon in the shared events. In some women's decathlon competitions, the schedule differs from the men's decathlon, with the field events switched between day one and day two. This rule was initially instituted to avoid scheduling conflicts when men's and women's decathlon competitions take place simultaneously, however by 2024 the rule was revised to allow conducting the women's decathlon using the men's event order. The inaugural Women's Decathlon World Championships used the men's ordering of events.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOne hour.\nThe one-hour decathlon is a special type of decathlon in which the athletes have to start the last of ten events (1500\u00a0m) within sixty minutes of the start of the first event. The world record holder is Czech decathlete Robert Zm\u011bl\u00edk, who achieved 7897 points at a meeting in Ostrava, Czechoslovakia, in 1992.\nMasters athletics.\nIn Masters athletics, performance scores are age graded before being applied to the standard scoring table. This way, marks that would be competitive within an age division can get rated, even if those marks would not appear on the scale designed for younger age groups. Additionally, like women, the age divisions use different implement weights and lower hurdles. Based on this system, German Rolf Geese in the M60 division and American Robert Hewitt in the M80 divisions have set their respective world records over 8000 points. Using the same scale, Nadine O'Connor scored 10,234 points in the W65 division, the highest decathlon score ever recorded.\nPoints system.\nThe 2001 IAAF points tables use the following formulae:\nA, B, and C are parameters that vary by discipline, as shown in the adjacent table, while P is the performance by the athlete, measured in seconds (running), metres (throwing), or centimetres (jumping).\nThe decathlon tables should not be confused with the scoring tables compiled by Bojidar Spiriev, to allow comparison of the relative quality of performances by athletes in different events. On those tables, for example, a decathlon score of 9006 points equates to 1265 \"comparison points\", the same number as a triple jump of 18\u00a0m.\nBenchmarks.\nSplit evenly between the events, the following table shows the benchmark levels needed to earn 1000, 900, 800, and 700 points in each sport.\nRecords.\nThe official men's decathlon world record holder is Kevin Mayer of France, with a score of 9126 points set during the 2018 D\u00e9castar in Talence, France, which was ratified by World Athletics.\nThe previous record from Ashton Eaton (9045 points):\nMen.\nThe total decathlon score for all world records in the respective events would be 12,676. The total decathlon score for all the best performances achieved during decathlons is 10,669. The \"Difference\" column shows the difference in points between the decathlon points that the individual current world record would be awarded and the points awarded to the current decathlon record for that event. The relative differences in points are much higher in throwing events than in running and jumping events.\nDecathlon bests are only recognized when an athlete completes the ten-event competition with a score of over 7000 points.\nNational records.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnder-20 records.\nThe world decathlon under-20 record is held by Niklas Kaul, of Germany, who scored 8435 points at the European U20 Championships in Grosseto, Italy, from 22\u201323 July 2017.\nThe world decathlon under-20 record using senior implements is held by Torsten Voss, of East Germany, who scored 8397 points in Erfurt, East Germany, from 6\u20137 July 1982. This was the last record to be ratified because it is no longer a World Athletics under-20 record event.\nKey:\n&lt;br&gt;\nKey:\n&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;br&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43724", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43724", "title": "Eddie Blazonczyk", "text": "American polka musician (1941\u20132012)\nEddie Blazonczyk, Sr. (July 12, 1941 \u2013 May 21, 2012) was an American polka musician and founder of the band The Versatones. He was inducted into the International Polka Hall of Fame in 1970, and was a 1998 National Heritage Fellowship recipient. He has been called \"one of the most important figures in the creation of the contemporary Polish-American polka sound.\" He released more than 60 albums.\nHistory.\nEddie Blazonczyk was born in Chicago, Illinois, to Polish immigrant parents of Goral heritage.\nBefore becoming a polka artist, and founding Chicago-based Bel-Aire Records in 1963, Eddie Blazonczyk recorded under the name Eddy Bell for Mercury Records, Versa Records, and Lucky Four Records, all three labels based in Chicago. During this period Blazonczyk toured with Buddy Holly, Gene Vincent and Brenda Lee. The records he made for these labels were rockabilly sides, and novelty songs. \"The Great Great Pumpkin\", released on Lucky Four #1012, is probably the most noteworthy of these recordings. This recording is still occasionally heard around Halloween and is highly sought by record collectors. Lenny LaCour, the owner of Lucky Four Records, encouraged Blazonczyk, at the age of 22, to specialize in polka music, rather than to continue as a rockabilly singer. Blazonczyk has said, \"I took his advice, and never regretted it.\"\nHe is credited with inventing the rhythmic polka subgenre known as \"Chicago push,\" although ironically the name given to the style comes from bands who came after and were inspired by Blazonczyk, notably the Chicago Push. Musicologist Norm Cohen wrote that \"in his illustrious career, Blazonczyk and his Versatones were the primary ambassadors of Polish-American polka, touring constantly and playing well over 200 road gigs per year.\"\nThe Versatones played a mix of both traditional and original tunes, with Blazonczyk singing in both Polish and English. The band consisted of a fiddler and concertina player, two trumpeter/clarinetists, a drummer and Blazonczyk himself on vocals and electric bass. Though his focus remained on the polka genre, Blazonczyk was a fan of rock, country, bluegrass and Cajun music and liked to incorporate those styles into his music when he felt it was appropriate.\nBlazonczyk retired from performing in 2002. At that time, he turned over responsibility for his band, The Versatones, to his son, Eddie Blazonczyk Jr. The Versatones played their last performance on New Year's Eve, 2011.\nDeath.\nBlazonczyk died of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome on May 21, 2012.\nAwards and honors.\nBlazonczyk was nominated for 11 Grammy Awards, and his album \"Another Polka Celebration\" won the 1986 Grammy for Best Polka Recording. He was a recipient of the 1998 National Heritage Fellowship awarded by the National Endowment for the Arts, which is the highest honor in the folk and traditional arts in the United States.\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "43727", "revid": "50290793", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43727", "title": "Frankie Yankovic", "text": "Slovenian-American musician\nFrank John Yankovic (July 28, 1915 \u2013 October 14, 1998) was an American accordion player and polka musician. Known as \"America's Polka King\", Yankovic was considered the premier artist to play in the Slovenian style during his long career. He was not related to fellow accordionist \"Weird Al\" Yankovic, although the two collaborated.\nBackground.\nYankovic was born in Davis (West Virginia) to Slovene immigrant parents: Andrew Yankovic (\"Andrej Jankovi\u010d\", 1879\u20131949) from Kal and Rose T. Yankovic (n\u00e9e \"Terezija Mele\", 1886\u20131968) from Cerknica, who married in 1910. Yankovic was raised in the Collinwood neighborhood on Cleveland's East Side. He recorded over 200 songs and sold over 30 million records in his career. In 1986, he was awarded the first-ever Grammy in the Best Polka Recording category. He rarely strayed from Slovenian-style polka, but did record with country guitarist Chet Atkins and pop singer Don Everly. He also recorded a version of the \"Too Fat Polka\" with comedian Drew Carey.\nHistory.\nYankovic's father, a blacksmith, and his mother, a cook, met in a lumber camp in West Virginia where they both worked. When Yankovic was young, his father moved to Cleveland to escape authorities who learned of his bootlegging, and the rest of the family followed shortly thereafter. While living in Cleveland, he became enthralled by the brass bands that played at Slovenian social functions. His mother took on boarders to help with the family finances, including a man named Max Zelodec who performed Slovenian tunes on a button box. Yankovic acquired an accordion at age 9, and received a few lessons from Zelodec. By the late 1920s, in his early teenage years, he was a working musician, playing for community events. In the 1930s, he formed a business relationship with Joe Trolli and began making radio appearances on stations such as WJAY and WGAR. As his reputation spread, he sought opportunities to make records, but the major labels turned him down. His first records were made for the Yankee and Joliet labels operated by Fred Wolf, and the expenses were paid for by Yankovic himself.\nIn 1940, he married his first wife June, and they began to raise a family. However, the expenses of family life quickly overcame the incoming money from his music career, so he opened a tavern, calling it the Yankovic Bar. It became a popular hangout for local musicians, and he continued to run it until he sold it in 1948, dedicating himself to the accordion.\nYankovic enlisted in the armed forces in 1943 and cut numerous records while on leave, prior to his departure for Europe. Yankovic was assigned duty in 1943 in the infantry as a flame-thrower operator. He fought in the Battle of the Bulge where a severe case of frostbite nearly required the amputation of his hands and feet. Fortunately, he was able to beat the resulting gangrene before that became necessary, and was awarded a Purple Heart. The doctors urged him to have his fingers amputated, but he refused, as that would have ended his music career. After getting out of the hospital, he and four other musicians were assigned to special services to entertain the troops, including General George Patton and his Third United States Army.\nYankovic hit the national scene when he earned two platinum singles for \"Just Because\" (1947) and \"Blue Skirt Waltz\" (1949). Others who recorded the Blue Skirt Waltz were the Tunemixers and Guy Lombardo both in 1949, Lawrence Welk (Myron Floren) in 1958, Jim Ed Brown and the Browns in 1960, Hank Thompson in 1962, and Bobby Vinton in 1976. Yankovic found a Bohemian Waltz called \"Cervenou Sukynku,\" (written by Vaclav Blaha) or loosely translated, \"Red Skirt Waltz.\" Yankovic asked Mitchell Parrish (\"Stardust\", \"Sleighride\") to write new lyrics to the melody. Parrish changed \"red\" to \"blue\". Yankovic sold over 2.5 million records and with the Tunemixers version and Guy Lombardo's version, it sold over 4 million records total in 1949. It was the second Cleveland-style song to sell over one million recordings.\nColumbia Records initially refused to record \"Just Because\", because other versions of the song had been around for years without much success; only allowing it when Yankovic said that he would buy the first 10,000 records. Yankovic obtained the title of America's Polka King after beating Louis Bashell, Romy Gosz, Harold Loeffelmacher and the Six Fat Dutchmen, Whoopee John Wilfahrt, and Lawrence Duchow in a battle of the bands in Milwaukee at the Milwaukee Arena on June 9, 1948.\nIn 1950, he made his Hollywood debut and collaborated with Doris Day as a singer.\nIn 1970, a house fire destroyed the gold records for \"Just Because\" and \"Blue Skirt Waltz\".\nYankovic also hosted the television series \"Polka Time\" for Buffalo, New York-based WKBW-TV for 26 weeks in 1962. He commuted from Cleveland to host each episode, which aired live. He also hosted a similar show at WGN-TV Chicago at about the same time.\nHe won a Grammy Award in 1986 for his album \"70 Years of Hits\". He was the first winner in the Polka category. The NARAS (Grammy) organization dropped the category in 2008.\nHe performed with musical comedian and fellow accordionist \"Weird Al\" Yankovic, although the two are not related. Al, who also performs polka music among many other styles, has jokingly hypothesized that he was given accordion lessons as a child because his parents thought that \"there should be at least one more accordion-playing Yankovic in the world.\" Al performed accordion and the backing vocal part on \"Who Stole the Kishka?\" on one of Frankie's final records, \"Songs of the Polka King, Vol. 1\". A portion of Frankie's \"The Tick Tock Polka\" is included in the song \"Polka Face\" on Weird Al's \"Alpocalypse\"; it was used as a lead-in for Weird Al's take on \"Tik Tok\" by Ke$ha.\nDeath.\nYankovic died on October 14, 1998, in New Port Richey, Florida, from heart failure, at the age of 83. He is buried in Cleveland's Calvary Cemetery. Hundreds of friends, family, his loyal fans and fellow musicians attended his memorial service. At his peak, Yankovic traveled extensively and performed 325 shows a year. He sold 30 million records during his lifetime.\nHonors.\nFrankie Yankovic visited Cerknica, the hometown of his parents, in 1952 or 1953 and again in 1995. On the second occasion, a special reception was organized in his honor in Rakov \u0160kocjan. He was presented with a commemorative certificate in recognition of his significant contributions to promoting Slovene culture worldwide. Additionally, he received an oil painting by the academic painter Toma\u017e Perko to remember his time in Cerknica.\nIn Bob Dolgan's 2006 biography of Yankovic, Frankie's longtime drummer Dave Wolnik observed that \"Yankovic didn't have a street named for him in his own hometown\". This launched a campaign by the National Cleveland-Style Polka Hall of Fame and Museum and City Councilman Michael Polensek, and in a ceremony on August 21, 2007, the square at the intersection of Waterloo Rd. and East 152nd St. in Cleveland (), not far from where Yankovic grew up, was named in his honor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43729", "revid": "12245379", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43729", "title": "Whigs (British political party)", "text": "Political faction then party in the United Kingdom between 1678 and 1859\nThe Whigs were a political party in the Parliaments of England, Scotland, Ireland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom. Between the 1680s and the 1850s, the Whigs contested power with their rivals, the Tories. The Whigs became the Liberal Party when the faction merged with the Peelites and Radicals in the 1850s. Many Whigs left the Liberal Party in 1886 over the issue of Irish Home Rule to form the Liberal Unionist Party, which merged into the Conservative Party in 1912.\nThe Whigs began as a political faction that opposed absolute monarchy and Catholic emancipation, supporting constitutional monarchism and parliamentary government, but also Protestant supremacy. They played a central role in the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and were the standing enemies of the Roman Catholic Stuart kings and pretenders. The period known as the Whig Supremacy (1714\u20131760) was enabled by the Hanoverian succession of George I in 1714 and the failure of the Jacobite rising of 1715 by Tory rebels. The Whigs took full control of the government in 1715 and thoroughly purged the Tories from all major positions in government, the army, the Church of England, the legal profession, and local political offices. The first great leader of the Whigs was Robert Walpole, who maintained control of the government from 1721 to 1742, and whose prot\u00e9g\u00e9, Henry Pelham, led the government from 1743 to 1754. Great Britain approximated a one-party state under the Whigs until King George III came to the throne in 1760 and allowed Tories back in; however, the Whig Party's hold on power remained strong for many years thereafter. Historians have called the period from roughly 1714 to 1783 the \"long period of Whig oligarchy\". During the American War of Independence, the Whigs were the party more sympathetic to American independence and the creation of a democracy in the United States.\nBy 1784, both the Whigs and Tories had become formal political parties, with Charles James Fox becoming the leader of a reorganized Whig Party arrayed against William Pitt the Younger's new Tories. The foundation of both parties depended more on the support of wealthy politicians than on popular votes. Although there were elections to the House of Commons, only a few men controlled most of the voters.\nBoth parties slowly evolved during the 18th century. In the beginning, the Whig Party generally tended to support the aristocratic families, the continued disenfranchisement of Catholics and toleration of nonconformist Protestants (dissenters such as the Presbyterians), while the Tories generally favoured the minor gentry and people who were (relatively speaking) smallholders; they also supported the legitimacy of a strongly established Church of England. (The so-called High Tories preferred high church Anglicanism, or Anglo-Catholicism. Some, particularly adherents of the non-juring schism, openly or covertly supported the exiled House of Stuart's claim to the throne\u2014a position known as Jacobitism.) Later, the Whigs came to draw support from the emerging industrial reformists and the mercantile class while the Tories came to draw support from farmers, landowners, royalists and (relatedly) those who favoured imperial military spending.\nBy the first half of the 19th century, the Whig manifesto had come to encompass the supremacy of parliament, the abolition of slavery, the expansion of the franchise (suffrage) and an acceleration of the move toward complete equal rights for Catholics (a reversal of the party's late-17th-century position, which had been militantly anti-Catholic).\nName.\nThe word \"Whig\" originated as a shortening of \"Whiggamore\", a nickname for a Scottish Presbyterian, particularly a Covenanter. This word first appeared in the context of the Whiggamore Raid of 1648, in which thousands of Covenanters marched on Edinburgh in order to overthrow the Engagers, who sought to reinstate Charles I. Its further history is unclear. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" regards it as a compound of \"whig\", meaning \"to drive briskly\", and \"mare\" (which would make it an example of a cutthroat compound). Bishop Burnet offers a different etymology, tracing the word to \"whiggam\", a call supposedly used to urge on horses:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The south-west counties of Scotland have seldom corn enough to serve them round the year: and the northern parts producing more than they need, those in the west come in the summer to buy at Leith the stores that come from the north: and from a word Whiggam, used in driving their horses, all that drove were called the Whiggamors, and shorter the Whiggs. Now in that year [1648], after the news came down of Duke Hamilton's defeat, the Ministers animated their people to rise, and march to Edinburgh: and they came up marching on the head of their parishes, with an unheard-of fury, praying and preaching all the way as they came. The Marquis of Argile and his party came and headed them, they being about 6000. This was called the Whiggamor's inroad: and ever after that all that opposed the Court came in contempt to be called Whiggs: and from Scotland the word was brought into England, where it is now one of our unhappy terms of distinction.\nThe word entered English political discourse during the Exclusion Crisis of 1679\u20131681, which hinged on whether Charles II's brother, the Duke of York (a Roman Catholic), should be allowed to succeed him as king. York's supporters were nicknamed \"Tories\" because of their supposed resemblance to Irish bandits and rebels, while his opponents were nicknamed \"Whigs\" because of their supposed resemblance to Scottish religious fanatics. In spite of their derogatory origins, the two words eventually became neutral designations for the two major factions in British politics.\nOrigins.\nThe parliamentarian faction.\nThe precursor to the Whigs was Denzil Holles' parliamentarian faction, which was characterised by its opposition to absolute monarchism.\nExclusion Crisis.\nUnder Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury's leadership, the Whigs (also known as the Country Party) sought to exclude the Duke of York (who later became King James II) from the throne due to his Roman Catholicism, his favouring of monarchical absolutism, and his connections to France. They believed the heir presumptive, if allowed to inherit the throne, would endanger the Protestant religion, liberty and property.4\nThe first Exclusion Bill was supported by a substantial majority on its second reading in May 1679. In response, King Charles II prorogued Parliament and then dissolved it; however, the subsequent elections in August and September saw the Whigs' strength increase. This new parliament did not meet for thirteen months, because Charles wanted to give passions a chance to die down. When it met in October 1680, an Exclusion Bill was introduced and passed in the Commons without major resistance, but was rejected in the Lords. Charles dissolved Parliament in January 1681, but the Whigs did not suffer serious losses in the ensuing election. The next Parliament first met in March at Oxford, but Charles dissolved it after only a few days, when he made an appeal to the country against the Whigs and determined to rule without Parliament. In February, Charles had made a deal with the French King Louis XIV, who promised to support him against the Whigs. Without Parliament, the Whigs gradually crumbled, mainly due to government repression following the discovery of the Rye House Plot. The Whig peers, the George Melville, 1st Earl of Melville, the David Leslie-Melville, Earl of Leven, and Lord Shaftesbury, and Charles II's illegitimate son the James Scott, 1st Duke of Monmouth, being implicated, fled to and regrouped in the United Provinces. Algernon Sidney, Thomas Armstrong and William Russell, Lord Russell, were executed for treason. The Earl of Essex committed suicide in the Tower of London over his arrest for treason, whilst Lord Grey of Werke escaped from the Tower.\nGlorious Revolution.\nAfter the Glorious Revolution of 1688, Queen Mary II and King William III governed with both Whigs and Tories, despite the fact that many of the Tories still supported the deposed Roman Catholic James II. William saw that the Tories were generally friendlier to royal authority than the Whigs and he employed both groups in his government. His early ministry was largely Tory, but gradually the government came to be dominated by the so-called Junto Whigs, a group of younger Whig politicians who led a tightly organised political grouping. The increasing dominance of the Junto led to a split among the Whigs, with the so-called Country Whigs seeing the Junto as betraying their principles for office. The Country Whigs, led by Robert Harley, gradually merged with the Tory opposition in the later 1690s.\nHistory.\n18th century.\nAlthough William's successor Anne had considerable Tory sympathies and excluded the Junto Whigs from power, after a brief and unsuccessful experiment with an exclusively Tory government she generally continued William's policy of balancing the parties, supported by her moderate Tory ministers, the Duke of Marlborough and Lord Godolphin. However, as the War of the Spanish Succession went on and became less and less popular with the Tories, Marlborough and Godolphin were forced to rely more and more on the Junto Whigs, so that by 1708 they headed an administration of the Parliament of Great Britain dominated by the Junto. Anne herself grew increasingly uncomfortable with this dependence on the Whigs, especially as her personal relationship with the Duchess of Marlborough deteriorated. This situation also became increasingly uncomfortable to many of the non-Junto Whigs, led by the Duke of Somerset and the Duke of Shrewsbury, who began to intrigue with Robert Harley's Tories. In the spring of 1710, Anne dismissed Godolphin and the Junto ministers, replacing them with Tories.\nThe Whigs now moved into opposition and particularly decried the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht, which they attempted to block through their majority in the House of Lords. The Tory administration led by Harley and the Viscount Bolingbroke persuaded the Queen to create twelve new Tory peers to force the treaty through.\nLiberal ideals.\nThe Whigs primarily advocated the supremacy of Parliament, while calling for toleration for Protestant dissenters. They adamantly opposed a Catholic as king. They opposed the Catholic Church because they saw it as a threat to liberty, or as Pitt the Elder stated: \"The errors of Rome are rank idolatry, a subversion of all civil as well as religious liberty, and the utter disgrace of reason and of human nature\".\nAshcraft and Goldsmith (1983) have traced in detail, in the period 1689 to 1710, the major influence of the liberal political ideas of John Locke on Whig political values, as expressed in widely cited manifestos such as \"Political Aphorisms: or, the True Maxims of Government Displayed\", an anonymous pamphlet that appeared in 1690 and was widely cited by Whigs. The 18th-century Whigs borrowed the concepts and language of universal rights employed by political theorists Locke and Algernon Sidney (1622\u20131682). By the 1770s the ideas of Adam Smith, a founder of classical liberalism became important. As Wilson and Reill (2004) note: \"Adam Smith's theory melded nicely with the liberal political stance of the Whig Party and its middle-class constituents\".\nSamuel Johnson (1709\u20131784), a leading London intellectual, repeatedly denigrated the \"vile\" Whigs and praised the Tories, even during times of Whig political supremacy. In his great \"Dictionary\" (1755), Johnson defined a Tory as \"one who adheres to the ancient Constitution of the state and the apostolical hierarchy of the Church of England, opposed to a Whig\". He linked 18th-century Whiggism with 17th-century revolutionary Puritanism, arguing that the Whigs of his day were similarly inimical to the established order of church and state. Johnson recommended that strict uniformity in religious externals was the best antidote to the objectionable religious traits that he linked to Whiggism.\nProtectionism.\nAt their inception, the Whigs were protectionist in economic policy, with free trade policies being advocated by Tories. The Whigs were opposed to the pro-French policies of the Stuart kings Charles II and James II as they believed that such an alliance with the Catholic absolute monarchy of France endangered liberty and Protestantism. The Whigs claimed that trade with France was bad for England and developed an economic theory of overbalance, that is a deficit of trade with France was bad because it would enrich France at England's expense.\nIn 1678, the Whigs passed the Prohibition of 1678 that banned certain French goods from being imported into England. The economic historian William Ashley claimed that this Act witnessed the \"real starting-point in the history of Whig policy in the matter of trade\". It was repealed upon the accession of James II by a Tory-dominated House of Commons but upon the accession of William III in 1688 a new Act was passed that prohibited the importation of French goods. In 1704, the Whigs passed the Trade with France Act that renewed protectionism against France. In 1710, Queen Anne appointed the predominantly Tory Harley Ministry, which favoured free trade. When the Tory minister Lord Bolingbroke proposed a commercial treaty with France in 1713 that would have led to freer trade, the Whigs were vehemently against it and it had to be abandoned.\nIn 1786, Pitt's government negotiated the Eden Agreement, a commercial treaty with France which led to freer trade between the two countries. All of the Whig leaders attacked this on traditional Whig anti-French and protectionist grounds. Fox claimed that France was England's natural enemy and that it was only at Britain's expense that she could grow. Edmund Burke, Richard Sheridan, William Windham and Charles Grey all spoke out against the trade agreement on the same grounds.\nAshley claimed that \"[t]he traditional policy of the Whig party from before the Revolution [of 1688] down to the time of Fox was an extreme form of Protectionism\". The Whigs' protectionism of this period is today increasingly cited with approval by heterodox economists such as Ha-Joon Chang, who wish to challenge contemporary prevailing free trade orthodoxies via precedents from the past.\nLater on, several members from the Whig party came to oppose the protectionism of the Corn Laws, but trade restrictions were not repealed even after the Whigs returned to power in the 1830s.\nWhig Supremacy.\nWith the succession of Elector George Louis of Hanover as king in 1714, the Whigs returned to government with the support of some Hanoverian Tories. The Jacobite rising of 1715 discredited much of the Tory party as treasonous Jacobites, and the Septennial Act ensured that the Whigs became the dominant party, establishing the Whig oligarchy. Between 1717 and 1720 the Whig Split led to a division in the party. Government Whigs led by the former soldier James Stanhope were opposed by Robert Walpole and his allies. While Stanhope was backed by George I, Walpole and his supporters were closer to the Prince of Wales. Following his success in defeating the government over the Peerage Bill in 1719, Walpole was invited back into government the following year. He was able to defend the government in the Commons when the South Sea Bubble collapsed. When Stanhope died unexpectedly in 1721, Walpole replaced him as leader of the government and became known as the first Prime Minister. In the 1722 general election the Whigs swept to a decisive victory.\nBetween 1714 and 1760, the Tories struggled as an active political force, but always retained a considerable presence in the House of Commons. The governments of Walpole, Henry Pelham and his older brother the Duke of Newcastle dominated between 1721 and 1757 (with a brief break during the also-Whig Carteret ministry). The leading entities in these governments consistently referred to themselves as \"Whigs\".\nGeorge III's accession.\nThis arrangement changed during the reign of George III, who hoped to restore his own power by freeing himself from the great Whig magnates. Thus George promoted his old tutor Lord Bute to power and broke with the old Whig leadership surrounding the Duke of Newcastle. After a decade of factional chaos, with distinct Bedfordite, Chathamite, Grenvillite and Rockinghamite factions successively in power and all referring to themselves as \"Whigs\", a new system emerged with two separate opposition groups. The Rockingham Whigs claimed the mantle of Old Whigs as the purported successors of the party of the Pelhams and the great Whig families. With such noted intellectuals as Edmund Burke behind them, the Rockingham Whigs laid out a philosophy which for the first time extolled the virtues of faction, or at least their faction. The other group were the followers of Lord Chatham, who as the great political hero of the Seven Years' War generally took a stance of opposition to party and faction.\nThe Whigs were opposed by the government of Lord North which they accused of being a Tory administration. While it largely consisted of individuals previously associated with the Whigs, many old Pelhamites as well as the Bedfordite Whig faction formerly led by the Duke of Bedford and elements of that which had been led by George Grenville, it also contained elements of the Kings' Men, the group formerly associated with Lord Bute and which was generally seen as Tory-leaning.\nAmerican impact.\nThe association of Toryism with Lord North's government was also influential in the American colonies and writings of British political commentators known as the Radical Whigs did much to stimulate colonial republican sentiment. Early activists in the colonies called themselves Whigs, seeing themselves as in alliance with the political opposition in Britain, until they turned to independence and started emphasising the label Patriots. In contrast, the American Loyalists, who supported the monarchy, were consistently also referred to as Tories.\nLater, the United States Whig Party was founded in 1833 on the basis of opposition to a strong presidency, initially the presidency of Andrew Jackson, analogous to the British Whig opposition to a strong monarchy. The True Whig Party, which for a century dominated Liberia, was named after the American party rather than directly after the British one.\nTwo-party system.\nDickinson reports the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All historians are agreed that the Tory party declined sharply in the late 1740s and 1750s and that it ceased to be an organized party by 1760. The research of Sir Lewis Namier and his disciples [...] has convinced all historians that there were no organized political parties in Parliament between the late 1750s and the early 1780s. Even the Whigs ceased to be an identifiable party, and Parliament was dominated by competing political connections, which all proclaimed Whiggish political views, or by independent backbenchers unattached to any particular group.\nThe North administration left power in March 1782 following the American War of Independence and a coalition of the Rockingham Whigs and the former Chathamites, now led by the Earl of Shelburne, took its place. After Rockingham's unexpected death in July 1782, this uneasy coalition fell apart, with Charles James Fox, Rockingham's successor as faction leader, quarrelling with Shelburne and withdrawing his supporters from the government. The following Shelburne administration was short-lived and Fox returned to power in April 1783, this time in an unexpected coalition with his old enemy Lord North. Although this pairing seemed unnatural to many at the time, it was to last beyond the demise of the coalition in December 1783. The coalition's untimely fall was brought about by George III in league with the House of Lords and the King now brought in Chatham's son William Pitt the Younger as his prime minister.\nIt was only now that a genuine two-party system can be seen to emerge, with Pitt and the government on the one side, and the ousted Fox-North coalition on the other. On 17 December 1783, Fox stated in the House of Commons that \"[i]f [...] a change must take place, and a new ministry is to be formed and supported, not by the confidence of this House or the public, but the sole authority of the Crown, I, for one, shall not envy that hon. gentleman his situation. From that moment I put in my claim for a monopoly of Whig principles\". Although Pitt is often referred to as a Tory and Fox as a Whig, Pitt always considered himself to be an independent Whig and generally opposed the development of a strict partisan political system. Fox's supporters saw themselves as legitimate heirs of the Whig tradition and they strongly opposed Pitt in his early years in office, notably during the regency crisis revolving around the King's temporary insanity in 1788\u20131789, when Fox and his allies supported full powers as regent for their ally, the Prince of Wales.\nThe opposition Whigs were split by the onset of the French Revolution. While Fox and some younger members of the party such as Charles Grey and Richard Brinsley Sheridan were sympathetic to the French revolutionaries, others led by Edmund Burke were strongly opposed. Although Burke himself was largely alone in defecting to Pitt in 1791, much of the rest of the party, including the influential House of Lords leader the Duke of Portland, Rockingham's nephew Lord Fitzwilliam and William Windham, were increasingly uncomfortable with the flirtations of Fox and his allies with radicalism and the French Revolution. They split in early 1793 with Fox over the question of support for the war with France and by the end of the year they had openly broken with Fox. By the summer of the next year, large portions of the opposition had defected and joined Pitt's government.\n19th century.\nMany of the Whigs who had joined with Pitt would eventually return to the fold, joining again with Fox in the Ministry of All the Talents following Pitt's death in 1806. The followers of Pitt\u2014led until 1809 by Fox's old colleague the Duke of Portland\u2014rejected the label of Tories and preferred to call themselves The Friends of Mr. Pitt. After the fall of the Talents ministry in 1807, the Foxite Whigs remained out of power for the better part of 25 years. The accession of Fox's old ally, the Prince of Wales, to the regency in 1811 did not change the situation, as the Prince had broken entirely with his old Foxite Whig companions. The members of the government of Lord Liverpool from 1812 to 1827 called themselves Whigs.\nStructure and appeal.\nBy 1815, the Whigs were still far from being a \"party\" in the modern sense. They had no definite programme or policy and were by no means even united. Generally, they stood for reducing crown patronage, sympathy towards nonconformists, support for the interests of merchants and bankers and a leaning towards the idea of a limited reform of the voting system. Most Whig leaders, such as Lord Grey, Lord Grenville, Lord Althorp, William Lamb (later Lord Melbourne) and Lord John Russell, were still rich landowners. The most prominent exception was Henry Brougham, the talented lawyer, who had a relatively modest background.\nHay argues that Whig leaders welcomed the increasing political participation of the English middle classes in the two decades after the defeat of Napoleon in 1815. The fresh support strengthened their position in Parliament. Whigs rejected the Tory appeals to governmental authority and social discipline and extended political discussion beyond Parliament. Whigs used a national network of newspapers and magazines as well as local clubs to deliver their message. The press organised petitions and debates and reported to the public on government policy, while leaders such as Henry Brougham (1778\u20131868) built alliances with men who lacked direct representation. This new approach to the grass roots helped to define Whiggism and opened the way for later success. Whigs thereby forced the government to recognise the role of public opinion in parliamentary debate and influenced views of representation and reform throughout the 19th century.\nReturn to power.\nWhigs restored their unity by supporting moral reforms, especially the abolition of slavery. They triumphed in 1830 as champions of Parliamentary reform. They made Lord Grey prime minister 1830\u20131834 and the Reform Act 1832 championed by Grey became their signature measure. It broadened the franchise and ended the system of \"rotten and pocket boroughs\" (where elections were controlled by powerful families) and instead redistributed power on the basis of population. It added 217,000 voters to an electorate of 435,000 in England and Wales. Only the upper and middle classes voted, so this shifted power away from the landed aristocracy to the urban middle classes. In 1832, the party abolished enslavement in the British Empire with the Slavery Abolition Act 1833. It purchased and freed the slaves, especially those in the Caribbean sugar islands. After parliamentary investigations demonstrated the horrors of child labour, limited reforms were passed in 1833. The Whigs also passed the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 that reformed the administration of relief to the poor and the Marriage Act 1836 that allowed civil marriages.\nIt was around this time that the great Whig historian Thomas Babington Macaulay began to promulgate what would later be coined the Whig view of history, in which all of English history was seen as leading up to the culminating moment of the passage of Lord Grey's reform bill. This view led to serious distortions in later portrayals of 17th-century and 18th-century history, as Macaulay and his followers attempted to fit the complex and changing factional politics of the Restoration into the neat categories of 19th-century political divisions.\nIn 1836, a private gentleman's Club was constructed in Pall Mall, Piccadilly as a consequence of the successful Reform Act 1832. The Reform Club was founded by Edward Ellice Sr., MP for Coventry and Whig Whip, whose riches came from the Hudson's Bay Company but whose zeal was chiefly devoted to securing the passage of the Reform Act 1832. This new club, for members of both Houses of Parliament, was intended to be a forum for the radical ideas which the First Reform Bill represented: a bastion of liberal and progressive thought that became closely associated with the Liberal Party, who largely succeeded the Whigs in the second half of the 19th century.\nUntil the decline of the Liberal Party in the early 20th century, it was \"de rigueur\" for Liberal MPs and peers to be members of the Reform Club, being regarded as an unofficial party headquarters. However, in 1882 the National Liberal Club was established under William Ewart Gladstone's chairmanship, designed to be more \"inclusive\" towards Liberal grandees and activists throughout the United Kingdom.\nTransition to the Liberal Party.\nThe Liberal Party (the term was first used officially in 1868, but had been used colloquially for decades beforehand) arose from a coalition of Whigs, free trade Tory followers of Robert Peel and free trade Radicals, first created, tenuously under the Peelite Earl of Aberdeen in 1852 and put together more permanently under the former Canningite Tory Lord Palmerston in 1859. Although the Whigs at first formed the most important part of the coalition, the Whiggish elements of the new party progressively lost influence during the long leadership of former Peelite William Ewart Gladstone. Subsequently, the majority of the old Whig aristocracy broke from the party over the issue of Irish home rule in 1886 to help form the Liberal Unionist Party, which in turn would merge with the Conservative Party by 1912. However, the Unionist support for trade protection in the early twentieth century under Joseph Chamberlain (probably the least Whiggish character in the Liberal Unionist party) further alienated the more orthodox Whigs. By the early twentieth century \"Whiggery\" was largely irrelevant and without a natural political home. One of the last active politicians to celebrate his Whiggish roots was the Liberal Unionist statesman Henry James.\nIn popular culture.\nThe colours of the Whig Party (blue and buff, a yellow-brown colour named after buff leather) were particularly associated with Charles James Fox.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43730", "revid": "50807092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43730", "title": "Linear programming", "text": "Method to solve optimization problems\nLinear programming (LP), also called linear optimization, is a method to achieve the best outcome (such as maximum profit or lowest cost) in a mathematical model whose requirements and objective are represented by linear relationships. Linear programming is a special case of mathematical programming (also known as mathematical optimization).\nMore formally, linear programming is a technique for the optimization of a linear objective function, subject to linear equality and linear inequality constraints. Its feasible region is a convex polytope, which is a set defined as the intersection of finitely many half spaces, each of which is defined by a linear inequality. Its objective function is a real-valued affine (linear) function defined on this polytope. A linear programming algorithm finds a point in the polytope where this function has the largest (or smallest) value if such a point exists.\nLinear programs are problems that can be expressed in standard form as:\nformula_1\nHere the components of formula_2 are the variables to be determined, formula_3 and formula_4 are given vectors, and formula_5 is a given matrix. The function whose value is to be maximized (formula_6 in this case) is called the objective function. The constraints formula_7 and formula_8 specify a convex polytope over which the objective function is to be optimized.\nLinear programming can be applied to various fields of study. It is widely used in mathematics and, to a lesser extent, in business, economics, and some engineering problems. There is a close connection between linear programs, eigenequations, John von Neumann's general equilibrium model, and structural equilibrium models (see dual linear program for details).\nIndustries that use linear programming models include transportation, energy, telecommunications, and manufacturing. It has proven useful in modeling diverse types of problems in planning, routing, scheduling, assignment, and design.\nHistory.\nThe problem of solving a system of linear inequalities dates back at least as far as Fourier, who in 1827 published a method for solving them, and after whom the method of Fourier\u2013Motzkin elimination is named.\nIn the late 1930s, Soviet mathematician Leonid Kantorovich and American economist Wassily Leontief independently delved into the practical applications of linear programming. Kantorovich focused on manufacturing schedules, while Leontief explored economic applications. Their groundbreaking work was largely overlooked for decades.\nThe turning point came during World War II when linear programming emerged as a vital tool. It found extensive use in addressing complex wartime challenges, including transportation logistics, scheduling, and resource allocation. Linear programming proved invaluable in optimizing these processes while considering critical constraints such as costs and resource availability.\nDespite its initial obscurity, the wartime successes propelled linear programming into the spotlight. Post-WWII, the method gained widespread recognition and became a cornerstone in various fields, from operations research to economics. The overlooked contributions of Kantorovich and Leontief in the late 1930s eventually became foundational to the broader acceptance and utilization of linear programming in optimizing decision-making processes.\nKantorovich's work was initially neglected in the USSR. About the same time as Kantorovich, the Dutch-American economist T. C. Koopmans formulated classical economic problems as linear programs. Kantorovich and Koopmans later shared the 1975 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences. In 1941, Frank Lauren Hitchcock also formulated transportation problems as linear programs and gave a solution very similar to the later simplex method. Hitchcock had died in 1957, and the Nobel Memorial Prize is not awarded posthumously.\nFrom 1946 to 1947 George B. Dantzig independently developed general linear programming formulation to use for planning problems in the US Air Force. In 1947, Dantzig also invented the simplex method that, for the first time efficiently, tackled the linear programming problem in most cases. When Dantzig arranged a meeting with John von Neumann to discuss his simplex method, von Neumann immediately conjectured the theory of duality by realizing that the problem he had been working in game theory was equivalent. Dantzig provided formal proof in an unpublished report \"A Theorem on Linear Inequalities\" on January 5, 1948. Dantzig's work was made available to public in 1951. In the post-war years, many industries applied it in their daily planning.\nDantzig's original example was to find the best assignment of 70 people to 70 jobs. The computing power required to test all the permutations to select the best assignment is vast; the number of possible configurations exceeds the number of particles in the observable universe. However, it takes only a moment to find the optimum solution by posing the problem as a linear program and applying the simplex algorithm. The theory behind linear programming drastically reduces the number of possible solutions that must be checked.\nThe linear programming problem was first shown to be solvable in polynomial time by Leonid Khachiyan in 1979, but a larger theoretical and practical breakthrough in the field came in 1984 when Narendra Karmarkar introduced a new interior-point method for solving linear-programming problems.\nUses.\nLinear programming is a widely used field of optimization for several reasons. Many practical problems in operations research can be expressed as linear programming problems. Certain special cases of linear programming, such as \"network flow\" problems and \"multicommodity flow\" problems, are considered important enough to have much research on specialized algorithms. A number of algorithms for other types of optimization problems work by solving linear programming problems as sub-problems. Historically, ideas from linear programming have inspired many of the central concepts of optimization theory, such as \"duality,\" \"decomposition,\" and the importance of \"convexity\" and its generalizations. Likewise, linear programming was heavily used in the early formation of microeconomics, and it is currently utilized in company management, such as planning, production, transportation, and technology. Although the modern management issues are ever-changing, most companies would like to maximize profits and minimize costs with limited resources. Google also uses linear programming to stabilize YouTube videos.\nStandard form.\n\"Standard form\" is the usual and most intuitive form of describing a linear programming problem. It consists of the following three parts:\n e.g. formula_9\n e.g.\n formula_10\n e.g.\n formula_11\nThe problem is usually expressed in \"matrix form\", and then becomes:\n formula_12\nOther forms, such as minimization problems, problems with constraints on alternative forms, and problems involving negative variables can always be rewritten into an equivalent problem in standard form.\nExample.\nSuppose that a farmer has a piece of farm land, say \"L\" hectares, to be planted with either wheat or barley or some combination of the two. The farmer has \"F\" kilograms of fertilizer and \"P\" kilograms of pesticide. Every hectare of wheat requires \"F\"1 kilograms of fertilizer and \"P\"1 kilograms of pesticide, while every hectare of barley requires \"F\"2 kilograms of fertilizer and \"P\"2 kilograms of pesticide. Let S1 be the selling price of wheat and S2 be the selling price of barley, per hectare. If we denote the area of land planted with wheat and barley by \"x\"1 and \"x\"2 respectively, then profit can be maximized by choosing optimal values for \"x\"1 and \"x\"2. This problem can be expressed with the following linear programming problem in the standard form:\nIn matrix form this becomes:\n maximize formula_13\n subject to formula_14\nAugmented form (slack form).\nLinear programming problems can be converted into an \"augmented form\" in order to apply the common form of the simplex algorithm. This form introduces non-negative \"slack variables\" to replace inequalities with equalities in the constraints. The problems can then be written in the following block matrix form:\n Maximize formula_15:\n formula_16\nformula_17\nwhere formula_18 are the newly introduced slack variables, formula_2 are the decision variables, and formula_15 is the variable to be maximized.\nExample.\nThe example above is converted into the following augmented form:\nwhere formula_21 are (non-negative) slack variables, representing in this example the unused area, the amount of unused fertilizer, and the amount of unused pesticide.\nIn matrix form this becomes:\n Maximize formula_15:\n formula_23\nDuality.\nEvery linear programming problem, referred to as a \"primal\" problem, can be converted into a dual problem, which provides an upper bound to the optimal value of the primal problem. In matrix form, we can express the \"primal\" problem as:\n Maximize cTx subject to \"A\"x \u2264 b, x \u2265 0;\n with the corresponding symmetric dual problem,\n Minimize bTy subject to \"A\"Ty \u2265 c, y \u2265 0.\nAn alternative primal formulation is:\n Maximize cTx subject to \"A\"x \u2264 b;\n with the corresponding asymmetric dual problem,\n Minimize bTy subject to \"A\"Ty = c, y \u2265 0.\nThere are two ideas fundamental to duality theory. One is the fact that (for the symmetric dual) the dual of a dual linear program is the original primal linear program. Additionally, every feasible solution for a linear program gives a bound on the optimal value of the objective function of its dual. The weak duality theorem states that the objective function value of the dual at any feasible solution is always greater than or equal to the objective function value of the primal at any feasible solution. The strong duality theorem states that if the primal has an optimal solution, x*, then the dual also has an optimal solution, y*, and cTx*=bTy*.\nA linear program can also be unbounded or infeasible. Duality theory tells us that if the primal is unbounded then the dual is infeasible by the weak duality theorem. Likewise, if the dual is unbounded, then the primal must be infeasible. However, it is possible for both the dual and the primal to be infeasible. See dual linear program for details and several more examples.\nVariations.\nCovering/packing dualities.\nA covering LP is a linear program of the form:\n Minimize: bTy,\n subject to: \"A\"Ty \u2265 c, y \u2265 0,\nsuch that the matrix \"A\" and the vectors b and c are non-negative.\nThe dual of a covering LP is a packing LP, a linear program of the form:\n Maximize: cTx,\n subject to: \"A\"x \u2264 b, x \u2265 0,\nsuch that the matrix \"A\" and the vectors b and c are non-negative.\nExamples.\nCovering and packing LPs commonly arise as a linear programming relaxation of a combinatorial problem and are important in the study of approximation algorithms. For example, the LP relaxations of the set packing problem, the independent set problem, and the matching problem are packing LPs. The LP relaxations of the set cover problem, the vertex cover problem, and the dominating set problem are also covering LPs.\nFinding a fractional coloring of a graph is another example of a covering LP. In this case, there is one constraint for each vertex of the graph and one variable for each independent set of the graph.\nComplementary slackness.\nIt is possible to obtain an optimal solution to the dual when only an optimal solution to the primal is known using the complementary slackness theorem. The theorem states:\nSuppose that x\u00a0=\u00a0(x1,\u00a0x2,\u00a0...\u00a0,\u00a0x\"n\") is primal feasible and that y\u00a0=\u00a0(y1,\u00a0y2,\u00a0...\u00a0,\u00a0y\"m\") is dual feasible. Let (w1,\u00a0w2,\u00a0...,\u00a0w\"m\") denote the corresponding primal slack variables, and let (z1,\u00a0z2,\u00a0...\u00a0,\u00a0z\"n\") denote the corresponding dual slack variables. Then x and y are optimal for their respective problems if and only if\nSo if the \"i\"-th slack variable of the primal is not zero, then the \"i\"-th variable of the dual is equal to zero. Likewise, if the \"j\"-th slack variable of the dual is not zero, then the \"j\"-th variable of the primal is equal to zero.\nThis necessary condition for optimality conveys a fairly simple economic principle. In standard form (when maximizing), if there is slack in a constrained primal resource (i.e., there are \"leftovers\"), then additional quantities of that resource must have no value. Likewise, if there is slack in the dual (shadow) price non-negativity constraint requirement, i.e., the price is not zero, then there must be scarce supplies (no \"leftovers\").\nTheory.\nExistence of optimal solutions.\nGeometrically, the linear constraints define the feasible region, which is a convex polytope. A linear function is a convex function, which implies that every local minimum is a global minimum; similarly, a linear function is a concave function, which implies that every local maximum is a global maximum.\nAn optimal solution need not exist, for two reasons. First, if the constraints are inconsistent, then no feasible solution exists: For instance, the constraints x\u00a0\u2265\u00a02 and x\u00a0\u2264\u00a01 cannot be satisfied jointly; in this case, we say that the LP is \"infeasible\". Second, when the polytope is unbounded in the direction of the gradient of the objective function (where the gradient of the objective function is the vector of the coefficients of the objective function), then no optimal value is attained because it is always possible to do better than any finite value of the objective function.\nOptimal vertices (and rays) of polyhedra.\nOtherwise, if a feasible solution exists and if the constraint set is bounded, then the optimum value is always attained on the boundary of the constraint set, by the \"maximum principle\" for \"convex functions\" (alternatively, by the \"minimum\" principle for \"concave functions\") since linear functions are both convex and concave. However, some problems have distinct optimal solutions; for example, the problem of finding a feasible solution to a system of linear inequalities is a linear programming problem in which the objective function is the zero function (i.e., the constant function taking the value zero everywhere). For this feasibility problem with the zero-function for its objective-function, if there are two distinct solutions, then every convex combination of the solutions is a solution.\nThe vertices of the polytope are also called \"basic feasible solutions\". The reason for this choice of name is as follows. Let \"d\" denote the number of variables. Then the fundamental theorem of linear inequalities implies (for feasible problems) that for every vertex x* of the LP feasible region, there exists a set of \"d\" (or fewer) inequality constraints from the LP such that, when we treat those \"d\" constraints as equalities, the unique solution is x*. Thereby we can study these vertices by means of looking at certain subsets of the set of all constraints (a discrete set), rather than the continuum of LP solutions. This principle underlies the simplex algorithm for solving linear programs.\nAlgorithms.\nBasis exchange algorithms.\nSimplex algorithm of Dantzig.\nThe simplex algorithm, developed by George Dantzig in 1947, solves LP problems by constructing a feasible solution at a vertex of the polytope and then walking along a path on the edges of the polytope to vertices with non-decreasing values of the objective function until an optimum is reached for sure. In many practical problems, \"\" occurs: many pivots are made with no increase in the objective function. In rare practical problems, the usual versions of the simplex algorithm may actually \"cycle\". To avoid cycles, researchers developed new pivoting rules.\nIn practice, the simplex algorithm is quite efficient and can be guaranteed to find the global optimum if certain precautions against \"cycling\" are taken. The simplex algorithm has been proved to solve \"random\" problems efficiently, i.e. in a cubic number of steps, which is similar to its behavior on practical problems.\nHowever, the simplex algorithm has poor worst-case behavior: Klee and Minty constructed a family of linear programming problems for which the simplex method takes a number of steps exponential in the problem size. In fact, for some time it was not known whether the linear programming problem was solvable in polynomial time, i.e. of complexity class P.\nCriss-cross algorithm.\nLike the simplex algorithm of Dantzig, the criss-cross algorithm is a basis-exchange algorithm that pivots between bases. However, the criss-cross algorithm need not maintain feasibility, but can pivot rather from a feasible basis to an infeasible basis. The criss-cross algorithm does not have polynomial time-complexity for linear programming. Both algorithms visit all\u00a02\"D\" corners of a (perturbed) cube in dimension\u00a0\"D\", the Klee\u2013Minty cube, in the worst case.\nInterior point.\nIn contrast to the simplex algorithm, which finds an optimal solution by traversing the edges between vertices on a polyhedral set, interior-point methods move through the interior of the feasible region.\nEllipsoid algorithm, following Khachiyan.\nThis is the first worst-case polynomial-time algorithm ever found for linear programming. To solve a problem which has \"n\" variables and can be encoded in \"L\" input bits, this algorithm runs in formula_24 time. Leonid Khachiyan solved this long-standing complexity issue in 1979 with the introduction of the ellipsoid method. The convergence analysis has (real-number) predecessors, notably the iterative methods developed by Naum Z. Shor and the approximation algorithms by Arkadi Nemirovski and D. Yudin.\nProjective algorithm of Karmarkar.\nKhachiyan's algorithm was of landmark importance for establishing the polynomial-time solvability of linear programs. The algorithm was not a computational break-through, as the simplex method is more efficient for all but specially constructed families of linear programs.\nHowever, Khachiyan's algorithm inspired new lines of research in linear programming. In 1984, N. Karmarkar proposed a projective method for linear programming. Karmarkar's algorithm improved on Khachiyan's worst-case polynomial bound (giving formula_25). Karmarkar claimed that his algorithm was much faster in practical LP than the simplex method, a claim that created great interest in interior-point methods. Since Karmarkar's discovery, many interior-point methods have been proposed and analyzed.\nVaidya's 87 algorithm.\nIn 1987, Vaidya proposed an algorithm that runs in formula_26 time.\nVaidya's 89 algorithm.\nIn 1989, Vaidya developed an algorithm that runs in formula_27 time. Formally speaking, the algorithm takes formula_28 arithmetic operations in the worst case, where formula_29 is the number of constraints, formula_30 is the number of variables, and formula_31 is the number of bits.\nInput sparsity time algorithms.\nIn 2015, Lee and Sidford showed that linear programming can be solved in formula_32 time, where formula_33 denotes the soft O notation, and formula_34 represents the number of non-zero elements, and it remains taking formula_35 in the worst case.\nCurrent matrix multiplication time algorithm.\nIn 2019, Cohen, Lee and Song improved the running time to formula_36 time, formula_37 is the exponent of matrix multiplication and formula_38 is the dual exponent of matrix multiplication. formula_38 is (roughly) defined to be the largest number such that one can multiply an formula_40 matrix by a formula_41 matrix in formula_42 time. In a followup work by Lee, Song and Zhang, they reproduce the same result via a different method. These two algorithms remain formula_43 when formula_44 and formula_45. The result due to Jiang, Song, Weinstein and Zhang improved formula_46 to formula_47.\nComparison of interior-point methods and simplex algorithms.\nThe current opinion is that the efficiencies of good implementations of simplex-based methods and interior point methods are similar for routine applications of linear programming. However, for specific types of LP problems, it may be that one type of solver is better than another (sometimes much better), and that the structure of the solutions generated by interior point methods versus simplex-based methods are significantly different with the support set of active variables being typically smaller for the latter one.\nOpen problems and recent work.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in computer science\nDoes linear programming admit a strongly polynomial-time algorithm?\nMore unsolved problems in computer science\nThere are several open problems in the theory of linear programming, the solution of which would represent fundamental breakthroughs in mathematics and potentially major advances in our ability to solve large-scale linear programs.\nThis closely related set of problems has been cited by Stephen Smale as among the 18 greatest unsolved problems of the 21st century. In Smale's words, the third version of the problem \"is the main unsolved problem of linear programming theory.\" While algorithms exist to solve linear programming in weakly polynomial time, such as the ellipsoid methods and interior-point techniques, no algorithms have yet been found that allow strongly polynomial-time performance in the number of constraints and the number of variables. The development of such algorithms would be of great theoretical interest, and perhaps allow practical gains in solving large LPs as well.\nAlthough the Hirsch conjecture was recently disproved for higher dimensions, it still leaves the following questions open.\nThese questions relate to the performance analysis and development of simplex-like methods. The immense efficiency of the simplex algorithm in practice despite its exponential-time theoretical performance hints that there may be variations of simplex that run in polynomial or even strongly polynomial time. It would be of great practical and theoretical significance to know whether any such variants exist, particularly as an approach to deciding if LP can be solved in strongly polynomial time.\nThe simplex algorithm and its variants fall in the family of edge-following algorithms, so named because they solve linear programming problems by moving from vertex to vertex along edges of a polytope. This means that their theoretical performance is limited by the maximum number of edges between any two vertices on the LP polytope. As a result, we are interested in knowing the maximum graph-theoretical diameter of polytopal graphs. It has been proved that all polytopes have subexponential diameter. The recent disproof of the Hirsch conjecture is the first step to prove whether any polytope has superpolynomial diameter. If any such polytopes exist, then no edge-following variant can run in polynomial time. Questions about polytope diameter are of independent mathematical interest.\nSimplex pivot methods preserve primal (or dual) feasibility. On the other hand, criss-cross pivot methods do not preserve (primal or dual) feasibility\u00a0\u2013 they may visit primal feasible, dual feasible or primal-and-dual infeasible bases in any order. Pivot methods of this type have been studied since the 1970s. Essentially, these methods attempt to find the shortest pivot path on the arrangement polytope under the linear programming problem. In contrast to polytopal graphs, graphs of arrangement polytopes are known to have small diameter, allowing the possibility of strongly polynomial-time criss-cross pivot algorithm without resolving questions about the diameter of general polytopes.\nInteger unknowns.\nIf all of the unknown variables are required to be integers, then the problem is called an integer programming (IP) or integer linear programming (ILP) problem. In contrast to linear programming, which can be solved efficiently in the worst case, integer programming problems are in many practical situations (those with bounded variables) NP-hard. 0\u20131 integer programming or binary integer programming (BIP) is the special case of integer programming where variables are required to be 0 or 1 (rather than arbitrary integers). This problem is also classified as NP-hard, and in fact the decision version was one of Karp's 21 NP-complete problems.\nIf only some of the unknown variables are required to be integers, then the problem is called a mixed integer (linear) programming (MIP or MILP) problem. These are generally also NP-hard because they are even more general than ILP programs.\nThere are however some important subclasses of IP and MIP problems that are efficiently solvable, most notably problems where the constraint matrix is totally unimodular and the right-hand sides of the constraints are integers or \u2013 more general \u2013 where the system has the total dual integrality (TDI) property.\nAdvanced algorithms for solving integer linear programs include:\nSuch integer-programming algorithms are discussed by Padberg and in Beasley.\nIntegral linear programs.\nA linear program in real variables is said to be integral if it has at least one optimal solution which is integral, i.e., made of only integer values. Likewise, a polyhedron formula_48 is said to be integral if for all bounded feasible objective functions \"c\", the linear program formula_49 has an optimum formula_50 with integer coordinates. As observed by Edmonds and Giles in 1977, one can equivalently say that the polyhedron formula_51 is integral if for every bounded feasible integral objective function \"c\", the optimal \"value\" of the linear program formula_49 is an integer.\nIntegral linear programs are of central importance in the polyhedral aspect of combinatorial optimization since they provide an alternate characterization of a problem. Specifically, for any problem, the convex hull of the solutions is an integral polyhedron; if this polyhedron has a nice/compact description, then we can efficiently find the optimal feasible solution under any linear objective. Conversely, if we can prove that a linear programming relaxation is integral, then it is the desired description of the convex hull of feasible (integral) solutions.\nTerminology is not consistent throughout the literature, so one should be careful to distinguish the following two concepts,\nOne common way of proving that a polyhedron is integral is to show that it is totally unimodular. There are other general methods including the integer decomposition property and total dual integrality. Other specific well-known integral LPs include the matching polytope, lattice polyhedra, submodular flow polyhedra, and the intersection of two generalized polymatroids/\"g\"-polymatroids \u2013 e.g. see Schrijver 2003.\nSolvers and scripting (programming) languages.\nPermissive licenses:\nCopyleft (reciprocal) licenses:\nMINTO (Mixed Integer Optimizer, an integer programming solver which uses branch and bound algorithm) has publicly available source code but is not open source.\nProprietary licenses:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "43731", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43731", "title": "295", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 295 (CCXCV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar, the 295th Year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 295th year of the 1st millennium, the 95th year and last 6 years of the 3rd century, and the 6th year of the 290s decade. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Tuscus and Anullinus (or, less frequently, year 1048 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 295 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43732", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43732", "title": "294", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 294 (CCXCIV) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and (Galerius) Maximianus (or, less frequently, year 1047 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 294 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43733", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43733", "title": "296", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 296 (CCXCVI) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Diocletian and Constantius (or, less frequently, year 1049 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 296 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43734", "revid": "50616605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43734", "title": "Network packet", "text": "Formatted unit of data carried by a packet-switched network\nIn telecommunications and computer networking, a network packet is a formatted unit of data carried by a packet-switched network. A packet consists of control information and user data; the latter is also known as the \"payload\". Control information provides data for delivering the payload (e.g., source and destination network addresses, error detection codes, or sequencing information). Typically, control information is found in packet headers and trailers.\nIn packet switching, the bandwidth of the transmission medium is shared between multiple communication sessions, in contrast to circuit switching, in which circuits are preallocated for the duration of one session and data is typically transmitted as a continuous bit stream.\nTerminology.\nIn the seven-layer OSI model of computer networking, \"packet\" strictly refers to a protocol data unit at layer 3, the network layer. A data unit at layer 2, the data link layer, is a \"frame\". In layer 4, the transport layer, the data units are \"segments\" and \"datagrams\". Thus, in the example of TCP/IP communication over Ethernet, a TCP segment is carried in one or more IP packets, which are each carried in one or more Ethernet frames.\nArchitecture.\nThe basis of the packet concept is the postal letter: the header is like the envelope, the payload is the entire content inside the envelope, and the footer would be the signature at the bottom.\nNetwork design can achieve two major results by using packets: \"error detection\" and \"multiple host addressing\".\nFraming.\nCommunications protocols use various conventions for distinguishing the elements of a packet and for formatting the user data. For example, in Point-to-Point Protocol, the packet is formatted in 8-bit bytes, and special characters are used to delimit elements. Other protocols, like Ethernet, establish the start of the header and data elements by their location relative to the start of the packet. Some protocols format the information at a bit level instead of a byte level.\nContents.\nA packet may contain any of the following components:\nThe routing of network packets requires two network addresses, the source address of the sending host, and the destination address of the receiving host.\nError detection and correction is performed at various layers in the protocol stack. Network packets may contain a checksum, parity bits or cyclic redundancy checks to detect errors that occur during transmission.\nAt the transmitter, the calculation is performed before the packet is sent. When received at the destination, the checksum is recalculated, and compared with the one in the packet. If discrepancies are found, the packet may be corrected or discarded. Any packet loss due to these discards is dealt with by the network protocol.\nIn some cases, modifications of the network packet may be necessary while routing, in which cases checksums are recalculated.\nUnder fault conditions, packets can end up traversing a closed circuit. If nothing was done, eventually the number of packets circulating would build up until the network was congested to the point of failure. Time to live is a field that is decreased by one each time a packet goes through a network hop. If the field reaches zero, routing has failed, and the packet is discarded.\nEthernet packets have no time-to-live field and so are subject to broadcast storms in the presence of a switching loop.\nThere may be a field to identify the overall packet length. However, in some types of networks, the length is implied by the duration of the transmission.\nIt is often desirable to carry multiple communication protocols on a network. A protocol identifier field specifies a packet's protocol and allows the protocol stack to process many types of packets.\nSome networks implement quality of service which can prioritize some types of packets above others. This field indicates which packet queue should be used; a high-priority queue is emptied more quickly than lower-priority queues at points in the network where congestion is occurring.\nIn general, the payload is the data that is carried on behalf of an application. It is usually of variable length, up to a maximum that is set by the network protocol and sometimes the equipment on the route. When necessary, some networks can break a larger packet into smaller packets.\nExamples.\nInternet protocol.\nIP packets are composed of a header and payload. The header consists of fixed and optional fields. The payload appears immediately after the header. An IP packet has no trailer. However, an IP packet is often carried as the payload inside an Ethernet frame, which has its own header and trailer.\nPer the end-to-end principle, IP networks do not provide guarantees of delivery, non-duplication, or in-order delivery of packets. However, it is common practice to layer a reliable transport protocol such as Transmission Control Protocol on top of the packet service to provide such protection.\nNASA Deep Space Network.\nThe Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) packet telemetry standard defines the protocol used for the transmission of spacecraft instrument data over the deep-space channel. Under this standard, an image or other data sent from a spacecraft instrument is transmitted using one or more packets.\nMPEG packetized stream.\nPacketized elementary stream (PES) is a specification associated with the MPEG-2 standard that allows an elementary stream to be divided into packets. The elementary stream is packetized by encapsulating sequential data bytes from the elementary stream between PES packet headers.\nA typical method of transmitting elementary stream data from a video or audio encoder is to first create PES packets from the elementary stream data and then to encapsulate these PES packets inside an MPEG transport stream (TS) packets or an MPEG program stream (PS). The TS packets can then be transmitted using broadcasting techniques, such as those used in an ATSC and DVB.\nNICAM.\nIn order to provide mono \"compatibility\", the NICAM signal is transmitted on a subcarrier alongside the sound carrier. This means that the FM or AM regular mono sound carrier is left alone for reception by monaural receivers. The NICAM packet (except for the header) is scrambled with a nine-bit pseudo-random bit-generator before transmission. Making the NICAM bitstream look more like white noise is important because this reduces signal patterning on adjacent TV channels.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43735", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43735", "title": "292", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 292 (CCXCII) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Hannibalianus and Asclepiodotus (or, less frequently, year 1045 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 292 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nMesoamerica.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43736", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43736", "title": "293", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 293 (CCXCIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Diocletian and Maximian (or, less frequently, year 1046 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 293 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43737", "revid": "615903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43737", "title": "290", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 290 (CCXC) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Valerius and Valerius (or, less frequently, year 1043 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 290 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43738", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43738", "title": "291", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 291 (CCXCI) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Tiberianus and Dio (or, less frequently, year 1044 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 291 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43739", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43739", "title": "289", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 289 (CCLXXXIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Bassus and Quintianus (or, less frequently, year 1042 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 289 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43740", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43740", "title": "288", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 288 (CCLXXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Maximian and Ianuarianus (or, less frequently, year 1041 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 288 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43741", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43741", "title": "285", "text": "Calendar year\nThe year 285 (CCLXXXV) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as the \"Year of the Consulship of Carinus and Aurelius\" (or, less frequently, \"year 1038 \"Ab urbe condita\"\"). The denomination \"285\" for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43742", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43742", "title": "287", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 287 (CCLXXXVII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Diocletian and Maximian (or, less frequently, year 1040 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 287 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43743", "revid": "40153758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43743", "title": "283", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 283 (CCLXXXIII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Carus and Carinus (or, less frequently, year 1036 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 283 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43744", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43744", "title": "282", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 282 (CCLXXXII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Probus and Victorinus (or, less frequently, year 1035 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 282 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43745", "revid": "43682752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43745", "title": "281", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 281 (CCLXXXI) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Probus and Tiberianus (or, less frequently, year 1034 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 281 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. The year comes after 280 and Comes before 282.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43746", "revid": "43568858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43746", "title": "280", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 280 (CCLXXX) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Messalla and Gratus (or, less frequently, year 1033 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 280 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nIndia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43747", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43747", "title": "279", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 279 (CCLXXIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Probus and Paternus (or, less frequently, year 1032 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 279 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43748", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43748", "title": "274", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 274 (CCLXXIV) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aurelianus and Capitolinus (or, less frequently, year 1027 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 274 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43749", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43749", "title": "278", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 278 (CCLXXVIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Probus and Lupus (or, less frequently, year 1031 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 278 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43750", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43750", "title": "273", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 273 (CCLXXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Tacitus and Placidianus (or, less frequently, year 1026 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 273 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. The year also saw most lost territories to rebellion returned to the Roman Empire by Emperor Aurelian.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nPersia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43751", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43751", "title": "272", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 272 (CCLXXII) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Postumius and Veldumnianus (or, less frequently, year 1025 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 272 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43752", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43752", "title": "277", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 277 (CCLXXVII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Probus and Paulinus (or, less frequently, year 1030 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 277 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43753", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43753", "title": "276", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 276 (CCLXXVI) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Tacitus and Aemilianus (or, less frequently, year 1029 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 276 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43754", "revid": "49191770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43754", "title": "275", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 275 (CCLXXV) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aurelianus and Marcellinus (or, less frequently, year 1028 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 275 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43755", "revid": "34957066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43755", "title": "250", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 250 (CCL) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Traianus and Gratus (or, less frequently, year 1003 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 250 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43756", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43756", "title": "252", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 252 (CCLII) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Trebonianus and Volusianus (or, less frequently, year 1005 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 252 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43757", "revid": "1301570753", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43757", "title": "256", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 256 (CCLVI) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Claudius and Glabrio (or, less frequently, year 1009 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 256 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43758", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43758", "title": "258", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 258 (CCLVIII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Tuscus and Bassus (or, less frequently, year 1011 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 258 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43759", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43759", "title": "259", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 259 (CCLIX) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aemilianus and Bassus (or, less frequently, year 1012 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 259 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43760", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43760", "title": "270", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 270 (CCLXX) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Antiochianus and Orfitus (or, less frequently, year 1023 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 270 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAfrica.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43761", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43761", "title": "260", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 260 (CCLX) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Saecularis and Donatus (or, less frequently, year 1013 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 260 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43762", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43762", "title": "261", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 261 (CCLXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gallienus and Taurus (or, less frequently, year 1014 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 261 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43763", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43763", "title": "263", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 263 (CCLXIII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Albinus and Dexter (or, less frequently, year 1016 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 263 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArt and Science.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43764", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43764", "title": "267", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 267 (CCLXVII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Paternus and Arcesilaus (or, less frequently, year 1020 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 267 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nNear East.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43765", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43765", "title": "262", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 262 (CCLXII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gallienus and Faustianus (or, less frequently, year 1015 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 262 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43766", "revid": "1291559258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43766", "title": "264", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 264 (CCLXIV) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gallienus and Saturninus (or, less frequently, year 1017 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 264 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nDeaths.\nValerian (emperor) (b.199)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43767", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43767", "title": "268", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 268 (CCLXVIII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Paternus and Egnatius (or, less frequently, the year 1021 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 268 for this year has been used since the early medieval period when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43768", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43768", "title": "265", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 265 (CCLXV) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Valerianus and Lucillus (or, less frequently, year 1018 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 265 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43769", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43769", "title": "266", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 266 (CCLXVI) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gallienus and Sabinillus (or, less frequently, year 1019 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 266 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43770", "revid": "33839581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43770", "title": "269", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 269 (CCLXIX) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Claudius and Paternus (or, less frequently, year 1022 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 269 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43771", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43771", "title": "190", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 190 (CXC) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aurelius and Sura (or, less frequently, year 943 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 190 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nEconomic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43772", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43772", "title": "191", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 191 (CXCI) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Apronianus and Bradua (or, less frequently, year 944 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 191 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43773", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43773", "title": "192", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 192 (CXCII) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aelius and Pertinax (or, less frequently, year 945 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 192 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method for Europeans for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43774", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43774", "title": "193", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 193 (CXCIII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Sosius and Ericius (or, less frequently, year 946 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 193 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nCommerce.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43775", "revid": "1315022249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43775", "title": "194", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 194 (CXCIV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Septimius and Septimius (or, less frequently, year 947 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 194 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\u0661\u0662\u0664\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43776", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43776", "title": "196", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 196 (CXCVI) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Dexter and Messalla (or, less frequently, year 949 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 196 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nKorea.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43778", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43778", "title": "197", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 197 (CXCVII) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Magius and Rufinus (or, less frequently, year 950 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 197 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43779", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43779", "title": "198", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 198 (CXCVIII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Sergius and Gallus (or, less frequently, year 951 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 198 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43780", "revid": "50631774", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43780", "title": "Veneto", "text": "Region of Italy\nVeneto, officially the Region of Veneto, is one of the 20 regions of Italy, located in the north-east of the country. It is the 4th most populous region in Italy, with a population of 4,851,851 as of 2025. Venice is the region's capital while Verona is the largest city.\nVeneto was part of the Roman Empire until the 5th century AD. Later, after a feudal period, it was part of the Republic of Venice until 1797. Venice ruled for centuries over one of the largest and richest maritime republics and trade empires in the world. After the Napoleonic Wars and the Congress of Vienna, the former Republic was combined with Lombardy and re-annexed to the Austrian Empire as the Kingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia, until that was merged with the Kingdom of Italy in 1866, as a result of the Third Italian War of Independence and of a plebiscite.\nBesides Italian, most inhabitants also speak Venetian. Since 1971, the Statute of Veneto has referred to the region's citizens as \"the Venetian people\". Article 1 defines Veneto as an \"autonomous Region\", \"constituted by the Venetian people and the lands of the provinces of Belluno, Padua, Rovigo, Treviso, Venice, Verona and Vicenza\", while maintaining \"bonds with Venetians in the world\". Article 2 sets forth the principle of the \"self-government of the Venetian people\" and mandates the Region to \"promote the historical identity of the Venetian people and civilisation\". Despite these affirmations, approved by the Italian Parliament, Veneto is not among the autonomous regions with special statute, unlike its north-eastern and north-western neighbours, Friuli-Venezia Giulia and Trentino-Alto Adige/S\u00fcdtirol respectively.\nVeneto is home to a notable nationalist movement, known as Venetian nationalism or Venetism. The region's largest party is , a founding component of . The current President of Veneto is Luca Zaia (\u2013), re-elected in 2020 with 76.8% of the vote. An autonomy referendum took place in 2017: 57.2% of Venetians turned out, 98.1% voting \"yes\" to \"further forms and special conditions of autonomy\".\nHaving been for a long period in history a land of mass emigration, Veneto is today one of the greatest immigrant-receiving regions in the country, with 655,026 foreigners (13.5% of the regional population in 2024), notably including Romanians (94,962), Moldovans (58,275), Moroccans (57,737), Albanians (48,013) and Chinese (27,603).\nHistory.\nVenetic period.\nBetween the 2nd and 1st millennium BC, the region was inhabited by the Euganei. According to ancient historians, who perhaps wanted to link Venetic origins to legend of Roman origins in Troy, the Veneti (often called the \"Palaeoveneti\") came from Paphlagonia in Anatolia at the time of the Fall of Troy (12th century BC), led by prince Antenor, a comrade of Aeneas. Other historians link Venetic origins with Celts.\nIn the 7th\u20136th centuries BC the local populations of Veneto entered into contact with the Etruscans and the Greeks. Venetic culture reached a high point during the 4th century BC. These ancient Veneti spoke Venetic, an Indo-European language akin to, but distinct from Latin and the other Italic languages. Meanwhile, the Veneti prospered through their trade in amber and breeding of horses. Este, Padua, Oderzo, Adria, Vicenza, Verona, and Altino became centres of Venetic culture. Over time, the Veneti began to adopt the dress and certain other customs of their Celtic neighbours.\nRoman period.\nDuring the 3rd century BC, the Veneti, together with the Cenomani Celts on their western border, sided with the Romans, as Rome expanded and struggled against the Insubres and Boii (Celts). During the Second Punic War (218 \u2013 202 BC), the Veneti even sent a contingent of soldiers to fight alongside the Romans against Hannibal and the invading Carthaginians. These Venetians were among those slaughtered at the Battle of Cannae (216 BC).\nIn 181 BC a Roman triumvirate of Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica, Caius Flaminius, and Lucius Manlius Acidinus founded a Latin colony at Aquileia as a base to protect the territory of the Veneti from incursions of the hostile Carni and Histri. From then on, Roman influence over the area increased. In 169 BC 1,500 more colonising families were sent by Rome to Aquileia. In 148 BC the \"Via Postumia\" was completed connecting Aquileia to Genoa. In 131 BC, the \"Via Annia\" joined Adria to Patavium (modern Padua) to Altinum to Concordia to Aquileia.\nThe Roman Republic gradually transformed its alliance with the Veneti into a relationship of dominance. After the 91 BC Italic rebellion, the cities of the Veneti, together with the rest of \"Transpadania\", were granted partial rights of Roman citizenship according to the \"Lex Pompeia de Transpadanis\". Later in 49 BC, by the \"Lex Roscia\" granted full Roman citizenship to the Veneti. The \"Via Claudia\" would be completed in AD 46 to connected Altinum, Tarvisium (modern Treviso), Feltria (modern Feltre), and Tridentum (modern Trento). From Tridentum it continued northwards to Pons Drusus and further to Augusta Vindelicorum (modern Augsburg), and southwards from Trento to Verona and Mutina (modern Modena).\nAfter the Battle of Philippi (42 BC) ended the Roman Civil War, the lands of the Veneti, together with the rest of Cisalpine Gaul, ceased to be a province. Between 8 and 6 BC, Augustus reorganized \"Italia\" into 11 \"regions.\" The territory of modern Veneto along with Istria, modern Friuli and Trentino-Alto Adige and eastern Lombardy (including its cities of Mantua, Cremona, Brescia, and Sondrio) became Region X (\"Venetia et Histria\"). Aquileia, although not officially the capital was the chief municipium of the region. Meanwhile, under the Pax Romana, Patavium developed into one of the most important cities of northern Italy. Other Venetic cities such as Opitergium (modern Oderzo), Tarvisium, Feltria, Vicetia (modern Vicenza), Ateste (modern Este), and Altinum (modern Altino) adopted the Latin language and the culture of Rome. By the end of the 1st century AD Latin had displaced the original Venetic language.\nIn 166 AD the Quadi and Marcomanni invaded Venetia. It was the beginning of many barbarian invasions. Marcus Aurelius retaining the regions of \"Italia\", superimposed another layer of administration by ascribing Regions X and XI to the district of \"Transpadana\" under a \"iuridicus\". The end of the 3rd c. brought further administrative changes when Diocletian abolished the regions and districts and established \"provinciae\". Thus, Region X (\"Venetia et Histria\") became Province VIII (\"Venetia et Histria\"), being enlarged in the west up to the Adda River governed by a \"corrector\" until 363 and from 368 to 373 by a \"consularius\" seated at Aquileia. \"Venetia et Histria\" remained one of the 16 Provinces of Italy in the 5th century when both Alaric the Goth and then Attila and the Huns devastated the area. Attila laid siege to Aquileia and turned it into a ruin in 452 AD. Many of the mainland inhabitants sought protection in the nearby lagoons which would become Grado in the east and Venice more to the west. On the heels of the Huns came the Ostrogoths who not only invaded, but also settled down in the region, especially near Treviso where the penultimate king Totila was born.\nDuring the mid-6th century, Justinian reconquered Venetia for the Eastern Roman Empire. An Exarch was established at Ravenna while a military tribune was set up in Oderzo. Greek-Byzantine rule did not last long. Starting in 568 AD, the Lombards crossed the Julian Alps. These invaders subdivided the territory of Venetia into numerous feuds ruled by Germanic dukes and counts, essentially creating the division of Veneto from Friuli.\nThe invasion provoked another wave of migration from the mainland to the Byzantine controlled coast and islands. In 643 AD the Lombards conquered the Byzantine base at Oderzo and took possession of practically all of Veneto (and Friuli) except for Venice and Grado. The 36 Lombard duchies included the Venetian cities of Ceneda, Treviso, Verona, and Vicenza. A reminder of Lombard rule can be seen in the place names beginning with the word \"Farra\".\nMiddle Ages.\nBy the middle of the 8th century, the Franks had assumed political control of the region and the mainland of Veneto became part of the Carolingian Empire. Though politically dominant, these Germanic invaders were gradually absorbed into the Venetian population over the centuries.\nIn the late 9th century, Berengar, Margrave of the March of Friuli was elected king of Italy. Under his tumultuous reign, the March of Friuli was absorbed into the March of Verona so that Verona's territory contained a large portion of Roman Venetia.\nIn the 10th century, the mainland of Veneto, after suffering raids from the Magyars and the Slavs, was incorporated into the Holy Roman Empire. Gradually, the communes of the mainland grew in power and wealth. In 1167 an alliance (called the Lombard League) was formed among the Venetian cities such as Padua, Treviso, Vicenza, and Verona with other cities of Northern Italy to assert their rights against the Holy Roman Emperor. \nThe emperor Frederick I, Barbarossa (reigned 1155\u20131190) conducted six military campaigns in Italy, which was under his Holy Roman Empire. Originally he wanted to confront the Norman Kingdom of Sicily in the south. However, his intervention in Italy was opposed by several Italian cities, particularly Milan, which he had partially destroyed during his second campaign. A dispute with Pope Alexander III (1159\u20131181) developed because Frederick endorsed antipope Victor IV, who had been elected in opposition to Alexander. Opposition against Frederick in northern Italy grew and the Lombard League, a league formed by several cities, fought him. Frederick was defeated at the Battle of Legnano in 1176. Preliminary peace negotiations took place at Anagni (the Peace of Anagni) in 1176. Negotiations involving all the concerned parties to reach a formal peace treaty took place in Venice where a conference was scheduled for July 1177. The doge Sebastiano Ziani (1172\u20131178) was to act as an intermediary.\nThe Second Treaty of Constance in 1183 confirmed the Peace of Venice of 1177 in which the cities agreed to remain part of the Empire as long as their jurisdiction over their own territories was not infringed upon. The league was dissolved at the death of Emperor Frederick II in 1250. This period also witnessed the founding of the second oldest university in Italy, the University of Padua founded in 1222. Around this time, Padua also served as home to St. Anthony, the beloved Saint called simply \"il Santo\" (\"the Saint\") by the inhabitants of the town.\nVenetian Republic.\nAs the barbarians were interested in the wealth of the mainland, part of the Venetian population sought refuge on some of the isolated and unoccupied islands in the lagoon, from which the city of \"Venetiae\" or Venice was born. After a period of Byzantine domination in 8th century, Venice became an independent maritime Republic ruled by its elected doge.\nThe Republic became a commercial superpower and its influence lasted through the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. In fact, the Venetian Republic enjoyed 1100 years of uninterrupted influence throughout the Mediterranean. By the 16th century, the Venetian Republic dominated Veneto, Friuli, parts of Lombardy and Romagna, Istria, Dalmatia, the Ionian Islands of Corfu, Cefalonia, Ithaca and Zante. From the 13th to 17th centuries, it held the island of Crete and from the mid-15th to mid-16th century, the island of Cyprus.\nVenetian mainland holdings led to Venetian involvement in European and in particular, Italian politics. Cities had to be fortified, two impressive examples are Nafplio in Peloponnese and Palmanova in Friuli. The wise rule and prosperity brought by the \"Serenissima\" (most serene republic) made the cities of the \"terra firma\" willing subjects. Eastern Islands served as useful ports for Venetian shipping. However, as the Ottoman Empire grew more powerful and aggressive, Venice was often put on the defensive. Ottoman control of the eastern Mediterranean and the discoveries of sea routes to Asia around Africa and of the Americas had a debilitating effect on the Venetian economy.\nIn 1797, Napoleon invaded the territory of the Venetian Republic. Overwhelmed by more powerful forces, Doge Ludovico Manin resigned and retired to his villa at Passariano in Friuli and the thousand year old Republic disappeared as an independent state. This proved very unpopular in the mainland cities where sympathies were strong with the Republic of Venice. By the Treaty of Campoformio signed on 17 October 1797, part of the Venetian mainland was handed over to Francis II of the Holy Roman Empire and a western part was annexed to the French backed Cisalpine Republic. The territory soon reverted to Napoleon in 1801.\nHabsburg rule.\nIn 1805\u20131806, Veneto was conquered by Napoleon's armies and included in the Kingdom of Italy. During 1809, the region revolted against the French-Italian rule, supporting the advancing Austrian troops during the War of the Fifth Coalition. It was mainly a peasant revolt, less organised than the nearby Andreas Hofer's revolt, while urban national guard troops fought on the French-Italian side. After the Congress of Vienna, 1814\u20131815, Venetia was the eastern half of the Kingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia, a separate kingdom within the Austrian Empire.\nDuring the 1848 First Italian War of Independence, Venetia rose against the central Austrian government, forming the Republic of San Marco. After 17 months, it sought annexation to the Kingdom of Sardinia, forming an Italian confederation against Austria, and using the Italian tricolour in its flag. However, the other Italian states left the war in May 1848, and Sardinia surrendered (August 1848, then March 1849), Venetia stood alone. It surrendered on 24 August 1849, when the Siege of Venice ended.\nThe Austrian imperial government was unpopular among upper and middle classes, because of Metternich's anti-liberal politics, turned by Emperor Franz Joseph into neo-absolutism after 1848, and for not granting Lombardo\u2013Venetia any real autonomy: It was considered less than a puppet state; nevertheless, it was appreciated (especially among lower classes) for its efficient and honest administration; by 1848\u20131849, there would be no further revolt against the Austrian rule.\nUnited Italy.\nVenetia remained under Austrian control until the Austro-Prussian War in 1866, when the Kingdom of Italy joined on the Prussian side and was promised Venetia in exchange for its assistance. Austria offered to sell Venetia to Italy, but the Italy refused, seeing it as a dishonourable choice. This resulted in a new southern front for Austria, the Third Italian War of Independence.\nOnce the wars ended, the Treaty of Vienna ceded the region to neutral France, but left the fortresses under Austrian control for a time. Following protests, the Austrians left, and the French ceded it to Italy on 20 October. A referendum \u2013 where only 30% of the adult population voted (as was customary in that period), and did so under government pressure \u2013 was held on 21\u201322 October, and ratified the handover, with a 99.99% majority for Italy.\nUneven economic development reduced many to poverty, making the 19th century, and the first half of the 20th, a period of emigration. Millions of Venetians left their homes and their native land, to seek opportunities in other parts of the world. Many settled in South America (especially in Brazil), and others in Australia, Canada, and the United States of America. \nThose who remained in Veneto would experience the turmoil of two world wars. In 1915, Italy entered the First World War on the side of the France and the United Kingdom (after extricating itself from its alliance with Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire). Veneto became a major battlefront. After Italian forces suffered an enormous defeat at Caporetto in November 1917, the combined Austro-Hungarian and German forces advanced \u2013 almost unhindered \u2013 through Veneto, towards Venice, until reaching the Piave River. The Battle of the Piave River prevented these invading troops from advancing further, and was celebrated in \"La Leggenda del Piave\". Between 24 October and 3 November 1918, Italy launched the decisive Battle of Vittorio Veneto, whose outcome assured Italy's victory. \nDuring the fascist era, due to the nationalist policy the Venetian language, as other local languages, was banned in public spaces. Between 1943 and 1945, Veneto belonged to the Italian Social Republic, while the province of Belluno was part of the Prealpine Operations Zone. Many towns in the region were bombed by the Allies during the Second World War. Most hit were Treviso and Vicenza, along with the industrial area around Marghera. The Armistice of Villa Giusti which ended warfare between Italy and Austria-Hungary in the Second World War, was signed at Villa Giusti near Padua.\nAfter the Second World War, many Venetians emigrated to Western European countries; in many of these places, their descendants have maintained the use of their ancestral Venetian dialects.\nGeography.\nGeomorphology.\nVeneto is the 8th largest region in Italy, with a total area of . It is located in the north-eastern part of Italy and is bordered to the east by Friuli-Venezia Giulia, to the south by Emilia-Romagna, to the west by Lombardy and to the north by Trentino-Alto Adige/S\u00fcdtirol. In its northernmost corner it also borders Austria.\nThe north\u2013south extension of Veneto is from the Austrian border to the mouth of the River Po. By area, 29% of its surface is mountainous (Carnic Alps, eastern Dolomites and Venetian Prealps). The highest massif in the Dolomites is the Marmolada-massif at . Other dolomitic peaks are the Tre Cime di Lavaredo and the Pale di San Martino. The Venetian Prealps are not as high and range between and . A distinctive landmark of the Pre-alps are the cave formations, including chasms and sink holes; the , situated in the Monti Lessini chain in the province of Verona, has an explored depth of , being the deepest cave in Italy. Fossil deposits are also abundant there.\nThe Po Valley, covering 57% of Veneto, extends from the mountains to the Adriatic sea, broken only by some low hills: Euganean Hills, Berici Hills, and Montello, which constitute the remaining 14% of the territory. The plain itself is subdivided into the higher plain (gravel-strewn and not very fertile) and the lower plain (rich in water sources and arable terrain). The lower plain is both a mainstay of agricultural production and the most populated part of the region.\nSeveral rivers flow through the region: the Po, Adige, Brenta, Bacchiglione, Livenza, Piave, and Tagliamento. The eastern shore of the largest lake in Italy, Lake Garda, belongs to Veneto. The coastline covers approximately , of which are beaches.\nThe coasts of the Adriatic Sea are characterised by the Venetian Lagoon, a flat terrain with ponds, marshes and islands. The Po Delta to the south features sandbars and dunes along the coastline. The inland portion contains cultivable land recently reclaimed by a system of canals and dykes. Fish ponds have been created there as well. The delta and the lagoon are a stopping-point for migratory birds.\nVeneto's morphology is characterised by its:\nClimate.\nThe climate changes significantly from one area to another: while it is continental on the plains, it is milder along the Adriatic coast; around the Lake Garda and in the hilly areas. The lowlands are often covered by thick fog, in winter; precipitations that are scarce \u2013 750\u00a0mm per year \u2013 close to the river Po, but are more abundant \u2013 from 750 to 1100\u00a0mm per year \u2013 at higher altitudes; the highest values \u2013 up to 3200\u00a0mm per year \u2013 are recorded in the Bellunese Prealps, near Mount Pasubio and on the Asiago plateau.\nGovernment and politics.\nVeneto is a semi-presidential representative democracy. The President of Veneto, colloquially nicknamed Governor or even \"Doge\" in remembrance of Venice's traditional head of state, is also the head of the Regional Government. Legislative power is exerted by the Regional Council, the local parliament. The Statute (i.e. the law establishing and regulating the regional institution, which was first promulgated on 22 May 1971), uses the term \"people\" for Venetians, but, like in the case of Sardinians, this is not a legal recognition of any differences from other Italian citizens. Moreover, the region is not granted a form of autonomy comparable to that of neighbouring Friuli-Venezia Giulia and Trentino-Alto Adige/S\u00fcdtirol. This is the reason why many municipalities have held referendums in order to be united to these regions.\nTraditionally a very Catholic region, Veneto was once the heartland of Christian Democracy, which won a record 60.5% of the vote in the 1948 general election, polled above 50% in each and every general and regional election until 1983 and governed the region since its establishment in 1970 to 1994. After that, Veneto has been a stronghold of the centre-right coalition, which has governed the region since 1995, first under President Giancarlo Galan (Forza Italia/The People of Freedom) and, since 2010, Luca Zaia (\u2013). In the 2020 regional election Liga Veneta\u2013Lega Nord won a combined 61.5% of the vote (sum of party list and Zaia's personal list), followed by the three main Italian parties of the time, the Democratic Party (11.9%), the Brothers of Italy (9.6%) and (3.6%).\nAccording to Robert D. Putnam, the \"institutional performance\" of Veneto's regional government is higher than average in Italy and Veneto belongs to the \"civic North\".\nVenetian nationalism.\nVenetian nationalism is a regionalist/nationalist political movement which gained prominence in Veneto during the 1970s and 1980s, demanding more autonomy, a special statute or even independence, and promoting Venetian culture, language and history. This is the political background in which the was launched in 1980. Other regionalist/nationalist groupings, including Liga Veneta Repubblica, North-East Project and the avowed separatist Veneto State, Venetian Independence and \"Plebiscito.eu\", emerged but they have never touched the popularity of Liga Veneta, which was a founding member of in 1991.\nVenetian Independence and other alike groups have been long proposing a referendum on the independence of Veneto from Italy. After the Regional Council approved a resolution on self-determination (with an explicit reference to a referendum) in November 2012, a referendum bill was proposed in April 2013.\nPlebiscite 2013 organised an online referendum, with no official recognition, for 16\u201321 March 2014. According to organisers, turnout was 63.2% (2.36 million voters) and 89.1% of participants (56.6 of all eligible voters) voted yes. Several news sources, however, contested these results, saying that participants were at most 135,000 (3.6% of eligible voters) based on public independent web traffic statistics.\nOn 22 October 2017 an official autonomy referendum took place in Veneto: 57.2% of Venetians participated and 98.1% voted \"yes\".\nAdministrative divisions.\nVeneto is divided into the Metropolitan City of Venice and 6 provinces and also divided in 560 municipalities. Of the seven provinces of the region, the Province of Padua is the most populous and has the greatest density, with 422.8 persons per km2, reaching 2,232.5 in the city of Padua. In contrast the capital city, Venice, has a moderate density of 599.8. The least populated and densely populated is Belluno (54.7), which is the largest in area and the most mountainous.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVeneto has about 4,851,851 inhabitants as of 2025, ranking it as the 5th most populated region in Italy. Veneto is also the 5th most densely populated region at 264.5 inhabitants per km2. This is particularly true in the provinces of Padua, Venice and Treviso, where the inhabitants per km2 are above 300. Belluno is the least densely populated province, with 54.7 inhabitants per km2. 49.3% of the population are male and 50.7% are female. Minors make up 14.7% of the population, and seniors make up 24.9%, compared to the Italian average of 14.9% and 24.7% respectively.\nLike the other regions of Northern Italy and Central Italy, though with a certain time lag, Veneto has been experiencing a phase of very slow population growth caused by the dramatic fall in fertility. The overall population has so far been increasing \u2013 though only slightly \u2013 due to the net immigration started at the end of the 1980s, after more than 20 years of massive exodus from the poorer areas of the region.\nImmigration and ethnicity.\nNearly 3 million Venetians left their country between 1861 and 1961 to escape poverty. Many emigrated to Brazil and Argentina. After World War II, they moved to other European countries. In 2008, there were 260,849 Venetian citizens living outside of Italy (5.4% of the region's population), the largest number was found in Brazil, with 57,052 Venetians, followed by Switzerland, with 38,320, and Argentina, with 31,823. There are several million people of Venetian descent around the world, particularly in Brazil, in the states of Rio Grande do Sul, Santa Catarina and Paran\u00e1. Local names in Southern Brazil such as Nova Schio, Nova Bassano, Nova Br\u00e9scia, Nova Treviso, Nova Veneza, Nova P\u00e1dua and Monteberico indicate the Venetian origin of their inhabitants. In recent years, people of Venetian descent from Brazil and Argentina have been migrating to Italy.\nDue to the impressive economic growth of the last two decades, Veneto has turned into a land of immigration and has been attracting more and more immigrants since the 1990s.\nAs of 2024, the foreign-born population is 655,026, equal to 13.5% of the population. The 5 largest foreign nationalities are Romanians (94,962), Moldovans (58,275), Moroccans (57,737), Albanians (48,013) and Chinese (27,603).\nReligion.\nVeneto converted to Christianity during Roman rule. The region venerates as its patrons the 2nd-century bishop St. Hermagoras and his deacon St. Fortunatus, both of Aquileia and both martyrs. Aquileia became the metropolitan see of Venetia. Aquileia had its own liturgical rites which were used throughout the dioceses of Veneto until the later Middle Ages when the Roman Rite replaced the Aquileian Rite. By the 6th century the bishop of Aquileia claimed the title of patriarch. Rejection of the Second Council of Constantinople (553) led to a schism wherein the bishops of Aquileia, Liguria, Aemilia, Milan and of the Istrian peninsula all refused to condemn the Three Chapters leading to the churches of Veneto to break communion with the Church of Rome. The invasion of the non-Catholic Lombards in 568 only served to prolong the schism until 606 and then finally 699 when the Synod of Pavia definitively ended the schism.\nIn 2004, over 95% of the population claimed to be Roman Catholic. The region of Veneto along with the regions of Friuli and Trentino-Alto Adige/S\u00fcdtirol form the ecclesiastical region of Triveneto under the Patriarchate of Venice. The Patriarchate of Venice is an archdiocese and metropolitan see of an ecclesiastical region which includes suffragan episcopal sees of Adria-Rovigo, Belluno-Feltre, Chioggia, Concordia-Pordenone, Padua, Treviso, Verona, Vicenza, and Vittorio Veneto.\nThe Archdiocese of Venice was elevated to an honorary Patriarchate by the pope on 8 October 1457 when the Patriarchate of Grado, a successor to the Patriarchate of Aquileia, was suppressed. The first patriarch of Venice was St. Laurence, a nobleman of the Giustiniani family.\nDuring the 20th century the patriarchs were usually appointed cardinal, and three cardinal patriarchs, Giuseppe Sarto, Angelo Roncalli, and Albino Luciani, were elected pope: Pius X, John XXIII, and John Paul I, respectively. The Patriarchate of Venice claims St. Mark the Evangelist as its patron. The same saint, symbolised by a winged lion, had become the typical symbol of the Venetian Republic and is still represented on many civic symbols.\nEconomy.\nUnder Austrian rule, Veneto's agriculturally-based economy suffered, which later led to mass emigration. But, since the 1970s it has seen impressive development, thanks to the so-called \"Veneto development model\" that is characterised by strong export-oriented entrepreneurship in traditional economic sectors (\u20ac64.47 billion of exports in 2019 ) and close social cohesion \u2013 making it actually the third richest region in terms of total GDP (\u20ac166.4 billion) after Lombardy and Lazio.\nGeography and historical events have determined the present social and economic structure of the region, centred on a broad belt running from east to west. The plain and the Alpine foothills are the most developed areas in contrast to the Po delta and the mountainous areas, with the exception of the surroundings of Belluno. This is why the Alps and the province of Rovigo are suffering more than other areas, from a trend of declining and ageing population.\nAgriculture.\nThough its importance has been decreasing for the past 20\u201330 years, agriculture continues to play a significant role in the regional economy. The agricultural sector of Veneto is among the most productive in Italy. However, it is still characterised by an intensive use of labour rather than capital, due to the specialisation in market gardening, fruit-growing and vine-growing throughout the plain and the foothills, requiring very much handicraft. In the south and in the extreme east of the region, grain crops are more common and land holdings are larger than in the rest of the region; mechanisation is more advanced here. The cattle stock, although declining, still represented 15% of the national stock. Fishing is also still important in coastal areas.\nThe main agricultural products include maize, green peas, vegetables, apples, cherries, sugar beets, forage, tobacco, hemp. Moreover, Veneto is one of Italy's most important wine-growing areas, producing wines, such as Prosecco, Valpolicella, and Soave. Overall, Veneto produces more bottles of DOC wine than any other area in Italy. The Amarone della Valpolicella, a wine from the hills around Verona, is made with high-selected grapes and is among the more expensive red wines in the world.\nIndustry.\nIn the last 30\u201340 years industrialisation transformed the appearance of the landscape, especially in the plains.\nThe regional industry is especially made of small and medium-sized businesses, which are active in several sectors: food products, wood and furniture, leather and footwear, textiles and clothing, gold jewelry, but also chemistry, metal-mechanics and electronics. This has led to the establishment of a strongly export-orientated system of industries.\nTypical of Veneto is the partition of the territory into industrial districts, which means that each area tends to specialise in a specific sector. The province of Venice hosts large metallurgical and chemical plants in Marghera and Mestre, but is also specialised in glass handicraft (Murano).\nThe province of Belluno hosts the so-called eyeglasses district, being the largest world manufacturer Luxottica a firm domiciled at Agordo. Other important firms are Safilo, De Rigo, Marcolin.\nFashion industry is extremely strong all over the region: Benetton, Bottega Veneta, Geox, Diesel, Golden Goose, Calzedonia, Pal Zileri, Dainese, Lotto, Marzotto, Tecnica Group are all Venetian brands.\nOther large Venetian companies are Aprilia, AGV, Campagnolo, De'Longhi, Fedrigoni, Laverda, Permasteelisa, Pinarello, Wilier Triestina, Zamperla.\nDuring the last 20 years, a large number of Venetian companies relocated their plants (especially the most dangerous and polluting productions) in Eastern Europe, especially Romania. The Romanian city of Timi\u0219oara is also called \"the newest Venetian province\".\nTourism.\nAlthough being a heavily industrialised region, tourism is one of its main economic resources; one-fifth of Italy's foreign tourism gravitates towards Veneto, which is the first region in Italy in terms of tourist presence, attracting over 60 million visitors every year, second after Emilia-Romagna in terms of hotel industry structures; the business volume of tourism in Veneto is estimated to be in the vicinity of 12 billion Euros.\nVeneto has many small and picturesque villages, 11 of them have been selected by (), a non-profit private association of small Italian towns of strong historical and artistic interest, that was founded on the initiative of the Tourism Council of the National Association of Italian Municipalities. These villages are:\nStatistics.\nHistorical GDP.\nA table which shows Veneto's GDP growth:\nEconomic sectors.\nThe main sectors in the economy of Veneto are:\nUnemployment rate.\nThe unemployment rate stood at 5.8% in 2020 and was lower than the national average. However, Veneto was along with Liguria the only northern region where the unemployment rate increased between 2017 and 2018.\nCulture.\nArt and architecture.\nThe Middle Ages stimulated the creation of monumental works such as the complex of churches on the island of Torcello, in the Venetian lagoon, with the Cathedral of Santa Maria Assunta founded in 639, its bell tower erected in the 11th century and the adjacent \"Martyrium of Santa Fosca\" built around the 1100, notable for the mosaics.\nThey saw the construction of the Basilica of San Zeno Maggiore in Verona, which was Veneto's main centre for that esthetic movement and we note, by the mixture of styles that Verona was an important crossroads to the north of Europe.\nExamples of Gothic art, in addition to the Venetian church of Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari and that of Santi Giovanni e Paolo, are the Scaliger Tombs in the historical centre of Verona.\nWhile in Veneto Byzantine art was important, an element of innovation was brought to Padua by Giotto, bearer of a new pictorial tradition: that of Tuscany. Towards the 1302 he was commissioned by Enrico Scrovegni to paint the family chapel, now known just by the name of Scrovegni Chapel, one of the most important artistic monuments of Padua and Veneto. The influences of the contribution of Giotto were felt immediately, as in the frescoes of Giusto de' Menabuoi in the Baptistry near the Cathedral of Padua and those of Altichiero in the Basilica of Saint Anthony.\nAfter a phase of development of Gothic art, with the creation of important works including the Ca' d'Oro and the Doge's Palace in Venice, and the churches of Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari and of Saints John and Paul in Venice, the influence of the Renaissance ushered in a new era. In addition to Donatello, an important Venetian Renaissance artist was Andrea Mantegna (1431\u20131506), whose most important work in Veneto is perhaps the \"San Zeno Altarpiece\", found in Verona. With the mainland expansion of the Venetian Republic and the consolidation of its institutions, there was also an artistic development of exceptional stature: Mantegna, Vittore Carpaccio, Giovanni Bellini, Cima da Conegliano, Pordenone laid the foundations for what would be the age of Venetian painting.\nPadua was a cradle of the Venetian Renaissance, Where influences from Tuscany and Umbria filtered north. Amongst the Renaissance artists who worked there were Donatello, who worked on an altar of the Basilica of Saint Anthony, and Pisanello, whose works are mainly in Verona, for example, the fresco of Saint George in the Church of St. Anastasia.\nIn the first phase with Carpaccio and Bellini, the influences of international painting were still evident and the references to Flemish art were numerous. Artists of the successive phase included Giorgione, Titian, Sebastiano del Piombo and Lorenzo Lotto. Giorgione and Titian developed an original and innovative style, which characterised the painters of the Venetian school rather than other traditions. Giorgione's enigmatic style infused his work with allegory, and he created his paintings with less reliance on a preparatory drawing than previous painters. This innovation was looking for the imitation of natural phenomena by creating atmospheres with the colours and shifting the emphasis from the pursuit of artistic perfection. \"The storm\" (1506\u20131508), now in the Accademia in Venice, is an example of this use of colour, where the mixture colour and texture continue indefinitely without preparatory drawing for the painting work gives a special atmosphere.\nTitian, born in Belluno Pieve di Cadore, brought forward the use of this technique without pictorial design, creating masterpieces such as the \"Assumption of the Virgin\" (1516\u20131518), an altar made by imposing visible sizes on the main altar of the Basilica of Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari in Venice, a work whose suggestion is due to the use of colour. At the end of his long life, he had acquired fame and commissions across the continent.\nTintoretto (1518\u20131594) recast Roman Mannerism in a Venetian style, less linear, and with more use of colour to distinguish forms, highlighting the bright prospects for its operations, giving unusual deformations of perspective, to increase the sense of tension in the work. His studio was prolific. Palaces and churches of Venice abound with his paintings. The Scuola Grande di San Rocco alone sports 66 paintings by this painter. The San Giorgio Maggiore houses a huge canvas by him depicting the \"Last Supper\".\nPaolo Veronese (1528\u20131588) was about as prolific as Tintoretto, with works that celebrated the Venetian state, as well as decorating houses of Venetian nobles. He decorated large portions of the Palazzo Ducale and the decoration of many villas Palladian, including Villa Barbaro.\nJacopo Bassano (1517\u20131592) and Lorenzo Lotto were active in the mainland, and reflected some of the influences of Milanese painters with the introduction of images taken from real life, enriched by a touch of drama.\nIn architecture, Andrea Palladio (1508\u20131580), born in Padua, completed some highly influential works, including Villas in the mainland, in Vicenza, Padua and Treviso. In Venice, he designed the Basilica of San Giorgio Maggiore, the Il Redentore, and Zitelle on the island of Giudecca. Palladian Villa architecture, in masterpieces such as Villa Emo, Villa Barbaro, Villa Capra, and Villa Foscari, evoked the imagined grandeur of antique classical Roman villas. This aesthetic, through his publications, proved popular and underwent a revival in the neoclassical period. In his villas, the owner shall permit the control over production activities of the surrounding countryside by structuring the functional parts, such as porch, close to the central body. In the case of Villa Badoer, the open barn, formed by a large circular colonnade, enclosing the front yard in front of the villa allows you to create a space that recalls the ancient idea of the Forum Romanum, and bringing all campaign activities to gravitate in front of the villa itself.\nThe research style of Palladio has created an architectural movement called Palladianism, which has had strong following in the next three centuries, inspiring architects, some of them his direct students, including Vincenzo Scamozzi, after the death of the teacher who completed several works, including the first Teatro Olimpico in Vicenza.\nThe 18th-century Venetian school comprises many artists. Important painters include Giambattista Tiepolo, his son Giandomenico, Giambattista Piazzetta, Niccol\u00f2 Bambini, Pietro Longhi, Marco and Sebastiano Ricci, Sebastiano Bombelli, Gianantonio Fumiani, Gaspare Diziani, Rosalba Carriera, and the architect/painter Girolamo Mengozzi Colonna.\nSculptors include Morlaiter, Filippo Parodi, Bernard Torretti and his nephew Giuseppe Torretti, and at the end of the republic Antonio Canova. Some other important artists are the architects Girolamo Frigimelica Roberti, Giorgio Massari, Scalfarotto, and Tommaso Temanza; the carver Andrea Brustolon; playwrights Carlo Goldoni and Gaspare Gozzi; the poets Alessandro Labia and George Whisker; and composers Benedetto Marcello and Antonio Vivaldi.\nGiovanni Battista Tiepolo (1696\u20131770), described as \"the greatest decorative painter of eighteenth-century Europe, as well as its most able craftsman.\" was a painter and printmaker, who together with Giambattista Pittoni, Canaletto, Giovan Battista Piazzetta, Giuseppe Maria Crespi and Francesco Guardi formed the ultimate group of traditional great Venetian old master painters of that period. Perspective played a central role in Tiepolo's representations, and was forced beyond the usual limits in his ceiling decorations depicting levitating figures viewed from below.\nAnother peculiar feature of Venetian art is landscape painting, which sees in Canaletto (1697\u20131768) and Francesco Guardi (1712\u20131793) the two leading figures. Canaletto's rigorous perspective studies make for an almost \"photographic\" reality, in contrast to Guardi's more subjective capriccios.\nAntonio Canova (1757\u20131822), born in Possagno, was the greatest of the neoclassical artists. The Temple of Possagno, which he designed, financed, and partly-built himself, is among landmarks of neo-classical architecture. His most important works include \"Psyche Revived by Love's Kiss\" and \"The Three Graces\".\nAfter the fall of the Republic of Venice in 1796, every city in Veneto created its own form of art. Important was, however, the role of Accademia di Belle Arti in Venice, who was able to attract many young artists from the surrounding territory.\nAmong the many artists which were important in modern ages were Guglielmo Ciardi, who incorporated the experience of macchiaioli movement, uniting the typical colour of the classic Venetian school, and yet bringing out from his paintings a chromatic essence, Giacomo Favretto, who too as Ciardi, enhanced the colour, which was sometimes very pronounced, painter Frederick Zandomeneghi, who deviates from the tradition of Venetian colouring to venture in a style similar to French impressionism, and finally Luigi Nono, whose works feel realistic, even if, in addition to painting genre scenes, includes portraits of finity for psychological enhancement.\nEducation.\nVeneto hosts one of the oldest universities in the world, the University of Padua, founded in 1222. OECD investigations show that school education achievements in North-Eastern Italy (whose population comes mainly from Veneto) are the highest in Italy. In 2003 the university had approximately 65,000 students.\nLanguage.\nMost of the people of Veneto speak Italian, along with widespread usage of local varieties of the Venetian language. Within Venetian there are distinct sub-groups centered on the major cities, and distinctions are also found between rural and urban dialects and those spoken in northern mountainous areas and on the plain.\nVenetian dialects are classified as Western Romance. Linguists identify five major types of Venetian: an Eastern or Coastal (Venice) group, a Central (Padua, Vicenza, Polesine) group, a Western (Verona) group, a North-Central (Treviso) group, and a Northern (Belluno, Feltre, Agordo, Cadore, Zoldo Alto) group of dialects. All dialects are mutually intelligible to varying degrees, are descended from Vulgar Latin and influenced to varying degrees by Italian. Venetian is first attested as a written language in the 13th century. It is also spoken outside of Veneto, such as in Friuli-Venezia Giulia (including in Trieste, see Triestine dialect), Istria in Croatia and Slovenia and Dalmatia in Croatia, Brazil (Talian dialect) and Mexico (Chipilo Venetian dialect).\nThe language of Venice enjoyed substantial prestige in the days of the Venetian Republic, when it attained the status of a lingua franca in the Mediterranean. Notable Venetian-language authors include the playwrights Carlo Goldoni (1707\u20131793) and Carlo Gozzi (1720\u20131806), while Ruzante (1502\u20131542) is best known for his rustic comedies \"cast in mainland peasant \"Pavan\" 'Paduan'\".\nLadin, also Romance, is spoken in parts of the province of Belluno, especially in the municipalities of Cortina d'Ampezzo, Livinallongo del Col di Lana and Colle Santa Lucia, while Cimbrian (Germanic) is spoken in two villages (Roana and Giazza respectively) of the Seven Communities and the Thirteen Communities. These are two historical groups of villages of Cimbric origin, which for a long time formed two distinct \"commonwealths\" under the rule of the Republic of Venice, among others. Furthermore, in the area around Portogruaro people speak Friulian.\nAs the region does not enjoy a special status of autonomy, minority languages are not granted any form of official recognition. A motion to recognise Venetian as an official regional language has been approved by the regional Parliament.\nLiterature.\nVenetian literature, referring to works written in the Venetian language, experienced an initial period of splendour in the 16th century with the success of artists such as Ruzante. It then reached its zenith in the 18th century, thanks especially to dramatist Carlo Goldoni. Subsequently, literary production in Venetian declined, following the collapse of the Republic of Venice. Nevertheless, during the 20th century there was a literary revival featuring lyrical poets such as Biagio Marin of Grado.\nCuisine.\nCuisine is an important part of the culture of Veneto, and the region is home to some of the most recognisable dishes, desserts and wines in Italian, European and worldwide cuisine.\nWines and drinks.\nVeneto is an important wine-growing area producing: Soave, Bardolino, Recioto, Amarone, Torcolato, Prosecco, Tocai Rosso, Garganega, Valpolicella, Verduzzo, Raboso, Moscato, Cabernet Franc, Pinot Nero, Pinot Grigio, and Merlot. Homemade wine making is widespread. After making wine, the alcohol of the pressed grapes is distilled to produce grappa or \"graspa\", as it is called in the local language.\nProsecco is a dry sparkling wine. It is made from the glera grape, a white grape formerly known as Prosecco, which is traditionally grown in an area near Conegliano and Valdobbiadene, in the hills north of Treviso. The name of \"Prosecco\" is derived from the northern Italian village of Prosecco (Trieste), where this grape variety is believed to have originated.\nSpritz, in the Venetian language also called \"spriss\" or \"spriseto\" depending on the area, usually consists of equal parts of sparkling wine, Aperol and sparkling water. Campari may also be used instead of Aperol.\nCheeses.\nCheeses of Veneto include: Asiago (PDO), Piave (PDO), Monte Veronese (PDO), Morlacco, Grana Padano (PDO).\nSalamis and meats.\nThe sopressa vicentina (PDO) is an aged salami, cylindrical in shape and prepared with raw, quality pork meat. It may or may not include garlic in its ingredients and comes in medium and large sizes. Prosciutto Veneto Berico-Euganeo (PDO) is obtained from the fresh meat of a top breed of adult hogs. The aroma is delicate, sweet and fragrant.\nVegetables.\nRadicchio rosso di Treviso (PGI) is a peculiar vegetable with a faintly bitter taste and a crunchy texture. The production area encompasses many town districts in the provinces of Treviso, Padua and Venice. The radicchio Variegato di Castelfranco (PGI) has a delicate and slightly sweet taste and a crunchy texture. Veronese Vialone Nano Rice from Verona (PGI) is a type of rice with short, plump grains, which have a creamy consistency when cooked. They are commonly used in risotto dishes and have a high starch content. The Bean of Lamon (PGI) is particularly prized for its delicate flavour and extremely tender skin. The White Asparagus of Cimadolmo (PGI) has a peculiar scent and a very delicate taste. The White Asparagus of Bassano is a typical product of the northern part of the province of Vicenza. The San Zeno di Montagna (Verona) chestnut has Protected Geographical Status.\nDesserts.\nTiramis\u00f9 (a dessert made from mascarpone, coffee, Marsala wine, savoiardi and chocolate) originates from Veneto.\nFestivals.\nEach town, often every quarter, has its patron saint whose feast day is solemnly celebrated. Many other festivals are closely linked to the religious calendar. Among these:\nMusic.\nVeneto, and in particular Venice and Verona, are important Italian musical centres, home to a vibrant musical life.\nThe city of Venice in Italy has played an important role in the development of the music of Italy. The Venetian state\u2014i.e. the medieval Maritime Republic of Venice\u2014was often popularly called the \"Republic of Music\", and an anonymous Frenchman of the 17th century is said to have remarked that \"In every home, someone is playing a musical instrument or singing. There is music everywhere.\"\nIn Padova, musical ensembles such as the \"Amici della Musica di Padova\", the \"Solisti Veneti\" and the Padova-Veneto Symphony are found. Concerts are often held in the historic Loggia Comaro, built in 1524. As well, the city is the site of the Teatro delle Maddalene, the Teatro delle Grazie, the Giuseppe Verdi Theater, and the Cesare Pollini music conservatory.\nRovigo is the site of the Teatro Sociale, built in 1819. In the 20th century it was the venue for the career beginnings of Tullio Serafin, Beniamino Gigli and Renata Tebaldi. The town of Rovigo is also the site of the Francesco Venezze music Conservatory.\nThe city of Verona is the site of the Roman amphitheater known as the \"Arena\" which has been hosting musical events since the 16th century, but more recently the spectacular outdoor staging of Verdi's Aida, an event staged for the first time in 1913. The city also has the Felice Evaristo Dall'Abaco music conservatory;\nMusicians and composers.\nSee also \nTourism.\nPalladian Villas of Veneto.\nVicenza and the Palladian Villas of Veneto are a number of Palladian villas which are World Heritage Sites. UNESCO inscribed the site on the World Heritage List in 1994. At first the site was called \"Vicenza, City of Palladio\" and only buildings in the immediate area of Vicenza were included. Various types of buildings were represented including the Teatro Olimpico, \"palazzi\" and a few villas. Most of Palladio's surviving villas lay outside the site. However, in 1996 the number of Palladian villas included in the site was expanded to include those in other parts of Veneto. The site was given its present name.\nThe term villa was used to describe a country house. Often rich families in Veneto also had a house in town called a palazzo. In most cases the owners named their palazzi and villas with the family surname, hence there is both a Palazzo Chiericati in Vicenza and a Villa Chiericati in the countryside, similarly there is a Palazzo Foscari in Venice and a Villa Foscari in the countryside. Somewhat confusingly there are multiple Villas Pisani, including two by Palladio.\nThere are these sorts of villas all over the Venetian plain, but especially in the provinces of Treviso, Padua, Vicenza and Venice. The date of construction of these villas ranges from the 15th to the 19th century. There are approximately five thousand Ville Venete, of which 1,400 are declared of historical and monumental interest.\nApart from the numerous Palladian villas, of which 24 are protected by UNESCO, there are many villas spread across Veneto, mainly from the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries. Many of them are museums, public institutions or private residences.\nThe 24 Palladian villas which are part of UNESCO:\nAmongst these, Villa Trissino (Cricoli) is not regarded a Palladian villa, but is also an important country house.\nLakes.\nThe area of Lake Garda is a major tourist destination. Various towns along the lake, such as Lazise, Cisano, Bardolino, Garda (VR), Torri del Benaco and Malcesine, are resorts.\nMountains.\nCortina d'Ampezzo is situated in the province of Belluno and is one of the most exclusive mountain locations in Europe together with Kitzb\u00fchel in Austria and St. Moritz in Switzerland. It was scene of the 1956 Winter Olympics and will host once again in 2026 alongside Milan. To the north there are the Tre Cime di Lavaredo, said to be a symbol of the Italian Dolomites.\nOther landmark places are:\nThermal baths.\nThe thermal baths of Abano Terme are an important tourist attraction. Montegrotto Terme and Recoaro Terme are other resorts.\nBeaches.\nVenice's Lido is an 11-kilometre-long sandbar, visited by many tourists every summer.\nJesolo is one of the most important seaside resorts on the Adriatic coast, just a few kilometres far from Venice. Every year Jesolo gives accommodation to over 4.5 million tourists.\nCaorle has often received awards for one of the cleanest beaches in Italy. Bibione, Eraclea and Sottomarina are resorts too. Albarella island is a private island on the Lido. Alberoni Beach is set in a nature reserve.\nTransport.\nAir.\nThe region is served by two major international airports, Venice Marco Polo Airport and Verona Villafranca Airport. Treviso Airport is a smaller international airport mainly serving low-cost carriers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43782", "revid": "4497767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43782", "title": "D\u00e1l Riata", "text": "Gaelic kingdom that included parts of western Scotland and northeastern Ulster in Ireland\nD\u00e1l Riata or D\u00e1l Riada (also Dalriada) () was a Gaelic kingdom that encompassed the western seaboard of Scotland and north-eastern Ireland, on each side of the North Channel. At its height in the 6th and 7th centuries, it covered what is now Argyll (\"Coast of the Gaels\") in Scotland and part of County Antrim in Northern Ireland. After a period of expansion, D\u00e1l Riata eventually became associated with the Gaelic Kingdom of Alba.\nIn Argyll, it consisted of four main kindreds or tribes, each with their own chief: the Cen\u00e9l nGabr\u00e1in (based in Kintyre), the Cen\u00e9l n\u00d3engusa (based on Islay), the Cen\u00e9l Loairn (who gave their name to the district of Lorn) and the Cen\u00e9l Comgaill (who gave their name to Cowal). The hillfort of Dunadd is believed to have been its capital. Other royal forts included Dunollie, Dunaverty and Dunseverick. Within D\u00e1l Riata was the important monastery of Iona, which played a key role in the spread of Celtic Christianity throughout northern Britain, and in the development of insular art. Iona was a centre of learning and produced many important manuscripts. D\u00e1l Riata had a strong seafaring culture and a large naval fleet.\nD\u00e1l Riata is said to have been founded by the legendary king Fergus M\u00f3r (Fergus the Great) in the 5th century. The kingdom reached its height under \u00c1ed\u00e1n mac Gabr\u00e1in (r. 574\u2013608). During his reign D\u00e1l Riata's power and influence grew; it carried out naval expeditions to Orkney and the Isle of Man, and assaults on the Brittonic kingdom of Strathclyde and Anglian kingdom of Bernicia. However, King \u00c6thelfrith of Bernicia checked its growth at the Battle of Degsastan in 603. Serious defeats in Ireland and Scotland during the reign of Domnall Brecc (died 642) ended D\u00e1l Riata's \"golden age\", and the kingdom became a client of Northumbria for a time. In the 730s the Pictish king \u00d3engus I led campaigns against D\u00e1l Riata and brought it under Pictish overlordship by 741. There is disagreement over the fate of the kingdom from the late 8th century onwards. Some scholars have seen no revival of D\u00e1l Riatan power after the long period of foreign domination (c. 637 to c. 750\u2013760), while others have seen a revival under \u00c1ed Find (736\u2013778). Some even claim that the D\u00e1l Riata usurped the kingship of Fortriu. From 795 onward there were sporadic Viking raids in D\u00e1l Riata. In the following century, there may have been a merger of the D\u00e1l Riatan and Pictish crowns. Some sources say Cin\u00e1ed mac Ailp\u00edn (Kenneth MacAlpin) was king of D\u00e1l Riata before becoming king of the Picts in 843, following a disastrous defeat of the Picts by Vikings. The kingdom's independence ended sometime after, as it merged with Pictland to form the Kingdom of Alba.\nLatin sources often referred to the inhabitants of D\u00e1l Riata as \"Scots\" (\"Scoti\"), a name originally used by Roman and Greek writers for the Irish Gaels who raided and colonised Roman Britain. Later, it came to refer to Gaels, whether from Ireland or elsewhere. They are referred to herein as \"Gaels\" or as \"D\u00e1l Riatans\".\nName.\nThe name \"\" comes from Old Irish and means \"the portion of Riata\". \"D\u00e1l\" is part of the names of other Irish territories, such as D\u00e1l Fiatach and D\u00e1l gCais. \"Riata\" is the genitive of a tribal name or deity name. Bede wrote that the kingdom was named after its founder, a man called Reuda. Some Old Gaelic texts say that the kingdom was named after the Corcu R\u00e9ti, descendants of Domangart R\u00e9ti. Another legend says that it was named after one Cairbre Riata.\nThe Dalradian geological series, a term coined by Archibald Geikie in 1891, was named after D\u00e1l Riata because its outcrop has a similar geographical reach to that of the former kingdom.\nPeople, land and sea.\nD\u00e1l Riata spanned the North Channel and included parts of western Scotland and north-eastern Ireland. In Scotland, it corresponded roughly to Argyll (from \"Airer Go\u00eddel\", \"coast of the Gaels\") and later grew to include Skye. In Ireland, it took in the north-east of County Antrim, roughly corresponding to the baronies of Cary and Glenarm.\nThe modern human landscape of D\u00e1l Riata differs a great deal from that of the first millennium. Most people today live in settlements far larger than anything known in early times, while some areas, such as Kilmartin, and many of the islands, such as Islay and Tiree, may well have had as many inhabitants as they do today. Many of the small settlements have now disappeared so that the countryside is far emptier than was formerly the case, and many areas that were formerly farmed are now abandoned. Even the physical landscape is not entirely as it was: sea levels have changed, and the combination of erosion and silting will have considerably altered the shape of the coast in some places, while the natural accumulation of peat and human-made changes from peat-cutting have altered inland landscapes.\nAs was normal at the time, subsistence farming was the occupation of most people. Oats and barley were the main cereal crops. Pastoralism was especially important, and transhumance (the seasonal movement of people with their livestock between fixed summer and winter pastures) was the practice in many places. Some areas, most notably Islay, were especially fertile, and good grazing would have been available all year round, just as it was in Ireland. Tiree was famed in later times for its oats and barley, while smaller, uninhabited islands were used to keep sheep. The area, until lately, was notable for its inshore fisheries, and for plentiful shellfish, therefore seafood is likely to have been an important part of the diet.\nThe \"Senchus fer n-Alban\" lists three main kin groups in D\u00e1l Riata in Scotland, with a fourth being added later:\nThe Senchus does not list any kindreds in Ireland, but does list an apparently very minor kindred called Cen\u00e9l Chonchride in Islay descended from another son of Erc, Fergus Becc. Another kindred, Cen\u00e9l B\u00e1et\u00e1in of Morvern (later Clan MacInnes), branched off from Cen\u00e9l Loairn about the same time that Cen\u00e9l Comgaill separated from its parent kindred. The Morvern district was formerly known as Kinelvadon, after the Cen\u00e9l B\u00e1et\u00e1in. The Cen\u00e9l Loairn may have been the largest of the \"three kindreds\", as the Senchus reports it being divided further into Cen\u00e9l Shalaig, Cen\u00e9l Cathbath, Cen\u00e9l nEchdach, Cen\u00e9l Murerdaig. Among the Cen\u00e9l Loairn it also lists the Airg\u00edalla, although whether this should be understood as being Irish settlers or simply another tribe to whom the label was applied is unclear. Bannerman proposes a tie to the U\u00ed Macc Uais. The meaning of Airg\u00edalla 'hostage givers' adds to the uncertainty, although it must be observed that only one grouping in Ireland was apparently given this name and it is therefore very rare, perhaps supporting the Ui Macc Uais hypothesis. There is no reason to suppose that this is a complete or accurate list.\nFour sites in D\u00e1l Riata may have had royal associations: Dunadd, Dunollie, Dunaverty and Tarbert. Among them, Dunadd appears to have been the most important. It has been partly excavated, and weapons, quern-stones and many moulds for the manufacture of jewellery were found in addition to fortifications. Other high-status materials included glassware and wine amphorae from Gaul, and in larger quantities than found elsewhere in Britain and Ireland. Lesser centres included Dun Ollaigh, seat of the Cen\u00e9l Loairn kings, and Dunaverty, at the southern end of Kintyre, in the lands of the Cen\u00e9l nGabr\u00e1in. The main royal centre in Ireland appears to have been at Dunseverick (\"D\u00fan Sebuirge\").\nD\u00e1l Riata had a strong seafaring culture, which was tribal and piratic. It was an archipelago with many islands and peninsulas. This, and the difficulty of overland travel, meant that travel by sea was the easiest means of moving any distance. As well as long-distance trade, local trade must also have been significant. Currachs were probably the most common seagoing craft, and on inland waters dugouts and coracles were used. Large timber ships, called \"long ships\", perhaps similar to the Viking ships of the same name, are attested to in a variety of sources. D\u00e1l Riata had a large war fleet manned by skilled sailors, capable of undertaking far-reaching expeditions. It had an organised system for manning the fleet. Houses were grouped into twenties for the purpose of naval recruitment, with each group having to provide a quota of 28 oarsmen.\nReligion and art.\nNo written accounts exist for pre-Christian D\u00e1l Riata, and the earliest-known records come from the chroniclers of Iona and Irish monasteries. During the time of Saint Patrick, D\u00e1l Riatan kings thought they were descended from Celtic gods, and pagans in the region viewed certain springs and \"spirit-inhabited groves of trees\" as sacred groves.\nAdomn\u00e1n's \"Life of St Columba\" implies a Christian D\u00e1l Riata. Whether this is true cannot be known. The figure of Columba looms large in any history of Christianity in D\u00e1l Riata. Adomn\u00e1n's \"Life\", although useful as a record, was not intended to serve as history, but rather as hagiography. Because the writing of the lives of the saints in Adomn\u00e1n's day had not reached the stylised formulas of the High Middle Ages, the \"Life\" contains a great deal of historically valuable information. It is also a vital linguistic source indicating the distribution of Gaelic and P-Celtic placenames in northern Scotland by the end of the 7th century. It famously notes Columba's need for a translator when conversing with an individual on Skye. This evidence of a non-Gaelic language is supported by a sprinkling of P-Celtic placenames on the remote mainland opposite the island.\nColumba's founding Iona within the bounds of D\u00e1l Riata ensured that the kingdom would be of great importance in the spread of Christianity in northern Britain, not only to Pictland, but also to Northumbria, via Lindisfarne, to Mercia, and beyond. Although the monastery of Iona belonged to the Cen\u00e9l Conaill of the Northern U\u00ed N\u00e9ill, and not to D\u00e1l Riata, it had close ties to the Cen\u00e9l nGabr\u00e1in, ties which may make the annals less than entirely impartial.\nIf Iona was the greatest religious centre in D\u00e1l Riata, it was far from unique. Lismore, in the territory of the Cen\u00e9l Loairn, was sufficiently important for the death of its abbots to be recorded with some frequency. Applecross, probably in Pictish territory for most of the period, and Kingarth on Bute are also known to have been monastic sites, and many smaller sites, such as on Eigg and Tiree, are known from the annals. In Ireland, Armoy was the main ecclesiastical centre in early times, associated with Saint Patrick and with Saint Olc\u00e1n, said to have been the first bishop at Armoy. An important early centre, Armoy later declined, overshadowed by the monasteries at Movilla (Newtownards) and Bangor.\nAs well as their primary spiritual importance, the political significance of religious centres cannot be dismissed. The prestige of being associated with the saintly founder was of no small importance. Monasteries represented a source of wealth as well as prestige. Additionally, the learning and literacy found in monasteries served as useful tools for ambitious kings.\nThe illuminated manuscript Book of Kells was probably at least begun at Iona, although not by Columba as legend has it, as it dates from about 800. (It may have been commissioned to mark the bicentennial of Columba's death in 597). Whether it was or not, Iona was certainly important in the formation of Insular art, which combined Mediterranean, Anglo-Saxon, Celtic and Pictish elements into a style of which the book of Kells is a late example.\nFor other arts, a number of sculptures remain to give an impression of D\u00e1l Riatan work. The St. Martin's Cross on Iona is the well-preserved high cross, probably inspired by Northumbrian free-standing crosses, such as the Ruthwell Cross, although a similar cross exists in Ireland (Ahenny, County Tipperary). The Kildalton Cross on Islay is similar. A sculpted slab at Ardchattan appears to show strong Pictish influences, while the Dupplin Cross, it has been argued, shows that influences also moved in the opposite direction. Fine Hiberno-Saxon metalwork such as penannular brooches is believed to have been created at Dunadd.\nIn addition to the monastic sites, a considerable number of churches are attested, not only from archaeological evidence, but also from the evidence of place names. The element \"kil\", from Gaelic \"cill\", can be shown in many cases to be associated with early churches, such as at Kilmartin by Dunadd.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe 11th-century \"Duan Albanach\" (Song of the Scots) tells that the three sons of Erc\u2014Fergus M\u00f3r, Loarn and \u00d3engus\u2014conquered \"Alba\" (Scotland) in around 500. The 8th-century writer Bede offers another, and probably older, account wherein D\u00e1l Riata was conquered by Irish Gaels led by a certain \"Reuda\". Old Irish \"d\u00e1l\" means 'portion' or 'share', and is usually followed by the name of an eponymous founder. Bede's tale may come from the same root as the Irish tales of Cairpre Riata and his brothers, the S\u00edl Conairi (sons/descendants of Conaire C\u00f3em and Conaire M\u00f3r). The story of D\u00e1l Riata moves from foundation myth to something nearer to history with the reports of the death of Comgall mac Domangairt around 540 and of his brother Gabr\u00e1n around 560.\nThe version of history in the \"Duan Albanach\" was long accepted, although it is preceded by the fictional tale of Albanus and Brutus conquering Britain. Traditionally, the presence of Gaelic in Scotland has been seen as the result of either a migration from Ireland, or a takeover by Irish Gaelic elites. However, in his academic paper \"Were the Scots Irish?\", archaeologist Dr Ewan Campbell says that there is no archaeological or placename evidence of a migration or takeover. This lack of archaeological evidence was previously noted by Professor Leslie Alcock. Campbell suggests that Argyll and Antrim formed a \"maritime province\", united by the sea and isolated from the rest of Scotland by the mountains of the Highlands, historically called the \"Druim Alban\". This hypothetical separation allowed a shared language to be maintained through the centuries; Argyll remained Gaelic-speaking while the rest of Scotland spoke either Pictish or another Brittonic language. Campbell suggests that the medieval accounts were a kind of dynastic propaganda, constructed to bolster a dynasty's claim to the throne and to bolster D\u00e1l Riata claims to territory in Antrim. Although this view of the medieval accounts is shared by other historians, his theory has been challenged.\nIrish scholar Eoin MacNeill postulated that Scottish D\u00e1l Riata came about in two stages. He conjectured that Irish settlements were founded in Argyll at the time of Irish raids on Britain, during the end of Roman rule. Later, as these settlements became economically and politically more significant than the home territory, its rulers moved from Ireland to Argyll.\nThe time in which D\u00e1l Riata arose was one of great instability in Ulster, following the Ulaid's loss of territory (including the ancient centre of Emain Macha) to the Airg\u00edalla and the U\u00ed N\u00e9ill. \"The thriving of Dalriada\", pp.\u00a047\u201350, notes a later conquest of Irish D\u00e1l Riata from Scotland, in the period after the fall of Emain Macha.\nLinguistic and genealogical evidence associates ancestors of the D\u00e1l Riata with the prehistoric Iverni and Darini, suggesting kinship with the Ulaid and a number of shadowy kingdoms in distant Munster. The Robogdii have also been suggested as ancestral. Ultimately, the D\u00e1l Riata, according to the earliest genealogies, are descendants of Deda mac Sin, a prehistoric king or deity of the \u00c9rainn.\nDruim Cett to Mag Rath.\nBy the mid-6th century, the D\u00e1l Riata in Scotland came under serious threat from Bridei I, king of the Picts, whilst the Irish portion faced hostility from the D\u00e1l nAraidi of Ulaid, resulting in their seeking the aid of the Irish Northern U\u00ed N\u00e9ill. D\u00e1l Riata reached its greatest extent in the reign of \u00c1ed\u00e1n mac Gabr\u00e1in, who was said to have been consecrated by Columba, to whom \u00c1ed\u00e1n granted the island of Iona off the coast of Scotland. Columba, who was also a Cen\u00e9l Conaill prince, negotiated an alliance between D\u00e1l Riata and the Cen\u00e9l Conaill, who were the ruling dynasty of the Northern U\u00ed N\u00e9ill, in 575 at the Convention of Druim Cett near Limavady. In attendance were Columba, \u00c1ed\u00e1n mac Gabr\u00e1in, and \u00c1ed mac Ainmuirech, king of the Northern U\u00ed N\u00e9ill and High King of Ireland.\nWhat was actually discussed at Druim Cett is a matter of debate, with various suggestions that it was: to determine the constitutional status of both parts of D\u00e1l Riata; to determine the status of Irish D\u00e1l Riata only with it having its own king; that D\u00e1l Riata was to become independent of the High King of Ireland; that the Irish part of D\u00e1l Riata would pay tribute to the High King and support him with land forces, and that the Scottish part would be independent but support the High King with its fleet when needed; the removal of D\u00e1l Riata from Ulaid's overlordship, allowing it to concentrate on extending its Scottish domain. What is certain is that both parties had the D\u00e1l nAraidi as a common foe.\nThis pact between the D\u00e1l Riata and Cen\u00e9l Conaill was successful, first in defeating B\u00e1etan mac Cairill, king of the D\u00e1l nAraidi, then in allowing \u00c1ed\u00e1n to campaign widely against his neighbours, as far afield as Orkney and lands of the Maeatae, on the River Forth. \u00c1ed\u00e1n appears to have been very successful in extending his power, until he faced the Bernician king \u00c6thelfrith at Degsastan c. 603. \u00c6thelfrith's brother was among the dead, but \u00c1ed\u00e1n was defeated, and the Bernician kings continued their advances in southern Scotland. \u00c1ed\u00e1n died c. 608 aged about 70. D\u00e1l Riata did expand to include Skye, possibly conquered by \u00c1ed\u00e1n's son Gartnait.\nIt has been suggested that Fiachnae mac B\u00e1et\u00e1in (died 626), D\u00e1l nAraidi over-king of Ulaid, was overlord of both parts of D\u00e1l Riata. Fiachnae campaigned against the Northumbrians, and besieged Bamburgh, and the D\u00e1l Riatans are thought to have fought in this campaign.\nIn 629, the D\u00e1l Riata suffered significant losses at the battle of Fid Euin where the D\u00e1l nAraidi, led by Congal C\u00e1ech mac Scandl\u00e1in, killed the D\u00e1l Riata king as well as three grandsons of \u00c1ed\u00e1n mac Gabr\u00e1in. It is suggested to have been an achievement that D\u00e1l Riata itself survived this battle. That same year the Cen\u00e9l Conaill defeated Congal C\u00e1ech at the battle of D\u00fan Ceithirn.\nD\u00e1l Riata remained allied with the Northern U\u00ed N\u00e9ill until the reign of Domnall Brecc, who was persuaded by the king of D\u00e1l nAraidi, Congal C\u00e1ech, to renounce this alliance. In an attempt to have himself installed as High King of Ireland, Congal made alliances with D\u00e1l Riata and Strathclyde, which resulted in the disastrous Battle of Magh Rath in 637, which saw Congal slain by High King Domnall mac \u00c1edo of the Northern U\u00ed N\u00e9ill and resulted in Irish D\u00e1l Riata losing possession of its Scottish lands. A battle had also taken place at sea at Sailt\u00edr, off Kintyre, in 637. This defeat was then attributed as divine retribution for Domnall Brecc turning his back on his prior alliance. Domnall Brecc's policy appears to have died with him in 642, at his final, and fatal, defeat by Eugein map Beli of Strathclyde at Strathcarron, for as late as the 730s, armies and fleets from D\u00e1l Riata fought alongside the U\u00ed N\u00e9ill.\nThis defeat shattered the power of D\u00e1l Riata as well as that of D\u00e1l nAraidi, allowing the Northern U\u00ed N\u00e9ill to become the dominant force in the north of Ireland. By the 10th century, the Irish lands of D\u00e1l Riata were under the control of the U\u00ed Tuirtri, and their clients, the Fir L\u00ed.\nMag Rath to the Pictish conquest.\nIt has been proposed that some of the more obscure kings of D\u00e1l Riata mentioned in the Annals of Ulster, such as Fiannamail ua D\u00fanchado and Donncoirce, may have been kings of Irish D\u00e1l Riata.\nThe after-effect of the Battle of Moira (Mag Rath) in regards to Scottish D\u00e1l Riata appears to have resulted in its becoming tributary to Northumbrian kings, which lasted until the Pictish king Bruide mac Bili defeated Ecgfrith of Northumbria at Dun Nechtain in 685. It is not certain that this subjection ended in 685, although this is usually assumed to be the case. However, it appears that Eadberht Eating made some effort to stop the Picts under \u00d3engus mac Fergusa crushing D\u00e1l Riata in 740. Whether this means that the tributary relationship had not ended in 685, or if Eadberht sought only to prevent the growth of Pictish power, is unclear.\nSince it has been thought that D\u00e1l Riata swallowed Pictland to create the Kingdom of Alba, the later history of D\u00e1l Riata has tended to be seen as a prelude to future triumphs. The annals make it clear that the Cen\u00e9l Gabra\u00edn lost any earlier monopoly of royal power in the late 7th century and in the 8th, when Cen\u00e9l Loairn kings such as Ferchar Fota, his son Selbach, and grandsons D\u00fangal and Muiredach are found contesting for the kingship of D\u00e1l Riata. The long period of instability in D\u00e1l Riata was only ended by the conquest of the kingdom by \u00d3engus mac Fergusa, king of the Picts, in the 730s. After the third campaign by \u00d3engus in 741, D\u00e1l Riata then disappears from the Irish records for a generation.\nThe last century.\n\u00c1ed Find may appear in 768, fighting against the Pictish king of Fortriu. At his death in 778, \u00c1ed Find is called \"king of D\u00e1l Riata\", as is his brother Fergus mac Echdach in 781. The Annals of Ulster say that a certain Donncoirche, \"king of D\u00e1l Riata\" died in 792, and there the record ends. Any number of theories have been advanced to fill the missing generations, none of which are founded on any very solid evidence. A number of kings are named in the \"Duan Albanach\", and in royal genealogies, but these are rather less reliable than we might wish. The obvious conclusion is that whoever ruled the petty kingdom of D\u00e1l Riata after its defeat and conquest in the 730s, only \u00c1ed Find and his brother Fergus drew the least attention of the chroniclers in Iona and Ireland. This argues very strongly for Alex Woolf's conclusion that \u00d3engus mac Fergusa \"effectively destroyed the kingdom\".\nIt is unlikely that D\u00e1l Riata was ruled directly by Pictish kings, but it is argued that Domnall, son of Caustant\u00edn mac Fergusa, was king of D\u00e1l Riata from 811 to 835. He was apparently followed by the last named king of D\u00e1l Riata \u00c1ed mac Boanta, who was killed in the great Pictish defeat of 839 at the hands of the Vikings.\nIn the 9th century, the Picts were becoming Gaelicised, and it is suggested that there was a merger of the D\u00e1l Riatan and Pictish kingships. Traditionally, this is attributed to Cin\u00e1ed mac Ailp\u00edn (Kenneth MacAlpin), who became king of the Picts in about 843. Some sources say that Cin\u00e1ed was king of D\u00e1l Riata for two years before this. Under the House of Alpin, D\u00e1l Riata and Pictland merged to form the Kingdom of Alba or Scotland.\nFrom D\u00e1l Riata to the Innse Gall.\nIf the Vikings had a great impact on Pictland and in Ireland, in D\u00e1l Riata, as in Northumbria, they appear to have entirely replaced the existing kingdom with a new entity. In the case of D\u00e1l Riata, this was to be known as the kingdom of the Sudreys, traditionally founded by Ketill Flatnose (\"Caitill Find\" in Gaelic) in the middle of the 9th century. The Frankish \"Annales Bertiniani\" may record the conquest of the Inner Hebrides, the seaward part of D\u00e1l Riata, by Vikings in 847.\nAlex Woolf has suggested that there occurred a formal division of D\u00e1l Riata between the Norse\u2013Gaelic U\u00ed \u00cdmair and the natives, like those divisions that took place elsewhere in Ireland and Britain, with the Norse controlling most of the islands, and the Gaels controlling the Scottish coast and the more southerly islands. In turn, Woolf suggests that this gave rise to the terms \"Airer Gaedel\" and \"Innse Gall\", respectively, \"the coast of the Gaels\" and the \"Islands of the foreigners\".\nUnder the House of Alpin.\nWoolf has further demonstrated that, by the time of Malcolm II, the leading \"cenela\" of D\u00e1l Riata had moved from the south-west of the region (north of the Firths) to the north, east and north-east, with Cenel Loairn moving up the Great Glen to occupy Moray, the former and sometimes still Fortriu, one branch of Cenel nGabhrain occupying the district known as Gowrie and another the district of Fife, Cenel nOengusa giving its name to Circinn as Angus, Cenel Comgaill occupying Strathearn, and another lesser-known kindred, Cenel Conaing, probably moving to Mar.\nIn fiction.\nIn Rosemary Sutcliff's 1965 novel \"The Mark of the Horse Lord\", the D\u00e1l Riada undergo an internal struggle for control of royal succession, and an external conflict to defend their frontiers against the Caledones.\nIn Rosemary Sutcliff's historical adventure novel \"The Eagle of the Ninth\" (1954), a young Roman officer searches to recover the lost Roman eagle standard of his father's legion in the northern part of Great Britain. The story is based on the Ninth Spanish Legion's supposed disappearance in the Scottish Highlands near the end of the Roman occupation. The novel was adapted by Jeremy Brock into the film \"The Eagle\" (2011).\nIn the Kushiel novels (a series, beginning with \"Kushiel's Dart\", 2001), by Jacqueline Carey, the Dalriada of the Kingdom of Alba figure prominently in a Royal marriage and subsequent alliance with France (known in the series as \"Terre d'Ange\").\nIn Julian May's Saga of Pliocene Exile series, the non-born Aiken Drum's homeworld is an ethnic Scottish planet called Dalriada.\nIn the \"Lost Girl\" television series, the pub where the Light Fae and the Dark Fae mingle is called the Dal Riata, named after the ancient kingdom.\nIn Jules Watson's Dalriada Trilogy (2006\u20132008), three centuries are chronicled during the time of the Roman Invasion of Britain.\nA feature-length fantasy film previously named \"Dalriata's King\", later named \"The Gaelic King\" was made in Scotland, with a story based loosely on the first king of the Scots. It was released to home media in 2017.\nD\u00e1l Riata is a playable nation in Paradox Interactive's 4X video game \"Crusader Kings II\". At the earliest start date, 769 with the \"Charlemagne\" DLC, they are an Irish Catholic independent petty kingdom ruled by \u00c1ed Find, comprising the Hebrides and Argyll. The game will also use D\u00e1l Riata to refer to the Duchy of the Isles whenever the realm's top liege is Irish\nDalriada is the name of a Hungarian folk metal band, Dalriada.\nThe Dalriada is the name of a raid introduced in \"\".\nIn , a faction known as the Dal Riata is featured. They are depicted as a tribe bearing the stereotypical hallmarks of a Scottish Gaelic group by way of blue face paint and a battle-centric culture.\nD\u00e1l Riata is also where the videogame Celtic Heores takes place, featuring a combination between reality and fantastic aspects.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43783", "revid": "5984052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43783", "title": "188", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 188 (CLXXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in the Roman Empire as the Year of the Consulship of Fuscianus and Silanus (or, less frequently, year 941 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 188 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43784", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43784", "title": "187", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 187 (CLXXXVII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Quintius and Aelianus (or, less frequently, year 940 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 187 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43785", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43785", "title": "186", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 186 (CLXXXVI) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aurelius and Glabrio (or, less frequently, year 939 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 186 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nNew Zealand.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43786", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43786", "title": "184", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 184 (CLXXXIV) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Eggius and Aelianus (or, less frequently, year 937 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 184 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nKorea.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43787", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43787", "title": "183", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 183 (CLXXXIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Aurelius and Victorinus (or, less frequently, year 936 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 183 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43788", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43788", "title": "182", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 182 (CLXXXII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Sura and Rufus (or, less frequently, year 935 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 182 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43789", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43789", "title": "181", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 181 (CLXXXI) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aurelius and Burrus (or, less frequently, year 934 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 181 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nOceania.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43790", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43790", "title": "180", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 180 (CLXXX) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Rusticus and Condianus (or, less frequently, year 933 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 180 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43791", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43791", "title": "204", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 204 (CCIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cilo and Flavius (or, less frequently, year 957 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 204 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nCommerce.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43792", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43792", "title": "231", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 231 (CCXXXI) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Claudius and Sallustus (or, less frequently, year 984 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 231 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43793", "revid": "12277875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43793", "title": "373", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 373 (CCCLXXIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Valens (or, less frequently, year 1126 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 373 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43794", "revid": "50930911", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43794", "title": "Partitions of Poland", "text": "18th-century forced partitions of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth\nThe Partitions of Poland were three partitions of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth that took place between 1772 and 1795, toward the end of the 18th century. They ended the existence of the state, resulting in the elimination of sovereign Poland and Lithuania for 123 years. The partitions were conducted by the Habsburg monarchy, the Kingdom of Prussia, and the Russian Empire, which divided up the Commonwealth lands among themselves progressively in the process of territorial seizures and annexations.\nThe First Partition was decided on August 5, 1772, after the Bar Confederation lost the war with Russia. The Second Partition occurred in the aftermath of the Polish\u2013Russian War of 1792 and the Targowica Confederation when Russian and Prussian troops entered the Commonwealth and the partition treaty was signed during the Grodno Sejm on January 23, 1793 (without Austria). The Third Partition took place on October 24, 1795, in reaction to the unsuccessful Polish Ko\u015bciuszko Uprising the previous year. With this partition, the Commonwealth ceased to exist.\nIn English, the term \"Partitions of Poland\" is sometimes used geographically as toponymy, to mean the three parts that the partitioning powers divided the Commonwealth into, namely: the Austrian Partition, the Prussian Partition and the Russian Partition. In Polish, there are two separate words for the two meanings. The consecutive acts of dividing and annexation of Poland are referred to as ' (plural: '), while the term ' (plural: ') refers to parts of the Commonwealth that were annexed in 1772\u20131795 and which became part of Imperial Russia, Prussia, or Austria. Following the Congress of Vienna in 1815, the borders of the three partitioned sectors were redrawn; the Austrians established Galicia in the Austrian partition, whereas the Russians gained Warsaw from Prussia and formed an autonomous polity known as Congress Poland in the Russian partition.\nIn Polish historiography, the term \"Fourth Partition of Poland\" has also been used, in reference to any subsequent annexation of Polish lands by foreign invaders. Depending on source and historical period, this could mean the events of 1815, or 1832 and 1846, or 1939. The term \"Fourth Partition\" in a temporal sense can also mean the diaspora communities that played an important political role in re-establishing the Polish sovereign state after 1918.\nHistory.\nDuring the reign of W\u0142adys\u0142aw IV (1632\u20131648), the was developed, a policy of parliamentary procedure based on the assumption of the political equality of every \"gentleman/Polish nobleman\", with the corollary that unanimous consent was needed for all measures. A single member of parliament's belief that a measure was injurious to his own constituency (usually simply his own estate), even after the act had been approved, became enough to strike the act. Thus it became increasingly difficult to undertake action. The also provided openings for foreign diplomats to get their ways, through bribing nobles to exercise it. Thus, one could characterise Poland\u2013Lithuania in its final period (mid-18th century) before the partitions as already in a state of disorder and not a completely sovereign state, and almost as a vassal state, with Polish kings effectively chosen in diplomatic maneuvers between the great powers Prussia, Austria, Russia, and France. This applies particularly to the last Commonwealth King Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski, who for some time had been a lover of Russian Empress Catherine the Great.\nIn 1730, the neighbors of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth (), namely Prussia, Austria and Russia, signed a secret agreement to maintain the : specifically, to ensure that the Commonwealth laws would not change. Their alliance later became known in Poland as the \"Alliance of the Three Black Eagles\" (or \"'s Treaty\"), because all three states used a black eagle as a state symbol (in contrast to the white eagle, a symbol of Poland). The Commonwealth had been forced to rely on Russia for protection against the rising Kingdom of Prussia, which demanded a slice of the northwest in order to unite its Western and Eastern portions; this would leave the Commonwealth with a Baltic coast only in Latvia and Lithuania. Catherine had to use diplomacy to win Austria to her side.\nThe Commonwealth had remained neutral in the Seven Years' War (1756\u20131763), yet it sympathized with the alliance of France, Austria, and Russia, and allowed Russian troops access to its western lands as bases against Prussia. Frederick II retaliated by ordering enough Polish currency counterfeited to severely affect the Polish economy. Through the Polish nobles whom Russia controlled and the Russian Minister to Warsaw, ambassador and Prince Nicholas Repnin, Empress Catherine the Great forced a constitution on the Commonwealth at the so-called Repnin Sejm of 1767, named after ambassador Repnin, who effectively dictated the terms of that Sejm (and ordered the capture and exile to Kaluga of some vocal opponents of his policies, including bishop J\u00f3zef Andrzej Za\u0142uski and others). This new constitution undid the reforms made in 1764 under Stanis\u0142aw II. The and all the old abuses of the last one and a half centuries were guaranteed as unalterable parts of this new constitution (in the so-called \"Cardinal Laws\"). Repnin also demanded the Russian protection of the rights of peasants in private estates of Polish and Lithuanian noblemen, religious freedom for the Protestant and Orthodox Christians and the political freedoms for Protestants, Orthodox Christians and Eastern Catholics (Uniates), including their right to occupy all state positions, including a royal one. The next king could be a member of the Russian ruling dynasty now. The Sejm approved this. Resulting reaction among some of Poland's Roman Catholics, as well as the deep resentment of Russian intervention in the Commonwealth's domestic affairs including the exile to Russia of the top Roman Catholic bishops, the members of the Polish Senate, led to the War of the Confederation of Bar of 1768\u20131772, formed in Bar, where the Poles tried to expel Russian forces from Commonwealth territory. The irregular and poorly commanded Polish forces had little chance in the face of the regular Russian army and suffered a major defeat. Adding to the chaos was a Ukrainian Cossack and peasant rebellion in the east (Koliyivshchyna), which erupted in 1768 and resulted in massacres of Polish noblemen (), Jews, Uniates, ethnic minorities and Catholic priests, before it was put down by Russian and governmental Polish troops. This uprising led to the intervention of the Ottoman Empire, supported by Roman Catholic France and Austria. Bar confederation and France promised Podolia and Volhynia and the protectorate over the Commonwealth to the Ottoman Empire for armed support.\nIn 1769, the Habsburg monarchy annexed a small territory of Spisz and in 1770 it annexed Nowy S\u0105cz and Nowy Targ. These territories had been a bone of contention between Poland and Hungary, which was a part of the Monarchy. Nevertheless, the Ottoman Empire, the Bar confederation, bolstered by French volunteers, were defeated by Russian and Polish government forces. As Russia moved into the Crimea and the Danubian Principalities (which the Habsburg monarchy long coveted), King Frederick II of Prussia and Maria Theresa were worried that the defeat of the Ottoman Empire would severely upset the balance of power in Eastern Europe. Frederick II began to construct the partition to rebalance the power in Eastern Europe.\nFirst Partition.\nIn February 1772, the agreement of partition was signed in Vienna. Early in August, Russian, Prussian and Austrian troops occupied the provinces agreed upon among themselves. However, fighting continued as Bar confederation troops and French volunteers refused to lay down their arms (most notably, in Tyniec, Cz\u0119stochowa and Krak\u00f3w). On August 5, 1772, the occupation manifesto was issued, to the dismay of the weak and exhausted Polish state; the partition treaty was ratified by its signatories on September 22, 1772.\nFrederick II of Prussia was elated with his success; Prussia took most of Royal Prussia (except Gda\u0144sk) that stood between its possessions in Prussia and the Margraviate of Brandenburg, as well as Ermland (Warmia), northern areas of Greater Poland along the Note\u0107 River (the Netze District), and parts of Kuyavia (but not the city of Toru\u0144).\nDespite token criticism of the partition from Empress Maria Theresa, Austrian statesman Wenzel Anton, Prince of Kaunitz-Rietberg, was proud of wresting as large a share as he did, with the rich salt mines of Bochnia and Wieliczka. To Austria fell Zator and O\u015bwi\u0119cim, part of Lesser Poland embracing parts of the counties of Krak\u00f3w and Sandomir and the whole of Galicia, less the city of Krak\u00f3w.\nEmpress Catherine II of Russia was also satisfied despite the loss of Galicia to the Habsburg monarchy. By this \"diplomatic document\" Russia gained Polish Livonia, and lands in eastern Belarus embracing the counties of Vitebsk, Polotsk and Mstislavl.\nBy this partition, the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth lost about 30% of its territory and half of its population (four million people), of which a large portion had not been ethnically Polish. By seizing northwestern Poland, Prussia instantly gained control over 80% of the Commonwealth's total foreign trade. Through levying enormous customs duties, Prussia accelerated the collapse of the Commonwealth.\nAfter having occupied their respective territories, the three partitioning powers demanded that King Stanis\u0142aw and the Sejm approve their action. When no help was forthcoming and the armies of the combined nations occupied Warsaw to compel by force of arms the calling of the assembly, the only alternative was passive submission to their will. The so-called Partition Sejm, with Russian military forces threatening the opposition, on September 18, 1773, signed the treaty of cession, renouncing all claims of the Commonwealth to the occupied territories.\nIn 1772, Jean-Jacques Rousseau was invited to present recommendations for a new constitution for the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, resulting in the \"Considerations on the Government of Poland\" (1782), which was to be his last major political work.\nSecond Partition.\nBy 1790, the Commonwealth had been weakened to such a degree that it was forced into an unnatural and terminal alliance with its enemy, Prussia. The Polish\u2013Prussian Pact of 1790 was signed. The conditions of the Pact contributed to the subsequent final two partitions of Poland\u2013Lithuania.\nThe May Constitution of 1791 enfranchised the bourgeoisie, established the separation of the three branches of government, and eliminated the abuses of the Repnin Sejm. Those reforms prompted aggressive actions on the part of its neighbours, wary of the potential renaissance of the Commonwealth. Arguing that Poland had fallen prey to the radical Jacobinism then at high tide in France, Russian forces invaded the Commonwealth in 1792.\nIn the War in Defense of the Constitution, pro-Russian conservative Polish magnates, the Confederation of Targowica, fought against Polish forces supporting the constitution, believing that Russians would help them restore the Golden Liberty. Abandoned by their Prussian allies, Polish pro-constitution forces, faced with Targowica units and the regular Russian army, were defeated. Prussia signed a treaty with Russia, agreeing that Polish reforms would be revoked, and both countries would receive chunks of Commonwealth territory. In 1793, deputies to the Grodno Sejm, last Sejm of the Commonwealth, in the presence of the Russian forces, agreed to Russian territorial demands. In the Second Partition, Russia and Prussia helped themselves to enough land so that only one-third of the 1772 population remained in Poland. Prussia named its newly gained province South Prussia, with Pozna\u0144 (and later Warsaw) as the capital of the new province.\nTargowica confederates, who did not expect another partition, and the king, Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski, who joined them near the end, both lost much prestige and support. The reformers, on the other hand, were attracting increasing support, and in 1794 the Ko\u015bciuszko Uprising began.\nThird Partition.\nKosciuszko's ragtag insurgent armies won some initial successes, but they eventually fell before the superior forces of the Russian Empire. The partitioning powers, seeing the increasing unrest in the remaining Commonwealth, decided to solve the problem by erasing any independent Polish state from the map. On October 24, 1795, their representatives signed a treaty, dividing the remaining territories of the Commonwealth between their three countries. One of Russia's chief foreign policy authors, Alexander Bezborodko, advised Catherine II on the Second and Third Partitions of Poland.\nThe Russian part included and 1.2\u00a0million people with Vilnius, the Prussian part (new provinces of New East Prussia and New Silesia) and 1\u00a0million people with Warsaw, and the Austrian with 1.2\u00a0million and Lublin and Krak\u00f3w.\nAftermath.\nThe King of Poland, Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski, under Russian military escort left for Grodno where he abdicated on November 25, 1795; next he left for Saint Petersburg, Russia, where he would spend his remaining days. This act ensured that Russia would be seen as the most important of the partitioning powers.\nWith regard to population, in the First Partition, Poland lost over four to five million citizens (about a third of its population of 14\u00a0million before the partitions). Only about 4\u00a0million people remained in Poland after the Second Partition which makes for a loss of another third of its original population, about a half of the remaining population. By the Third Partition, Prussia ended up with about 23% of the Commonwealth's population, Austria with 32%, and Russia with 45%.\n(Wandycz also offers slightly different total annexed territory estimates, with 18% for Austria, 20% for Prussia and 62% for Russia.)During the Napoleonic Wars and in their immediate aftermath the borders between partitioning powers shifted several times, changing the numbers seen in the preceding table. Ultimately, Russia ended up with most of the Polish core at the expense of Prussia and Austria. Following the Congress of Vienna, Russia controlled 82% of the pre-1772 Commonwealth's territory (this includes its puppet state of Congress Poland), Austria 11%, and Prussia 7%.\nAs a result of the Partitions, Poles were forced to seek a change of status quo in Europe. Polish poets, politicians, noblemen, writers, artists, many of whom were forced to emigrate (thus the term Great Emigration), became the revolutionaries of the 19th century, as desire for freedom became one of the defining parts of Polish romanticism. Polish revolutionaries participated in uprisings in Prussia, the Austrian Empire and Imperial Russia. Polish legions fought alongside Napoleon and, under the slogan of \"For our freedom and yours\", participated widely in the Spring of Nations (particularly the Hungarian Revolution of 1848).\nPoland would be briefly resurrected\u2014if in a smaller frame\u2014in 1807, when Napoleon set up the Duchy of Warsaw. After his defeat and the implementation of the Congress of Vienna treaty in 1815, the Russian-dominated Congress Kingdom of Poland was created in its place. After the Congress, Russia gained a larger share of Poland (with Warsaw) and, after crushing an insurrection in 1831, the Congress Kingdom's autonomy was abolished and Poles faced confiscation of property, deportation, forced military service, and the closure of their own universities. After the uprising of 1863, Russification of Polish secondary schools was imposed and the literacy rate dropped dramatically. In the Austrian sector which now was called Galicia, Poles fared better and were allowed to have representation in Parliament and to form their own universities, and Krak\u00f3w with Lemberg (Lw\u00f3w/Lviv) became centers of Polish culture and education. Meanwhile, Prussia Germanized the entire school system of its Polish subjects, and had no more respect for Polish culture and institutions than the Russian Empire. In 1915 a client state of the German Empire and Austria-Hungary was proposed and accepted by the Central Powers of World War I: the Regency Kingdom of Poland. After the end of World War I, the Central Powers' surrender to the Western Allies, the chaos of the Russian Revolution and the Treaty of Versailles finally allowed and helped the restoration of Poland's full independence after 123 years.\nFourth Partition.\nThe term \"Fourth Partition of Poland\" may refer to any subsequent division of Polish lands, including:\nIf one accepts more than one of those events as partitions, fifth, sixth, and even seventh partitions can be counted, but these terms are very rare. (For example, Norman Davies in \"God's Playground\" refers to the 1807 creation of the Duchy of Warsaw as the fourth partition, the 1815 Treaty of Vienna as the fifth, the 1918 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk as the sixth, and the 1939 division of Poland between Nazi Germany and the USSR as the seventh.) However, in recent times, the 1815 division of the Duchy of Warsaw at the Congress of Vienna and the 1939 division of Poland have been sometimes called the fourth and fifth partitions, respectively.\nThe term \"Fourth Partition\" was also used in the 19th and 20th centuries to refer to diaspora communities who maintained a close interest in the project of regaining Polish independence. Sometimes termed Polonia, these expatriate communities often contributed funding and military support to the project of regaining the Polish nation-state. Diaspora politics were deeply affected by developments in and around the homeland, and vice versa, for many decades.\nReasons, legality and justifications.\nMore recent studies claim that partitions happened when the Commonwealth had been showing the beginning signs of a slow recovery and see the last two partitions as an answer to strengthening reforms in the Commonwealth and the potential threat they represented to its power-hungry neighbours.\nAs historian Norman Davies stated, because the balance of power equilibrium was observed, many contemporary observers accepted explanations of the \"enlightened apologists\" of the partitioning state. 19th-century historians from countries that carried out the partitions, such as 19th-century Russian scholar Sergey Solovyov, and their 20th century followers, argued that partitions were justified, as the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth had degenerated to the point of being partitioned because the counterproductive principle of made decision-making on divisive issues, such as a wide-scale social reform, virtually impossible. Solovyov specified the cultural, language and religious break between the supreme and lowest layers of the society in the east regions of the Commonwealth, where the Belarusian and Ukrainian serf peasantry was Orthodox. Russian authors emphasized the historical connections between Belarus, Ukraine and Russia, as former parts of the medieval old Russian state where dynasty of Rurikids reigned (Kievan Rus'). Thus, Nikolay Karamzin wrote: \"Let the foreigners denounce the partition of Poland: we took what was ours.\" Russian historians often stressed that Russia annexed primarily Ukrainian and Belarusian provinces with Eastern Slavic inhabitants, although many Ruthenians were no more enthusiastic about Russia than about Poland, and ignoring ethnically Polish and Lithuanian territories also being annexed later. A new justification for partitions arose with the Russian Enlightenment, as Russian writers such as Gavrila Derzhavin, Denis Fonvizin, and Alexander Pushkin stressed degeneration of Catholic Poland and the need to \"civilize\" it by its neighbors.\nNonetheless, other 19th century contemporaries were much more skeptical; for example, British jurist Sir Robert Phillimore discussed the partition as a violation of international law; German jurist Heinrich Bernhard Oppenheim presented similar views. Other older historians who challenged such justifications for the Partitions included French historian Jules Michelet, British historian and politician Thomas Babington Macaulay, and Edmund Burke, who criticized the immorality of the partitions. Nonetheless, most governments accepted the event as a fait acompli. The Ottoman Empire was either the only, or one of only two countries in the world that refused to accept the partitions, (the other being the Persian Empire), and reserved a place in its diplomatic corps for an Ambassador of Lehistan (Poland).\nSeveral scholars focused on the economic motivations of the partitioning powers. Hajo Holborn noted that Prussia aimed to take control of the lucrative Baltic grain trade through Gda\u0144sk. In the 18th century the Russian peasants were escaping from Russia to the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth (where the once dire conditions had improved, unlike in Russia) in significant enough numbers to become a major concern for the Russian Government sufficient to play a role in its decision to partition the Commonwealth (one of the reasons Catherine II gave for the partition of Poland was that thousands of peasants escaped from Russia to Poland to seek a better fate\"). Jerzy Czajewski and Piotr Kimla assert that in the 18th century until the partitions solved this problem, Russian armies increasingly raided territories of the Commonwealth, officially to recover the escapees, but in fact kidnapping many locals; Piotr Kimla noted that the Russian government spread international propaganda, mainly in France, which falsely exaggerated serfdom conditions in Poland, while ignoring worse conditions in Russia, as one of the justification for the partitions.\nLegacy.\n, the Italian national anthem, contains a reference to the partition.\nThe ongoing partitions of Poland were a major topic of discourse in \"The Federalist Papers\", where the structure of the government of Poland, and of foreign influence over it, is used in several papers (Federalist No. 14, Federalist No. 19, Federalist No. 22, Federalist No. 39 for examples) as a cautionary tale for the writers of the U.S. Constitution.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43795", "revid": "26674835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43795", "title": "Stone of Scone", "text": "Ancient Scottish coronation artefact\nThe Stone of Scone (; , meaning Stone of Destiny, also called clach-na-cinneamhuinn; ) is an oblong block of red sandstone that was used in the coronation of Scottish monarchs until the 13th century when it was seized by Edward I during the First War of Scottish Independence and taken to England. Thereafter, it was used in the coronation of English and later British monarchs.\nIt is considered an ancient symbol of the Scottish monarchy and the Kingdom of Scotland, with its first recorded use being in 1249 for the coronation of Alexander III of Scotland. The Stone measures and weighs approximately . A cross is roughly incised on one surface, and an iron ring at each end aids with transport. Monarchs sat on the Stone of Scone itself, until a wooden platform was added to the Coronation Chair in the 17th\u00a0century.\nThe artefact was originally kept at the Scone Abbey (now ruined) in Scone, near Perth. In 1296, the forces of Edward I of England captured it during Edward's invasion of Scotland. The Stone has been used in the coronation of English monarchs and British monarchs for over 500 years. In 1996, the stone was returned to Scotland, and kept in Edinburgh Castle with the Honours of Scotland. The stone remains property of the Crown, with Crown Estate Scotland, an executive agency of the Scottish Government responsible for the stone in the rights of the monarch. It is transported to London for use at coronations under the supervision of the Keeper of the Great Seal of Scotland. Since March 2024, it has been on permanent public display in Perth.\nOrigin and legends.\nIn the 14th century the English cleric and historian Walter of Guisborough identified the previous location of the Scottish coronation stone as the monastery of Scone, north of Perth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nVarious theories and legends exist about the stone's history prior to its placement in Scone. One story concerns Fergus, son of Erc, the first King of the Scots (r.\u2009501\u2013\u00a0) in Scotland, whose transport of the Stone from Ireland to Argyll, where he was crowned on it, was recorded in a 15th-century chronicle. Some versions identify the stone brought by Fergus with the Lia F\u00e1il used at Tara for inaugurating the High Kings of Ireland. Other traditions contend that the Lia F\u00e1il remains at Tara. (\"Inis F\u00e1il\", \"The Island of Destiny\", is one of the traditional names of Ireland.) Other legends place the origins of the Stone in Biblical times and identify it as the Stone of Jacob, taken by Jacob from Bethel while on the way to Haran (Genesis 28:10\u201322). This same Stone of Jacob was then supposedly taken to ancient Ireland by the prophet Jeremiah.\nContradicting these legends, geologists have proven that the stone taken by Edward I of England to Westminster is a \"lower Old Red Sandstone\", which was quarried in the vicinity of Scone. Doubts over the authenticity of the stone at Westminster exist: a blog post by retired Scottish academic and writer of historical fiction Marie MacPherson shows that they date back at least two hundred years.\nA letter to the editor of the \"Morning Chronicle\", dated 2 January 1819, states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the 19th of November, as the servants belonging to the West Mains of Dunsinane-house, were employed in carrying away stones from the excavation made among the ruins that point out the site of Macbeth's castle here, part of the ground they stood on suddenly gave way, and sank down about six feet, discovering a regularly built vault, about six feet long and four wide. None of the men being injured, curiosity induced them to clear out the subterranean recess, when they discovered among the ruins a large stone, weighing about 500 lb [], which is pronounced to be of the meteoric or semi-metallic kind. This stone must have lain here during the long series of ages since Macbeth's reign. Beside it were also found two round tablets, of a composition resembling bronze. On one of these two lines are engraved, which a gentleman has thus deciphered. \u2013 'The sconce (or shadow) of kingdom come, until Sylphs in air carry me again to Bethel.' These plates exhibit the figures of targets for the arms. From time immemorial it has been believed among us here, that unseen hands brought Jacob's pillow from Bethel and dropped it on the site where the palace of Scoon now stands. A strong belief is also entertained by many in this part of the country that it was only a representation of this Jacob's pillow that Edward sent to Westminster, the sacred stone not having been found by him. The curious here, aware of such traditions, and who have viewed these venerable remains of antiquity, agree that Macbeth may, or rather must, have deposited the stone in question at the bottom of his Castle, on the hill of Dunsinane (from the trouble of the times), where it has been found by the workmen. This curious stone has been shipped for London for the inspection of the scientific amateur, in order to discover its real quality.\nDunsinane Hill has the remains of a late prehistoric hill fort, and this has historical associations with Macbeth, but no remains dating to the 11th century have been identified on the hill.\nWestminster Abbey.\nIn 1296, during the First Scottish War of Independence, Edward I of England took the stone as spoils of war and removed it to Westminster Abbey, where it was fitted into a wooden chair \u2013 known as the Coronation Chair or King Edward's Chair \u2013 on which most subsequent English and then British sovereigns have been crowned. Edward I sought to claim the status of the \"Lord Paramount\" of Scotland, with the right to oversee its King.\nSome doubt exists over the stone captured by Edward I. The Westminster Stone theory posits that the monks at Scone Palace hid the real stone in the River Tay, or buried it on Dunsinane Hill, and that the English troops were tricked into taking a substitute. Some proponents of this theory claim that historic descriptions of the stone do not match the present stone.\nIn the 1328 Treaty of Northampton between the Kingdom of Scotland and the Kingdom of England, England agreed to return the captured stone to Scotland; rioting crowds prevented it from being removed from Westminster Abbey. The stone remained in England for another six centuries. When James VI of Scotland assumed the English throne as James I of England, he was crowned at Westminster Abbey on the stone. For the next century, the Stuart kings and queens of Scotland once again sat on the stone \u2013 but at their coronation as kings and queens of, and in, England.\n1914 suffragette bombing.\nOn 11 June 1914, as part of the suffragette bombing and arson campaign of 1912\u20131914, suffragettes of the Women's Social and Political Union planted a bomb loaded with metal bolts and nuts to act as shrapnel next to the Coronation Chair and Stone; no serious injuries were reported in the aftermath of the subsequent explosion despite the building having been busy with 80\u2013100 visitors, but the deflagration blew off a corner of the Coronation Chair and broke the Stone in half \u2013 although this was not discovered until 1950, when four Scottish nationalists broke into the church to steal the stone and return it to Scotland. Two days after the Westminster Abbey bombing, a second suffragette bomb was discovered before it could explode in St Paul's Cathedral.\nEarly 20th century.\nThe possibility that the Coronation Chair could be damaged or destroyed by German air raids during the Second World War resulted in it being moved to Gloucester Cathedral for the duration of the war. Concerns about the propaganda implications of the Stone falling into German hands led to it being hidden behind ancient lead coffins in a burial vault under Abbot Islip's Chapel, situated off the north ambulatory of the abbey. Other than the Dean, Paul de Labilliere and the Surveyor of the Fabric of Westminster Abbey, Charles Peers, only a few other people knew of its hiding place. Worried that the secret could be lost if all of them were killed during the war, Peers drew up three maps showing its location. Two were sent in sealed envelopes to Canada, one to the Canadian Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King, who deposited it in the Bank of Canada's vault in Ottawa. The other went to Albert Edward Matthews, the Lieutenant Governor of Ontario, who stored his envelope in the Bank of Montreal in Toronto. Once he had received word that the envelopes had been received, Peers destroyed the third map, which he had been keeping at his bank.\nPeers later received a suggestion via the Office of Works that the Stone should be sent to Scotland for safekeeping:\nI trust the Office of Works will not lend itself to this attempt by the Scotch to get hold of the Stone by a side wind. You cannot be so simple as not to know that this acquisitive nation have ever since the time of Edward I been attempting by fair means or foul, to get possession of the Stone, and during my time at Westminster we have received warnings from the Police that Scottish emissaries were loose in London, intending to steal the Stone and we had better lock up the Confessor's Chapel, where it is normally kept.\nReturning to Scotland.\nFirst return.\nOn Christmas Day 1950, a group of four Scottish students (Ian Hamilton, Gavin Vernon, Kay Matheson, and Alan Stuart) removed the stone from Westminster Abbey, intending to return it to Scotland. During the removal, the stone broke into two pieces. After burying the greater part of the Stone in a Kent field, where they camped for a few days, they uncovered the buried stone and returned to Scotland, along with a new accomplice, John Josselyn.\nAccording to an American diplomat who was posted in Edinburgh at the time, the stone was briefly hidden in a trunk in the basement of the consulate's Public Affairs Officer, without his knowledge, then brought up further north. The smaller piece was similarly brought north at a later time. The entire stone was passed to Glasgow politician Robert Gray, who arranged for a Glasgow stonemason to repair it.\nThe British Government ordered a major search for the stone, but were unsuccessful. The stone was left by those that had been hiding it on the altar of Arbroath Abbey on 11 April 1951, a property owned by the Church of Scotland. Once the London police were informed of its whereabouts, the stone was returned to Westminster four months after its removal. Afterward, rumours circulated that copies of the stone had been made, and that the returned stone was not the original.\nSecond return.\nOn 3 July 1996, in response to a growing discussion around Scottish cultural history, the British Government announced that the stone would return to Scotland, 700 years after it had been taken. On 15 November 1996, after a handover ceremony at the border between representatives of the Home Office and of the Scottish Office, the stone was transported to Edinburgh Castle. An official handover ceremony occurred in the Castle on 30 November 1996, St Andrew's Day, to mark the arrival of the stone. The then Prince Andrew, Duke of York (later Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor), representing Queen Elizabeth II, formally handed over the Royal Warrant transferring the stone into the safekeeping of the Commissioners for the Regalia. It currently resides in Perth.\nTemporary return to London.\nIn September 2022, Historic Environment Scotland announced that the stone would temporarily return to Westminster Abbey for the coronation of Charles III. It subsequently left the castle on 27 April 2023 in a procession led by Joseph Morrow, the Lord Lyon King of Arms, arriving in Westminster Abbey on 29 April. After the coronation on 6 May, the stone was put on temporary display at the abbey before being returned to Edinburgh Castle later in the month.\nPublic display.\nAs part of a consultation in 2019, the Scottish Government asked the public for their views on the preferred location for public display of the Stone of Scone. Two options were proposed: featuring it as the centrepiece of a proposed new Perth Museum (a \u00a323 million redevelopment of the former Perth City Hall) or remaining at Edinburgh Castle in a major redevelopment of the existing display.\nIn December 2020, the Scottish Government announced that the stone would be relocated to the Perth Museum. The museum opened on 30 March 2024, with the stone as one of its main exhibits.\nVandalism.\nOn 15 November 2023, three members of environmental activist group \"This is Rigged\" smashed the stone's protective glass case, and spray-painted the words \"Is Treasa Tuath Na Tighearna\" (Scottish Gaelic for \"The People Are Mightier Than A Lord\") on the glass, alongside the group's logo. Edinburgh Castle was closed to the public for the rest of the day. The activists were arrested following the action, which they claimed was intended to pressure supermarkets to reduce food prices and the Scottish Government to fund a community food hub. In November 2024, two of the three pled guilty at Edinburgh Sheriff Court to charges of malicious damage in connection with the incident. In December, the third protester also pled guilty to damaging the cabinet; his not guilty plea to a charge of breaching the peace was accepted.\nOn 12 July 2025, an Australian national wearing a kilt was arrested after he was caught smashing the stone's protective glass case while it was on display at the Perth Museum. He was subsequently charged with malicious mischief.\nMissing fragments.\nIn January 2024, a fragment of the stone, previously thought to have been lost, was found in a cupboard at the headquarters of the Scottish National Party. According to Scottish cabinet papers released on 1 January, the fragment was given to the then first minister Alex Salmond in 2008 by the son of John MacCormick, who had been involved in the removal of the stone from Westminster Abbey. Sir John Elvidge, who was Permanent Secretary to the Cabinet at the time, told Salmond that he could keep the fragment. Salmond then passed it to the SNP for safekeeping.\nHistoric Environment Scotland subsequently carried out tests on the fragment, which established it was genuine \"beyond reasonable doubt\". In May 2024, it was announced that the fragment would be held by the Commissioners for the Safeguarding of the Regalia \"on behalf of the Nation and the people of Scotland\".\nIn January 2025, the BBC reported that a search was in progress for \"up to 30\" further missing fragments. These fragments were separated from the stone while it was being repaired shortly after the 1950 theft. Robert Gray, who oversaw the repair, passed them to the students who carried out the theft, as well as to \"those he admired in the campaign for Scottish independence\". The search is being undertaken by Sally Foster from the University of Stirling; she has so far been able to confirm the locations of four of them.\nIn November 2025, Professor Foster reported that she had identified Detective inspector William Kerr as the recipient of one of the fragments. Kerr had been involved in the search for the stone in 1951. Robert Gray was thought to have handed him the fragment in 1956.\nIn literature.\nThe Stone of Scone is parodied as the Scone of Stone in Terry Pratchett's \"Discworld\" series of novels, notably in \"The Fifth Elephant\". The connection between the Stone of Scone and Jacob's Pillow is central to the plot of \"This Jagged Way\" (ASIN : B0C4B9Q7PQ) by Tormad Cockburn.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43797", "revid": "41985887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43797", "title": "Violence against LGBTQ people", "text": "Hateful actions towards sexuality or gender identity\nLGBTQ people experience violence directed toward their sexuality, gender identity, or gender expression. This violence may be enacted by the state, as in laws prescribing punishment for homosexual acts, or by individuals. It may be psychological or physical and motivated by biphobia, gayphobia, homophobia, lesbophobia, and transphobia. Influencing factors may be cultural, religious, or political mores and biases.\nCurrently, homosexual acts are legal in almost all Western countries, and in many of these countries violence against LGBTQ people is classified as a hate crime. Outside the West, many countries are deemed potentially dangerous to their LGBTQ population due to both discriminatory legislation and threats of violence. These include most African countries (except South Africa), most Asian countries (except some LGBTQ-friendly countries as Japan, Taiwan, Thailand, Vietnam and the Philippines), and some former communist countries such as Russia, Armenia, Belarus, Poland, Slovakia and Serbia. Such violence is often associated with religious condemnation of homosexuality or conservative social attitudes that portray homosexuality as an illness or a character flaw.\nHistorically, state-sanctioned persecution of homosexuals was mostly limited to male homosexuality, termed \"sodomy\". During the Middle Ages and the early modern period, the penalty for sodomy was usually death. During the modern period (from the 19th century to the mid-20th century) in the Western world, the penalty was usually a fine or imprisonment. There was a drop in locations where homosexual acts remained illegal from 2009 when there were 80 countries worldwide (notably throughout the Middle East, Central Asia and in most of Africa, but also in some of the Caribbean and Oceania) with five carrying the death penalty to 2016 when 72 countries criminalized consensual sexual acts between adults of the same sex.\nBrazil, a country with LGBTQ rights protections and legal same-sex marriage, is reported by Grupo Gay da Bahia (GGB) to have the world's highest LGBTQ murder rate, with more than 380 murders in 2017 alone, an increase of 30% compared to 2016. Gay men experience potentially fatal violence in several places in the world, for example by ISIS, stoning by Nigeria, and others.\nIn some countries, 85% of LGBTQ students experience homophobic and transphobic violence in school, and 45% of transgender students drop out of school.\nState-sanctioned violence.\nHistoric.\nThe Middle East.\nAn early ancient moral penal code that criminalizes all forms of unnaturally lustful carnal knowledge-based intercourse against the order of nature to all individuals involved (typically between those of the same-sex) are recorded in the Book of Leviticus as written in according to what is described by the Torah through the Hebrew people which includes the death penalty for their transgressions within a civilized society. A violently lawful criminal penal code regarding same-sex intercourse is prescribed in the Middle Assyrian Law Codes (1075 BCE), stating: \"If a man lays down with his own brethren, when they have prosecuted and convicted him, they shall stay with him and turn him into a eunuch\".\nEurope.\nMany harshly enacted laws and penal codes that strictly prohibited the practice of sodomy are enforced and reinforced throughout the entire European continent to prosecute and punish those who were found guilty for their criminal offense from the 4th to 12th centuries.\nRoman Empire.\nDuring the Republican Era of Ancient Rome, the poorly attested \"Lex Scantinia\" penalized any adult male for committing a sex crime \"(stuprum)\" against an underage male citizen \"(ingenuus)\". It is unclear whether the penalty was death or a fine. The law may also have been used to prosecute adult male citizens who willingly took a receiving passive role in same-sex penetrative intercourse, but prosecutions are rarely recorded and the provisions of the law are vague; as John Boswell has noted. \"If there was a law against carnally lustful relations between individuals of the same-sex, no one in around Cicero's time knew anything about it\". \nWhen the entire Roman Empire came under Christian rule beginning with the reign of Constantine the Great, all forms of sodomite activities between individuals (especially those of the same-sex) were increasingly repressed, often with the pain of death. In 342 CE, the Christian Roman emperors Constantius and Constans declared sodomite marriage to be illegal. Shortly after around the year 390 CE. The Roman emperors Valentinian II, Theodosius I and Arcadius declared all acts of sodomy to be an illegal criminal offense against the order of human nature in a civilized society and those who were found guilty of it are severely reprimanded and condemned to be publicly burned to death. Roman emperor Justinian I (527\u2013565 CE) made sodomites a scapegoat for problems such as \"famines, earthquakes, and pestilences.\"\nSwitzerland.\nThe earliest known execution for sodomy was recorded in the annals of the city of Basel in 1277. The mention is only one sentence: \"King Rudolph burned Lord Haspisperch for the vice of sodomy.\" The executed was an obscure member of the German-Swiss aristocracy; it is unknown if there was a political motivation behind the execution.\nFrance and Florence.\nDuring the Middle Ages, the Kingdom of France and the City of Florence also instated the death penalty. In Florence, a young boy named Giovanni di Giovanni (1350\u20131365?) was castrated and burned between the thighs with a red-hot iron by court order under this law. These punishments continued into the Renaissance, and spread to the Swiss canton of Z\u00fcrich. Knight Richard von Hohenberg (died 1482) was burned at the stake together with his lover, his young squire, during this time. In France, French writer Jacques Chausson (1618\u20131661) was also burned alive for attempting to seduce the son of a nobleman.\nEngland.\nIn England, the Buggery Act 1533 made sodomy and bestiality punishable by death. This act was superseded in 1828, but sodomy remained punishable by death under the new act until 1861, although the last executions were in 1835.\nMalta.\nIn seventeenth century Malta, Scottish voyager and author William Lithgow, writing in his diary in March 1616, claims a Spanish soldier and a Maltese teenage boy were publicly burnt to ashes for confessing to have practiced sodomy together. To escape this fate, Lithgow further claimed that a hundred \"bardassoes\" (boy prostitutes) sailed for Sicily the following day.\nThe Holocaust.\nIn Nazi Germany and Occupied Europe, homosexuals and gender-nonconforming people were among the groups targeted by the Holocaust (\"See Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany\"). In 1936, the poet Federico Garc\u00eda Lorca was executed by right-wing rebels who established Franco's dictatorship in Spain.\nContemporary.\nAs of \u00a02025[ [update]], 64 countries criminalize consensual sexual acts between adults of the same sex.\n53 countries where homosexual acts are criminalized but not punished by death, by region, include:\nAfrica\nAlgeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Comoros, Egypt, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, Libya, Malawi, Mali, Morocco, Nigeria (death penalty in some states), Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe\nAsia\nBangladesh, Aceh (Indonesia), Iraq, Kuwait, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Syria, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Gaza Strip under Palestinian Authority\nCaribbean\nGrenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines\nPacific Islands\nKiribati, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu\nAfghanistan, where such acts remain punishable with fines and a prison sentence, dropped the death penalty after the fall of the Taliban in 2001, who had mandated it from 1996. India criminalized homosexuality until September 6, 2018, when the Supreme Court of India declared section 377 of the Indian Penal Code invalid and arbitrary when it concerns consensual relations of consenting adults in private.\nJamaica has some of the toughest sodomy laws in the world, with homosexual activity carrying a ten-year jail sentence.\nInternational human rights organizations such as Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International condemn laws that criminalize homosexual relations between consenting adults. Since 1994, the United Nations Human Rights Committee has also ruled that such laws violated the right to privacy guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.\nCriminal assault.\nEven in countries where homosexuality is legal (most countries outside of Africa and the Middle East), there are reports of homosexual people being targeted with bullying or physical assault or even homicide.\nAccording to the Grupo Gay da Bahia (GGB), Brazil's oldest gay rights NGO, the rate of murders of homosexuals in Brazil is particularly high, with a reported 3,196 cases over the 30-year period of 1980 to 2009 (or about 0.7 cases per 100,000 population per annum). At least 387 LGBT Brazilians were murdered in 2017.\nGGB reported 190 documented alleged homophobic murders in Brazil in 2008, accounting for about 0.5% of intentional homicides in Brazil (homicide rate 22 per 100,000 population as of 2008). 64% of the victims were gay men, 32% were trans women or transvestites, and 4% were lesbians.\nBy comparison, the FBI reported five homophobic murders in the United States during 2008, corresponding to 0.03% of intentional homicides (homicide rate 5.4 per 100,000 population as of 2008).\nThe numbers produced by the Grupo Gay da Bahia (GGB) have occasionally been contested on the grounds that they include all murders of LGBT people reported in the media \u2013 that is, not only those motivated by bias against homosexuals. Reinaldo de Azevedo, in 2009, columnist of the right-wing \"Veja\" magazine, Brazil's most read weekly publication, called the GGB's methodology \"unscientific\" based on the above objection: that they make no distinction between murders motivated by bias and those that were not. On the high level of murders of transsexuals, he suggested transsexuals' allegedly high involvement with the drug trade may expose them to higher levels of violence as compared to non-transgender homosexuals and heterosexuals.\nIn many parts of the world, including much of the European Union and United States, acts of violence are legally classified as hate crimes, which entail harsher sentences if convicted. In some countries, this form of legislation extends to verbal abuse as well as physical violence.\nViolent hate crimes against LGBT people tend to be especially brutal, even compared to other hate crimes: \"an intense rage is present in nearly all homicide cases involving gay male victims\".\nIt is rare for a victim to just be shot; he is more likely to be stabbed multiple times, mutilated, and strangled. \"They frequently involved torture, cutting, mutilation... showing the absolute intent to rub out the human being because of his (sexual) preference\".\nIn a particularly brutal case in the United States, on March 14, 2007, in Wahneta, Florida, 25-year-old Ryan Keith Skipper was found dead from 20 stab wounds and a slit throat. His body had been dumped on a dark, rural road less than 2 miles from his home. His two alleged attackers, William David Brown Jr., 20, and Joseph Eli Bearden, 21, were indicted for robbery and first-degree murder. Highlighting their malice and contempt for the victim, the accused killers allegedly drove around in Skipper's blood-soaked car and bragged of killing him. According to a sheriff's department affidavit, one of the men stated that Skipper was targeted because \"he was a faggot.\"\nIn Canada in 2008, police-reported data found that approximately 10% of all hate crimes in the country were motivated by sexual orientation. Of these, 56% were of a violent nature. In comparison, 38% of all racially motivated offenses were of a violent nature.\nIn the same year in the United States, according to Federal Bureau of Investigation data, though 4,704 crimes were committed due to racial bias and 1,617 were committed due to sexual orientation, only one murder and one forcible rape were committed due to racial bias, whereas five murders and six rapes were committed based on sexual orientation.\nIn Northern Ireland in 2008, 160 homophobic incidents and 7 transphobic incidents were reported. Of those incidents, 68.4% were violent crimes; significantly higher than for any other bias category. By contrast, 37.4% of racially motivated crimes were of a violent nature.\nPeople's ignorance of and prejudice against LGBT people can contribute to the spreading of misinformation about them and subsequently to violence. In 2018, a transgender woman was killed by a mob in Hyderabad, India, following false rumors that transgender women were sex trafficking children. Three other transgender women were injured in the attack.\nRecent research on university-level students indicated the importance of queer visibility and its impact in creating a positive experience for LGBTIQ+ members of a campus community, this can reduce the impact and effect of incidents on youth attending university. When there is a poor climate \u2013 students are much less likely to report incidents or seek help.\nViolence at universities.\nIn the United States since the early 2010s, colleges and universities have taken major steps to prevent sexual harassment from taking place on campus, but students have still reported violence due to their sexual orientation. Sexual harassment can include \"non-contact forms\" such as making jokes or comments and \"contact forms\" like forcing students to commit sexual acts. Even though little information exists with LGBT violence taking place at higher learning institutions, different communities are taking a stand against the violence. Many LGBT rape survivors said they experienced their first assault before the age of 25, and that many arrive on campus with this experience. Almost half of bisexual women experience their first assault between the ages of 18 and 24, and most of these take place unreported on college campuses. In 2012, though the Federal Bureau of Investigation changed what the \"federal\" definition of what rape means (for reporting purposes), local state governments still determine how campus violence cases are treated. Catherine Hill and Elana Silva said in \"Drawing the Line: Sexual Harassment on Campus,\" \"Students who admit to harassing other students generally don't see themselves as rejected suitors, rather misunderstood comedians.\" Most students who commit sexual violence towards other students do it to boost their own ego, believing that their actions are humorous. More than 46% of sexual harassment towards LGBT people still goes unreported. National resources have been created to deal with the issue of sexual violence and various organizations such as The American Association of University Women and the National Center on Domestic and Sexual Violence are established to provide information and resources for those who have been sexually harassed.\nLegislation against homophobic hate crimes.\nMembers of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe began describing hate crimes based on sexual orientation (as opposed to generic anti-discrimination legislation) to be counted as aggravating circumstance in the commission of a crime in 2003.\nAustralia.\nFollowing a spate of murders of gay men in the 1980s and 1990s, significant advances have been made. Hate speech laws in Australia provide protection in all states against racial vilification, with some additional protections on the grounds of sexual orientation in New South Wales, Queensland, the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania. In New South Wales, 'homosexual vilification' is prohibited under the umbrella of the Anti-Discrimination Act 1977. In 2011, the Australian Human Rights Commission had reported that there was no federal law protecting LGBT+ Australians from discrimination or vilification. However, with the legalisation of same-sex marriage in Australia in 2017, and sexual orientation anti-discrimination protections in all states, LGBT rights in Australia are now among the most progressive in the world.\nScotland.\nIn 2009, Scotland passed the \"Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice (Scotland) Act\", which made acts of prejudice against Disability, Sexual Orientation and Transgender Status specific offences. This Act requires only a single source of evidence, and those convicted under it must be told upon sentencing both what their sentence will be and what it would have been had prejudice not been a factor.\nIn July 2017, James Chalmers and Fiona Leverick of the University of Glasgow, submitted their report \"A Comparative Analysis of Hate Crime Legislation\" to the Hate Crime Legislation Review which contributed to the Scottish government's publication of its final report \"Independent review of hate crime legislation in Scotland\" in May 2018.\nWhile homophobia is still an issue in modern Scotland, particularly in schools, social attitudes towards LGBT+ persons have changed significantly, helped by every Scottish political party leader being vocally in support of equal marriage throughout that campaign. Former leaders of both Scottish Labour and the Scottish Conservatives have been \"out\" lesbians and current co-leader of the Scottish Greens, Patrick Harvie is openly gay. In the UK Parliament, as of March 2023, Westminster MP for Livingstone, West Lothian, Hannah Bardell was one of 62 \"out\" LGBT politicians in the United Kingdom.\nUSA.\nThe United States does not have federal legislation marking sexual orientation as criterion for hate crimes, but several states, including the District of Columbia, enforce harsher penalties for crimes where real or perceived sexual orientation may have been a motivator. Among these 12 countries as well, only the United States has criminal law that specifically mentions gender identity, and even then only in 11 states and the District of Columbia. In November 2010, the United Nations General Assembly voted 79\u201370 to remove \"sexual orientation\" from the Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions, a list of unjustified reasons for executions, replacing it with \"discriminatory reasons on any basis\". The resolution specifically mentions a large number of groups, including race, religion, linguistic differences, refugees, street children and indigenous peoples.\nLegal and police response to these types of hate crimes is hard to gauge, however. Lack of reporting by authorities on the statistics of these crimes and under-reporting by the victims themselves are factors for this difficulty. Often a victim will not report a crime as it will shed unwelcome light on their orientation and invite more victimization.\nAlleged judicative bias.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"It's pretty disturbing that somebody that [kills] a person gets out very quickly\u2026.\"\n Canadian MLA Spencer Herbert\nThe Gay Panic Defense has at times been adduced to plea for more lenient punishments for people accused of assaulting or killing homosexuals because of their actual or perceived orientation. This defense posits that the attacker was so enraged by their victim's alleged advances as to cause temporary insanity, rendering them unable to stop themselves. If the loss of faculties is proven, or sympathized to the jury, a sentence may be mitigated. In several common law countries, the mitigatory defense of provocation has been used in violent attacks against LGBT persons, which has led Australian states progressively to abolish the Gay Panic Defense, now effective nationwide.\nPeople convicted of violence against LGBT people have in several cases received shorter sentences under the Gay Panic Defense plea:\nThere have also been criticisms concerning the impartiality of judges. In 1988 in Texas, in handing down a 30-year sentence to a man for killing two gay men, instead of the life sentence requested by the prosecutor, Judge Jack Hampton said: \"I don't much care for queers cruising the streets picking up teenage boys ...[I] put prostitutes and gays at about the same level ... and I'd be hard put to give somebody life for killing a prostitute.\"\nIn 1987, a Florida judge trying a case concerning the beating to death of a gay man asked the prosecutor, \"That's a crime now, to beat up a homosexual?\" The prosecutor responded, \"Yes, sir. And it's also a crime to kill them.\" \"Times have really changed,\" the judge replied. The judge, Daniel Futch, maintained that he was joking, but was removed from the case.\nAttacks on gay pride parades.\nLGBT Pride Parades in East European, Asian and South American countries often attract violence because of their public nature. Though many countries where such events take place attempt to provide police protection to participants, some would prefer that the parades not happen, and police either ignore or encourage violent protesters. The country of Moldova has shown particular contempt to marchers, shutting down official requests to hold parades and allowing protesters to intimidate and harm any who try to march anyway. In 2007, after being denied a request to hold a parade, a small group of LGBT people tried to hold a small gathering. They were surrounded by a group twice their size who shouted derogatory things at them and pelted them with eggs. The gathering proceeded even so, and they tried to lay flowers at the Monument to the Victims of Repression. They were denied the opportunity, however, by a large group of police claiming they needed permission from city hall.\nThe following year, a parade was again attempted. A bus carried approximately 60 participants to the capital, but before they could disembark, an angry crowd surrounded the bus. They shouted things like \"let's get them out and beat them up\", and \"beat them to death, don't let them escape\" at the frightened passengers. The mob told the activists that if they wanted to leave the bus unharmed, they would have to destroy all of their pride materials. The passengers complied and the march was called off. All the while, police stood passively about 100 meters away, taking no action even though passengers claimed at least nine emergency calls were made to police while on the bus.\nRussia's officials are similarly averse to Pride Parades. Mayor of Moscow Yury Luzhkov has repeatedly banned marches, calling them \"satanic\". Pride participants instead tried to peacefully assemble and deliver a petition to city hall regarding the right of assembly and freedom of expression. They were met by skinheads and other protesters, and police who had closed off the square and immediately arrested activists as they entered. As some were being arrested, other participants were attacked by protesters. Police did nothing. Around eleven women and two men were arrested and left in the heat, denied medical attention, and verbally abused by police officers. The officers told the women, \"No one needs lesbians, no one will ever get you out of here.\" When participants were released from custody hours later, they were pelted by eggs and shouted at by protesters who had been waiting.\nHungary, on the other hand, has tried to afford the best protection they can to marchers, but cannot stem the flow of violence. In 2008, hundreds of people participated in the Budapest Dignity March. Police, on alert due to attacks on two LGBT-affiliated businesses earlier in the week, erected high metal barriers on either side of the street the march was to take place on. Hundreds of angry protesters threw petrol bombs and rocks at police in retaliation. A police van was set on fire and two police officers were injured in the attacks. During the parade itself, protesters threw Molotov cocktails, eggs and firecrackers at marchers. At least eight participants were injured. Forty-five people were detained in connection with the attacks, and observers called the incident \"the worst violence during the dozen years the Gay Pride Parade has taken place in Budapest\".\nIn Israel, three marchers in a gay pride parade in Jerusalem on June 30, 2005, were stabbed by Yishai Shlisel, a Haredi Jew. Shlisel claimed he had acted \"in the name of God\". He was charged with attempted murder. Ten years later, On July 30, 2015, six marchers were injured, again by Yishai Shlisel when he stabbed them. It was three weeks after he was released from jail. One of the victims, 16-year-old Shira Banki, died of her wounds at the Hadassah Medical Center three days later, on August 2, 2015. Shortly after, Prime Minister Netanyahu offered his condolences, adding \"We will deal with the murderer to the fullest extent of the law.\"\nIn 2019, the gay pride parade in Detroit was infiltrated by armed neo-nazis who reportedly claimed they wanted to spark \"Charlottesville 2.0\" referring to the Unite the Right demonstration in 2017 which resulted in the murder of Heather Heyer, and many others injured.\nOn July 20, 2019, the first Bia\u0142ystok equality march was held in Bia\u0142ystok, a Law and Justice party stronghold, surrounded by Bia\u0142ystok county which is a declared LGBT-free zone. Two weeks before the march Archbishop Tadeusz Wojda delivered a proclamation to all churches in Podlaskie Voivodeship and Bia\u0142ystok stating that pride marches were \"blasphemy against God\". Wojda also asserted that the march was \"foreign\" and thanked those who \"defend Christian values\". Approximately a thousand pride marchers were opposed by thousands of members of far-right groups, ultra football fans, and others. Firecrackers were tossed at the marchers, homophobic slogans were chanted, and the marchers were pelted with rocks and bottles. Dozens of marchers were injured. Amnesty International criticized the police response, saying they had failed to protect marchers and \"failed to respond to instances of violence\". According to the \"New York Times\", similar to the manner in which the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville shocked Americans, the violence in Bia\u0142ystok raised public concern in Poland over anti-LGBT propaganda.\nAdvocacy in song lyrics.\nAs a result of the strong anti-homosexual culture in Jamaica, many reggae and dancehall artists, such as Buju Banton, Elephant Man, Sizzla, have published song lyrics advocating violence against homosexuals.\nSimilarly, hip-hop music occasionally includes aggressively homophobic lyrics, but has since appeared to reform.\nBanton wrote a song when he was 15 years old that became a hit when he released it years later in 1992 called \"Boom Bye Bye\". The song is about murdering homosexuals and \"advocated the shooting of gay men, pouring acid on them and burning them alive.\" A song by Elephant Man proclaims: \"When you hear a lesbian getting raped/It's not our fault ... Two women in bed/That's two sodomites who should be dead.\"\nCanadian activists have sought to deport reggae artists from the country due to homophobic content in some of their songs, which they say promote anti-gay violence. In the UK, Scotland Yard has investigated reggae lyrics and Sizzla was barred from entering the United Kingdom in 2004 over accusations his music promotes murder.\nGay rights advocates have started the group Stop Murder Music to combat what they say is the promotion of hate and violence by artists. The group organized protests, causing some venues to refuse to allow the targeted artists to perform, and the loss of sponsors. In 2007, the group asked reggae artists to promise \"not to produce music or make public statements inciting hatred against gay people. Neither can they authorise the re-release of previous homophobic songs.\" Several artists signed that agreement, including Buju Banton, Beenie Man, Sizzla and Capleton, but some later denied signing it.\nDuring the 1980s, skinheads in North America who promoted emerging neo-Nazi pop culture and racist rock songs increasingly went to punk rock concerts with anti-gay music advocating violence.\nMotivations.\nMacho culture and social homophobia.\nThe vast majority of homophobic criminal assault is perpetrated by male aggressors on male victims, and is connected to aggressive heterosexual machismo or male chauvinism.\nTheorists including Calvin Thomas and Judith Butler have suggested that homophobia can be rooted in an individual's fear of being identified as gay.\nHomophobia in men is correlated with insecurity about masculinity. For this reason, allegedly homophobia is rampant in sports, and in the subculture of its supporters, that are considered stereotypically \"male\", such as football and rugby.\nThese theorists have argued that a person who expresses homophobia does so not only to communicate their beliefs about the class of gay people, but also to distance themselves from this class and its social status. Thus, by distancing themselves from gay people, they are reaffirming their role as a heterosexuals in a heteronormative culture, thereby attempting to prevent themselves from being labeled and treated as a gay person.\nVarious psychoanalytic theories explain homophobia as a threat to an individual's own same-sex impulses, whether those impulses are imminent or merely hypothetical. This threat causes repression, denial or reaction formation.\nIslam.\nThe Quran cites the story of the \"people of Lot\" (also known as the people of Sodom and Gomorrah), destroyed by the wrath of Allah because they engaged in lustful carnal acts between men.\nThe most followed Scholars of Islam, such as Shaykh al-Isl\u0101m Imam Malik, and Imam Shafi among others, ruled that Islam disallows male homosexuality and ordained capital punishment for a person guilty of it.\nThe legal punishment for male sodomy has varied among juristic schools: some prescribe capital punishment; while other prescribe a milder discretionary punishment. Homosexual activity is a crime and forbidden in most Muslim-majority countries. In some relatively secular Muslim-majority countries such as Indonesia, Jordan and Turkey, this is not the case, however social persecution such as honor killings are widespread of cis-gendered gay men and sometimes lesbians.\nThe Quran, much like the Bible and Torah, has a vague condemnation of homosexuality and how it should be dealt with, leaving it ambiguous. For this reason, Islamic jurists have turned to the collections of the hadith (sayings of Muhammad) and Sunnah (accounts of his life). These, on the other hand, are perfectly clear and particularly harsh.\nIbn al-Jawzi records Muhammad as cursing sodomites in several hadith, and recommending the death penalty for both the active and passive partners in same-sex acts.\nMuhammad prescribed the death penalty for both the active and the passive male homosexual partners, which is a clear condemnation of male homosexuality within Islam, and the association with male homosexuality being associated with a cursed action has produced a long history of religiously condoned and sanctioned violence against gay men:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Narrated by Abdullah ibn Abbas: \"The Prophet said: 'If you find anyone doing as Lot's people did, kill the one who does it, and the one to whom it is done'.\"\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Narrated Abdullah ibn Abbas: \"If a man who is not married is seized committing sodomy he will be stoned to death.\"\u2014\u200a\nIbn al-Jawzi (1114\u20131200), writing in the 12th century, claimed that Muhammad had cursed \"sodomites\" in several hadith, and had recommended the death penalty for both the active and passive partners in homosexual acts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was narrated that Ibn Abbas said: \"The Prophet said: '... cursed is the one who does the action of the people of Lot'.\"\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ahmad narrated from Ibn Abbas that the Prophet of Allah said: 'May Allah curse the one who does the action of the people of Lot, may Allah curse the one who does the action of the people of Lot', three times.\"\u2014\u200a\nAl-Nuwayri (1272\u20131332), writing in the 13th century, reported in his \"Nihaya\" that Muhammad is \"alleged to have said what he feared most for his community were the practices of the people of Lot (he seems to have expressed the same idea in regard to wine and female seduction).\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was narrated that Jabir: \"The Prophet said: 'There is nothing I fear for my followers more than the deed of the people of Lot.'\"\nThe overall moral or theological principle is that a person who performs such actions challenges the harmony of God's creation, and is therefore a revolt against God.\nThese views vary depending upon sect. It is noteworthy to point out that Quranists (those who do not integrate the aforementioned Hadiths into their belief system) do not advocate capital punishment, while still condemning male homosexuality as an abomination and major sin.\nMost imams within the Sunni and Shia branches still preach views stating that homosexual males should be executed under Islamic law. These are also followed up by executions in Islamic countries, and lynchings, honor killings, and hate crimes within Muslim communities in non-Islamic countries. Abu Usamah at Green Lane Mosque in Birmingham defended his words to followers by saying \"If I were to call homosexuals perverted, dirty, filthy dogs who should be executed, that's my freedom of speech, isn't it?\"\nOther contemporary Islamic views are that the \"crime of homosexuality is one of the greatest of crimes, the worst of sins and the most abhorrent of deeds\". Homosexuality is considered the 11th major sin in Islam, in the days of the companions of Muhammad, a slave boy was once forgiven for killing his master who sodomized him.\nThe 2016 Orlando nightclub shooting was at the time the deadliest mass shooting by an individual and remains the deadliest incident of violence against LGBT people in U.S. history. On June 12, 2016, Omar Mateen killed 49 people and wounded more than 50 at Pulse gay nightclub in Orlando, Florida. The act has been described by investigators as an Islamic terrorist attack and a hate crime.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43799", "revid": "11498870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43799", "title": "1570s BC", "text": "Decade The 1570s BC is a decade that began on January 1, 1579, BC, and ended on December 31, 1570, BC."}
{"id": "43800", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43800", "title": "VIM", "text": ""}
{"id": "43803", "revid": "39200713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43803", "title": "Tin foil hat", "text": "Hat and stereotype for conspiracy theorists\nA tin foil hat is a hat made from one or more sheets of tin foil or aluminium foil, or a piece of conventional headgear lined with foil, often worn in the belief or hope that it shields the brain from threats such as electromagnetic fields, mind control, and mind reading. The notion of wearing homemade headgear for such protection has become a popular stereotype and byword for paranoia, persecutory delusions, and belief in pseudoscience and conspiracy theories.\n\"Tin foil\" is a common misnomer for aluminium foil in English-speaking countries; packaging metal foil was formerly made out of tin before it was replaced with aluminium.\nOrigin.\nSome people \u2013 \"Tin Foil Hatters\" \u2013 have a belief that such hats prevent mind control by governments, spies, mobsters, corporations, extraterrestrial, or paranormal beings that employ ESP or the microwave auditory effect. People in many countries who believe they are \"targeted individuals\", subject to government, corporate, or criminal spying or harassment, have developed websites, conference calls, and support meetings to discuss their concerns, including the idea of protective headgear. \"Vice Magazine\" wrote that the tin foil hat in popular culture \"can be traced back in a very weird and prescient short story written in 1927 by Julian Huxley\" titled \"The Tissue-Culture King\", wherein the main character uses a metal hat to prevent being mind controlled by the villain scientist. Over time the term \"tin foil hat\" has become associated with paranoia and conspiracy theories.\nScientific basis.\nEffects of strong electromagnetic radiation on health have been documented for quite some time. The efficiency of a metal enclosure in blocking electromagnetic radiation depends on the thickness of the foil, as dictated by the \"skin depth\" of the conductor for a particular wave frequency range of the radiation. For half-millimetre-thick aluminum foil, radiation above about 20\u00a0kHz (i.e., including both AM and FM bands) would be partially blocked, although aluminum foil is not sold in this thickness, so numerous layers of foil would be required to achieve this effect.\nAllan H. Frey discovered in 1962 that the microwave auditory effect (i.e., the sounds induced by the reception of radio-frequency electromagnetic signals, heard as clicks and buzzes) can be blocked by a patch of wire mesh (rather than foil) placed above the temporal lobe. A tongue-in-cheek experimental study by a group of MIT students in 2005 found that tin foil hats do shield their wearers from radio waves over most of the tested spectrum, but amplified certain frequencies, around 2.6\u00a0GHz and 1.2\u00a0GHz.\nIn popular culture.\nDaniel Wilson wrote in a 2016 article in paranormal magazine \"Fortean Times\" noted an early allusion to an \"insulative electrical contrivance encircling the head during thought\" in the unusual 1909 non-fiction publication \"Atomic Consciousness\" by self-proclaimed \"seer\" John Palfrey (aka \"James Bathurst\") who believed such headgear was not effective for his \"retention of thoughts and ideas\" against a supposed \"telepathic impactive impingement\".\nTin foil hats have appeared in such films as \"Signs\" (2002), ' (2005), and ' (2009). The 2019 HBO television series \"Watchmen\" features the character Wade Tillman/Looking Glass, a police officer who wears a mask made of reflective foil, and while off-duty, a cap lined in foil to protect his mind from alien psychic attacks.\nAmerican comedy musician \"Weird Al\" Yankovic referenced the concept in his 2014 song Foil, a parody of the song Royals by Lorde. Yankovic begins the parody by discussing the merit of the use of aluminum foil for its uses for food preservation, before abruptly segueing into a discussion about various conspiracy theories and the necessity of protection using a tin foil hat. \nSeveral teachers in Russia's Voronezh Oblast reportedly posed in pictures with tin foil hats in 2024, due a prank by a Belarusian prankster Vladislav Bokhan, who posed as an official from United Russia. He sent an \"order\" to local schools asking teachers to hold a \"Helmet of the Fatherland\" workshop, which contained instructions for making tin foil hats as a \"patriotic campaign\" and to \"defend themselves from the irradiation from NATO satellites\". The local branch of the Russian Ministry of Education commended the teachers for demonstrating \"patriotic spirit, strong dedication, and a creative approach to any task\", despite it being a prank.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
