{"id": "30763", "revid": "50195003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30763", "title": "Debt of Honor", "text": "1994 thriller novel by Tom Clancy\nDebt of Honor is a techno-thriller novel, written by Tom Clancy and released on August 17, 1994. A direct sequel to \"The Sum of All Fears\" (1991), Jack Ryan becomes the National Security Advisor when a secret cabal of Japanese industrialists seize control of their country's government and wage war on the United States. The book debuted at number one on \"The New York Times\" bestseller list. The novel was later noted as containing plot elements which were similar to the circumstances of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and the hijacking of United Airlines Flight 93.\nPlot.\nJapanese industrialist Raizo Yamata has been plotting to bring back his country to a position of greatness for years, partly as revenge for the death of his family at the hands of American forces invading the island of Saipan during World War II. His opportunity comes when a car accident in East Tennessee, caused by gas tanks made in Japan which were corroded after improper omission of galvanization and exposure to seawater during shipping, results in the deaths of six Americans in a multi-vehicle collision. The incident leads to the swift passage of a law allowing the U.S. to mirror trade practices of the countries from which it imports goods, cutting off the American export markets upon which the Japanese economy depends. Facing an economic crisis, Japan's ruling zaibatsu, led by Yamata, decides to take economic and military action against the United States. Along with covert support from China and India, they plot to curtail the U.S. presence in the Pacific and re-establish the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. After the Japanese Prime Minister Mogataru Koga resigns in disgrace due to the economic situation, the zaibatsu installs Hiroshi Goto, an aggressive nationalist and critic of the U.S., to succeed him. Meanwhile, Japan has covertly developed nuclear weapons, and with SS-19 designs bought from the former Soviet Union, has fabricated and deployed several ICBMs.\nJapan launches the first phase of its assault, sending Self-Defense Force units to occupy the Mariana Islands, specifically Saipan and Guam, without casualties. Also, during a joint military exercise, Japanese ships \"accidentally\" launch torpedoes at the U.S. Pacific Fleet, destroying two submarines and crippling two aircraft carriers. An immediate retaliation is forestalled by the second phase of the Japanese offensive: an economic attack, where Japan engineers the collapse of the U.S. stock market by hiring a programmer who is a consultant for an exchange firm to insert a logic bomb into the system, which when triggered blocks the storage of all trade records made after noon on Friday. They also assassinate the President of the Federal Reserve Bank. The Japanese government then immediately sue for peace, offering international talks and seemingly free elections in the Marianas to delay a U.S. response.\nMeanwhile, Jack Ryan is pulled out of retirement from government service by U.S. President Roger Durling, who appoints him as National Security Advisor. Despite his typical focus on military issues, he advises the president to deal with the economic crisis first, realizing that Japan's deletion of trade records could be an advantage in responding to the economic threat. He engineers a \"do-over\", where all of the transactions that were deleted on the day of the mass deletion are ignored and all trade information is restored to its condition at noon of that day. The U.S. stock market is successfully restored with only minor disruption, and a group of U.S. investment banks start a massive economic unloading of Japanese investment products, effectively eliminating any gains made by the zaibatsu.\nThe United States military then proceeds to launch a counterattack on their Japanese counterparts using whatever resources they have. In a staged accident, CIA operatives John Clark and Domingo Chavez blind two incoming Japanese E-767 pilots with a Dazzler that causes them to crash upon landing. The U.S. Air Force then proceeds to eliminate the rest of Japan's AWACS system through low-profile military attacks using widely dispersed U.S. assets, allowing B-2 bombers to destroy the hidden ICBM silos. They later use an attack by stealthy F-22 fighters to further damage Japan's air defenses. An Army special operations team is airdropped into Japan to support covertly inserted Comanche helicopters. One helicopter is used to attack another AWACS plane with air-to-air missiles while several others use Hellfire missiles to kill members of Yamata's cabal. Meanwhile, Admiral Robby Jackson liberates the Marianas with few casualties by using a combination of cruise missiles and carrier air attacks to severely damage the Japanese aircraft stationed on the islands, which forces the Japanese commander to surrender his troops.\nOutmaneuvered and cornered by the United States' military and economic response, Goto resigns, ceding power to his predecessor Koga, who was rescued earlier by Clark and Chavez from Yamata. Yamata and his surviving conspirators are arrested for treason, and the new Japanese government accepts the generous U.S. offer of \"status quo ante\".\nThroughout the book, President Durling faces another political crisis: Vice President Ed Kealty is forced to resign after being accused of rape. With the crisis over, President Durling nominates Ryan as vice president for successfully handling the crisis. However, an embittered Japan Air Lines pilot, driven mad by the deaths of his son and brother during the conflict, flies his Boeing 747 directly into the U.S. Capitol during a special joint session of Congress. The president, as well as nearly the entire Congress, the Supreme Court, and many other members of the federal government, are all killed in the attack. Ryan, who was on his way to be sworn as vice president after being confirmed, narrowly escapes the explosion. He becomes the President of the United States and takes his oath of office before a district judge in the CNN studios in Washington.\nThemes.\n\"Debt of Honor\" was released during a time of American resentment towards the Japanese, which was further popularized by the publication of Michael Crichton's crime thriller novel \"Rising Sun\" in 1992.\nThe novel also reinforces Clancy's belief that the recent downsizing of the military establishment after the Cold War \"has so depleted our military resources that the country is vulnerable to aggression that can arise anywhere, anytime\", according to \"Publishers Weekly\"'s review of the book.\nReception.\nCommercial.\nThe book debuted at number one on the \"New York Times\" bestseller list. It also debuted at number one on the \"USA Today\"'s Best-selling Books list for the week of August 25, 1994.\nCritical.\nThe novel received mixed reviews. \"Publishers Weekly\" praised Clancy, who \"spins out story threads in a rich but bewildering tangle of plot and setting, then vigorously weaves them together. Here, the heart-stopping climax is unexpected, but oddly appropriate.\" However, Christopher Buckley, in a review for \"The New York Times\", called the book a \"herniating experience\", criticized its \"racist\" depictions of Japanese characters and judged that it was \"as subtle as a World War II anti-Japanese poster showing a mustachioed Tojo bayoneting Caucasian babies\".\nLegacy.\nIn later years, the novel was noted for its similarity to the circumstances surrounding United Airlines Flight 93, especially regarding its climax, where an embittered Japanese pilot crashes his 747 on a joint session of Congress in the Capitol. While researching for the novel's ending, Clancy consulted an Air Force officer and described his reaction: \"I ran this idea past him and all of a sudden this guy's eyeballing me rather closely and I said, 'Come on General, I know you must have looked at this before, you've got to have a plan for it.' And the guy goes, 'Mr. Clancy, to the best of my knowledge, if we had a plan to deal with this, it would be secret, I wouldn't be able to talk to you about it, but to the best of my knowledge we've never looked at this possibility before.'\"\nIn April 1995, United States senator Sam Nunn outlined a scenario similar to the novel's ending, in which terrorists attack the Capitol on the night of a State of the Union address by crashing a radio-controlled airplane filled with chemical weapons into it. Nunn concluded that the scenario is \"not far-fetched\" and that the required technology is readily available. However, the 9/11 Commission Report revealed that national security officials did not consider the possibility: \u201c[Counterterror official] Richard Clarke told us that he was concerned about the danger posed by aircraft in the context of protecting the Atlanta Olympics of 1996, the White House complex, and the 2001 G-8 summit in Genoa. But he attributed his awareness more to Tom Clancy novels than to warnings from the intelligence community.\u201d\nIn the aftermath of the attacks, Clancy was called into CNN and commented on the similarity between a plane crash depicted in the novel and the crash of United Flight 93. CNN anchor Judy Woodruff later remarked: \"People in our newsroom have been saying today that what is happening is like right out of a Tom Clancy novel.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30765", "revid": "29747065", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30765", "title": "Jack Ryan (character)", "text": "Fictional character created by author Tom Clancy\nJohn Patrick Ryan (Hon.), nicknamed Jack, is a character created by American author Tom Clancy in 1984. He is the main character of the Ryanverse series of novels, films, video games, and a TV series. Clancy wrote fourteen novels featuring Ryan, which have charted at the top of the \"New York Times\" bestseller list.\nA former U.S. Marine lieutenant and stockbroker, Ryan worked as a civilian history professor at the United States Naval Academy. He became an analyst working for the Central Intelligence Agency during the Cold War. He goes up the ranks at the CIA, eventually becoming Deputy Director. After a brief retirement, Ryan served as National Security Advisor and Vice President before becoming President of the United States following a terrorist attack at the United States Capitol. He went on to serve two non-consecutive terms and mostly dealt with international crises in Europe, South America, and Asia.\nSince Clancy's death in 2013, there have been other authorized writers of novels featuring Ryan, including Mark Greaney, Marc Cameron, and Andrews and Wilson. Additionally, a spin-off series featuring Ryan's son Jack Junior was written by Grant Blackwood, Mike Maden, Don Bentley, and M. P. Woodward.\nRyan has been portrayed in adaptations by actors Alec Baldwin, Harrison Ford, Ben Affleck, Chris Pine, and John Krasinski. The film series from 1990 to 2014 have an unadjusted worldwide gross revenue of $788.4 million to date, making it the 57th-highest-grossing film series. A television series from Amazon Prime Video ran from 2018 to 2023.\nConcept and creation.\nClancy developed the Jack Ryan character while working as an insurance agent in Maryland, drawing extensively from his early interests and personal background. Clancy, who grew up in an Irish-American family in Baltimore and was unable to serve in the military due to nearsightedness, developed a passion for military history and strategy from an early age. He was described as a \"nerd\" who enjoyed playing military board games and was an avid reader of military history books and science fiction.\nThe author's research methodology became central to his character and world-building process. Many of Clancy's insurance clients were former nuclear submariners, both officers and enlisted personnel, whose expertise he systematically gathered. He conducted extensive research using military publications such as \"Armed Forces Weekly\" and \"Jane's Defence Weekly\", and collaborated with subject experts ranging from Soviet defectors to retired Air Force generals. Clancy based his first novel on the real-life attempted defection of the crew of the Soviet frigate \"Storozhevoy\" to Sweden.\nAccording to character sketches discovered by the U.S. Naval Institute, Clancy originally envisioned Ryan as born in the 1950s, the son of a Baltimore police officer and hospital nurse. The character was designed to attend Clancy's own alma mater, Loyola High School, and earn an economics degree from Boston College before joining the United States Marine Corps. The detailed background included Ryan's career path from a helicopter crash injury during military service, through work at Merrill Lynch, to eventual recruitment by the CIA while working as an associate editor with the U.S. Naval Institute.\nThe character of Jack Ryan was modeled partly on former Director of Central Intelligence Robert Gates, with Clancy telling Gates that \"You know, for the first several novels, I pretty much modeled Ryan's career on yours\". This grounding in real-world intelligence careers helped establish the series' commitment to authenticity in depicting government operations and military technology.\nBackground.\nEarly life.\nRyan was born on May 17, 1950, to an Irish Catholic family in Baltimore, Maryland. His father, Emmett William Ryan, was a homicide lieutenant for the Baltimore Police Department and World War II veteran, while his mother, Catherine Burke Ryan, was a nurse. Ryan also had a younger sister who lived in Seattle.\nAfter graduating from Boston College with a bachelor\u2019s degree, Ryan became a lieutenant with the United States Marine Corps while also passing the Certified Public Accountant exam. However, his military career was cut short after three months when his platoon's helicopter crashed during a NATO exercise over Crete, which badly injured his back. After a lengthy recovery process where he became addicted to pain medications, Ryan was discharged from the Marine Corps. He later took a position with Wall Street investment firm Merrill Lynch at its Baltimore office.\nRyan's parents died in a plane crash at Chicago Midway International Airport 19 months after his crash in Crete. He developed a fear of flying that persisted for years.\nCivilian career.\nAs a stockbroker, Ryan began to invest his own money. He meets Caroline \"Cathy\" Muller, then a medical student at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, through her father Joe, a senior vice president at Merrill Lynch. They fall in love and get engaged. Cathy becomes an ophthalmic surgeon at the Wilmer Eye Institute of the Johns Hopkins. Jack and Cathy get married and give birth to a daughter Olivia, nicknamed Sally.\nAfter creating a net worth of $8 million, Ryan left Merrill Lynch after four years and studied at Georgetown University, later graduating with a doctorate degree. After a brief stint at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, he accepted a position at the U.S. Naval Academy as a civilian professor of history. As a history professor, Ryan wrote books on naval history, including a biography of World War II Admiral William \"Bull\" Halsey.\nCIA career.\nRyan was first asked to work as a consultant for the Central Intelligence Agency. He wrote a paper called \"Agents and Agencies\" and devised the canary trap, which come to the attention of U.S. Navy Vice Admiral James Greer, the CIA's Deputy Director of Intelligence. Greer offers Ryan a job, which he initially declined.\n\"Patriot Games\" (1981).\nWhile on a work trip in London with his family, Ryan (played by Harrison Ford in the film adaptation) thwarts a kidnapping attempt on the Prince and Princess of Wales by the Ulster Liberation Army, a splinter group of the Provisional Irish Republican Army. For his bravery, he is granted the honorary Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order by the Queen Elizabeth II. One of the ULA attackers, Sean Miller, was captured and sentenced to life imprisonment, but is freed by his compatriots. Embittered over the failure of the kidnapping attempt, he exacts revenge by attacking his wife and daughter. After pleas by Greer, Ryan agrees to join the CIA as an analyst, originally to gather intelligence on the ULA. Later, Miller and his men stage another kidnapping attempt on the Prince and Princess of Wales, who are visiting the Ryan family in their Maryland home; however, they are overpowered by the combined efforts of Ryan, his friend Robert Jefferson \"Robby\" Jackson, and the Prince as well as law enforcement and naval officers. Shortly after, Ryan's second child Jack Ryan Jr. was born.\n\"Red Rabbit\" (1982).\nRyan's first CIA assignment is in London as a member of a liaison group to the British Secret Intelligence Service. Initially called in to assess the Soviet government and economy, Ryan is later tasked to assist in the defection of KGB communications officer Oleg Zaitzev, who had discovered that his boss Yuri Andropov had ordered the assassination of Pope John Paul II. Although Ryan and a small team of British SIS agents helps Zaitzev and his family get to the West, they fail to prevent the attack on the Pope (which happened in real life). Nevertheless, the pope is wounded and his would-be assassin captured, while the British execute his Bulgarian handler. Zaitzev's defection proves to be a major coup for both the American and British intelligence agencies.\n\"The Hunt for Red October\" (1984).\nMarko Ramius, the Soviet Navy's top submarine commander, takes command of the \"\u041a\u0440\u0430\u0441\u043d\u044b\u0439 \u041e\u043a\u0442\u044f\u0431\u0440\u044c\" (\"Krasny Oktyabr\", or in English, \"Red October\"), the newest Typhoon-class ballistic missile submarine, with which he plans to defect with his officers. Having briefly met Ramius at an embassy function several years before, Ryan (portrayed by Alec Baldwin in the film adaptation) is asked by Admiral Greer to brief National Security Advisor Jeffrey Pelt and his staff on Ramius' background and the deadly new capabilities of \"Red October\"'s secret revolutionary silent jet propulsion drive system called the caterpillar drive. Ryan recognizes that the renegade ethnic Lithuanian captain may want to defect rather than attack the West. Ryan works to establish contact with Ramius and get him and his crew along with the submarine secretly into the U.S., eventually succeeding.\n\"Red Winter\" (1985).\nRyan is tasked with investigating a possible East German defector. Accompanied by CIA officer Mary Pat Foley, he meets the defector, a Stasi major named Kurt Pfeiffer, who had passed on intelligence about radar technology and identified a mole at the CIA station in West Berlin. After finding out that Pfeiffer had taken the intelligence from physicist Uwe Hauptman's research through his wife Elke, Ryan instead transports Hauptman and his family across the border to West Berlin, and arranges for Pfeiffer to be given back to Stasi in exchange for a U.S. Foreign Service officer who had been captured by Stasi after Pfeiffer had originally passed her the information.\n\"The Cardinal of the Kremlin\" (1986).\nRyan is reassigned to the CIA headquarters at Langley and becomes Admiral Greer's special assistant. He is sent to Moscow as part of the American nuclear weapons reduction (START) team, and later engineers the extraction of CARDINAL, the CIA's highest agent-in-place, from the country. Ryan also forces KGB chairman Nikolay Gerasimov to defect due to his anti-American nature, which could jeopardize the arms reduction talks once he becomes General Secretary.\n\"Clear and Present Danger\" (1988).\nRyan (portrayed by Harrison Ford in the film adaptation) is promoted to acting Deputy Director of Intelligence when Greer is hospitalized with cancer. He realizes he is being kept in the dark about covert CIA operations to disrupt the illegal drug trade in Colombia, which involves inserting light infantry troops of Hispanic descent, intercepting drug flights, and surveillance of drug cartel management. When the American troops are later betrayed to avoid the political fallout, Ryan works with the FBI to rescue them. He also meets CIA operative John Clark, with whom he would become friends.\n\"The Sum of All Fears\" (1991).\nRyan (portrayed by Ben Affleck in the film adaptation) becomes Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency. His career is jeopardized when J. Robert Fowler becomes President and his lover Elizabeth Elliott becomes National Security Advisor. They not only deny Ryan any credit for an innovative Middle East peace plan, but also panic when Palestinian and former East German terrorists detonate a nuclear bomb in Denver during the Super Bowl and nearly plunge the world into a Soviet-American nuclear war. Ryan defuses the nuclear crisis by commandeering the Moscow-Washington hotline and convincing the Soviet leader that the crisis is a setup. He then refuses to confirm Fowler's order to launch a nuclear missile at Qom, where the Iranian ayatollah lives. After Fowler resigns, Ryan retires from the CIA.\n\"Debt of Honor\" (1994).\nTwo years later, Ryan returns to government service as National Security Advisor under President Roger Durling. They deal with war against Japan, which includes an attack on America's economic infrastructure. After a clean sweep of Japan's forces in the South Pacific, Vice President Ed Kealty is forced to resign after a sex scandal. President Durling taps Ryan for the job, which he accepts on the condition that he will only serve until the end of Durling's term. However, a Japanese airline pilot crashes a 747 into the U.S. Capitol building during Congress's joint session, killing most of the people inside, decapitating the U.S. government, and elevating Ryan to the presidency.\nFirst Ryan administration.\n\"Executive Orders\" (1996).\nThe reluctant yet determined Ryan administration emerges as Ryan slowly rebuilds the government. He is faced with Kealty's political trickery, as the former vice president disputes his legitimacy as the nation's chief executive by publicly stating that he never actually resigned, when in fact a member of his staff had secretly taken the resignation letter from the office of the now-dead Secretary of State and destroyed it. Initially the lone voice of opposition to Ryan's policies on live television, he later enlists disaffected CIA intelligence officials (affected by the reduction in force at the agency in favor of more field operatives) to procure classified information on Ryan from his time in the CIA. He then suborns NBC news anchor and fellow Ryan critic Tom Donner into ambushing him with questions about his CIA career in a televised interview. Donner's colleague John Plumber later realizes his mistake and publicly apologizes to President Ryan, while Kealty's challenge eventually fails in court.\nAlong the way, Ryan also has to deal with the dictator of the new United Islamic Republic (a coalition of Iran and Iraq), the Ayatollah Mahmoud Haji Daryaei. The ayatollah regards him as a weakling and seizes the opportunity to stage a multi-pronged attack on the country: a biological attack using a weaponized strain of the Ebola virus, a kidnapping attempt on his youngest daughter Katie, and an assassination attempt on himself through an Iranian sleeper agent disguised as a Secret Service bodyguard; with the U.S. overwhelmed by a multitude of crises, he believes that he can invade Saudi Arabia with little military opposition from the U.S. While the attempt on Katie was swiftly averted by the FBI and the Secret Service, the Ebola epidemic causes Ryan to declare martial law and enforce a travel ban that becomes instrumental in killing the virus, since it cannot survive in the American environment due to its fragile nature. He later deploys what is left of the American military to assist Saudi and Kuwaiti forces in repelling the UIR military, which also becomes successful. The would-be assassin is later arrested on the spot by the FBI after attempting to kill President Ryan inside the Oval Office.\nRyan Doctrine.\nAt the end of \"Executive Orders\", Ryan, in the tradition of Presidents Monroe, Truman, Carter and Reagan, issues a foreign policy doctrine which largely defines his administration's international perspective. The Ryan Doctrine states that the U.S. will no longer tolerate attacks on \"our territory, our possessions, or our citizens,\" and will hold whoever orders such attacks accountable.\nThis statement comes soon after the Ebola attack on the U.S. ordered by Daryaei. Ryan announces the new doctrine on television, momentarily cutting away to show Daryaei and his UIR advisors being incinerated by laser-guided bombs launched from two F-117s, on Ryan's orders. Therefore, the Ryan doctrine supersedes the executive order put in place by President Ford, which forbids the assassination of foreign heads of state. Ryan, however, believes it is a more ethical alternative than total war, since it punishes the person responsible for the attack instead of the people he rules.\nWithin the books, the Ryan doctrine is not officially invoked after Daryaei's death (although Ryan threatens to use it on the Chinese leadership in \"The Bear and the Dragon\", should anything happen to American citizens living in China as a consequence of the Siberian War).\n\"The Bear and the Dragon\" (2000).\nRyan has completed Durling's term as president and has campaigned for the next election, which he wins. He retains most of his emergency Cabinet and has Robby Jackson as vice president. He has to deal with the attempted assassination of Golovko, who is now head of Russia's Foreign Intelligence Service (formerly the KGB). This turns out to be an attempt to sow confusion in the Russian government because of China's designs to annex Eastern Siberia, where geologists had recently discovered a large amount of oil and gold. These events lead to the inclusion of Russia into NATO and the assistance of U.S. forces in the Sino-Russian conflict (although attacks on NATO members outside the Atlantic should not trigger Article V).\nWhen the Chinese begin losing the war, U.S. forces target their strategic assets. A U.S. submarine sinks a Chinese ballistic missile submarine, causing the Chinese Politburo to panic and increase the readiness of their 12 land-based ICBMs. U.S. forces do not have the ability to destroy the silos, as they could only use deep-penetrating bombs, which had all been used to destroy Chinese bridges to disrupt the People's Liberation Army's (PLA) logistical support. This causes the U.S. and Russia to send a joint RAINBOW-Spetsnaz team to destroy the silos. They destroy 11 of the 12 ICBMs, but one of them manages to launch and head towards Washington, DC, and with Ryan taking a command initiative at an Aegis missile cruiser, the ICBM is intercepted by ABMs from the .\nWith the PLA's looming defeat in Siberia, which they were about to learn about via live UAV broadcasts from the CIA through the Internet, student demonstrators in Beijing raid a Politburo meeting, causing reformist minister Fang Gan to take control and arrest the war's perpetrators, making peace negotiations with the U.S. and Russia, and beginning China's transition to democracy.\nThe Campus.\nFollowing this, Ryan apparently completes his term and refuses to run for a second elected term. Robby Jackson thus campaigns to become the first African American President, but he is assassinated by the Ku Klux Klan on a trip to the South, enabling Kealty, his opponent, to become the next President by default. Before Ryan leaves office, he creates The Campus, a covert counter-terrorism and intelligence organization that fronts as Hendley Associates, a financial trading firm. He also writes 100 presidential pardons for its members, with Attorney General Pat Martin's assistance.\nSecond Ryan administration.\n\"Dead or Alive\" (2010).\nIn his retirement, Ryan is living easy with a net worth of over $80 million. He is working on two versions of his memoirs, one for immediate release, and another detailing his CIA career to be published twenty years after his death. While he is at first publicly silent about his opinion on President Kealty's policies, he becomes increasingly frustrated with the direction in which he is taking the country. Ultimately, he announces that he will come out of retirement to run for a second full term as a Republican presidential candidate. Despite not being originally involved in the Campus' activities due to his high-profile status, he gradually becomes more directly linked to the Campus' operations, aiding them from behind the scenes on occasion. Here, Ryan learns his son, Jack Jr., is a field operative of the Campus, a fact which he reluctantly accepts.\n\"Locked On\" (2011).\nRyan campaigns against Kealty, facing off against him in various televised debates. It becomes apparent that Ryan will win the election, as the majority of Americans had never entirely accepted Kealty. Despite the efforts of Paul Laska, a high-profile Czech billionaire and a devout enemy of Ryan, and key members of the Kealty administration who labelled Ryan's longtime friend John Clark a fugitive in an effort to expose the Campus (as well as tying Ryan to it by association), Ryan narrowly wins the election, overcoming all of Kealty's efforts to harm him.\n\"Threat Vector\" (2012).\nSoon after returning to the presidency, Ryan deals with a developing crisis in China, where President Wei Zhen Lin has declared his intentions to annex Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan and expand his country's territory into the South China Sea in a desperate attempt to recoup his country's economic losses. In reality, PLA Chairman Su Ke Qiang has been manipulating President Wei for his expansionist policies, secretly sanctioning cyber attacks on America's infrastructure that compromises the nation's national security apparatus. President Ryan decides to take action by supporting Taiwan, along with India, Vietnam, Indonesia, and the Philippines, which would also be affected by an expansion of China's territory.\nThe Campus later tracks down the nerve center of China's cyberattacks on the U.S. to an office building in Guangzhou. President Ryan orders the destruction of the building, decapitating China's cyberwarfare abilities. He makes contact with Wei and warns him that the cyber attacks are considered an act of war on China's part. After realizing that he has been used by Su for his own gain, Wei intentionally divulges information on Chairman Su's whereabouts, which Ryan interprets as a request from the Chinese president to assassinate the military leader. The Campus, with aid from a local rebel force and the FSB, later carry out a false flag attack on Chairman Su's motorcade outside Beijing. Ryan announces a blockade of China's oil supplies until the war effort is abandoned, calling upon Wei and the Politburo to accept defeat. A cornered Wei later commits suicide, eventually ending the conflict between the United States and China.\n\"Command Authority\" (2013).\nThe Ryan administration then contends with newly elected Russian president Valeri Volodin, who is a dedicated communist seeking to restore Russia to its former glory. Volodin had merged the SVR and the FSB into one entity to be led by enigmatic FSB head Roman Talanov, and later decides to invade Ukraine all the way to the capital of Kyiv. President Ryan sends American military forces to counter Russia's advance into Kyiv.\nRyan later finds out that Talanov is Zenith, a KGB assassin from the Cold War. Volodin had been his control officer, and together they had been employed by rogue elements within the KGB, who had an exit strategy in mind with the imminent fall of communism in the late 1980s by siphoning off billions of dollars from Soviet programs. Volodin then double-crossed his co-conspirators by ordering Talanov as Zenith to kill them all, as well as the bankers involved in order to prevent exposure to the rest of the KGB. In addition, Talanov was planted by his boss into Russian crime organization Seven Strong Men, rising in ranks to become its eventual leader and turning it into a tool for Volodin's policies. Ryan uses this information to blackmail the Russian president into stopping the Russian Army's advance into Kyiv. Talanov resigns and is later murdered.\n\"Full Force and Effect\" (2014).\nPresident Ryan deals with North Korean dictator Choi Ji-hoon, who attempts to start production of a rare earth mineral deposit found in their territory and then use the resulting billions of dollars in profit to purchase nuclear weapons technology. Choi decides to order the assassination of the American leader (with the aid of a Mexican drug cartel and an Arab bomb maker) in order to stop his persistent interference. During a state visit to Mexico City, Ryan barely survives the attempt on his life. The Campus later uncovers Choi's involvement in the incident, which leads to the dictator being deposed from power and later executed.\n\"Commander in Chief\" (2015).\nRyan squares off with Volodin once again, as he observes that a series of seemingly isolated attacks in Europe correspond with an increase in Russia's oil profit. He tries to convince NATO, but they dispute his theory, fearing the consequences of an all-out war. Nevertheless, he sends the United States Navy to dispatch its Russian counterpart in the Baltic Sea. Volodin is later assassinated by the siloviki after his gambit of a covert violent offensive in an effort to recoup Russia's economic losses fails.\n\"True Faith and Allegiance\" (2016).\nPresident Ryan faces a crisis where American military and intelligence personnel are being targeted by ISIS. The specificity of the target packages make it clear that a massive intelligence breach has occurred. President Ryan finds himself pressured by the media and some of his government advisers to send troops into the Middle East to fight the Islamic State terrorists, but he resists and gathers more intelligence. The culprit was later revealed to be a Romanian hacker, who had obtained an old copy of a database containing personal information on military and intelligence personnel. After footage of terrorist attacks released by ISIS inspires a wave of copycat attacks in the United States, President Ryan orders the bombing of the headquarters of Islamic State's propaganda wing.\nRyan then appears in \"Point of Contact\" (2017) as he attends a funeral for his son Jack Junior's colleague in Hendley Associates, Paul Brown, who was revealed as a former CIA officer who had helped avert a North Korean plot to crash the Asian stock market.\n\"Power and Empire\" (2017).\nRyan deals with the Chinese once again, as a series of seemingly unrelated attacks in Asia, Europe, and Africa show their involvement. The Campus later discovers that a secret cabal composed of hardliners within the Chinese government are plotting to depose current president Zhao Chengzhi for his moderate stance on several issues of importance. The cabal plans to make Zhao look reckless, provoking Ryan to invoke the Ryan Doctrine and have him killed. Jack Ryan Jr. later prevents an assassination attempt on his father and President Zhao in the G20 summit in Tokyo, and the conspirators are later arrested for treason.\nRyan briefly appears in the next released novel \"Line of Sight\" (2018), where he orders the destruction of a building in Bosnia containing stolen thermobaric warheads to be launched by Serb extremists on a Serbian Orthodox Church event nearby as a false flag attack to provoke war between NATO and the Russians in the Balkans.\n\"Oath of Office\" (2018).\nPresident Ryan is faced with a multitude of crises. A flu epidemic as well as spring floods occur in the southeast United States, and Ryan has to deal with his political rival, senator Michelle Chadwick, who has been attacking him using bot-planted fake news stories. He sends the Secret Service to protect her from imminent assassination, and an attempt by Russian foreign intelligence is thwarted. President Ryan later delivers a presidential address showing the dangers of fake news. Overseas, Ryan has to deal with Russia plotting to invade Ukraine yet again disguised as a military exercise, as well as the siege of the United States embassy in Cameroon by the Cameroonian government eager on arresting its opposition leader.\nPresident Ryan expresses caution over a series of protests in Iran, favorably dubbed the Persian Spring. His suspicion was proven true when it was revealed that the leader of the dissidents, Reza Kazem, was a proxy of the Iranian government acting on behalf of rogue elements in the Russian government, who have stolen nuclear weapons and are intent on launching them on American military bases in or near Iran. Kazem reneges on his deal and plots to launch the missiles into low Earth orbit, creating space junk that would destroy several satellites in its path. Ryan orders the destruction of the nuclear defense facility in Mashhad containing one of the missiles; the other is launched into space but fails to reach its destination at the last minute.\nRyan then appears in the next Jack Ryan Jr. novel \"Enemy Contact\" (2019). He deals with U.S. senator Deborah Dixon's stonewalling of his proposed foreign policy initiative, which includes building a U.S. military base in Poland to counter Russian aggression to the east. When it was revealed that Senator Dixon's son has unsavory connections to the Chinese, President Ryan blackmails her into passing an anticorruption bill.\n\"Code of Honor\" (2019).\nPresident Ryan receives a cryptic text message from his friend and former CIA colleague Father Pat West. He warns him of a next-generation AI program named Calliope, which could be used by the Chinese military to start a conflict with the United States. The Jesuit priest had been imprisoned by Indonesian police for trumped-up charges of blasphemy against Islam, when in fact he had earlier witnessed the murder of an American software engineer who first told him about Calliope.\nThe chief executive discreetly orders the Campus to investigate Father West's text. Then he calls on the Indonesian president to release his friend, to no avail. Undeterred, he makes a state visit to Indonesia, eventually informing the Indonesian president of China's sinister plans. Father West is eventually released from prison.\nRyan appears in the next Jack Ryan Jr. novel \"Firing Point\" (2020). A series of container ships mysteriously disappear across the Pacific Ocean, and President Ryan tries to pinpoint whoever is responsible.\n\"Shadow of the Dragon\" (2020).\nPresident Ryan tasks Director of National Intelligence Mary Pat Foley with finding a mole codenamed SURVEYOR within the CIA. He also discreetly orders the Campus to track down Medina Tohti, a Uyghur freedom fighter who worked with the missing Chinese engineering professor Liu Wangshu. The professor had been on board the Chinese nuclear ballistic missile submarine \"Long March\" #880 along the Arctic Ocean, which had suffered an engine fire that burned most of its crew. President Ryan eventually informs the Chinese president about the submarine, allowing him to rescue its crew.\n\"Chain of Command\" (2021).\nPresident Ryan prepares a protectionist bill regulating the production of pharmaceutical drugs, which leads Indian billionaire Harjit Malhotra to plot to intimidate him into repealing it. This includes ransomware, cyberattacks, and deepfake videos of him circulating on the Internet, and culminates in the kidnapping of First Lady Cathy Ryan at the San Antonio River Walk and an American husband-and-wife team of doctors along the Wakhan Corridor. President Ryan invokes the 25th Amendment and temporarily steps down until the crises are resolved.\nRyan appears in the next Jack Ryan Jr. novel \"Flash Point\". He deals with the abduction of Clark by Chinese mercenaries and a crisis at the South China Sea after an American reconnaissance aircraft collides with a Chinese fighter plane. President Ryan also integrates The Campus into the U.S. intelligence community to aid in locating Clark, who was later rescued by his son. He also appears in the next Jack Junior novel \"Weapons Grade\", where he deals with the discovery of a secret uranium enrichment mine in Iran and tasks an experimental unmanned combat aerial vehicle to destroy the facility.\n\"Command and Control\" (2023).\nPresident Ryan accepts an invitation by Panamanian president Rafael Botero to visit his country in a show of support amidst a workers' strike. However, he finds himself in the middle of a coup orchestrated by Botero's economic adviser Felix Moncada with help from the Camarilla, which had kidnapped the First Lady in the previous novel. Trapped inside the presidential palace in Panama City, President Ryan and his Secret Service bodyguard eventually survive the coup.\n\"Act of Defiance\" (2024).\nPresident Ryan deals with a rogue Russian nuclear submarine called the \"Belgorod\", forty years after he dealt with the \"Red October\" as a CIA analyst. His daughter Katie, now an Office of Naval Intelligence analyst, gathers intelligence about the submarine and its commander, Konstantin Gorov, who had a grievance against Ryan for indirectly causing the death of his father, an engineer who had worked on the \"Red October\" and had unsuccessfully tried to defect in 1984. After determining the \"Belgorod\" as being used as a pawn by military hardliners to overthrow Russian president Yermilov, President Ryan bargains with him in order to avert a nuclear war. Afterwards, he informs Katie about his involvement in the finding of the \"Red October\".\nRyan appears in the Jack Junior novel \"Shadow State\" as he spearheads the development of an experimental stealth pod named UMBRA and deals with his son's disappearance in the Vietnamese highlands.\n\"Defense Protocol\" (2024).\nPresident Ryan deals with Chinese president Li Jian Jun's plan to invade Taiwan, which he learns after defense minister Qin Haiyu, the author of the battle plan, signaled his desire to defect. He authorizes an interagency task force led by Katie Ryan to gather intelligence crucial to the U.S. Navy as they prepare to defend Taiwan, as well as a multinational task force led by Clark to extract Qin from mainland China.\n\"Executive Power\" (2025).\nPresident Ryan deals with the disappearance of his son, Kyle Ryan, who has always been a free-spirited interference. Kyle's decision to join the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) instead of the CIA and his political disagreements with his father have always set him apart. Kyle vanishes in an unstable African nation on the verge of a coup. His last communication is a troubling and blasts. President Ryan to confront an agonizing decision. He must choose between his duties as President of the United States, which require him to prioritize his country's interests, and his personal need to save his son.\n\"Rules of Engagement\" (2026).\nPresident Ryan suspects foul play when his Secretary of Commerce dies in a plane crash in Turkey, having been on a secret CIA mission. Katie Ryan leads the investigation, which important a missing body among the wreckage. This dispatch a hostile and theory, compelling President Ryan to confront a dangerous enemy from his past.\nAdaptations.\nFilms.\nFive films based on Clancy novels featuring Jack Ryan have been produced. Jack Ryan was portrayed by Alec Baldwin in the 1990 film \"The Hunt for Red October\", Harrison Ford in \"Patriot Games\" (1992) and \"Clear and Present Danger\" (1994), Ben Affleck in the 2002 film \"The Sum of All Fears\", and Chris Pine in 2014 film \"\".\nIn the novels, \"Patriot Games\" occurs before \"The Hunt for Red October\", though the order was reversed in the film versions. Additionally, \"The Sum of All Fears\" is not part of the Baldwin/Ford series, but rather an intended reboot of the franchise which departs significantly from the chronology of the novels. It takes place in 2002, whereas the novel takes place in 1991/1992. \"Jack Ryan: Shadow Recruit\" is a second reboot of the franchise and departs from all previous films.\nTelevision.\nJohn Krasinski portrays Jack Ryan in the series of the same name for Amazon Prime Video, released in August 2018, consisting of four seasons. John also serves as an executive producer of the show. His portrayal is inspired by the Harrison Ford \"Jack Ryan\" films.\nVideo games.\nSeveral video games based on the series have been made, some based on the novels, others on the films and spin-offs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30766", "revid": "29747065", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30766", "title": "John Clark (Ryanverse character)", "text": "Fictional character created by Tom Clancy\nJohn Clark (n\u00e9 John Terence Kelly, at times codenamed Rainbow Six) is a fictional character created by Tom Clancy. He has been featured in many of his Ryanverse novels. Although he first appeared in \"The Cardinal of the Kremlin\" (1988), his origin story was detailed in \"Without Remorse\" (1993).\nAlongside Clancy's other character Jack Ryan, Clark has been described by his creator as \"Ryan's dark side\" and \"more inclined to take physical action than Jack is.\" A former Navy SEAL, he became an operations officer for the CIA, and at one point served as Ryan's driver and bodyguard. During Ryan's first term as president, Clark served as director of a multinational counterterrorism unit codenamed Rainbow, which was composed of elite soldiers from countries comprising the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). After retiring from CIA and Rainbow, Clark worked for The Campus, an off-the-books intelligence organization created by President Ryan, later acquiring a position as director of operations.\nIn film, Clark has been portrayed by Willem Dafoe, Liev Schreiber, and Michael B. Jordan, the latter in a planned series including adaptations of \"Without Remorse\" and the in-development \"Rainbow Six\". Clark has also appeared in the \"Rainbow Six\" series of video games.\nProfile.\nPersonal life.\nJohn Kelly was born in Indianapolis, Indiana to Irish-American parents somewhere in 1944\u20131945 and raised as a Catholic. His father, Timothy Kelly, served in the Navy during World War II and was a fireman who perished from a heart attack during a fire. John lost his mother to cancer when he was nine. He attended Brebeuf Jesuit Preparatory School in Indianapolis.\nHis first wife Patricia \"Tish\" was pregnant when she was killed in a car accident. Six months after his wife died, Kelly had a brief relationship with Pamela Madden, a former prostitute who had been forced into working as a courier for a drug ring. She was later recaptured by members of the ring and subsequently tortured, raped, and killed; Kelly was gravely wounded. While recovering from his injuries at Johns Hopkins Hospital, he met his future second wife, nurse Sandra \"Sandy\" O'Toole. They eventually had two daughters, Patricia Doris and Margaret Pamela.\nKelly, who had by now changed his identity to Clark, first met Domingo \"Ding\" Chavez in the CIA during a black operation in Colombia (\"Clear and Present Danger\"). They would later work frequently together in succeeding novels. Chavez becomes Clark's son-in-law when he marries his daughter Patricia, and they later have a son, John Conor, who was born in \"Rainbow Six\", although misnamed as John Patrick in \"Threat Vector\".\nProfessional life.\nWhen Clark was 18, he joined the US Navy (as John Terence Kelly) and later became a Navy SEAL who participated in several special operations, one of which was the rescue of a naval aviator shot down over North Vietnam. The aviator was the son of Admiral Dutch Maxwell and his rescue earned Kelly a promotion to Chief Petty Officer. After his first tour of duty, Kelly left the Navy but was later re-hired by the Central Intelligence Agency's (CIA) Special Activities Division (Special Operations Group) for another mission in Vietnam; a rescue operation on a secret POW camp. At the same time, Kelly was carrying out his own war at home against a drug ring that killed his girlfriend, Pamela Madden. While he succeeded in taking it down, the Baltimore Police Department (including Emmet Ryan, Jack Ryan's father) eventually identifies him as the man who murdered the drug dealers. In response, Kelly faked his own death (with the help of the CIA, which falsifies the identity of his fingerprints in his Navy personnel file) and goes to work for the CIA full-time, under the pseudonym \"John Clark\". (See \"Without Remorse\") His middle name appears variously with one and two 'R's, and the name \"John Terrence Clark\" appears in the novel \"Clear and Present Danger\".\nThroughout his career, Clark has been through a number of real-life crisis zones. In addition to the Vietnam War, he has also been through the Iran hostage crisis (see \"Debt of Honor\") and the Gulf War, plus a number of missions in the Soviet Union, and claims to have \"had Abu Nidal's head in my gunsights\", but never got the green light allowing him to kill the man (\"Clear and Present Danger\").\nHe first enters the Jack Ryan universe in \"Without Remorse\", which also features police officer Emmet Ryan and his son Jack. Although he does not appear in \"Patriot Games\", it is later revealed that he was the CIA's liaison with a French black ops unit involved in the campaign against the ULA. He also does not appear in \"Red Rabbit\", but is mentioned as giving advice to trainees at The Farm, the CIA training facility. He appears in \"Red Winter\", where he is assigned to provide covert security for Ryan and Mary Pat Foley as they investigate a possible East German defector, and appears briefly in \"The Cardinal of the Kremlin\", during which he extracts KGB Chairman Gerasimov's wife and daughter from Tallinn in the Estonian SSR after the Chairman decides to defect to the United States. This marks Clark's first published appearance.\nIn \"Clear and Present Danger,\" he commands a U.S. Army black-ops unit carrying out a secret war against the Medell\u00edn Cartel in Colombia. When the government abandons the men for political reasons, Clark and Jack Ryan fly down to Colombia and rescue the survivors. This is the first time he interacts with Ryan.\nIn \"The Sum of All Fears\", he is Ryan's personal driver and bodyguard. Later in the novel, he is returned to the field for one operation, bugging the aircraft of the Japanese Prime Minister in Mexico City. During the operation, a terrorist bombing in Denver occurs and his mission is changed to intercepting the Palestinian terrorists trying to escape through Mexico, which he does successfully. He interrogates them and secures their confessions, then hands them over to the judicial system for eventual Islamic justice (execution by sword) in Riyadh.\nIn \"Debt of Honor\", he is again a field officer for the CIA's Directorate of Operations (DO). At the beginning of the novel, he and Domingo Chavez capture an Aidid-like African warlord, Mohammed Abdul Corp, and bring him to justice. Soon thereafter, they are sent to Japan to assess the national mood of the country, where Clark is undercover as a Russian reporter. When the situation turns into a war between Japan and the United States, they establish contacts with the opposition in the Japanese government and are also tasked to eliminate a pair of Japanese AWACS planes.\nClark spends the first half of the next book, \"Executive Orders\", serving as an instructor for CIA field officers in training. Early in the novel, Jack Ryan, the new president, issues a pardon to John Terence Kelly for his several murders. This clears his name and personal honor, but he will continue his career as John Clark. Towards the end of the book, he and Chavez are returned to the field and ordered to discover who is responsible for an Ebola attack on the United States, an action they quickly trace to the new United Islamic Republic (comprising Iran and Iraq). With the cooperation of the Russian SVR, they are infiltrated into Tehran, where they laser-designate the home of UIR dictator Mahmoud Haji Daryaei so that Air Force stealth aircraft can destroy the house.\nThe next year, Clark writes a memo to the CIA expressing his concerns over the rise of international terrorism since the demise of the Cold War, and recommends creating a NATO response team that could be rapidly deployed in terrorist situations. This special unit is created soon thereafter, with its base in Hereford, England. It is code-named Rainbow, and Clark is put in command of the unit with the equivalent rank of major general.\nIn the book \"Rainbow Six\", Rainbow is first put into operation. It responds successfully to three attacks by \"Red\" terrorists in Bern, Vienna, and Madrid. It also succeeds in defending itself from an attack by the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA) against its home base. This is eventually determined to have been ordered by a radical eco-terrorist group, which Rainbow tracks down and destroys in the last pages of the novel.\nClark's next appearance is in \"The Bear and the Dragon\", where he is still the head of Rainbow. Initially assigned to train Russian Spetsnaz operatives, Rainbow is temporarily deployed to the Russian-Chinese war being fought in Siberia. In a joint Rainbow-Spetsnaz operation, he is involved in the destruction of China's only ICBM base. The operation is mostly successful: all but one of the missiles is destroyed, and the last one, while it is fired, is destroyed by the Navy before it can reach its intended target.\nNeither Clark nor Rainbow appears in \"The Teeth of the Tiger\", but it is revealed that Rainbow is still operating. Prior to Jack Ryan resigning as president, Clark's Navy Cross was upgraded to the Medal of Honor. During the Medal of Honor ceremony, Jack Ryan Jr. was present in the Oval Office.\nClark returns in \"Dead or Alive\", in which he is part of a Rainbow team that successfully rescues all hostages taken by terrorists at the Swedish embassy in Libya. This proves to be his last act with the CIA, as he is pushed into retirement by Kealty political appointees. He then joins The Campus, an off-the-books intelligence agency that Ryan had founded before the end of his presidency. Clark is immediately involved with the organization's effort to find and neutralize \"the Emir\", an international terrorist leader modeled on Osama bin Laden, while also serving as mentor and trainer to Jack's son Jack Jr., a Campus analyst who wants to do fieldwork.\nIn \"Locked On\", Clark becomes a pawn in Czech billionaire and Kealty supporter Paul Laska's vendetta to discredit Ryan during the presidential campaign. The Emir had identified him as one of his captors to his Laska-affiliated lawyer. When it was revealed that he killed an East German Stasi operative in Berlin in 1981 (which was not a CIA matter but a personal job by his friend and Berlin station chief who had been blackmailed), he becomes the subject of a manhunt by the FBI and later French investigators hired by Laska.\nClark goes on the run and travels to eastern Europe to clear his name, later finding out that rogue SVR operative Valentin Kovalenko had given the information to Laska, who in turn covertly presented it to Kealty. However, he is captured shortly after and later tortured for information about The Campus by Kovalenko's men. He is later rescued by the Russian government, who then assigns him to temporarily lead Rainbow in order to retake a Russian spaceport which had been hijacked by Muslim Dagestani terrorists intent on launching nuclear weapons into Moscow.\nIn \"Threat Vector\", Clark has been exonerated by the outgoing Kealty administration. After an assassination job on a cell of former Libyan intelligence officers in Istanbul, he briefly retires from The Campus due to old age. However, he later comes out of retirement when Chinese special operations forces attack the headquarters of The Campus. He travels to China with fellow Campus operatives and works with the local rebels and FSB to assassinate People's Liberation Army Chairman Su Ke Qiang, who has been waging war against the United States by trying to annex Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan, and territories in the South China Sea by military force as well as sanctioning cyberattacks on the U.S.\nIn \"Command Authority\", Clark becomes director of operations for The Campus. He travels to Ukraine along with his fellow operatives to gather intelligence on Russian criminal organization Seven Strong Men and its leader Gleb the Scar. They take part in defending a CIA special mission compound in Sevastopol, which came under attack from pro-Russian protesters aided by FSB proxy agents and the Seven Strong Men. Clark later cooperates with Delta Force operatives in capturing Gleb the Scar, revealed to be directly involved in the polonium poisoning of former SVR head Sergey Golovko, in his heavily guarded base of operations in Kyiv.\nIn \"Full Force and Effect\", Clark and his fellow Campus colleagues investigate a connection between an American corporate espionage firm and the North Korean government, who are intent on producing nuclear weapons. In \"Commander in Chief\", he tracks down the accountant of Russian president Valeri Volodin, who has been moving his personal net worth to a safe place in anticipation of his failure to placate the siloviki should his plan of a covert armed offensive across Europe fail to repair the ongoing economic recession in his country. In \"True Faith and Allegiance\", Clark helps investigate a series of terrorist attacks on American military and intelligence personnel, which is due to a massive intelligence breach. He later assassinates a Saudi technocrat who has been setting up ISIS with the attacks in order to save his country from economic ruin in a quagmire likely to result from American troops being redeployed to the Middle East.\nIn \"Power and Empire\", Clark investigates Chinese agent provocateur Vincent Chen's connection to a sex trafficking ring in Texas. He wages a one-man war on the ring in order to save a prostitute as well, who had been instrumental in revealing China's involvement in several false flag attacks designed to blame the current president, whose moderate stance on several issues compelled a secret cabal to act to have him removed from power. Clark was later arrested for murder, but was released from police custody soon after.\nClark briefly appears in \"Line of Sight\", where he assassinates a Romanian crime boss who had a vendetta against Jack Ryan Jr. in revenge for killing one of his associates in a previous novel.\nIn \"Oath of Office\", Clark leads a surveillance operation in Portugal on French arms dealer Hugo Gaspard, who has ties to ISIS. He witnesses Gaspard's murder by French assassin Lucile Fournier, who works under rival arms dealer Urbano da Rocha. Clark and his team then proceed to shadow Da Rocha and Fournier, who later strike a deal intended for Gaspard with a pair of Russian GRU officers. However, the Russians later double cross da Rocha, attempting to kill him in his villa. Clark rescues the arms dealer, who later reveals a plot to provide stolen nuclear weapons to dissident Reza Kazem on behalf of the GRU and the Iranian government.\nIn \"Code of Honor\", Clark leads the Campus's efforts to retrieve Calliope, a next-generation AI software, before the Chinese military uses it for sinister purposes. He later tracks down Kang, an assassin working for the People's Liberation Army who had tried to assassinate a former Navy admiral who now works for a communications company.\nIn \"Shadow of the Dragon\", Clark tracks down and rescues the daughter of an Uyghur freedom fighter who had worked with a missing Chinese scientist in Kashgar. They were later exfiltrated by the U.S. Special Forces at the Wakhjir Pass along the Afghanistan border. In \"Flash Point\", Clark was kidnapped by Chinese mercenaries but was later rescued by Jack Junior. In \"Act of Defiance\", he takes on an active role in uncovering a conspiracy among the Russian military in overthrowing the president of Russia. In \"Defense Protocol\", Clark is assigned as the head of a multinational task force modeled on Rainbow to extract the defecting defense minister of China.\nOutside the novels, John Clark's career continues further in the \"Rainbow Six\" video game series. In ', Clark retires and passes the leadership of Team Rainbow on to Chavez. Although Chavez appears in ' as Rainbow commander, no mention is made of Clark.\nAwards.\nJohn Clark has been awarded the Navy Cross, Silver Star with an oak leaf cluster, Bronze Star with Valor devices with three oak leaf clusters, three Purple Hearts and four Intelligence Stars. He is also a recipient of the Medal of Honor, awarded and presented to him by Jack Ryan (then President of the U.S.) for the rescue of a downed fighter pilot during his time in Vietnam (see \"Without Remorse\"). He is a simulated major general in the \"Rainbow Six\" book, though he only reached the rank of Chief Boatswain's Mate (Chief Petty Officer) during his Naval career.\nDistinguishing marks.\nClark has a small tattoo of a red seal, sitting up on its hind flippers \"grinning impudently\" on his forearm. Though no other visual details are given, a comment made by Lieutenant Colonel Daniel \"Bear\" Malloy in \"Rainbow Six\" indicated that at least some soldiers in Ryanverse who dealt with special operations had heard of the red seal tattoo and understood that it was associated with the Third Special Operations Group (SOG), with whom Clark served during the Vietnam War. Clark stated that everyone in his unit got the tattoo. In the real world, having such a tattoo would violate operations security (OPSEC); however, similar tattoos are not particularly uncommon, so long as the tattoo is not specifically unit identifiable. Also, the Third SOG is not a real military unit, but a similarly named group, the Studies and Observation Group MACV-SOG, was initially named the Special Operations Group and was active in Vietnam in the types of operations and environments referenced in the series, and had Navy SEALs among its personnel. The symbol of the red seal is actually the unit insignia for SEAL Team 1.\nLiterary appearances.\nThe character John Clark appears in the following books:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn other media.\nFilm.\nIn 2012 Paramount Pictures began developing a film adaptation of \"Without Remorse\", and reportedly were in early negotiations with Tom Hardy to play Clark. By September 2018, Michael B. Jordan was cast to play John Clark in the new film series. \"Without Remorse\" was released on 30 April 2021 and was directed by Stefano Sollima from a screenplay written by Taylor Sheridan and Will Staples. It is produced by Akiva Goldsman. \"Rainbow Six\" is currently in development.\nJack Ryan films.\nJohn Clark has been portrayed by Willem Dafoe in \"Clear and Present Danger\" (1994) and Liev Schreiber in \"The Sum of All Fears\" (2002).\nIn \"Clear and Present Danger\" Clark is initially depicted as a cynical and opportunistic mercenary, but slowly reveals his virtues. Clark aids Ryan in rescuing Clark's men from Escobedo and Cortez, saving Ryan's life.\nIn \"The Sum of All Fears\" Clark is depicted as a much more sardonic character, though he, like his novel counterpart, has also participated in numerous CIA operations.\nVideo games.\nJohn Clark features in his role as leader of Rainbow in the games \"Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six\" (1998), ' (1999), ' (2001), ' (2003), ' (2006) and \"\" (2006).\nClark also features in \"The Sum of All Fears\" based on the film of the same name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30769", "revid": "50977441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30769", "title": "Th\u00edch Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh", "text": "Vietnamese Buddhist monk and activist (1926\u20132022)\nTh\u00edch Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh ( ; , Hu\u1ebf dialect: ; born Nguy\u1ec5n Xu\u00e2n B\u1ea3o; 11 October 1926 \u2013 22 January 2022) was a Vietnamese Thi\u1ec1n Buddhist monk, peace activist, prolific author, poet, and teacher, who founded the Plum Village Tradition, historically recognized as the main inspiration for engaged Buddhism. Known as the \"father of mindfulness\", Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was a major influence on Western practices of Buddhism.\nIn the mid-1960s, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh co-founded the School of Youth for Social Services and created the Order of Interbeing. He was exiled from South Vietnam in 1966 after expressing opposition to the war and refusing to take sides. In 1967, Martin Luther King, Jr. nominated him for a Nobel Peace Prize. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh established dozens of monasteries and practice centers and spent many years living at the Plum Village Monastery, which he founded in 1982 in southwest France near Th\u00e9nac, traveling internationally to give retreats and talks. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh promoted deep listening as a nonviolent solution to conflict and sought to raise awareness of the interconnectedness of environments that sustain and promote peace. He coined the term \"engaged Buddhism\" in his book \"\".\nAfter a 39-year exile, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was permitted to visit Vietnam in 2005. In 2018, he returned to Vietnam to his \"root temple\", T\u1eeb Hi\u1ebfu Temple, near Hu\u1ebf, where he lived until his death in 2022, at the age of 95.\nEarly life.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was born Nguy\u1ec5n Xu\u00e2n B\u1ea3o on 11 October 1926, in the ancient capital of Hu\u1ebf in central Vietnam. He is 15th generation Nguy\u1ec5n \u0110\u00ecnh; the poet Nguy\u1ec5n \u0110\u00ecnh Chi\u1ec3u, author of \"L\u1ee5c V\u00e2n Ti\u00ean\", was his ancestor. His father, Nguy\u1ec5n \u0110\u00ecnh Ph\u00fac, from Th\u00e0nh Trung village in Th\u1eeba Thi\u00ean, Hu\u1ebf, was an official with the French administration. His mother, Tr\u1ea7n Th\u1ecb D\u0129, was a homemaker from Gio Linh district. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was the fifth of their six children. Until he was age five, he lived with his large extended family at his grandmother's home. He recalled feeling joy at age seven or eight after he saw a drawing of a peaceful Buddha, sitting on the grass. On a school trip, he visited a mountain where a hermit lived who was said to sit quietly day and night to become peaceful like the Buddha. They explored the area, and he found a natural well, which he drank from and felt completely satisfied. It was this experience that led him to want to become a Buddhist monk. At age 12, he expressed an interest in training to become a monk, which his parents, cautious at first, eventually let him pursue at age 16.\nNames applied to him.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh had many names in his lifetime. As a boy, he received a formal family name (Nguy\u1ec5n \u0110\u00ecnh Lang) to register for school, but was known by his nickname (B\u00e9 Em). He received a spiritual name (\u0110i\u1ec7u Sung) as an aspirant for the monkhood; a lineage name (Tr\u1eebng Quang) when he formally became a lay Buddhist; and when he was ordained as a monk he received a Dharma name (Ph\u00f9ng Xu\u00e2n). He took the Dharma title Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh when he moved to Saigon in 1949.\nThe Vietnamese name \"Th\u00edch\" (\u91cb) is from \"Th\u00edch Ca\" or \"Th\u00edch Gi\u00e0\" (\u91cb\u8fe6, \"of the Shakya clan\"). All Buddhist monastics in East Asian Buddhism adopt this name as their surname, implying that their first family is the Buddhist community. In many Buddhist traditions, a person can receive a progression of names. The lineage name is given first when a person takes refuge in the Three Jewels. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's lineage name is Tr\u1eebng Quang (\u6f84\u5149, \"Clear, Reflective Light\"). The second is a dharma name, given when a person takes vows or is ordained as a monastic. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's dharma name is Ph\u00f9ng Xu\u00e2n (\u9022\u6625, \"Meeting Spring\") and his dharma title is Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh.\nNeither \"Nh\u1ea5t\" (\u4e00) nor \"H\u1ea1nh\" (\u884c), which approximate the roles of middle name and given name, was part of his name at birth. \"Nh\u1ea5t\" means \"one\", implying \"first-class\", or \"of best quality\"; \"H\u1ea1nh\" means \"action\", implying \"right conduct\", \"good nature\", or \"virtue\". He translated his Dharma names as \"One\" (Nh\u1ea5t) and \"Action\" (H\u1ea1nh). Vietnamese names follow this convention, placing the family name first, then the middle name, which often refers to the person's position in the family or generation, followed by the given name.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's followers called him (\"master; teacher\"), or \"Th\u1ea7y\" Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh. Any Vietnamese monk in the Mahayana tradition can be addressed as \"th\u1ea7y\", with monks addressed as \"th\u1ea7y tu\" (\"monk\") and nuns addressed as \"s\u01b0 c\u00f4\" (\"sister\") or \"s\u01b0 b\u00e0\" (\"elder sister\"). He is also known as Thi\u1ec1n S\u01b0 Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh (\"Zen Master Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh\").\nEducation.\nAt age 16, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh entered the monastery at T\u1eeb Hi\u1ebfu Temple, where his primary teacher was Zen Master Thanh Qu\u00fd Ch\u00e2n Th\u1eadt, who was from the 43rd generation of the L\u00e2m T\u1ebf Zen school and the ninth generation of the Li\u1ec5u Qu\u00e1n school. He studied as a novice for three years and received training in Vietnamese traditions of Mahayana and Theravada Buddhism. He also learned Chinese, English, and French. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh attended B\u00e1o Qu\u1ed1c Buddhist Academy. Dissatisfied with the academy, which he found lacking in philosophy, literature, and foreign languages, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh left in 1950 and took up residence in the \u1ea4n Quang Pagoda in Saigon, where he was ordained as a monk in 1951. He supported himself by selling books and poetry while attending Saigon University, where he studied literature, philosophy, psychology, and science and received a degree in French and Vietnamese Literature.\nIn 1955, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh returned to Hu\u1ebf and served as the editor of (\"Vietnamese Buddhism\"), the official publication of the General Association of Vietnamese Buddhists () for two years before the publication was suspended as higher-ranking monks disapproved of his writing. He believed that this was due to his opinion that South Vietnam's various Buddhist organisations should unite. In 1956, while he was away teaching in \u0110\u00e0 L\u1ea1t, his name was expunged from the records of \u1ea4n Quang, effectively disowning him from the temple. In late 1957, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh decided to go on retreat, and established a monastic \"community of resistance\" named Ph\u01b0\u01a1ng B\u00f4i, in \u0110\u1ea1i Lao Forest near \u0110\u00e0 L\u1ea1t. During this period, he taught at a nearby high school and continued to write, promoting the idea of a humanistic, unified Buddhism.\nFrom 1959 to 1961, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh taught several short courses on Buddhism at various Saigon temples, including the large X\u00e1 L\u1ee3i Pagoda, where his class was cancelled mid-session and he was removed due to disapproval of his teachings. Facing further opposition from Vietnamese religious and secular authorities, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh accepted a Fulbright Fellowship in 1960 to study comparative religion at Princeton University. He studied at the Princeton Theological Seminary in 1961. In 1962 he was appointed lecturer in Buddhism at Columbia University and also taught as a lecturer at Cornell University. By then he had gained fluency in French, Classical Chinese, Sanskrit, Pali and English, in addition to his native Vietnamese.\nCareer.\nActivism in Vietnam 1963\u20131966.\nIn 1963, after the military overthrow of the minority Catholic regime of President Ngo Dinh Diem, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh returned to South Vietnam on 16 December 1963, at the request of Thich Tri Quang, the monk most prominent in protesting the religious discrimination of Diem, to help restructure the administration of Vietnamese Buddhism. As a result of a congress, the General Association of Buddhists and other groups merged to form the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam (UBCV) in January 1964, and Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh proposed that the executive publicly call for an end to the Vietnam War, help establish an institute for the study of Buddhism to train future leaders, and create a centre to train pacifist social workers based on Buddhist teaching.\nIn 1964, two of Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's students founded La Boi Press with a grant from Mrs. Ngo Van Hieu. Within two years, the press published 12 books, but by 1966, the publishers risked arrest and jail because the word \"peace\" was taken to mean communism. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh also edited the weekly journal (\"Sound of the Rising Tide\"), the UBCV's official publication. He continually advocated peace and reconciliation, notably calling in September 1964, soon after the Gulf of Tonkin incident, for a peace settlement, and referring to the Viet Cong as brothers. The South Vietnamese government subsequently closed the journal.\nOn 1 May 1966, at T\u1eeb Hi\u1ebfu Temple, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh received the \"lamp transmission\" from Zen Master Ch\u00e2n Th\u1eadt, making him a dharmacharya (teacher) and the spiritual head of T\u1eeb Hi\u1ebfu and associated monasteries.\nV\u1ea1n H\u1ea1nh Buddhist University.\nOn 13 March 1964, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh and the monks at An Quang Pagoda founded the Institute of Higher Buddhist Studies (), with the UBCV's support and endorsement. Renamed V\u1ea1n H\u1ea1nh Buddhist University, it was a private institution that taught Buddhist studies, Vietnamese culture, and languages, in Saigon. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh taught Buddhist psychology and prajnaparamita literature there, and helped finance the university by fundraising from supporters.\nSchool of Youth for Social Service (SYSS).\nIn 1964, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh co-founded the School of Youth for Social Service (SYSS), a neutral corps of Buddhist peace workers who went into rural areas to establish schools, build healthcare clinics, and help rebuild villages. The SYSS consisted of 10,000 volunteers and social workers who aided war-torn villages, rebuilt schools and established medical centers. He left for the U.S. shortly afterwards and was not allowed to return, leaving Sister Ch\u00e2n Kh\u00f4ng in charge of the SYSS. Ch\u00e2n Kh\u00f4ng was central to the foundation and many of the activities of the SYSS, which organized medical, educational and agricultural facilities in rural Vietnam during the war. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was initially given substantial autonomy to run the SYSS, which was initially part of V\u1ea1n H\u1ea1nh University. In April 1966, the V\u1ea1n H\u1ea1nh Students' Union under the presidency of Ph\u01b0\u1ee3ng issued a \"Call for Peace\". Vice Chancellor Th\u00edch Minh Ch\u00e2u dissolved the students' union and removed the SYSS from the university's auspices.\nOrder of Interbeing.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh created the Order of Interbeing (), a monastic and lay group, between 1964 and 1966. He headed this group, basing it on the philosophical concept of interbeing and teaching it through the Five Mindfulness Trainings and the Fourteen Mindfulness Trainings. The trainings were a modern adaptation of the traditional bodhisattva vows designed to support efforts to promote peace and rebuild war-torn villages. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh established the Order of Interbeing from a selection of six SYSS board members, three men and three women, who took a vow to practice the Fourteen Precepts of Engaged Buddhism. He added a seventh member in 1981.\nIn 1967, Nhat Chi Mai, one of the first six Order of Interbeing members, set fire to herself and burned to death in front of the Tu Nghiem Pagoda in Saigon as a peace protest after calling for an end to the Vietnam War. On several occasions, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh explained to Westerners that Th\u00edch Qu\u1ea3ng \u0110\u1ee9c and other Vietnamese Buddhist monks who self-immolated during the Vietnam war did not perform acts of suicide; rather, their acts were, in his words, aimed \"at moving the hearts of the oppressors, and at calling the attention of the world to the suffering endured then by the Vietnamese.\"\nThe Order of Interbeing expanded into an international community of laypeople and monastics focused on \"mindfulness practice, ethical behavior, and compassionate action in society.\" By 2017, the group had grown to include thousands known to recite the Fourteen Precepts.\nDuring the Vietnam War.\nV\u1ea1n H\u1ea1nh University was taken over by one of the chancellors, who wished to sever ties with Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh and the SYSS, accusing Ch\u00e2n Kh\u00f4ng of being a communist. Thereafter the SYSS struggled to raise funds and faced attacks on its members. It persisted in its relief efforts without taking sides in the conflict.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh returned to the U.S. in 1966 to lead a symposium in Vietnamese Buddhism at Cornell University and continue his work for peace. He was invited by Professor George McTurnan Kahin, also of Cornell and a U.S. government foreign policy consultant, to participate on a forum on U.S. policy in Vietnam. On 1 June, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh released a five-point proposal addressed to the U.S. government, recommending that (1) the U.S. make a clear statement of its desire to help the Vietnamese people form a government \"truly responsive to Vietnamese aspirations\"; (2) the U.S. and South Vietnam cease air strikes throughout Vietnam; (3) all anti-communist military operations be purely defensive; (4) the U.S. demonstrate a willingness to withdraw within a few months; and (5) the U.S. offer to pay for reconstruction. In 1967 he wrote \"Vietnam \u2014 The Lotus in the Sea of Fire\", about his proposals. The South Vietnamese military junta responded by accusing him of treason and being a communist.\nWhile in the U.S., Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh visited Gethsemani Abbey to speak with the Trappist monk Thomas Merton. When the South Vietnamese regime threatened to block Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's reentry to the country, Merton wrote an essay of solidarity, \"Nhat Hanh is my Brother\". Between June and October 1963, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh conducted numerous interviews with newspapers and television networks to rally support for the peace movement. During this time, he also undertook a widely publicized five-day fast. Additionally, he translated reports of human rights violations from Vietnamese into English and compiled them into a document he presented to the United Nations. In 1964, after the publication of his poem \"whoever is listening, be my witness: I cannot accept this war...\", the American press called Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh an \"antiwar poet\" and a \"pro-Communist propagandist\". In 1965 he wrote Martin Luther King Jr. a letter titled \"In Search of the Enemy of Man\". During his 1966 stay in the U.S., Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh met King and urged him to publicly denounce the Vietnam War. In 1967, due in large part to Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh, King gave the speech \"\" at Riverside Church in New York City, his first to publicly question U.S. involvement in Vietnam. Later that year, King nominated Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh for the 1967 Nobel Peace Prize. In his nomination, King said, \"I do not personally know of anyone more worthy of the Nobel Peace Prize than this gentle monk from Vietnam. His ideas for peace, if applied, would build a monument to ecumenism, to world brotherhood, to humanity\". King also called Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh \"an apostle of peace and nonviolence\". King named the candidate he had chosen to nominate with a \"strong request\" to the prize committee, in sharp violation of Nobel traditions and protocol. The committee did not make an award that year.\nRefuge in France.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh moved to Paris in 1966 and became the chair of the Vietnamese Buddhist Peace Delegation, a group involved with the Paris Peace Accords, which ultimately ended American involvement in the Vietnam War. For refusing to take sides in the war, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was exiled by both the North and South Vietnamese governments. He received asylum in France and moved to the Paris suburbs, living with other Vietnamese refugees.\nIn 1969, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh established the Unified Buddhist Church (\u00c9glise Bouddhique Unifi\u00e9e) in France (not a part of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam). In 1975, he formed the Sweet Potatoes Meditation Centre at Fontvannes, in the , near Troyes in Aube province southeast of Paris. For the next seven years, he focused on writing, and completed \"The Miracle of Mindfulness\", \"The Moon Bamboo\", and \"The Sun My Heart\".\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh began teaching mindfulness in the mid-1970s with his books, particularly \"The Miracle of Mindfulness\" (1975), serving as the main vehicle for his early teachings. In an interview for On Being, he said that \"The Miracle of Mindfulness\" was \"written for our social workers, first, in Vietnam, because they were living in a situation where the danger of dying was there every day. So out of compassion, out of a willingness to help them to continue their work, \"The Miracle of Mindfulness\" was written as a practice manual. And after that, many friends in the West, they think that it is helpful for them, so we allow it to be translated into English.\" The book was originally titled \"The Miracle of Being Awake\", as in 1975 \"mindfulness\" was barely recognized in English. Its focus on integrating mindfulness into daily life, rather than confining it to meditation, emphasized that living mindfully could foster personal growth, enlightenment, and even global peace.\nCampaign to help boat people and expulsion from Singapore.\nWhen the North Vietnamese army took control of the south in 1975, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was denied permission to return to Vietnam, and the communist government banned his publications. He soon began to lead efforts to help rescue Vietnamese boat people in the Gulf of Siam, eventually stopping under pressure from the governments of Thailand and Singapore.\nRecounting his experience years later, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh said he was in Singapore attending a conference on religion and peace when he discovered the plight of the suffering of the boat people:So many boat people were dying in the ocean, and Singapore had a very harsh policy on the boat people\u2026 The policy of Singapore at that time was to reject the boat people; Malaysia, also. They preferred to have the boat people die in the ocean rather than to bring them to land and make them into prisoners. Every time there was a boat with the boat people [that came] to the shore, they tried to push them [back] out into the sea in order [for them] to die. They didn't want to host [them]. And those fishermen who had compassion, who were able to save the boat people from drowning in the sea, were punished. They had to pay a very huge sum of money so that next time they won't have the courage to save the boat people.He stayed on in Singapore to organise a secret rescue operation. Aided by concerned individuals from France, the Netherlands, and other European countries, he hired a boat to bring food, water and medicine to refugees in the sea. Sympathetic fishermen who had rescued boat people would call up his team, and they shuttled the refugees to the French embassy in the middle of the night and helped them climb into the compound, before they were discovered by staff in the morning and handed over to the police where they were placed in the relative safety of detention. \"Please Call Me by My True Names\", Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's best-known poem, was written in 1978 during his efforts to assist the boat people.\nWhen the Singapore government discovered the clandestine network, the police surrounded its office and impounded the passports of both Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh and Ch\u00e2n Kh\u00f4ng, giving them 24 hours to leave the country. It was only with the intervention of the then-French ambassador to Singapore Jacques Gasseau that they were given 10 days to wind down their rescue operations.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was only allowed to return to Singapore in 2010 to lead a meditation retreat at the Kong Meng San Phor Kark See Monastery.\nPlum Village.\nBy 1982, Sweet Potatoes was too small to accommodate the growing number of people who wanted to visit for retreats. In 1982, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh and Ch\u00e2n Kh\u00f4ng established the Plum Village Monastery, a vihara in the Dordogne near Bordeaux in southern France. Plum Village is the largest Buddhist monastery in Europe and America, with over 200 monastics and over 10,000 visitors a year.\nThe Plum Village Community of Engaged Buddhism (formerly the Unified Buddhist Church) and its sister organization in France, the Congr\u00e9gation Bouddhique Zen Village des Pruniers, are the legally recognized governing bodies of Plum Village in France.\nExpanded practice centres.\nBy 2019, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh had built a network of monasteries and retreat centres in several countries, including France, the U.S., Australia, Thailand, Vietnam, and Hong Kong. Additional practice centres and associated organizations Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh and the Order of Interbeing established in the US include Blue Cliff Monastery in Pine Bush, New York; the Community of Mindful Living in Berkeley, California; Parallax Press; Deer Park Monastery (Tu Vi\u1ec7n L\u1ed9c Uy\u1ec3n), established in 2000 in Escondido, California; Magnolia Grove Monastery (\u0110\u1ea1o Tr\u00e0ng M\u1ed9c Lan) in Batesville, Mississippi; and the European Institute of Applied Buddhism in Waldbr\u00f6l, Germany. (The Maple Forest Monastery (Tu Vi\u1ec7n R\u1eebng Phong) and Green Mountain Dharma Center (\u00d0\u1ea1o Tr\u00e0ng Thanh S\u01a1n) in Vermont closed in 2007 and moved to the Blue Cliff Monastery in Pine Bush.) The monasteries, open to the public during much of the year, provide ongoing retreats for laypeople, while the Order of Interbeing holds retreats for specific groups of laypeople, such as families, teenagers, military veterans, the entertainment industry, members of Congress, law enforcement officers and people of colour.\nAccording to the Th\u00edch Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh Foundation, the charitable organization that serves as the Plum Village Community of Engaged Buddhism's fundraising arm, as of 2017 the monastic order Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh established comprises over 750 monastics in 9 monasteries worldwide.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh established two monasteries in Vietnam, at the original T\u1eeb Hi\u1ebfu Temple near Hu\u1ebf and at Prajna Temple in the central highlands.\nWritings.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh has published over 130 books, including more than 100 in English, which as of January 2019 had sold over five million copies worldwide. His books, which cover topics including spiritual guides and Buddhist texts, teachings on mindfulness, poetry, story collections, a biography of the Buddha, and scholarly essays on Zen practice, have been translated into more than 40 languages as of January 2022. In 1986 Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh founded Parallax Press, a nonprofit book publisher and part of the Plum Village Community of Engaged Buddhism.\nDuring his long exile, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's books were often smuggled into Vietnam, where they had been banned.\nLater activism.\nIn 2014, major Jewish, Muslim, Hindu, Buddhist, Anglican, Catholic and Orthodox Christian leaders met to sign a shared commitment against modern-day slavery; the declaration they signed called for the elimination of slavery and human trafficking by 2020. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was represented by Ch\u00e2n Kh\u00f4ng.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was known to refrain from consuming animal products as a means of nonviolence toward animals.\nChristiana Figueres has said that Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh helped her overcome a personal crisis and develop the deep listening and empathy required to facilitate the Paris Agreement on climate change.\nRelations with Vietnamese governments.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's relationship with the government of Vietnam varied over the years. He stayed away from politics, but did not support the South Vietnamese government's policies of Catholicization. He questioned American involvement, putting him at odds with the Saigon leadership, which banned him from returning to South Vietnam while he was abroad in 1966.\nHis relationship with the communist government ruling Vietnam was tense due to its anti-religious stance. The communist government viewed him with skepticism, distrusted his work with the overseas Vietnamese population, and restricted his praying requiem on several occasions.\nReturn visits to Vietnam 2005\u20132007.\nIn 2005, after lengthy negotiations, the Vietnamese government allowed Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh to return for a visit. He was also allowed to teach there, publish four of his books in Vietnamese, and travel the country with monastic and lay members of his Order, including a return to his root temple, Tu Hieu Temple in Hu\u1ebf. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh arrived on 12 January after 39 years in exile. The trip was not without controversy. Thich Vien Dinh, writing on behalf of the banned Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam (UBCV), called for Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh to make a statement against the Vietnamese government's poor record on religious freedom. Vien Dinh feared that the government would use the trip as propaganda, suggesting that religious freedom is improving there, while abuses continue.\nDespite the controversy, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh returned to Vietnam in 2007, while the heads of the UBCV, Thich Huyen Quang and Thich Quang Do, remained under house arrest. The UBCV called his visit a betrayal, symbolizing his willingness to work with his co-religionists' oppressors. V\u00f5 V\u0103n \u00c1i, a UBCV spokesman, said, \"I believe Th\u00edch Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's trip is manipulated by the Hanoi government to hide its repression of the Unified Buddhist Church and create a false impression of religious freedom in Vietnam.\" The Plum Village website listed three goals for his 2007 trip to Vietnam: to support new monastics in his Order; to organize and conduct \"Great Chanting Ceremonies\" intended to help heal remaining wounds from the Vietnam War; and to lead retreats for monastics and laypeople. The chanting ceremonies were originally called \"Grand Requiem for Praying Equally for All to Untie the Knots of Unjust Suffering\", but Vietnamese officials objected, calling it unacceptable for the government to \"equally\" pray for South Vietnamese and U.S. soldiers. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh agreed to change the name to \"Grand Requiem For Praying\". During the 2007 visit, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh suggested ending government control of religion to President Nguyen Minh Triet. A provincial police officer later spoke to a reporter about this incident, accusing Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh of breaking Vietnamese law. The officer said, \"[Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh] should focus on Buddhism and keep out of politics.\"\nDuring the 2005 visit, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh 's followers were invited by Abbot Duc Nghi, a member of the official Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam, to occupy Bat Nha monastery and continue their practice there. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's followers say that during a sacred ceremony at Plum Village Monastery in 2006, Nghi received a transmission from Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh and agreed to let them occupy Bat Nha. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's followers spent $1 million developing the monastery, building a meditation hall for 1,800 people. The government support initially given to his supporters is now believed to have been a ploy to get Vietnam off the US State Department's Religious Freedom blacklist, improve chances of entry into the World Trade Organization, and increase foreign investment. During this time, thousands of people came to the center to practice, and Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh ordained more than 500 monks and nuns at the monastery.\nIn 2008, during an interview in Italian television, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh made some statements regarding the Dalai Lama that his followers claim upset Chinese officials, who in turn put pressure on the Vietnamese government. The chairman of Vietnam's national Committee on Religious Affairs sent a letter that accused Nhat Hanh's organization of publishing false information about Vietnam on its website. It was written that the posted information misrepresented Vietnam's policies on religion and could undermine national unity. The chairman requested that Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's followers leave Bat Nha. The letter also stated that Abbot Duc Nghi wanted them to leave. \"Duc Nghi is breaking a vow that he made to us... We have videotapes of him inviting us to turn the monastery into a place for worship in the Plum Village tradition, even after he dies \u2014 life after life. Nobody can go against that wish,\" said Brother Phap Kham. In September and October 2009, a standoff developed, which ended when authorities cut the power, and followed up with police raids augmented by mobs assembled through gang contacts. The attackers used sticks and hammers to break in and dragged off hundreds of monks and nuns. \"Senior monks were dragged like animals out of their rooms, then left sitting in the rain until police dragged them to the taxis where 'black society' bad guys pushed them into cars,\" a villager said in a phone interview. Two senior monks had their IDs taken and were put under house arrest without charges in their home towns. Monastics responded with chanting, but continued to be persecuted by the government.\nReligious approach and influence.\nEngaged Buddhism.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh combined a variety of teachings of Early Buddhist schools, Mahayana, Zen, and ideas from Western psychology to teach mindfulness of breathing and the four foundations of mindfulness, offering a modern perspective on meditation practice.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh has also been a leader in the Engaged Buddhism movement (he is credited with coining the term), promoting the individual's active role in creating change. He credited the 13th-century Vietnamese Emperor Tr\u1ea7n Nh\u00e2n T\u00f4ng with originating the concept. Tr\u1ea7n Nh\u00e2n T\u00f4ng abdicated his throne to become a monk and founded the Vietnamese Buddhist school of the Bamboo Forest tradition. He also called it Applied Buddhism in later years to emphasize its practical nature.\nMindfulness trainings.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh rephrased the five precepts for lay Buddhists as \"mindfulness trainings\", which were traditionally written in terms of refraining from negative activities, such as committing to taking positive action to prevent or minimize others' negative actions. For example, instead of merely refraining from stealing, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh wrote, \"prevent others from profiting from human suffering or the suffering of other species on Earth\" by, for example, taking action against unfair practices or unsafe workplaces.\nAccording to Plum Village, Manifesto 2000, introduced by UNESCO, was largely inspired by their five mindfulness trainings. In keeping with the northern tradition of Bodhisattva precepts, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh wrote the fourteen mindfulness trainings for the Order of Interbeing based on the ten deeds. He also updated the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya for Plum Village monastics while keeping its number of rules, 250 for monks and 348 for nuns.\nInterbeing.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh developed the English term \"interbeing\" by combining the prefix \"inter-\" with the verb \"to be\" to denote the interconnection of all phenomena. This was inspired by the Chinese word \u76f8\u5373 in Master Fa Zang's \"Golden Lion Chapter\", a Huayan summary of the Avatamsaka Sutra. Some scholars believed it was a presentation of the Prajnaparamita, which \"is often said to provide a philosophical foundation\" for Zen. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was also known for expressing deep teachings through simple phrases or parables. \"The sun my heart\", for instance, was an insight of meditation on the interdependence of all things. He used \"no mud no lotus\" to illustrate the interrelationship between awakening and afflictions, well-being and ill-being. \"A cloud never dies\", on the other hand, is a contemplation of phenomena beyond birth and death. To teach non-duality, he often told the story of his left and right hand. His meditation on aimlessness (\"apranihita\") was told through the story of a river. The relationship between waves and water explained the Dharma Realm of Unobstructed Interpenetration of Truth and Phenomena.\nNew translations of the Heart Sutra.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh completed new English and Vietnamese translations of the Heart Sutra in September 2014. In a letter to his students, he said he wrote these new translations because he thought that poor word choices in the original text had resulted in significant misunderstandings of these teachings for almost 2,000 years.\nManifestation-Only Teaching.\nContinuing the Yog\u0101c\u0101ra and Dharmalaksana school, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh composed the \"fifty verses on the nature of consciousness\". He preferred calling the teaching manifestation-only (vijnapti-matrata) rather than consciousness-only (vijnana-matrata) to avoid misintepretation into a kind of idealism.\nThe Father of Mindfulness.\nCalled \"the Father of Mindfulness\", Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh has been credited as one of the main figures in bringing Buddhism to the West, and especially for making mindfulness well known in the West. According to James Shaheen, the editor of the American Buddhist magazine \"\", \"In the West, he's an icon. I can't think of a Western Buddhist who does not know of Thich Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh.\" His 1975 book \"The Miracle of Mindfulness\" was credited with helping to \"lay the foundations\" for the use of mindfulness in treating depression through \"mindfulness-based cognitive therapy\", influencing the work of University of Washington psychology professor Marsha M. Linehan, the originator of dialectical behavior therapy (DBT). J. Mark G. Williams of Oxford University and the Oxford Mindfulness Centre has said, \"What he was able to do was to communicate the essentials of Buddhist wisdom and make it accessible to people all over the world, and build that bridge between the modern world of psychological science and the modern healthcare system and these ancient wisdom practices \u2013 and then he continued to do that in his teaching.\" One of Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's students, Jon Kabat-Zinn, developed the mindfulness-based stress reduction course that is available at hospitals and medical centres across the world, and as of 2015, around 80% of medical schools are reported to have offered mindfulness training. As of 2019, it was reported that mindfulness as espoused by Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh had become the theoretical underpinning of a $1.1 billion industry in the U.S. One survey determined that 35% of employers used mindfulness in practices in the workplace.\nInterfaith dialogue.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was known for his involvement in interfaith dialogue, which was not common when he began. He was noted for his friendships with Martin Luther King Jr. and Thomas Merton, and King wrote in his Nobel nomination for Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh, \"His ideas for peace, if applied, would build a monument to ecumenism, to world brotherhood, to humanity\". Merton wrote an essay for \"Jubilee\" in August 1966 titled \"Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh Is My Brother\", in which he said, \"I have far more in common with Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh than I have with many Americans, and I do not hesitate to say it. It is vitally important that such bonds be admitted. They are the bonds of a new solidarity ... which is beginning to be evident on all five continents and which cuts across all political, religious and cultural lines to unite young men and women in every country in something that is more concrete than an ideal and more alive than a program.\" The same year, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh met with Pope Paul VI and the pair called on Catholics and Buddhists to help bring about world peace, especially relating to the conflict in Vietnam. According to Buddhism scholar Sallie B. King, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was \"extremely skilled at expressing their teachings in the language of a kind of universal spirituality rather than a specifically Buddhist terminology. The language of this universal spirituality is the same as the basic values that they see expressed in other religions as well\".\nFinal years.\nIn November 2014, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh experienced a severe brain hemorrhage and was hospitalized. After months of rehabilitation, he was released from the stroke rehabilitation clinic at Bordeaux Segalen University. In July 2015, he flew to San Francisco to speed his recovery with an aggressive rehabilitation program at UCSF Medical Center. He returned to France in January 2016. After spending 2016 in France, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh travelled to the Thai Plum Village. He continued to see both Eastern and Western specialists while in Thailand, but was unable to verbally communicate for the remainder of his life.\nIn November 2018, a press release from the Plum Village community confirmed that Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh, then 92, had returned to Vietnam a final time and would live at T\u1eeb Hi\u1ebfu Temple for \"his remaining days\". In a meeting with senior disciples, he had \"clearly communicated his wish to return to Vietnam using gestures, nodding and shaking his head in response to questions\". In January 2019, a representative of Plum Village, Sister True Dedication, wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Th\u1ea7y's health has been remarkably stable, and he is continuing to receive Eastern treatment and acupuncture. When there's a break in the rains, Thay comes outside to enjoy visiting the Root Temple's ponds and stupas, in his wheelchair, joined by his disciples. Many practitioners, lay and monastic, are coming to visit Tu Hieu, and there is a beautiful, light atmosphere of serenity and peace, as the community enjoys practicing together there in Thay's presence.\nWhile it was clear Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh could no longer speak, Vietnamese authorities assigned plainclothes police to monitor his activities at the temple.\nDeath.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh died at his residence in T\u1eeb Hi\u1ebfu Temple on 22 January 2022, at age 95, as a result of complications from his stroke seven years earlier. His death was widely mourned by various Buddhist groups in and outside Vietnam. The Dalai Lama, South Korean President Moon Jae-in and the U.S. State Department also issued words of condolence.\nHis five-day funeral, which began on the day of his death, had a seven-day wake that culminated with his cremation on 29 January. In a 2015 book, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh described what he wanted for the disposition of his remains, in part to illustrate how he believes that he \"continues\" on in his teachings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have a disciple in Vietnam who wants to build a stupa for my ashes when I die. He and others want to put a plaque with the words, \"Here lies my beloved teacher.\" I told them not to waste the temple land...I suggested that, if they still insist on building a stupa, they have the plaque say, \"I am not in here\". But in case people don't get it, they could add a second plaque, \"I am not out there either\". If still people don't understand, then you can write on the third and last plaque, \"I may be found in your way of breathing and walking\".\nAt the conclusion of the 49-day mourning period, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh's ashes were portioned and scattered in T\u1eeb Hi\u1ebfu Temple and temples associated with Plum Village.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAwards and honours.\nNobel laureate Martin Luther King Jr. nominated Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1967. The prize was not awarded that year. Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh was awarded the Courage of Conscience award in 1991.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh received 2015's \"Pacem in Terris\" Peace and Freedom Award.\nIn November 2017, the Education University of Hong Kong conferred an honorary doctorate upon Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh for his \"lifelong contributions to the promotion of mindfulness, peace and happiness across the world\". As he was unable to attend the ceremony in Hong Kong, a simple ceremony was held on 29 August 2017, in Thailand, where John Lee Chi-kin, vice-president (academic) of EdUHK, presented the honorary degree certificate and academic gown to Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh on the university's behalf.\nIn popular culture.\nFilms.\nNh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh has been featured in many films, including:\nGraphic novel.\nAlong with Alfred Hassler and Ch\u00e2n Kh\u00f4ng, Nh\u1ea5t H\u1ea1nh is the subject of the 2013 graphic novel \"The Secret of the 5 Powers\".\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30770", "revid": "44935001", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30770", "title": "The Troubles", "text": "1960s\u20131990s conflict in Northern Ireland\nThe Troubles () were an ethno-nationalist conflict in Northern Ireland that lasted for about 30 years from the late 1960s to 1998. Also known internationally as the Northern Ireland conflict, it began in the late 1960s and is usually deemed to have ended with the Good Friday Agreement of 1998. Although the Troubles mostly took place in Northern Ireland, at times violence spilled over into parts of the Republic of Ireland, England, and mainland Europe.\nSometimes described as an asymmetric or irregular war or a low-intensity conflict, the Troubles were a political and nationalistic struggle fueled by historical events, with a strong ethnic and sectarian dimension, fought over the status of Northern Ireland. Unionists and loyalists, who for historical reasons were mostly Ulster Protestants, wanted Northern Ireland to remain within the United Kingdom. Irish nationalists and republicans, who were mostly Irish Catholics, wanted Northern Ireland to leave the United Kingdom and join a united Ireland. Despite the division between Protestants and Catholics, it was not primarily a religious war.\nThe conflict began during a campaign by the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association to end discrimination against the Catholic-nationalist minority by the Protestant-unionist government and local authorities. The government attempted to suppress the protests. The police, the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), were overwhelmingly Protestant and known for sectarianism and police brutality. The campaign was also violently opposed by Ulster loyalists, who believed it was a front for republican political activity. Increasing tensions led to the August 1969 riots and the deployment of British troops, in what became the British Army's longest operation. \"Peace walls\" were built in some areas to keep the two communities apart. Some Catholics initially welcomed the British Army as a more neutral force than the RUC, but soon came to see it as hostile and biased, particularly after Bloody Sunday in 1972.\nThe main participants in the Troubles were republican paramilitaries such as the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) and the Irish National Liberation Army (INLA); loyalist paramilitaries such as the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) and Ulster Defence Association (UDA); British state security forces such as the British Army and RUC (Royal Ulster Constabulary); and political activists. The security forces of the Republic of Ireland played a smaller role. Republicans carried out a guerrilla campaign against British forces as well as a bombing campaign against infrastructural, commercial, and political targets. Loyalists attacked republicans/nationalists and the wider Catholic community in what they described as retaliation. At times, there were bouts of sectarian tit-for-tat violence, as well as feuds within and between paramilitary groups. The British security forces undertook policing and counterinsurgency campaigns, primarily against republicans. There were incidents of collusion between British state forces and loyalist paramilitaries (see Stevens Inquiries). The Troubles also involved numerous riots, mass protests, and acts of civil disobedience, and led to increased segregation and the creation of temporary no-go areas.\nMore than 3,500 people were killed in the conflict, of whom 52% were civilians, 32% were members of the British security forces, and 16% were members of paramilitary groups. Republican paramilitaries were responsible for 60% of total deaths, followed by loyalist paramilitaries at 30% and security forces at 10%. Loyalists were responsible for 48% of all civilian deaths, however, followed by republicans at 39% and security forces at 10%.\nThe Northern Ireland peace process led to paramilitary ceasefires and talks between the main political parties, which resulted in the Good Friday Agreement of 1998. This Agreement restored self-government to Northern Ireland on the basis of \"power-sharing\" and it included acceptance of the principle of consent, commitment to civil and political rights, parity of esteem between the two communities, police reform, paramilitary disarmament, and early release of paramilitary prisoners.\nThere has been sporadic violence since the Agreement, including punishment attacks, loyalist gangs' control of major organised crime rackets (e.g., drugs supply, community coercion and violence, intimidation), and violent crime linked to dissident republican groups.\nName.\nThe word \"troubles\" has been used as a synonym for violent conflict for centuries. It was used to describe the 17th-century Wars of the Three Kingdoms by all three national parliaments. For example, after the Restoration in 1660, the English \"\" starts with \"The King's most excellent Majesty, taking into his gracious and serious consideration the long and great troubles\u00a0...\"; as does the similar act in Scotland: \"The king's most excellent majesty, considering that by the late troubles diverse of his subjects\u00a0...\" (Scottish Parliament 1662); and by the Irish Parliament in the Act of Explanation (1665) \"our royal father of blessed memory had been forced, during the late troubles, to make with the Irish subjects of that our kingdom\" (Irish Parliament 1665, \u00a7 2). The term was used to describe the Irish revolutionary period in the early twentieth century. It was subsequently adopted to refer to the escalating violence in Northern Ireland after 1969.\nBackground.\n1609\u20131791.\nIn 1609, Scottish and English settlers, known as \"planters\", were given land escheated from the native Irish in the Plantation of Ulster. Coupled with Protestant immigration to \"unplanted\" areas of Ulster, particularly Antrim and Down, this resulted in conflict between the native Catholics and the \"planters\", leading in turn to two bloody religious conflicts known as the Irish Confederate Wars (1641\u20131653) and the Williamite war (1689\u20131691), both of which resulted in Protestant victories.\nAnglican dominance in Ireland was ensured by the passage of the Penal Laws that curtailed the religious, legal, and political rights of anyone (including both Catholics and Protestant Dissenters, such as Presbyterians) who did not conform to the state church, the Anglican Church of Ireland. As the Penal Laws started to be phased out in the latter part of the 18th century, there was more competition for land, as restrictions were lifted on the Irish Catholic ability to rent. With Irish Catholics allowed to buy land and enter trades from which they had formerly been banned, tensions arose resulting in the Protestant \"Peep o' Day Boys\" and Catholic \"Defenders\". This created polarisation between the communities and a dramatic reduction in reformers among Protestants, many of whom had been growing more receptive to democratic reform.\n1791\u20131912.\nFollowing the foundation of the republican Society of the United Irishmen by Presbyterians, Catholics, and liberal Anglicans, and the resulting failed Irish Rebellion of 1798, sectarian violence between Catholics and Protestants continued. The Orange Order (founded 1795), with its stated goal of upholding the Protestant faith and loyalty to the heirs of William of Orange, dates from this period and remains active to this day.\nWith the Acts of Union 1800 (which came into force on 1 January 1801), a new political framework was formed with the abolition of the Irish Parliament and incorporation of Ireland into the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. The result was a closer tie between Anglicans and the formerly republican Presbyterians as part of a \"loyal\" Protestant community. Although Catholic emancipation was achieved in 1829, largely eliminating official discrimination against Roman Catholics (then around 75% of Ireland's population), Dissenters, and Jews, the Repeal Association's campaign to repeal the 1801 Union failed.\nIn the late 19th century, the Home Rule movement was created and served to define the divide between most nationalists (usually Catholics) who sought the restoration of an Irish Parliament, and most unionists (usually Protestants) who were afraid of being a minority under a Catholic-dominated Irish Parliament and who tended to support continuing union with Great Britain.\nUnionists and Home Rule advocates were the main political factions in late 19th- and early 20th-century Ireland.\n1912\u20131922.\nBy the second decade of the 20th century, Home Rule, or limited Irish self-government, was on the brink of being conceded due to the agitation of the Irish Parliamentary Party.\nIn response to the campaign for Home Rule which started in the 1870s, unionists, mostly Protestant and largely concentrated in Ulster, had resisted both self-government and independence for Ireland, fearing for their future in an overwhelmingly Catholic country dominated by the Roman Catholic Church. In 1912, unionists led by Edward Carson signed the Ulster Covenant and pledged to resist Home Rule by force if necessary. To this end, they formed the paramilitary Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF).\nIn response, nationalists led by Eoin MacNeill formed the Irish Volunteers in 1913, whose goal was to oppose the UVF and ensure enactment of the Third Home Rule Bill in the event of British or unionist refusal. The outbreak of the First World War in 1914, and Ireland's involvement in the war, temporarily averted possible civil war in Ireland and delayed the resolution of the question of Irish independence. Home Rule, although passed in the British Parliament with Royal Assent, was suspended for the duration of the war.\nThe Irish Volunteers split, with a majority, known as the National Volunteers, supporting the war effort, and some of them joining Irish regiments of the New British Army. Many of those who stayed were radical nationalists, among them Irish Republican Brotherhood infiltrators. From these ranks came those who launched the Easter Rising in Dublin in 1916, led by Patrick Pearse and James Connolly. Two-and-a-half years after the executions of sixteen of the Rising's leaders, the separatist Sinn F\u00e9in party won the December 1918 general election in Ireland with 47% of the vote and a majority of seats, and set up the 1919 First D\u00e1il (Irish Parliament) in Dublin. Their victory was aided by the threat of conscription for First World War service. The Irish War for Independence followed, leading to eventual independence in 1922 for the Irish Free State, which comprised 26 of the 32 Irish counties. In Ulster, particularly in the six counties which became Northern Ireland, Sinn F\u00e9in fared relatively poorly in the 1918 election, and unionists won a majority.\nThe Government of Ireland Act 1920 partitioned the island of Ireland into two separate jurisdictions, Southern Ireland and Northern Ireland, both devolved regions of the United Kingdom. This partition of Ireland was confirmed when the Parliament of Northern Ireland exercised its right in December 1922 under the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921 to opt out of the newly established Irish Free State. A part of the treaty signed in 1922 mandated that a boundary commission would sit to decide where the frontier of the northern state would be in relation to its southern neighbour. After the Irish Civil War of 1922\u20131923, this part of the treaty was given less priority by the new Dublin government led by W. T. Cosgrave, and was quietly dropped. As counties Fermanagh and Tyrone and border areas of Londonderry, Armagh, and Down were mainly nationalist, the Irish Boundary Commission could reduce Northern Ireland to four counties or fewer. In October 1922, the Irish Free State government established the North-Eastern Boundary Bureau, a government office which by 1925 had prepared 56 boxes of files to argue its case for large areas of Northern Ireland to be transferred to the Free State.\nNorthern Ireland remained a part of the United Kingdom, albeit under a separate system of government whereby it was given its own parliament and devolved government. While this arrangement met the desires of unionists to remain part of the United Kingdom, nationalists largely viewed the partition of Ireland as an illegal and arbitrary division of the island against the will of the majority of its people. They argued that the Northern Ireland state was neither legitimate nor democratic, but created with a deliberately gerrymandered unionist majority. Catholics initially composed about 35% of its population. A total of 557 people, mostly Catholics, were killed in political or sectarian violence from 1920 to 1922 in the six counties that would become Northern Ireland, both during and after the Irish War of Independence. The result was communal strife between Catholics and Protestants, with some historians describing this violence, especially that in Belfast, as a pogrom, although historian Peter Hart argues that the term is not appropriate given the reciprocity of violence in Northern Ireland. (see The Troubles in Ulster (1920\u20131922) and Bloody Sunday (1921)).\n1922\u20131966.\nA marginalised remnant of the Irish Republican Army survived the Irish Civil War. This would come to have a major impact on Northern Ireland. Although the IRA was proscribed on both sides of the new Irish border, it remained ideologically committed to overthrowing both the Northern Ireland and the Free State governments by force of arms to unify Ireland. The government of Northern Ireland passed the Special Powers Act in 1922, giving sweeping powers to the government and police to intern suspects without trial and to administer corporal punishment such as flogging to re-establish or preserve law and order. The Act continued to be used against nationalists long after the violence of this period had come to an end. Various unionist militias were also incorporated into state structures, including the Ulster Special Constabulary, which Allen Feldman argues \"emulated the state's fusion of repressive and ideological apparatuses\".\nIn 1920, in local elections held under proportional representation, nationalists had won control over many local governments, including the County Councils of Fermanagh and Tyrone, and the Londonderry Borough Council governing Derry City. In response, in 1922, the new unionist government re-drew the electoral boundaries to give its supporters a disproportionate majority and abolished proportional representation in favour of first past the post voting. This resulted in control by unionists of areas such as Derry City, Fermanagh, and Tyrone, where they were actually a minority of voters.\nThe two sides' positions became strictly defined following this period. From a unionist perspective, Northern Ireland's nationalists were inherently disloyal and determined to force unionists into a united Ireland. This threat was seen as justifying preferential treatment of unionists in housing, employment, and other fields. The prevalence of larger families and thus the potential for a more rapid population growth among Catholics was seen as a threat. Unionist governments ignored Edward Carson's warning in 1921 that alienating Catholics would make Northern Ireland inherently unstable. After the early 1920s, there were occasional incidents of sectarian unrest in Northern Ireland. These included severe rioting in Belfast in the 1930s and 1950s, and the IRA's brief Northern Campaign in the 1940s and Border Campaign between 1956 and 1962, which did not enjoy broad popular support among nationalists. After the IRA called off its campaign in 1962, Northern Ireland became relatively stable for a few years.\nLate 1960s.\nThere is little agreement on the exact date of the start of the Troubles. Different writers have suggested different dates. These include the formation of the modern Ulster Volunteer Force in 1966, the civil rights march in Derry on 5 October 1968, the beginning of the 'Battle of the Bogside' on 12 August 1969, or the deployment of British troops on 14 August 1969. The Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023, passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, defined the start of the Troubles as 1 January 1966 for the purposes of the act.\nCivil rights campaign and unionist backlash.\nIn March and April 1966, Irish nationalists/republicans held parades throughout Ireland to mark the 50th anniversary of the Easter Rising. On 8 March, a group of Irish republicans dynamited Nelson's Pillar in Dublin. At the time, the IRA was weak and not engaged in armed action, but some unionists warned it was about to be revived to launch another campaign against Northern Ireland. In April 1966, loyalists led by Ian Paisley, a Protestant fundamentalist preacher, founded the Ulster Constitution Defence Committee (UCDC). It set up a paramilitary-style wing called the Ulster Protestant Volunteers (UPV) to oust Terence O'Neill, Prime Minister of Northern Ireland. Although O'Neill was a unionist, they viewed him as being too 'soft' on the civil rights movement and opposed his policies. At the same time, a loyalist group calling itself the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) emerged in the Shankill area of Belfast. It was led by Gusty Spence, a former British soldier. Many of its members were also members of the UCDC and UPV. In April and May 1966, the UVF petrol bombed a number of Catholic homes, schools, and businesses. A firebomb killed an elderly Protestant widow, Matilda Gould. \nOn 21 May 1966, the UVF issued a statement declaring \"war\" against the IRA and anyone helping it. The UVF fatally shot a Catholic civilian, John Scullion, as he walked home on 27 May. A month later it shot three Catholic civilians as they left a pub, killing Peter Ward, a Catholic from the Falls Road. Shortly after, the UVF was proscribed by the Northern Ireland government. The UVF is still considered a terrorist organization by the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland.\nIn the mid-1960s, a non-violent civil rights campaign began in Northern Ireland. It comprised groups such as the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA), the Campaign for Social Justice, the Derry Housing Action Committee, and People's Democracy, whose stated goals were:\nSome suspected and accused NICRA of being a republican front-group whose ultimate goal was to unite Ireland. Although republicans and some members of the IRA (then led by Cathal Goulding and pursuing a non-violent agenda) helped to create and drive the movement, they did not control it and were not a dominant faction within it.\nOn 20 June 1968, civil rights activists, including nationalist Member of Parliament (MP) Austin Currie, protested against housing discrimination by squatting in a house in Caledon, County Tyrone. The local council had allocated the house to an unmarried 19-year-old Protestant (Emily Beattie, the secretary of a local UUP politician) instead of either of two large Catholic families with children. RUC officers \u2013 one of whom was Beattie's brother \u2013 forcibly removed the activists. Two days before the protest, the two Catholic families who had been squatting in the house next door were removed by police. Currie had brought their grievance to the local council and to Stormont, but had been told to leave. The incident invigorated the civil rights movement.\nOn 24 August 1968, the civil rights movement held its first civil rights march from Coalisland to Dungannon. Many more marches were held over the following year. Loyalists (especially members of the UPV) attacked some of the marches and held counter-demonstrations in a bid to get the marches banned. Because of the lack of police reaction to the attacks, nationalists saw the RUC, which was almost wholly Protestant, as backing the loyalists and allowing the attacks to occur. On 5 October 1968, a civil rights march in Derry was banned by the Northern Ireland government. When marchers defied the ban, RUC officers surrounded the marchers and beat them indiscriminately and without provocation. More than 100 people were injured, including a number of nationalist politicians. The incident was filmed by television news crews and shown around the world. It caused outrage among Catholics and nationalists, sparking two days of rioting in Derry between nationalists and the RUC.\nA few days later, a student civil rights group, People's Democracy, was formed in Belfast. In late November, O'Neill promised the civil rights movement some concessions, but these were seen as too little by nationalists and too much by loyalists. On 1 January 1969, People's Democracy began a four-day march from Belfast to Derry, which was repeatedly harassed and attacked by loyalists. At Burntollet Bridge, the marchers were attacked by about 200 loyalists, including some off-duty police officers, armed with iron bars, bricks, and bottles in a planned ambush. When the march reached Derry City, it was again attacked. The marchers claimed that police did nothing to protect them and that some officers helped the attackers. That night, RUC officers went on a rampage in the Bogside area of Derry, attacking Catholic homes, attacking and threatening residents, and hurling sectarian abuse. Residents then sealed off the Bogside with barricades to keep the police out, creating \"Free Derry\", which was briefly a no-go area for the security forces.\nIn March and April 1969, loyalists bombed water and electricity installations in Northern Ireland, blaming them on the dormant IRA and elements of the civil rights movement. Some attacks left much of Belfast without power and water. Loyalists hoped the bombings would force O'Neill to resign and bring an end to any concessions to nationalists. There were six bombings between 30 March and 26 April. All were widely blamed on the IRA, and British soldiers were sent to guard installations. Unionist support for O'Neill waned, and on 28 April he resigned as prime minister.\nAugust 1969 riots and aftermath.\nOn 19 April, there were clashes between NICRA marchers, the RUC, and loyalists in the Bogside. RUC officers entered the house of Samuel Devenny (42), an uninvolved Catholic civilian, and beat him along with two of his teenage daughters and a family friend. One of the daughters was beaten unconscious as she lay recovering from surgery. Devenny suffered a heart attack and died on 17 July from his injuries. On 13 July, RUC officers beat another Catholic civilian, Francis McCloskey (67), during clashes in Dungiven. He died of his injuries the next day.\nOn 12 August, the loyalist Apprentice Boys of Derry were allowed to march along the edge of the Bogside. Taunts and missiles were exchanged between the loyalists and nationalist residents. After being bombarded with stones and petrol bombs from nationalists, the RUC, backed by loyalists, tried to storm the Bogside. The RUC used CS gas, armoured vehicles, and water cannons, but were kept at bay by hundreds of nationalists. The continuous fighting, which became known as the Battle of the Bogside, lasted for three days.\nIn response to events in Derry, nationalists held protests at RUC bases in Belfast and elsewhere. Some of these led to clashes with the RUC and attacks on RUC bases. In Belfast, loyalists responded by invading nationalist districts, burning houses and businesses. These sectarian attacks were characterized as the worst assaults on Catholic districts since the 1920s (see The Troubles in Ulster (1920\u20131922). There were gun battles between nationalists and the RUC and between nationalists and loyalists. A group of about 30 IRA members was involved in the fighting in Belfast. The RUC deployed Shorland armoured cars mounted with heavy Browning machine guns. The Shorlands twice opened fire on a block of flats in a nationalist district, killing a nine-year-old boy named Patrick Rooney. RUC officers opened fire on rioters in Armagh, Dungannon, and Coalisland.\nDuring the riots, on 13 August, . He condemned the RUC and said that the Irish Government \"can no longer stand by and see innocent people injured and perhaps worse\". He called for a United Nations peacekeeping force to be deployed and said that Irish Army field hospitals were being set up at the border in County Donegal near Derry. Lynch added that Irish re-unification would be the only permanent solution. Some interpreted the speech as a threat of military intervention. After the riots, Lynch ordered the Irish Army to plan for a possible humanitarian intervention in Northern Ireland. The plan, Exercise Armageddon, was rejected and remained classified for thirty years.\nOn 14\u201315 August, British troops were deployed in Operation Banner in Derry and Belfast to restore order, but did not try to enter the Bogside, bringing a temporary end to the riots. Ten people had been killed, among them Rooney (the first child killed by police during the conflict), and 745 had been injured, including 154 who suffered gunshot wounds. 154 homes and other buildings were demolished and over 400 needed repairs, of which 83% of the buildings damaged were occupied by Catholics. Between July and 1 September, 505 Catholic and 315 Protestant families were forced to flee their homes. The Irish Army set up refugee camps in the Republic near the border (see Gormanston Camp). Nationalists initially welcomed the British Army, as they did not trust the RUC.\nOn 9 September, the Northern Ireland Joint Security Committee met at Stormont Castle and decided that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A peace line was to be established to separate physically the Falls and the Shankill communities. Initially this would take the form of a temporary barbed wire fence which would be manned by the Army and the Police\u00a0... It was agreed that there should be no question of the peace line becoming permanent although it was acknowledged that the barriers might have to be strengthened in some locations.\nOn 10 September, the British Army started construction of the first \"peace wall\". It was the first of many such walls across Northern Ireland, and still stands today.\nAfter the riots, the Hunt Committee was set up to examine the RUC. It published its report on 12 October, recommending that the RUC become an unarmed force and the B Specials be disbanded. That night, loyalists took to the streets of Belfast in protest at the report. During violence in the Shankill, UVF members shot dead RUC officer Victor Arbuckle. He was the first RUC officer to be killed during the Troubles. In October and December 1969, the UVF carried out a number of small bombings in the Republic of Ireland.\n1970s.\nViolence peaks and Stormont collapses.\nDespite the British government's attempt to do \"nothing that would suggest partiality to one section of the community\" and the improvement of the relationship between the Army and the local population following the Army assistance with flood relief in August 1970, the Falls Curfew and a situation that was described at the time as \"an inflamed sectarian one, which is being deliberately exploited by the IRA and other extremists\" meant that relations between the Catholic population and the British Army rapidly deteriorated.\nFrom 1970 to 1972, an explosion of political violence occurred in Northern Ireland. The deadliest attack in the early 1970s was the McGurk's Bar bombing by the UVF in 1971. The violence peaked in 1972, when nearly 500 people, just over half of them civilians, were killed, the worst year in the entire conflict.\nBy the end of 1971, 29 barricades were in place in Derry, blocking access to what was known as Free Derry; 16 of these were impassable even to the British Army's one-ton armoured vehicles. Many of the nationalist or republican \"no-go areas\" were controlled by one of the two factions of the Irish Republican Army\u00a0\u2013 the Provisional IRA and Official IRA. There are several reasons offered for why violence escalated in these years.\nUnionists say the main reason was the formation of the Provisional IRA and Official IRA, particularly the former. These two groups were formed when into the 'Provisional' and 'Official' factions. While the older IRA had embraced non-violent civil agitation, the new Provisional IRA was determined to wage \"armed struggle\" against British rule in Northern Ireland. The new IRA was willing to take on the role of \"defenders of the Catholic community\", rather than seeking working-class ecumenical unity across both communities.\nNationalists point to a number of events in these years to explain the upsurge in violence. One such incident was the Falls Curfew in July 1970, when 3,000 troops imposed a curfew on the nationalist Lower Falls area of Belfast for two days as part of a weapons search, in which four civilians were killed and the army faced sporadic riots and gun battles with the Official IRA, firing over 1500 rounds of ammunition in total. Another was the introduction of internment without trial in 1971 (of 350 initial detainees, none were Protestants). Moreover, due to poor intelligence, very few of those interned were actually republican activists at the time, but some internees became increasingly radicalised as a result of their experiences.\nIn August 1971, eleven civilians were shot dead in the Ballymurphy massacre in Belfast. They were innocent and the killings were unjustified, according to a 2021 coroner's inquest. Nine victims were shot by the British Army.\nBloody Sunday.\nThe Bogside massacre, colloquially known as Bloody Sunday, was the shooting dead of thirteen unarmed men by the British Army at a proscribed anti-internment rally in Derry on 30 January 1972 (a fourteenth man died of his injuries some months later), while fifteen other civilians were wounded. The march had been organised by the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA). The soldiers involved were members of the 1st Battalion, Parachute Regiment, also known as \"1 Para\".\nThis was one of the most prominent events that occurred during the Troubles as it was recorded as the largest number of civilians killed in a single shooting incident. Bloody Sunday greatly increased the hostility of Catholics and Irish nationalists towards the British military and government while significantly elevating tensions. As a result, the Provisional IRA gained more support, especially through rising numbers of recruits in the local areas.\nFollowing the introduction of internment, there were numerous gun battles between the British Army and both the Provisional and Official IRA. These included the Battle at Springmartin and the Battle of Lenadoon. Between 1971 and 1975, 1,981 people were interned: 1,874 were Catholic/republican, and 107 were Protestant/loyalist. There were widespread allegations of abuse and even torture of detainees, and in 1972, the \"five techniques\" used by the police and army for interrogation were ruled to be illegal following a British government inquiry.\nThe Provisional IRA, or \"Provos\", as they became known, sought to establish themselves as the defender of the nationalist community. The Official IRA (OIRA) began its own armed campaign in reaction to the ongoing violence. The Provisional IRA's offensive campaign began in early 1971 when the Army Council sanctioned attacks on the British Army.\nIn 1972, the Provisional IRA killed approximately 100 members of the security forces, wounded 500 others, and carried out approximately 1,300 bombings, mostly against commercial targets which they considered \"the artificial economy\". Their bombing campaign killed many civilians, notably on Bloody Friday on 21 July, when they set off 22 bombs in the centre of Belfast, killing five civilians, two British soldiers, a Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) reservist, and an Ulster Defence Association (UDA) member. Ten days later, nine civilians were killed in a triple car bombing in Claudy. The IRA is accused of committing this bombing but no proof for that accusation is yet published.\nIn 1972, the Official IRA's campaign was largely counter-productive. The Aldershot bombing, an attack on the barracks of the Parachute Regiment in retaliation for Bloody Sunday, killed five female cleaners, a gardener and an army chaplain. The Official IRA killed three soldiers in Derry in April, but Joe McCann was killed by the Parachute Regiment in Belfast during the same month. The Official IRA called off its campaign in May 1972.\nBritish troop concentrations peaked at 1:50 of the civilian population, the highest ratio found in the history of counterinsurgency warfare, higher than that achieved during the \"Malayan Emergency\"/\"Anti-British National Liberation War\" to which the conflict is frequently compared. Operation Motorman, the military operation for the surge, was the biggest military operation in Ireland since the Irish War of Independence. In total, almost 22,000 British forces were involved. In the days before 31 July, about 4,000 extra troops were brought into Northern Ireland.\nDespite a temporary ceasefire in 1972 and talks with British officials, the Provisionals were determined to continue their campaign until the achievement of a united Ireland. The UK government in London, believing the Northern Ireland administration incapable of containing the security situation, sought to take over the control of law and order there. As this was unacceptable to the Northern Ireland Government, the British government pushed through emergency legislation (the Northern Ireland (Temporary Provisions) Act 1972) which suspended the unionist-controlled Stormont parliament and government, and introduced \"direct rule\" from London. Direct rule was initially intended as a short-term measure; the medium-term strategy was to restore self-government to Northern Ireland on a basis that was acceptable to both unionists and nationalists. Agreement proved elusive, however, and the Troubles continued throughout the 1970s, 1980s, and the 1990s within a context of political deadlock. The existence of \"no-go areas\" in Belfast and Derry was a challenge to the authority of the British government in Northern Ireland, and the British Army demolished the barricades and re-established control over the areas in Operation Motorman on 31 July 1972.\nSunningdale Agreement and UWC strike.\nIn June 1973, following the publication of a British White Paper and a referendum in March on the status of Northern Ireland, a new parliamentary body, the Northern Ireland Assembly, was established. Elections to this body were held on 28 June. In October 1973, mainstream nationalist and unionist parties, along with the British and Irish governments, negotiated the Sunningdale Agreement, which was intended to produce a political settlement within Northern Ireland, but with a so-called \"Irish dimension\" involving the Republic. The agreement provided for \"power-sharing\" \u2013 the creation of an executive containing both unionists and nationalists; and a \"Council of Ireland\" \u2013 a body made up of ministers from Northern Ireland and the Republic that was designed to encourage cross-border co-operation.\nUnionists were split over Sunningdale, which was also opposed by the IRA, whose goal remained nothing short of an end to the existence of Northern Ireland as part of the UK. Many unionists opposed the concept of power-sharing, arguing that it was not feasible to share power with nationalists who sought the destruction of the state. Perhaps more significant, however, was the unionist opposition to the \"Irish dimension\" and the Council of Ireland, which was perceived as being an all-Ireland parliament-in-waiting. Remarks by a young Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) councillor Hugh Logue to an audience at Trinity College Dublin that Sunningdale was the tool \"by which the Unionists will be trundled off to a united Ireland\" also damaged chances of significant unionist support for the agreement. In January 1974, Brian Faulkner was narrowly deposed as UUP leader and replaced by Harry West, although Faulkner retained his position as Chief Executive in the new government. A UK general election in February 1974 gave the anti-Sunningdale unionists the opportunity to test unionist opinion with the slogan \"Dublin is only a Sunningdale away\", and the result galvanised their support: they won 11 of the 12 seats, winning 58% of the vote with most of the rest going to nationalists and pro-Sunningdale unionists.\nUltimately, the Sunningdale Agreement was brought down by mass action on the part of loyalist paramilitaries and workers, who formed the Ulster Workers' Council. They organised a general strike, the Ulster Workers' Council strike. This severely curtailed business in Northern Ireland and cut off essential services such as water and electricity. Nationalists argue that the British Government did not do enough to break this strike and uphold the Sunningdale initiative. There is evidence that the strike was further encouraged by MI5, a part of their campaign to 'disorientate' British prime minister Harold Wilson's government (see also Harold Wilson conspiracy theories). Faced with such opposition, the pro-Sunningdale unionists resigned from the power-sharing government and the new regime collapsed. Three days into the UWC strike, on 17 May 1974, two UVF teams from the Belfast and Mid-Ulster brigades detonated three no-warning car bombs in Dublin's city centre during the Friday evening rush hour, resulting in 26 deaths and close to 300 injuries. Ninety minutes later, a fourth car bomb exploded in Monaghan, killing seven additional people. Nobody has ever been convicted for these attacks and the bombings were the greatest loss of life in a single day during the Troubles.\nProposal of an independent Northern Ireland.\nEven as his government deployed troops in August 1969, Wilson ordered a secret study of whether the British military could withdraw from Northern Ireland, including all 45 bases, such as the submarine school in Derry. The study concluded that the military could do so in three months, but if increased violence collapsed civil society, Britain would have to send in troops again. Without bases, to do so would be an invasion of Ireland; Wilson thus decided against a withdrawal.\nWilson's cabinet discussed the more drastic step of complete British withdrawal from an independent Northern Ireland as early as February 1969, as one of various possibilities for the region including direct rule. He wrote in 1971 that Britain had \"responsibility without power\" there, and secretly met with the IRA that year while leader of the opposition; his government in late 1974 and early 1975 again met with the IRA to negotiate a ceasefire. During the meetings, the parties discussed complete British withdrawal. Although the British government publicly stated that troops would stay as long as necessary, widespread fear from the Birmingham pub bombings and other IRA attacks in Britain itself increased support among MPs and the public for a military withdrawal.\nThe failure of Sunningdale and the effectiveness of the UWC strike against British authority were more evidence to Wilson of his 1971 statement. They led to the serious consideration in London of independence until November 1975. Had the withdrawal occurred \u2013 which Wilson supported but others, including James Callaghan, opposed \u2013 the region would have become a separate dominion. According to the secret plan, codenamed \"Doomsday\", Britain would have had as little to do with the new \"Ulster Dominion\" as possible, with financial subsidies ending within five years. It would not have been an associated state, with Britain in control only of foreign relations, because a war between Ulster and the Republic would involve Britain. The dominion would also not have been a member of the British Commonwealth. The Northern Ireland Office cited the 1948 Newfoundland referendums\u00a0\u2013 in which the island voluntarily joined Canada, its larger neighbor\u00a0\u2013 as an example that divided Ireland might hopefully follow.\nThe British negotiations with the IRA, an illegal organisation, angered the Republic's government. It did not know what was discussed but feared that the British were considering abandoning Northern Ireland. Irish Foreign Minister Garret FitzGerald discussed in a memorandum of June 1975 the possibilities of orderly withdrawal and independence, repartition of the island, or a collapse of Northern Ireland into civil war and anarchy. The memorandum preferred a negotiated independence as the best of the three \"worst case scenarios\", but concluded that the Irish government could do little.\nThe Irish government had already failed to prevent a crowd from the burning of British Embassy, Dublin in 1972. It believed that Ireland could not enlarge the country's small army of 12,500 men without negative consequences. A civil war in Northern Ireland would cause many deaths there and severe consequences for the Republic, as the public would demand that it intervene to protect nationalists. FitzGerald warned Callaghan that the failure to intervene, despite Ireland's inability to do so, would \"threaten democratic government in the Republic\", which would jeopardise British and European security against Communist and other foreign nations.\nWilson's aides had in 1969 come to a similar conclusion, telling him that removing Northern Ireland from the United Kingdom would cause violence and a military intervention by the Republic that would not allow the removal of British troops. Loyalist leader Glen Barr said in 2008 that a British withdrawal would have caused civil war, as Loyalists would have expected the Republic to invade Northern Ireland. Peter Ramsbotham, British Ambassador to the United States, warned of a hostile American reaction.\nWilson's desire to extricate the British government from Northern Ireland was ultimately stymied by the fear that doing so might lead to catastrophe. The Irish government so dreaded the consequences that FitzGerald refused to ask Britain not to withdraw\u00a0\u2013 as he feared that openly discussing the issue could permit the British to proceed\u00a0\u2013 and other members of government opposed the Irish Cabinet even discussing what FitzGerald referred to as a \"doomsday scenario\". He wrote in 2006 that \"Neither then nor since has public opinion in Ireland realised how close to disaster our whole island came during the last two years of Harold Wilson's premiership\"; in 2008, he said that the Republic \"was more at risk then than at any time since our formation\".\nMid-1970s.\nIn February 1974, an IRA time bomb killed 12 people on a coach on the M62 in the West Riding of Yorkshire. Merlyn Rees, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, lifted the proscription against the UVF in April 1974. In December, a month after the Birmingham pub bombings killed 21 people, the IRA declared a ceasefire; this would theoretically last throughout most of the following year. The ceasefire notwithstanding, sectarian killings escalated in 1975, along with internal feuding between rival paramilitary groups. This made 1975 one of the \"bloodiest years of the conflict\".\nOn 7 August 1974, a 24 year old man from Limehill near Pomeroy, County Tyrone was shot in the back and killed by a member of the British Army (First Battalion, Royal Regiment of Wales). At the first inquest the soldier was cleared of all charges but in 2020 another inquest was ordered by the Attorney General. The inquest was the first in a series of coroners' inquiries into deaths associated with the Troubles. The Coroner ruled that the killing of Paddy McElhone was unjustified with a judge stating \"an innocent man shot in cold blood without warning when he was no threat to anyone.\" The McElhone family issued a statement reading in part: \"Our family always knew that Paddy was an innocent young man, taken from his home and shot by a British soldier for no reason\". The statement also said that his parents \"went to their graves broken-hearted knowing that their innocent son had been killed, without justification, explanation or apology\". \nOn 5 April 1975, Irish republican paramilitary members killed a UDA volunteer and four Protestant civilians in a gun and bomb attack at the Mountainview Tavern on the Shankill Road, Belfast. The attack was claimed by the Republican Action Force believed to be a covername used by Provisional IRA (IRA) volunteers.\nOn 31 July 1975 at Buskhill, outside Newry, popular Irish cabaret band the Miami Showband was returning home to Dublin after a gig in Banbridge when it was ambushed by gunmen from the UVF Mid-Ulster Brigade wearing British Army uniforms at a bogus military roadside checkpoint on the main A1 road. Three of the bandmembers, two Catholics and a Protestant, were shot dead, while two of the UVF men were killed when the bomb they had loaded onto the band's minibus detonated prematurely. The following January, eleven Protestant workers were gunned down in Kingsmill, South Armagh after having been ordered off their bus by an armed republican gang, which called itself the South Armagh Republican Action Force. This resulted in 10 fatalities, with one man surviving despite being shot 18 times. These killings were reportedly in retaliation to a loyalist double shooting attack against the Reavey and O'Dowd families the previous night.\nThe violence continued through the rest of the 1970s. This included a series of attacks in Southern England in 1974 and 1975 by Provisional IRA active service unit the Balcombe Street Gang. The British Government reinstated the ban against the UVF in October 1975, making it once more an illegal organisation. The Provisional IRA's December 1974 ceasefire officially ended in January 1976, although it had carried out several attacks in 1975. The Provisional IRA had lost the hope it had felt in the early 1970s that it could force a rapid British withdrawal from Northern Ireland, and instead developed a strategy known as the \"Long War\", which involved a less intense but more sustained campaign of violence that could continue indefinitely. The Official IRA ceasefire of 1972, however, became permanent, and the \"Official\" movement eventually evolved into the Workers' Party, which rejected violence completely. However, a splinter from the \"Officials\"\u00a0\u2013 the Irish National Liberation Army\u00a0\u2013 continued a campaign of violence beginning in 1974.\nLate 1970s.\nBy the late 1970s, war-weariness was visible in both communities. One sign of this was the formation of the Peace People, which won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1976. The Peace People organised large demonstrations calling for an end to paramilitary violence. Their campaign lost momentum, however, after they appealed to the nationalist community to provide information on the IRA to security forces.\nIn February 1978, the IRA bombed La Mon, a hotel restaurant in Comber, County Down. The decade ended with a double attack by the IRA against the British. On 27 August 1979, Lord Mountbatten, while on holiday in Mullaghmore, County Sligo, was killed by a bomb planted on board his boat. Three other people were also killed: Lady Brabourne, the elderly mother of Mountbatten's son-in-law; and two teenagers, a grandson of Mountbatten and a local boatman. That same day, eighteen British soldiers, mostly members of the Parachute Regiment, were killed by two remote-controlled bombs in the Warrenpoint ambush at Narrow Water Castle, near Warrenpoint, County Down. It was the British Army's largest loss of life in a single incident in Operation Banner.\nSuccessive British Governments, having failed to achieve a political settlement, tried to \"normalise\" Northern Ireland. Aspects included the removal of internment without trial and the removal of political status for paramilitary prisoners. From 1972 onward, paramilitaries were tried in juryless Diplock courts to avoid intimidation of jurors. On conviction, they were to be treated as ordinary criminals. Resistance to this policy among republican prisoners led to more than 500 of them in the Maze prison initiating the \"blanket\" and \"dirty\" protests. Their protests culminated in hunger strikes in 1980 and 1981, aimed at the restoration of political status, as well as other concessions.\n1980s.\nIn the 1981 Irish hunger strike, ten republican prisoners (seven from the Provisional IRA and three from the INLA) died of starvation. The first hunger striker to die, Bobby Sands, was elected to Parliament on an Anti-H-Block ticket, as was his election agent Owen Carron following Sands's death. The hunger strikes resonated among many nationalists; over 100,000 people attended Sands's funeral mass in West Belfast and thousands attended those of the other hunger strikers. From an Irish republican perspective, the significance of these events was to demonstrate potential for a political and electoral strategy.\nIn the wake of the hunger strikes, Sinn F\u00e9in, which had become the Provisional IRA's political wing, began to contest elections for the first time in both Northern Ireland (as abstentionists) and in the Republic. In 1986, Sinn F\u00e9in recognised the legitimacy of the Irish D\u00e1il, which caused a small group of members to break away and form Republican Sinn F\u00e9in.\nThe IRA's \"Long War\" was boosted by large donations of arms from Libya in the 1980s (see Provisional IRA arms importation) partly due to Muammar Gaddafi's anger at British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's government for assisting the Reagan government's 1986 bombing of Libya, which had allegedly killed one of Gaddafi's children. Additionally, it received funding from supporters in the Republic of Ireland and the United States and elsewhere throughout the Irish diaspora. Loyalist paramilitaries also received significant funding and arms from supporters in Canada and Scotland.\nIn July 1982, the IRA bombed military ceremonies in London's Hyde Park and Regent's Park, killing four soldiers, seven bandsmen, and seven horses. The INLA was highly active in the early and mid-1980s. In December 1982, it bombed a disco in Ballykelly, County Londonderry, frequented by off-duty British soldiers, killing 11 soldiers and six civilians. In December 1983, the IRA attacked Harrods using a car bomb, killing six people. One of the IRA's most high-profile actions in this period was the Brighton hotel bombing on 12 October 1984, when it set off a 100-pound time bomb in the Grand Brighton Hotel in Brighton, where politicians including Thatcher were staying for the Conservative Party conference. The bomb, which exploded in the early hours of the morning, killed five people, including Conservative MP Sir Anthony Berry, and injured 34 others.\nOn 28 February 1985 in Newry, nine RUC officers were killed in a mortar attack on the police station. It was planned by the IRA's South Armagh Brigade and an IRA unit in Newry. Nine shells were fired from a mark 10 mortar which was bolted onto the back of a hijacked Ford van in Crossmaglen. Eight shells overshot the station; the ninth hit a portable cabin which was being used as a canteen. It was the RUC's largest loss of life during the Troubles. On 8 May 1987, eight IRA members attacked an RUC station in Loughgall, County Armagh, using a bomb and guns. All were killed by the SAS \u2013 the most IRA members killed in a single incident in the Troubles. On 8 November 1987 in Enniskillen, County Fermanagh, a Provisional IRA time bomb exploded during a Remembrance Sunday ceremony for UK Commonwealth war casualties. The bomb went off near a cenotaph that was at the heart of the parade. Eleven people (ten civilians and one serving member of the RUC) were killed and 63 were injured. Former school headmaster Ronnie Hill was seriously injured in the bombing and slipped into a coma two days later, remaining in this condition for more than a decade before his death in December 2000. The unit that carried out the bombing was disbanded. Loyalist paramilitaries responded to the bombing with revenge attacks on Catholics, mostly civilians. Another bomb had been planted at nearby Tullyhommon at a parallel Remembrance Day commemoration but failed to detonate.\nIn March 1988, three IRA volunteers who were planning a bombing were shot dead by the SAS at a Shell petrol station on Winston Churchill Avenue in Gibraltar, the British Overseas Territory attached to the south of Spain. This became known as Operation Flavius. Their funeral at Milltown Cemetery in Belfast was attacked by Michael Stone, a UDA member who threw grenades as the coffin was lowered and shot at people who chased him. Stone killed three people, including IRA volunteer Kevin Brady. Stone was jailed for life the following year, but was freed 11 years later under the Good Friday Agreement. Two British Army corporals, David Howes and Derek Wood, who were in plain clothes, drove their car into Brady's funeral cortege in Andersonstown. The crowd assumed the soldiers were loyalists intent on repeating Stone's attack; dozens of people surrounded and attacked their car. The soldiers were pulled out of their car, kidnapped and shot dead by the IRA. This became known as the Corporals killings.\nIn September 1989, the IRA used a time bomb to attack the Royal Marine Depot, Deal in Kent, killing 11 bandsmen.\nTowards the end of the decade, the British Army tried to soften its public appearance to residents in communities such as Derry in order to improve relations between the local community and the military. Soldiers were told not to use the telescopic sights on their rifles to scan the streets, as civilians believed they were being aimed at. Soldiers were also encouraged to wear berets when manning checkpoints (and later other situations) rather than helmets, which were perceived as militaristic and hostile. The system of complaints was overhauled \u2013 previously, if civilians believed they were being harassed or abused by soldiers in the streets or during searches and made a complaint, they would never find out what action (if any) was taken. The new regulations required an officer to visit the complainants house to inform them of the outcome of their complaint.\nIn the 1980s, loyalist paramilitary groups\u2014the Ulster Volunteer Force, the Ulster Defence Association, and Ulster Resistance\u2014imported arms and explosives from South Africa. The weapons obtained were divided between the groups, although some of the weaponry (such as rocket-propelled grenades) were hardly used. In 1987, the Irish People's Liberation Organisation (IPLO), a breakaway faction of the INLA, engaged in a bloody feud against the INLA which weakened the INLA's presence in some areas. By 1992, the IPLO was destroyed by the Provisionals for its involvement in drug dealing, thus ending the feud.\n1990s.\nEscalation in South Armagh.\nThe IRA's South Armagh Brigade had made the countryside village of Crossmaglen their stronghold since the 1970s. The surrounding villages of Silverbridge, Cullyhanna, Cullaville, Forkhill, Jonesborough, and Creggan were also IRA strongholds. In February 1978, a British Army Gazelle helicopter was shot down near Silverbridge, killing Lieutenant Colonel Ian Corden-Lloyd.\nIn the 1990s, the IRA came up with a new plan to restrict British Army foot patrols near Crossmaglen. They developed two sniper teams to attack British Army and RUC patrols. They usually fired from an improvised armoured car using a .50 BMG calibre M82 sniper rifle. Signs were put up around South Armagh reading \"Sniper at Work\". The snipers killed a total of nine members of the security forces: seven soldiers and two constables. The last to be killed before the Good Friday Agreement was a British soldier, bombardier Steven Restorick.\nThe IRA had developed the capacity to attack helicopters in South Armagh and elsewhere since the 1980s, including the 1990 shootdown of a Gazelle flying over the border between counties Tyrone and Monaghan by the East Tyrone Brigade; there were no fatalities in any of those incidents.\nAnother incident involving British helicopters in South Armagh was the Battle of Newry Road in September 1993. Two other helicopters, a British Army Lynx and a Royal Air Force Puma were shot down by improvised mortar fire in 1994. The IRA set up checkpoints in South Armagh during this period, which were unchallenged by the security forces.\nDowning Street mortar attack.\nOn 7 February 1991, the IRA attempted to assassinate prime minister John Major and his war cabinet by firing a mortar at 10 Downing Street while they were gathered there to discuss the Gulf War. The shelling caused only four injuries, two of which were to police officers, while Major and the entire war cabinet were unharmed.\nFirst ceasefire.\nAfter a prolonged period of background political manoeuvring, during which the 1992 Baltic Exchange and 1993 Bishopsgate bombings occurred in London, both loyalist and republican paramilitary groups declared ceasefires in 1994.\nThe year leading up to the ceasefires included a mass shooting in Castlerock, County Londonderry, in which four people were killed. The IRA responded with the Shankill Road bombing in October 1993, which aimed to kill the UDA leadership, but instead killed eight Protestant civilian shoppers and a low-ranking UDA member, as well as one of the perpetrators, who was killed when the bomb detonated prematurely. The UDA responded with attacks in nationalist areas including a mass shooting in Greysteel, in which eight civilians were killed \u2013 six Catholics and two Protestants.\nOn 16 June 1994, just before the ceasefires, the Irish National Liberation Army killed three UVF members in a gun attack on the Shankill Road. In revenge, three days later the UVF killed six civilians in a shooting at a pub in Loughinisland, County Down. The IRA, in the remaining month before its ceasefire, killed four senior loyalist paramilitaries, three from the UDA and one from the UVF. On 31 August 1994, the IRA declared a ceasefire. The loyalist paramilitaries, temporarily united in the \"Combined Loyalist Military Command\", reciprocated six weeks later. Although these ceasefires failed in the short run, they marked an effective end to large-scale political violence, as they paved the way for the final ceasefires.\nIn 1995, the United States appointed George J. Mitchell as the United States Special Envoy for Northern Ireland. Mitchell was recognised as being more than a token envoy and as representing a President (Bill Clinton) with a deep interest in events. The British and Irish governments agreed that Mitchell would chair an international commission on disarmament of paramilitary groups.\nSecond ceasefire.\nOn 9 February 1996, less than two years after the declaration of the ceasefire, the IRA revoked it with the Docklands bombing in the Canary Wharf area of London, killing two people, injuring 39 others, and causing \u00a385\u00a0million in damage to the city's financial centre. Sinn F\u00e9in blamed the failure of the ceasefire on the British Government's refusal to begin all-party negotiations until the IRA decommissioned its weapons.\nThe attack was followed by several more, most notably the 1996 Manchester bombing, which destroyed a large area of the centre of the city on 15 June. It was the largest bomb attack in Britain since World War II. While the attack avoided any fatalities due to a telephone warning and the rapid response of the emergency services, over 200 people were injured in the attack, many of them outside the established cordon. The damage caused by the blast was estimated at \u00a3411\u00a0million. Lance bombardier Stephen Restorick, the last British soldier killed during the Troubles, was shot dead at a checkpoint on the Green Rd near Bessbrook on 12 February 1997 by the IRA's South Armagh sniper.\nThe IRA reinstated their ceasefire in July 1997, as negotiations for the document that became known as the Good Friday Agreement began without Sinn F\u00e9in. In September of the same year, Sinn F\u00e9in signed the Mitchell Principles and were admitted to the talks. The UVF was the first paramilitary grouping to split as a result of their ceasefire, spawning the Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF) in 1996. In December 1997, the INLA assassinated LVF leader Billy Wright, leading to a series of revenge killings by loyalist groups. A group split from the Provisional IRA and formed the Real IRA (RIRA).\nIn August 1998, a Real IRA bomb in Omagh killed 29 civilians, the most by a single bomb during the Troubles. This bombing discredited \"dissident republicans\" and their campaigns in the eyes of many who had previously supported the Provisionals' campaign. They became small groups with little influence, but still capable of violence.\nThe INLA also declared a ceasefire after the Good Friday Agreement. Since then, most paramilitary violence has been directed at their \"own\" communities and at other factions within their organisations. The UDA, for example, has feuded with their fellow loyalists the UVF on two occasions since 2000. There have been internal struggles for power between \"brigade commanders\" and involvement in organised crime.\nPolitical process.\nAfter the ceasefires, talks began between the main political parties in Northern Ireland to establish political agreement. These talks led to the Good Friday Agreement of 1998. This Agreement restored self-government to Northern Ireland on the basis of \"power-sharing\". In 1999, an executive was formed consisting of the four main parties, including Sinn F\u00e9in. Other important changes included the reform of the RUC, renamed as the Police Service of Northern Ireland, which was required to recruit at least a 50% quota of Catholics for ten years, and the removal of Diplock courts under the Justice and Security (Northern Ireland) Act 2007.\nA security normalisation process also began as part of the treaty, which comprised the progressive closing of redundant British Army barracks, border observation towers, and the withdrawal of all forces taking part in Operation Banner \u2013 including the resident battalions of the Royal Irish Regiment \u2013 that would be replaced by an infantry brigade, deployed in ten sites around Northern Ireland but with no operative role in the province.\nThe power-sharing Executive and Assembly were suspended in 2002, when unionists withdrew following \"Stormontgate\", a controversy over allegations of an IRA spy ring operating at Stormont. There were ongoing tensions about the Provisional IRA's failure to disarm fully and sufficiently quickly. IRA decommissioning has since been completed (in September 2005) to the satisfaction of most parties.\nA feature of Northern Ireland politics since the Agreement has been eclipsed in electoral terms of parties such as the SDLP and Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) by rival parties such as Sinn F\u00e9in and the DUP. Similarly, although political violence is greatly reduced, sectarian animosity has not disappeared. Residential areas are more segregated between Catholic nationalists and Protestant unionists than ever. Thus, progress towards restoring the power-sharing institutions was slow and tortuous. On 8 May 2007, devolved government returned to Northern Ireland. DUP leader Ian Paisley and Sinn F\u00e9in's Martin McGuinness took office as First Minister and deputy First Minister, respectively.\nSupport outside Northern Ireland.\nArms importation.\nBoth Republican and Loyalist paramilitaries sought to obtain weapons outside of Northern Ireland in order to achieve their objectives. Irish Republican paramilitaries received the vast majority of external support. Over the years, the Provisional IRA imported arms from external sources such as sympathisers in the Republic of Ireland, Irish diaspora communities within the Anglosphere, mainland Europe, the Palestine Liberation Organization, and Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi. The Soviet Union and North Korea supplied the Official IRA with 5,000 weapons, and the INLA received considerable arms from overseas as well.\nThe IRA's primary external support was from the Republic of Ireland, whose safe haven allowed the group to raise legal and illegal funds, organise and train, and manufacture a large number of firearms and explosives with ease and then smuggled them into Northern Ireland and England. The IRA's primary weapon in the Republic was explosives (including gelignite and ANFO), which were responsible for the vast majority of the bombings in Northern Ireland and England throughout the conflict. While the plastic explosive Semtex donated by Gaddafi was appreciated and infamous in IRA bombing campaigns, they were actually sparsely used. Notable events of IRA bombs of Irish origin included Bloody Friday, the Warrenpoint ambush, the assassination of Lord Mountbatten, and the Hyde Park and Regent's Park bombings.\nLoyalist paramilitaries also received support, mainly from Protestant supporters in Canada, England, and Scotland (including members of the Orange Order). From 1979 to 1986, loyalist paramilitaries imported up to 100 machine guns and \"as many rifles, grenade launchers, magnum revolvers and hundreds of thousands of rounds of ammunition from Canada.\" Members of the Grand Orange Lodge of Scotland sent gelignite explosives to UDA and UVF members. British Army's Force Research Unit (FRU) agent Brian Nelson also secured a large amount of weaponry from the South African government to loyalists.\nFunding.\nIrish Republican and Loyalist militants also received significant funding from groups, individuals, and state actors outside Northern Ireland. From the 1970s to the early 1990s, Libya gave the IRA over $12.5\u00a0million in cash (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024). The IRA also received at least $2 million from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) in exchange for training them with bomb techniques, including shaped charges, propane bombs, landmines, and the construction of mortars (see also the Colombia Three). On the Loyalist side, the Northern Ireland Affairs Select Committee report of June 2002 stated that \"in 1992 it was estimated that Scottish support for the UDA and UVF might amount to \u00a3100,000 a year.\"\nIn the Anglosphere outside Great Britain, Irish Americans, Irish Canadians, Irish Australians, and Irish New Zealanders provided considerable or substantial financial donations to the Republican movement, mostly the Provisionals. The financial backbone of the Provisional cause in America was the Irish Northern Aid Committee (NORAID), which was estimated to have raised $3.6 million between 1970 and 1991, including for supporting families of dead or imprisoned IRA members, lobbying and propaganda efforts, and sometimes purchasing weapons for the Provisional IRA. In Australia, officials estimated that by the 1990s, no more than A$20,000 were raised annually for the Provisionals. Canadian supporters raised money to secretly purchase weapons, notably detonators used for Canadian mining sites and smuggled to the IRA.\nHowever, nearly all or the vast majority of the funding for both Republican and Loyalist paramilitaries came from criminal and business activities within the island of Ireland and Great Britain. The Northern Ireland Affairs Select Committee report of June 2002 stated that:Historically, the vast majority of paramilitary funds for both Republican and Loyalist groups have been generated within Northern Ireland. The primary reason for this is the relative ease of raising funds within these communities. Sympathy for the cause is greatest within the originating community. Those concerned also have the local knowledge which facilitates crime or the direct intimidation of individuals from whom money is sought. The fact that Northern Ireland remains predominantly a cash economy also encourages a local focus, as it facilitates money laundering and makes it difficult for the law enforcement agencies to trace transactions.\nCollusion between security forces and paramilitaries.\nThere were many incidents of collusion between the British state security forces (the British Army and RUC) and loyalist paramilitaries. This included soldiers and policemen taking part in loyalist attacks while off-duty, giving weapons and intelligence to loyalists, not taking action against loyalists, and hindering police investigations. The De Silva Report found that, during the 1980s, 85% of the intelligence loyalists used to target people came from the security forces, who in turn also had double agents and informers within loyalist groups who organised attacks on the orders of or with the knowledge of their handlers. Of the 210 loyalists arrested by the Stevens Inquiries team, all but three were found to be state agents or informers.\nThe British Army's locally recruited Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR) was almost wholly Protestant. Despite recruits being vetted, some loyalist militants managed to enlist, mainly to obtain weapons, training, and information. A 1973 British Government document (uncovered in 2004), \"Subversion in the UDR\", suggested that 5\u201315% of UDR soldiers then were members of loyalist paramilitaries. The report said the UDR was the main source of weapons for those groups, although by 1973, UDR weapons losses had dropped significantly, partly due to stricter controls. In 1977, the Army investigated a UDR battalion based at Girdwood Barracks, Belfast. The investigation found that 70 soldiers had links to the UVF, that thirty soldiers had fraudulently diverted up to \u00a347,000 to the UVF, and that UVF members socialised with soldiers in their mess. Following this, two UDR members were dismissed. The investigation was halted after a senior officer claimed it was harming morale. By 1990, at least 197 UDR soldiers had been convicted of loyalist terrorist offences and other serious crimes, including 19 convicted of murder. This was only a small fraction of those who served in the UDR, but the proportion was higher than the regular British Army, the RUC, and the civilian population.\nDuring the 1970s, the Glenanne gang\u00a0\u2013 a secret alliance of loyalist militants, British soldiers, and RUC officers\u00a0\u2013 carried out a string of gun and bomb attacks against nationalists in an area of Northern Ireland known as the \"murder triangle\". It also carried out some attacks in the Republic, killing about 120 people in total, mostly uninvolved civilians. The \"Cassel Report\" investigated 76 murders attributed to the group and found evidence that soldiers and policemen were involved in 74 of those. One member, RUC officer John Weir, claimed his superiors knew of the collusion but allowed it to continue. The Cassel Report also stated some senior officers knew of the crimes but did nothing to prevent, investigate, or punish perpetrators. Attacks attributed to the group include the Dublin and Monaghan bombings (1974), the Miami Showband killings (1975), and the Reavey and O'Dowd killings (1976).\nThe Stevens Inquiries found that elements of the security forces had used loyalists as \"proxies\" who, via double-agents and informers, had helped loyalist groups to kill targeted individuals, usually suspected republicans but also civilians both intentionally and otherwise. The inquiries concluded this had intensified and prolonged the conflict. The British Army's Force Research Unit (FRU) was the main agency involved. Brian Nelson, the UDA's chief 'intelligence officer', was a FRU agent. Through Nelson, FRU helped loyalists target people for assassination. FRU commanders say they helped loyalists target only suspected or known republican activists and prevented the killing of civilians. The Inquiries found evidence only two lives were saved and that Nelson/FRU was responsible for at least 30 murders and many other attacks, many on civilians. One victim was solicitor Pat Finucane. Nelson also supervised the shipping of weapons to loyalists in 1988. From 1992 to 1994, loyalists were responsible for more deaths than republicans, partly due to FRU involvement. Members of the security forces tried to obstruct the Stevens investigation.\nA Police Ombudsman report from 2007 revealed that UVF members had been allowed to commit a string of terrorist offences, including murder, while working as informers for RUC Special Branch. It found that Special Branch had given informers immunity by ensuring they were not caught or convicted and blocking weapons searches. Ombudsman Nuala O'Loan concluded that this had led to \"hundreds\" of deaths and said senior British Government officials pressured her into halting her investigation. UVF member Robin Jackson has been linked to between 50 and 100 killings in Northern Ireland, although he was never convicted for any. It is alleged by many, including members of the security forces, that Jackson was an RUC agent. The Irish Government's Barron Report alleged that Jackson also \"had relationships with British Intelligence\". In 2016, a new Ombudsman report concluded that there had been collusion between the police and the UVF in relation to the deaths of six Catholic men in the 1994 Loughinisland massacre and that the investigation was undermined by the wish to protect informers, but found no evidence police had foreknowledge of the attack.\nThe Smithwick Tribunal concluded that a member of the (the Republic of Ireland's police force) colluded with the IRA in the killing of two senior RUC officers in 1989. The two officers were ambushed by the IRA near Jonesborough, County Armagh, when returning from a cross-border security conference in Dundalk in the Republic of Ireland.\nThe Disappeared.\nDuring the 1970s and 1980s, republican and loyalist paramilitaries abducted a number of individuals, many alleged to have been informers, who were then secretly killed and buried. Seventeen people \u2013 sixteen men and one woman, including a British Army officer \u2013 were killed during the Troubles and are informally referred to as \"The Disappeared\". All were abducted by republican groups. A further case, that of Lisa Dorrian, who disappeared in 2005 and is believed to have been abducted by loyalists, is often included in broader usage of the term, though her case falls outside the Troubles-era context and the remit of the Independent Commission for the Location of Victims' Remains. The remains of all but four of those referred to as \"The Disappeared\" have been recovered and returned to their families.\nBritish Army attacks on civilians.\nBritish government security forces, including the Military Reaction Force (MRF), carried out what have been described as \"extrajudicial killings\" of unarmed civilians. Their victims were often Catholic or suspected Catholic civilians unaffiliated with any paramilitaries, such as the Whiterock Road shooting of two unarmed Catholic civilians by British soldiers on 15 April 1972, and the Andersonstown shooting of seven unarmed Catholic civilians on 12 May that same year. A member of the MRF stated in 1978 that the Army often attempted false flag sectarian attacks, provoking sectarian conflict and \"taking the heat off the Army\". A former member stated: \"[W]e were not there to act like an army unit, we were there to act like a terror group.\"\nShoot-to-kill allegations.\nRepublicans allege that the security forces operated a shoot-to-kill policy rather than arresting IRA suspects. The security forces denied this and pointed out that six of the eight IRA men killed in the Loughgall ambush in 1987 were heavily armed. On the other hand, the shooting of three unarmed IRA members in Gibraltar by the Special Air Service ten months later appeared to confirm suspicions among republicans and in the British and Irish media of a tacit British shoot-to-kill policy of suspected IRA members.\nParades issue.\nInter-communal tensions rise and violence often breaks out during the \"marching season\" when the Protestant Orange Order parades take place across Northern Ireland. The parades are held to commemorate William of Orange's victory in the Battle of the Boyne in 1690, which secured the Protestant Ascendancy and British rule in Ireland. One particular flashpoint which has caused continuous annual strife is the Garvaghy Road area in Portadown, where an Orange parade from Drumcree Church passes through a mainly nationalist estate off the Garvaghy Road. This parade has now been banned indefinitely, following nationalist riots against the parade and loyalist counter-riots against its banning.\nIn 1995, 1996, and 1997, there were several weeks of prolonged rioting throughout Northern Ireland over the impasse at Drumcree. A number of people died in this violence, including a Catholic taxi driver killed by the Loyalist Volunteer Force, and three (of four) nominally Catholic brothers (from a mixed-religion family) died when their house in Ballymoney was petrol-bombed.\nSocial repercussions.\nThe impact of the Troubles on the ordinary people of Northern Ireland has been compared to that of the Blitz on the people of London. The stress resulting from bomb attacks, street disturbances, security checkpoints, and the constant military presence had the strongest effect on children and young adults. There was also the fear that local paramilitaries instilled in their respective communities with the punishment beatings, \"romperings\", and the occasional tarring and feathering meted out to individuals for various purported infractions. The legacy of the Troubles has been viewed by some, including researcher Rupert Taylor, as still persistent in Northern Ireland more than two decades after the Good Friday Agreement of 1998, as inequality and division between Catholics and Protestants continue. \nIn addition to the violence and intimidation, there was chronic unemployment and a severe housing shortage. Many people were rendered homeless as a result of intimidation or having their houses burnt, and urban redevelopment played a role in the social upheaval. Belfast families faced being transferred to new, alien estates when older, decrepit districts such as Sailortown and the Pound Loney were being demolished. According to social worker and author Sarah Nelson, this problem of homelessness and disorientation contributed to the breakdown of the normal fabric of society, allowing for paramilitaries to exert a strong influence in certain districts. Vandalism was also a major problem. In the 1970s, there were 10,000 vandalised empty houses in Belfast alone. Most of the vandals were aged between eight and thirteen.\nAccording to one historian of the conflict, the stress of the Troubles engendered a breakdown in the previously strict sexual morality of Northern Ireland, resulting in a \"confused hedonism\" in respect of personal life. In Derry, illegitimate births and alcoholism increased for women and the divorce rate rose. Teenage alcoholism was also a problem, partly as a result of the drinking clubs established in both loyalist and republican areas. In many cases, there was little parental supervision of children in some of the poorer districts. The Department of Health has looked at a report written in 2007 by Mike Tomlinson of Queen's University, which asserted that the legacy of the Troubles has played a substantial role in the current rate of suicide in Northern Ireland.\nFurther social issues arising from the Troubles include antisocial behavior and an aversion towards political participation. According to one historian, children raised during the Troubles were found to develop similar antisocial external behaviors as children similarly born in regions of conflict, notably those born and raised during World War II. Further studies into the impact of violence on the psychological development of children in Northern Ireland also found that those raised during the Troubles were more likely to be averse towards political participation, noting that while older generations still actively associated with their own social and political groups, younger generations became wary of such groups as social and political divisions continued to expand during the thirty years of the Troubles.\nPeace lines, which were built in Northern Ireland during the early years of the Troubles, remain in place.\nAccording to a 2022 poll, 69% of Irish nationalists polled believe there was no option but \"violent resistance to British rule during the Troubles\".\nCasualties.\nAccording to the Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN), 3,532 people were killed as a result of the conflict between 1969 and 2001. Of these, 3,489 were killed up to 1998. According to the book \"Lost Lives\" (2006 edition), 3,720 people were killed as a result of the conflict from 1966 to 2006. Of these, 3,635 were killed up to 1998.\nIn \"The Politics of Antagonism: Understanding Northern Ireland\", Brendan O'Leary and John McGarry point out that \"nearly two per cent of the population of Northern Ireland have been killed or injured through political violence [...] If the equivalent ratio of victims to population had been produced in Great Britain in the same period some 100,000 people would have died, and if a similar level of political violence had taken place, the number of fatalities in the USA would have been over 500,000\". Using this relative comparison to the US, analyst John M. Gates suggests that whatever one calls the conflict, it was \"certainly not\" a \"low intensity conflict\".\nIn 2010, it was estimated that 107,000 people in Northern Ireland suffered some physical injury as a result of the conflict. On the basis of data gathered by the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency, the Victims Commission estimated that the conflict resulted in 500,000 'victims' in Northern Ireland alone. It defines 'victims' are those who are directly affected by 'bereavement', 'physical injury', or 'trauma' as a result of the conflict.\nOne statistical breakdown of Troubles deaths put the death toll at 3,466, with 3,218 lives lost in Northern Ireland, 125 in Great Britain, 105 in the Republic of Ireland, and 18 in the rest of Europe.\nResponsibility.\nRepublican paramilitaries were responsible for some 60% of all deaths, loyalists 30% and British security forces 10%.\nLoyalists killed 48% of the civilian casualties, republicans killed 39%, and the British security forces killed 10%. Most of the Catholic civilians were killed by loyalists, and most of the Protestant civilians were killed by republicans.\nOf those killed by republican paramilitaries:\nOf those killed by loyalist paramilitaries:\nOf those killed by British security forces:\nStatus.\nApproximately 52% of the dead were civilians, 32% were members or former members of the British security forces, 11% were members of republican paramilitaries, and 5% were members of loyalist paramilitaries. About 60% of the civilian casualties were Catholics, 30% of the civilians were Protestants, and the rest were from outside Northern Ireland.\nAbout 257 of those killed were children under the age of seventeen, representing 7.2% of the total, while 274 children under the age of eighteen were killed during the conflict.\nIt has been the subject of dispute whether some individuals were members of paramilitary organisations. Several casualties that were listed as civilians were later claimed by the IRA as their members. One Ulster Defence Association (UDA) and three Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) members killed during the conflict were also Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR) soldiers at the time of their deaths. At least one civilian victim was an off-duty member of the Territorial Army.\nLocation.\nMost killings took place within Northern Ireland, especially in Belfast and County Armagh. Most of the killings in Belfast took place in the west and north of the city. Dublin, London and Birmingham were also affected, albeit to a lesser degree than Northern Ireland itself. Occasionally, the IRA attempted or carried out attacks on British targets in Gibraltar, Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands.\nNorthern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023.\nOn 18 September 2023, the Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023 (c. 41), also known as the Legacy Act received royal assent. \nThe Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission has raised concerns about the legislation's incompatibility with the Human Rights Act 1998. The legislation exempts conduct related to the Troubles from prosecution and establishes the Independent Commission for Reconciliation and Information Recovery.\nThe legislation has been criticised by all major political parties in Northern Ireland, the Labour Party and the Irish government - the Irish government announced it was challenging the legislation through the European Court of Human Rights and Labour have pledged to repeal the legislation, but have stated they would keep the Independent Commission for Reconciliation and Information Recovery.\nOn 19 September 2025, the British and Irish governments jointly announced new proposals aimed at addressing legacy issues, including enhanced support for families of the Disappeared, expanded truth recovery mechanisms, and cross-border cooperation. The initiative was framed as a response to ongoing criticism of the Legacy Act and concerns about its compatibility with human rights standards.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30773", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30773", "title": "Theoretical ecology", "text": "Scientific discipline\nTheoretical ecology is the scientific discipline devoted to the study of ecological systems using theoretical methods such as simple conceptual models, mathematical models, computational simulations, and advanced data analysis. Effective models improve understanding of the natural world by revealing how the dynamics of species populations are often based on fundamental biological conditions and processes. Further, the field aims to unify a diverse range of empirical observations by assuming that common, mechanistic processes generate observable phenomena across species and ecological environments. Based on biologically realistic assumptions, theoretical ecologists are able to uncover novel, non-intuitive insights about natural processes. Theoretical results are often verified by empirical and observational studies, revealing the power of theoretical methods in both predicting and understanding the noisy, diverse biological world.\nThe field is broad and includes foundations in applied mathematics, computer science, biology, statistical physics, genetics, chemistry, evolution, and conservation biology. Theoretical ecology aims to explain a diverse range of phenomena in the life sciences, such as population growth and dynamics, fisheries, competition, evolutionary theory, epidemiology, animal behavior and group dynamics, food webs, ecosystems, spatial ecology, and the effects of climate change.\nTheoretical ecology has further benefited from the advent of fast computing power, allowing the analysis and visualization of large-scale computational simulations of ecological phenomena. Importantly, these modern tools provide quantitative predictions about the effects of human induced environmental change on a diverse variety of ecological phenomena, such as: species invasions, climate change, the effect of fishing and hunting on food network stability, and the global carbon cycle.\nModelling approaches.\nAs in most other sciences, mathematical models form the foundation of modern ecological theory.\nEcological models can be deterministic or stochastic.\nSpecies can be modelled in continuous or discrete time.\nModels are often used to describe real ecological reproduction processes of single or multiple species.\nThese can be modelled using stochastic branching processes. Examples are the dynamics of interacting populations (predation competition and mutualism), which, depending on the species of interest, may best be modeled over either continuous or discrete time. Other examples of such models may be found in the field of mathematical epidemiology where the dynamic relationships that are to be modeled are host\u2013pathogen interactions.\nBifurcation theory is used to illustrate how small changes in parameter values can give rise to dramatically different long run outcomes, a mathematical fact that may be used to explain drastic ecological differences that come about in qualitatively very similar systems. Logistic maps are polynomial mappings, and are often cited as providing archetypal examples of how chaotic behaviour can arise from very simple non-linear dynamical equations. The maps were popularized in a seminal 1976 paper by the theoretical ecologist Robert May. The difference equation is intended to capture the two effects of reproduction and starvation.\nIn 1930, R.A. Fisher published his classic \"The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection\", which introduced the idea that frequency-dependent fitness brings a strategic aspect to evolution, where the payoffs to a particular organism, arising from the interplay of all of the relevant organisms, are the number of this organism' s viable offspring. In 1961, Richard Lewontin applied game theory to evolutionary biology in his \"Evolution and the Theory of Games\",\nfollowed closely by John Maynard Smith, who in his seminal 1972 paper, \"Game Theory and the Evolution of Fighting\", defined the concept of the evolutionarily stable strategy.\nBecause ecological systems are typically nonlinear, they often cannot be solved analytically and in order to obtain sensible results, nonlinear, stochastic and computational techniques must be used. One class of computational models that is becoming increasingly popular are the agent-based models. These models can simulate the actions and interactions of multiple, heterogeneous, organisms where more traditional, analytical techniques are inadequate. Applied theoretical ecology yields results which are used in the real world. For example, optimal harvesting theory draws on optimization techniques developed in economics, computer science and operations research, and is widely used in fisheries.\nPopulation ecology.\nPopulation ecology is a sub-field of ecology that deals with the dynamics of species populations and how these populations interact with the environment. It is the study of how the population sizes of species living together in groups change over time and space, and was one of the first aspects of ecology to be studied and modelled mathematically.\nExponential growth.\nThe most basic way of modeling population dynamics is to assume that the rate of growth of a population depends only upon the population size at that time and the per capita growth rate of the organism. In other words, if the number of individuals in a population at a time t, is N(t), then the rate of population growth is given by:\nformula_1\nwhere r is the per capita growth rate, or the intrinsic growth rate of the organism. It can also be described as r = b-d, where b and d are the per capita time-invariant birth and death rates, respectively. This first order linear differential equation can be solved to yield the solution\nformula_2,\na trajectory known as Malthusian growth, after Thomas Malthus, who first described its dynamics in 1798. A population experiencing Malthusian growth follows an exponential curve, where N(0) is the initial population size. The population grows when r &gt; 0, and declines when r &lt; 0. The model is most applicable in cases where a few organisms have begun a colony and are rapidly growing without any limitations or restrictions impeding their growth (e.g. bacteria inoculated in rich media).\nLogistic growth.\nThe exponential growth model makes a number of assumptions, many of which often do not hold. For example, many factors affect the intrinsic growth rate and is often not time-invariant. A simple modification of the exponential growth is to assume that the intrinsic growth rate varies with population size. This is reasonable: the larger the population size, the fewer resources available, which can result in a lower birth rate and higher death rate. Hence, we can replace the time-invariant r with r'(t) = (b \u2013a*N(t)) \u2013 (d + c*N(t)), where a and c are constants that modulate birth and death rates in a population dependent manner (e.g. intraspecific competition). Both a and c will depend on other environmental factors which, we can for now, assume to be constant in this approximated model. The differential equation is now:\nformula_3\nThis can be rewritten as:\nformula_4\nwhere r = b-d and K = (b-d)/(a+c).\nThe biological significance of K becomes apparent when stabilities of the equilibria of the system are considered. The constant K is the carrying capacity of the population. The equilibria of the system are N = 0 and N = K. If the system is linearized, it can be seen that N = 0 is an unstable equilibrium while K is a stable equilibrium.\nStructured population growth.\nAnother assumption of the exponential growth model is that all individuals within a population are identical and have the same probabilities of surviving and of reproducing. This is not a valid assumption for species with complex life histories. The exponential growth model can be modified to account for this, by tracking the number of individuals in different age classes (e.g. one-, two-, and three-year-olds) or different stage classes (juveniles, sub-adults, and adults) separately, and allowing individuals in each group to have their own survival and reproduction rates.\nThe general form of this model is\nformula_5\nwhere Nt is a vector of the number of individuals in each class at time \"t\" and L is a matrix that contains the survival probability and fecundity for each class. The matrix L is referred to as the Leslie matrix for age-structured models, and as the Lefkovitch matrix for stage-structured models.\nIf parameter values in L are estimated from demographic data on a specific population, a structured model can then be used to predict whether this population is expected to grow or decline in the long-term, and what the expected age distribution within the population will be. This has been done for a number of species including loggerhead sea turtles and right whales.\nCommunity ecology.\nAn ecological community is a group of trophically similar, sympatric species that actually or potentially compete in a local area for the same or similar resources. Interactions between these species form the first steps in analyzing more complex dynamics of ecosystems. These interactions shape the distribution and dynamics of species. Of these interactions, predation is one of the most widespread population activities.\nTaken in its most general sense, predation comprises predator\u2013prey, host\u2013pathogen, and host\u2013parasitoid interactions.\nPredator\u2013prey interaction.\nPredator\u2013prey interactions exhibit natural oscillations in the populations of both predator and the prey. In 1925, the American mathematician Alfred J. Lotka developed simple equations for predator\u2013prey interactions in his book on biomathematics. The following year, the Italian mathematician Vito Volterra, made a statistical analysis of fish catches in the Adriatic and independently developed the same equations. It is one of the earliest and most recognised ecological models, known as the Lotka-Volterra model:\nformula_6\nformula_7\nwhere N is the prey and P is the predator population sizes, r is the rate for prey growth, taken to be exponential in the absence of any predators, \u03b1 is the prey mortality rate for per-capita predation (also called 'attack rate'), c is the efficiency of conversion from prey to predator, and d is the exponential death rate for predators in the absence of any prey.\nVolterra originally used the model to explain fluctuations in fish and shark populations after fishing was curtailed during the First World War. However, the equations have subsequently been applied more generally. Other examples of these models include the Lotka-Volterra model of the snowshoe hare and Canadian lynx in North America, any infectious disease modeling such as the recent outbreak of SARS\nand biological control of California red scale by the introduction of its parasitoid, \"Aphytis melinus\".\nA credible, simple alternative to the Lotka-Volterra predator\u2013prey model and their common prey dependent generalizations is the ratio dependent or Arditi-Ginzburg model. The two are the extremes of the spectrum of predator interference models. According to the authors of the alternative view, the data show that true interactions in nature are so far from the Lotka\u2013Volterra extreme on the interference spectrum that the model can simply be discounted as wrong. They are much closer to the ratio-dependent extreme, so if a simple model is needed one can use the Arditi\u2013Ginzburg model as the first approximation.\nHost\u2013pathogen interaction.\nThe second interaction, that of host and pathogen, differs from predator\u2013prey interactions in that pathogens are much smaller, have much faster generation times, and require a host to reproduce. Therefore, only the host population is tracked in host\u2013pathogen models. Compartmental models that categorize host population into groups such as susceptible, infected, and recovered (SIR) are commonly used.\nHost\u2013parasitoid interaction.\nThe third interaction, that of host and parasitoid, can be analyzed by the Nicholson\u2013Bailey model, which differs from Lotka-Volterra and SIR models in that it is discrete in time. This model, like that of Lotka-Volterra, tracks both populations explicitly. Typically, in its general form, it states:\nformula_8\nformula_9\nwhere f(Nt, Pt) describes the probability of infection (typically, Poisson distribution), \u03bb is the per-capita growth rate of hosts in the absence of parasitoids, and c is the conversion efficiency, as in the Lotka-Volterra model.\nCompetition and mutualism.\nIn studies of the populations of two species, the Lotka-Volterra system of equations has been extensively used to describe dynamics of behavior between two species, N1 and N2. Examples include relations between \"D. discoiderum\" and \"E. coli\",\nas well as theoretical analysis of the behavior of the system.\nformula_10\nformula_11\nThe r coefficients give a \"base\" growth rate to each species, while K coefficients correspond to the carrying capacity. What can really change the dynamics of a system, however are the \u03b1 terms. These describe the nature of the relationship between the two species. When \u03b112 is negative, it means that N2 has a negative effect on N1, by competing with it, preying on it, or any number of other possibilities. When \u03b112 is positive, however, it means that N2 has a positive effect on N1, through some kind of mutualistic interaction between the two.\nWhen both \u03b112 and \u03b121 are negative, the relationship is described as competitive. In this case, each species detracts from the other, potentially over competition for scarce resources.\nWhen both \u03b112 and \u03b121 are positive, the relationship becomes one of mutualism. In this case, each species provides a benefit to the other, such that the presence of one aids the population growth of the other.\n\"See Competitive Lotka\u2013Volterra equations for further extensions of this model.\"\nNeutral theory.\nUnified neutral theory is a hypothesis proposed by Stephen P. Hubbell in 2001. The hypothesis aims to explain the diversity and relative abundance of species in ecological communities, although like other neutral theories in ecology, Hubbell's hypothesis assumes that the differences between members of an ecological community of trophically similar species are \"neutral,\" or irrelevant to their success. Neutrality means that at a given trophic level in a food web, species are equivalent in birth rates, death rates, dispersal rates and speciation rates, when measured on a per-capita basis. This implies that biodiversity arises at random, as each species follows a random walk. This can be considered a null hypothesis to niche theory. The hypothesis has sparked controversy, and some authors consider it a more complex version of other null models that fit the data better.\nUnder unified neutral theory, complex ecological interactions are permitted among individuals of an ecological community (such as competition and cooperation), providing all individuals obey the same rules. Asymmetric phenomena such as parasitism and predation are ruled out by the terms of reference; but cooperative strategies such as swarming, and negative interaction such as competing for limited food or light are allowed, so long as all individuals behave the same way. The theory makes predictions that have implications for the management of biodiversity, especially the management of rare species. It predicts the existence of a fundamental biodiversity constant, conventionally written \"\u03b8\", that appears to govern species richness on a wide variety of spatial and temporal scales.\nHubbell built on earlier neutral concepts, including MacArthur &amp; Wilson's theory of island biogeography and Gould's concepts of symmetry and null models.\nSpatial ecology.\nBiogeography.\nBiogeography is the study of the distribution of species in space and time. It aims to reveal where organisms live, at what abundance, and why they are (or are not) found in a certain geographical area.\nBiogeography is most keenly observed on islands, which has led to the development of the subdiscipline of island biogeography. These habitats are often a more manageable areas of study because they are more condensed than larger ecosystems on the mainland. In 1967, Robert MacArthur and E.O. Wilson published \"The Theory of Island Biogeography\". This showed that the species richness in an area could be predicted in terms of factors such as habitat area, immigration rate and extinction rate. The theory is considered one of the fundamentals of ecological theory. The application of island biogeography theory to habitat fragments spurred the development of the fields of conservation biology and landscape ecology.\nr/K-selection theory.\nA population ecology concept is r/K selection theory, one of the first predictive models in ecology used to explain life-history evolution. The premise behind the r/K selection model is that natural selection pressures change according to population density. For example, when an island is first colonized, density of individuals is low. The initial increase in population size is not limited by competition, leaving an abundance of available resources for rapid population growth. These early phases of population growth experience \"density-independent\" forces of natural selection, which is called \"r\"-selection. As the population becomes more crowded, it approaches the island's carrying capacity, thus forcing individuals to compete more heavily for fewer available resources. Under crowded conditions, the population experiences density-dependent forces of natural selection, called \"K\"-selection.\nMetapopulations.\nSpatial analysis of ecological systems often reveals that assumptions that are valid for spatially homogenous populations \u2013 and indeed, intuitive \u2013 may no longer be valid when migratory subpopulations moving from one patch to another are considered. In a simple one-species formulation, a subpopulation may occupy a patch, move from one patch to another empty patch, or die out leaving an empty patch behind. In such a case, the proportion of occupied patches may be represented as\nformula_12\nwhere m is the rate of colonization, and e is the rate of extinction. In this model, if e &lt; m, the steady state value of p is 1 \u2013 (e/m) while in the other case, all the patches will eventually be left empty. This model may be made more complex by addition of another species in several different ways, including but not limited to game theoretic approaches, predator\u2013prey interactions, etc. We will consider here an extension of the previous one-species system for simplicity. Let us denote the proportion of patches occupied by the first population as p1, and that by the second as p2. Then,\nformula_13\nformula_14\nIn this case, if e is too high, p1 and p2 will be zero at steady state. However, when the rate of extinction is moderate, p1 and p2 can stably coexist. The steady state value of p2 is given by\nformula_15\n(p*1 may be inferred by symmetry).\nIf e is zero, the dynamics of the system favor the species that is better at colonizing (i.e. has the higher m value). This leads to a very important result in theoretical ecology known as the Intermediate Disturbance Hypothesis, where the biodiversity (the number of species that coexist in the population) is maximized when the disturbance (of which e is a proxy here) is not too high or too low, but at intermediate levels.\nThe form of the differential equations used in this simplistic modelling approach can be modified. For example:\nThe model can also be extended to combinations of the four possible linear or non-linear dependencies of colonization and extinction on p are described in more detail in.\nEcosystem ecology.\nIntroducing new elements, whether biotic or abiotic, into ecosystems can be disruptive. In some cases, it leads to ecological collapse, trophic cascades and the death of many species within the ecosystem. The abstract notion of ecological health attempts to measure the robustness and recovery capacity for an ecosystem; i.e. how far the ecosystem is away from its steady state. Often, however, ecosystems rebound from a disruptive agent. The difference between collapse or rebound depends on the toxicity of the introduced element and the resiliency of the original ecosystem.\nIf ecosystems are governed primarily by stochastic processes, through which its subsequent state would be determined by both predictable and random actions, they may be more resilient to sudden change than each species individually. In the absence of a balance of nature, the species composition of ecosystems would undergo shifts that would depend on the nature of the change, but entire ecological collapse would probably be infrequent events. In 1997, Robert Ulanowicz used information theory tools to describe the structure of ecosystems, emphasizing mutual information (correlations) in studied systems. Drawing on this methodology and prior observations of complex ecosystems, Ulanowicz depicts approaches to determining the stress levels on ecosystems and predicting system reactions to defined types of alteration in their settings (such as increased or reduced energy flow), and eutrophication.\nEcopath is a free ecosystem modelling software suite, initially developed by NOAA, and widely used in fisheries management as a tool for modelling and visualising the complex relationships that exist in real world marine ecosystems.\nFood webs.\nFood webs provide a framework within which a complex network of predator\u2013prey interactions can be organised. A food web model is a network of food chains. Each food chain starts with a primary producer or autotroph, an organism, such as a plant, which is able to manufacture its own food. Next in the chain is an organism that feeds on the primary producer, and the chain continues in this way as a string of successive predators. The organisms in each chain are grouped into trophic levels, based on how many links they are removed from the primary producers. The length of the chain, or trophic level, is a measure of the number of species encountered as energy or nutrients move from plants to top predators. Food energy flows from one organism to the next and to the next and so on, with some energy being lost at each level. At a given trophic level there may be one species or a group of species with the same predators and prey.\nIn 1927, Charles Elton published an influential synthesis on the use of food webs, which resulted in them becoming a central concept in ecology. In 1966, interest in food webs increased after Robert Paine's experimental and descriptive study of intertidal shores, suggesting that food web complexity was key to maintaining species diversity and ecological stability. Many theoretical ecologists, including Sir Robert May and Stuart Pimm, were prompted by this discovery and others to examine the mathematical properties of food webs. According to their analyses, complex food webs should be less stable than simple food webs. The apparent paradox between the complexity of food webs observed in nature and the mathematical fragility of food web models is currently an area of intensive study and debate. The paradox may be due partially to conceptual differences between persistence of a food web and equilibrial stability of a food web.\nSystems ecology.\nSystems ecology can be seen as an application of general systems theory to ecology. It takes a holistic and interdisciplinary approach to the study of ecological systems, and particularly ecosystems. Systems ecology is especially concerned with the way the functioning of ecosystems can be influenced by human interventions. Like other fields in theoretical ecology, it uses and extends concepts from thermodynamics and develops other macroscopic descriptions of complex systems. It also takes account of the energy flows through the different trophic levels in the ecological networks. Systems ecology also considers the external influence of ecological economics, which usually is not otherwise considered in ecosystem ecology. For the most part, systems ecology is a subfield of ecosystem ecology.\nEcophysiology.\nThis is the study of how \"the environment, both physical and biological, interacts with the physiology of an organism. It includes the effects of climate and nutrients on physiological processes in both plants and animals, and has a particular focus on how physiological processes scale with organism size\".\nBehavioral ecology.\nSwarm behaviour.\nSwarm behaviour is a collective behaviour exhibited by animals of similar size which aggregate together, perhaps milling about the same spot or perhaps migrating in some direction. Swarm behaviour is commonly exhibited by insects, but it also occurs in the flocking of birds, the schooling of fish and the herd behaviour of quadrupeds. It is a complex emergent behaviour that occurs when individual agents follow simple behavioral rules.\nRecently, a number of mathematical models have been discovered which explain many aspects of the emergent behaviour. Swarm algorithms follow a Lagrangian approach or an Eulerian approach. The Eulerian approach views the swarm as a field, working with the density of the swarm and deriving mean field properties. It is a hydrodynamic approach, and can be useful for modelling the overall dynamics of large swarms. However, most models work with the Lagrangian approach, which is an agent-based model following the individual agents (points or particles) that make up the swarm. Individual particle models can follow information on heading and spacing that is lost in the Eulerian approach. Examples include ant colony optimization, self-propelled particles and particle swarm optimization.\nOn cellular levels, individual organisms also demonstrated swarm behavior. Decentralized systems are where individuals act based on their own decisions without overarching guidance. Studies have shown that individual \"Trichoplax adhaerens\" behave like self-propelled particles (SPPs) and collectively display phase transition from ordered movement to disordered movements. Previously, it was thought that the surface-to-volume ratio was what limited the animal size in the evolutionary game. Considering the collective behaviour of the individuals, it was suggested that order is another limiting factor. Central nervous systems were indicated to be vital for large multicellular animals in the evolutionary pathway.\nSynchronization.\nThe coexistence of the synchronization and asynchronization in the flashings in the system composed of multiple fireflies could be characterized by the chimera states. Synchronization could spontaneously occur. The agent-based model has been useful in describing this unique phenomenon. The flashings of individual fireflies could be viewed as oscillators and the global coupling models were similar to the ones used in condensed matter physics.\nEvolutionary ecology.\nThe British biologist Alfred Russel Wallace is best known for independently proposing a theory of evolution due to natural selection that prompted Charles Darwin to publish his own theory. In his famous 1858 paper, Wallace proposed natural selection as a kind of feedback mechanism which keeps species and varieties adapted to their environment.\n\"The action of this principle is exactly like that of the centrifugal governor of the steam engine, which checks and corrects any irregularities almost before they become evident; and in like manner no unbalanced deficiency in the animal kingdom can ever reach any conspicuous magnitude, because it would make itself felt at the very first step, by rendering existence difficult and extinction almost sure soon to follow.\"\nThe cybernetician and anthropologist Gregory Bateson observed in the 1970s that, though writing it only as an example, Wallace had \"probably said the most powerful thing that'd been said in the 19th Century\". Subsequently, the connection between natural selection and systems theory has become an area of active research.\nOther theories.\nIn contrast to previous ecological theories which considered floods to be catastrophic events, the river flood pulse concept argues that the annual flood pulse is the most important aspect and the most biologically productive feature of a river's ecosystem.\nHistory.\nTheoretical ecology draws on pioneering work done by G. Evelyn Hutchinson and his students. Brothers H.T. Odum and E.P. Odum are generally recognised as the founders of modern theoretical ecology. Robert MacArthur brought theory to community ecology. Daniel Simberloff was the student of E.O. Wilson, with whom MacArthur collaborated on \"The Theory of Island Biogeography\", a seminal work in the development of theoretical ecology.\nSimberloff added statistical rigour to experimental ecology and was a key figure in the SLOSS debate, about whether it is preferable to protect a single large or several small reserves. This resulted in the supporters of Jared Diamond's community assembly rules defending their ideas through Neutral Model Analysis. Simberloff also played a key role in the (still ongoing) debate on the utility of corridors for connecting isolated reserves.\nStephen P. Hubbell and Michael Rosenzweig combined theoretical and practical elements into works that extended MacArthur and Wilson's Island Biogeography Theory - Hubbell with his Unified Neutral Theory of Biodiversity and Biogeography and Rosenzweig with his Species Diversity in Space and Time.\nTheoretical and mathematical ecologists.\nA tentative distinction can be made between mathematical ecologists, ecologists who apply mathematics to ecological problems, and mathematicians who develop the mathematics itself that arises out of ecological problems.\nSome notable theoretical ecologists can be found in these categories:\nJournals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30775", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30775", "title": "Thomas Nast", "text": "American cartoonist (1840\u20131902)\nThomas Nast (; ; September 26, 1840\u00a0\u2013 December 7, 1902) was a German-born American caricaturist and editorial cartoonist often considered to be the \"Father of the American Cartoon\".\nHe was a sharp critic of \"Boss\" Tweed and the Tammany Hall Democratic Party political machine. He created a modern version of Santa Claus (based on the traditional German figures of Saint Nicholas and Weihnachtsmann) and the political symbol of the elephant for the Republican Party (GOP). Contrary to popular belief, Nast did not create Uncle Sam (the male personification of the United States Federal Government), Columbia (the female personification of American values), or the Democratic donkey, although he did popularize those symbols through his artwork. Nast was associated with the magazine \"Harper's Weekly\" from 1859 to 1860 and from 1862 until 1886. Nast's influence was so widespread that Theodore Roosevelt once said, \"Thomas Nast was our best teacher.\"\nEarly life and education.\nNast was born in military barracks in Landau, Bavaria, Germany (now in Rhineland-Palatinate), as his father was a trombonist in the Bavarian 9th regiment band. Nast was the last child of Appolonia (n\u00e9e Abriss) and Joseph Thomas Nast. He had an older sister Andie; two other siblings had died before he was born. His father held political convictions that put him at odds with the Bavarian government, so in 1846, Joseph Nast left Landau, enlisting first on a French man-of-war and subsequently on an American ship. He sent his wife and children to New York City, where they arrived in June 1846, and at the end of his enlistment in 1850, he joined them there.\nNast attended school in New York City from the age of six to 14. He did poorly at his lessons, but his passion for drawing was apparent from an early age. In 1854, at the age of 14, he was enrolled for about a year of study with Alfred Fredericks and Theodore Kaufmann, and then at the school of the National Academy of Design. In 1856, he started working as a draftsman for \"Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper\". His drawings appeared for the first time in \"Harper's Weekly\" on March 19, 1859, when he illustrated a report exposing police corruption; Nast was 18 years old at that point.\nCareer.\nIn February 1860, he went to England for the \"New York Illustrated News\" to depict one of the major sporting events of the era, the prize fight between the American John C. Heenan and the English Thomas Sayers sponsored by George Wilkes, publisher of \"Wilkes' Spirit of the Times\". A few months later, as artist for \"The Illustrated London News\", he joined Garibaldi in Italy. Nast's cartoons and articles about the Garibaldi military campaign to unify Italy captured the popular imagination in the U.S. In February 1861, he arrived back in New York. In September of that year, he married Sarah Edwards, whom he had met two years earlier.\nHe left the \"New York Illustrated News\" to work again, briefly, for \"Frank Leslie's Illustrated News\". In 1862, he became a staff illustrator for \"Harper's Weekly\". In his first years with \"Harper's\", Nast became known especially for compositions that appealed to the sentiment of the viewer. An example is \"Christmas Eve\" (1862), in which a wreath frames a scene of a soldier's praying wife and sleeping children at home; a second wreath frames the soldier seated by a campfire, gazing longingly at small pictures of his loved ones. One of his most celebrated cartoons was \"Compromise with the South\" (1864), directed against those in the North who opposed the prosecution of the American Civil War. He was known for drawing battlefields in border and southern states. These attracted great attention, and Nast was referred to by President Abraham Lincoln as \"our best recruiting sergeant\".\nAfter the war, Nast strongly opposed the anti-Reconstruction policy of President Andrew Johnson, whom he depicted in a series of trenchant cartoons that marked \"Nast's great beginning in the field of caricature\".\nStyle and themes.\nNast's cartoons frequently had numerous sidebars and panels with intricate subplots to the main cartoon. A Sunday feature could provide hours of entertainment and highlight social causes. After 1870, Nast favored simpler compositions featuring a strong central image. He based his likenesses on photographs.\nIn the early part of his career, Nast used a brush and ink wash technique to draw tonal renderings onto the wood blocks that would be carved into printing blocks by staff engravers. The bold cross-hatching that characterized Nast's mature style resulted from a change in his method that began with a cartoon of June 26, 1869, which Nast drew onto the wood block using a pencil, so that the engraver was guided by Nast's linework. This change of style was influenced by the work of the English illustrator John Tenniel. A recurring theme in Nast's cartoons is anti-Catholicism. Nast was baptized a Catholic at the Saint Maria Catholic Church in Landau, and for a time received Catholic education in New York City. \nWhen Nast converted to Protestantism remains unclear, but his conversion was likely formalized upon his marriage in 1861. (The family were practicing Episcopalians at St. Peter's in Morristown.) Nast considered the Catholic Church to be a threat to American values. According to his biographer, Fiona Deans Halloran, Nast was \"intensely opposed to the encroachment of Catholic ideas into public education\". When Tammany Hall proposed a new tax to support parochial Catholic schools, he was outraged. \nHis 1871 cartoon \"The American River Ganges\", depicts Catholic bishops, guided by Rome, as crocodiles moving in to attack American school children as Irish politicians prevent their escape. He portrayed public support for religious education as a threat to democratic government. The authoritarian papacy in Rome, ignorant Irish Americans, and corrupt politicians at Tammany Hall figured prominently in his work. Nast favored nonsectarian public education that mitigated differences of religion and ethnicity. However, in 1871 Nast and \"Harper's Weekly\" supported the Republican-dominated board of education in Long Island in requiring students to hear passages from the King James Bible, and his educational cartoons sought to raise anti-Catholic and anti-Irish fervor among Republicans and independents.\nNast expressed anti-Irish sentiment by depicting them as violent drunks. He used Irish people as a symbol of mob violence, machine politics, and the exploitation of immigrants by political bosses. Nast's emphasis on Irish violence may have originated in scenes he witnessed in his youth. Nast was physically small and had experienced bullying as a child. In the neighborhood in which he grew up, acts of violence by the Irish against black Americans were commonplace.\nIn 1863, he witnessed the New York City draft riots in which a mob composed mainly of Irish immigrants burned the Colored Orphan Asylum to the ground. His experiences may explain his sympathy for black Americans and his \"antipathy to what he perceived as the brutish, uncontrollable Irish thug\". An 1876 Nast cartoon combined a caricature of Charles Francis Adams Sr with anti-Irish sentiment and anti-Fenianship.\nIn general, his political cartoons supported American Indians and Chinese Americans. He advocated the abolition of slavery, opposed racial segregation, and deplored the violence of the Ku Klux Klan. In one of his more famous cartoons, the phrase \"Worse than Slavery\" is printed on a coat of arms depicting a despondent black family holding their dead child; in the background is a lynching and a schoolhouse destroyed by arson. Two members of the Ku Klux Klan and White League, paramilitary insurgent groups in the Reconstruction-era South, shake hands in their mutually destructive work against black Americans.\nDespite Nast's championing of minorities, Morton Keller writes that later in his career \"racist stereotypy of blacks began to appear: comparable to those of the Irish\u2014though in contrast with the presumably more highly civilized Chinese.\"\nDuring Nast's era, William Shakespeare's plays were an inherent part of the school curriculum. He introduced into American cartoons the practice of modernizing scenes from Shakespeare for a political purpose, referencing 23 of his 37 plays in more than 100 cartoons\u2014sometimes with just a recognizable line or two, but generally with pictorial content.\nNast also brought his approach to bear on the usually prosaic almanac business, publishing an annual \"Nast's Illustrated Almanac\" from 1871 to 1875. \"The Green Bag\" republished all five of Nast's almanacs in the 2011 edition of its \"Almanac &amp; Reader\".\nCampaign against the Tweed Ring.\nNast's drawings were instrumental in the downfall of Boss Tweed, the powerful Tammany Hall leader. As commissioner of public works for New York City, Tweed led a ring that by 1870 had gained total control of the city's government, and controlled \"a working majority in the State Legislature\". Tweed and his associates\u2014Peter Barr Sweeny (park commissioner), Richard B. Connolly (controller of public expenditures), and Mayor A. Oakey Hall\u2014defrauded the city of many millions of dollars by grossly inflating expenses paid to contractors connected to the Ring. Nast, whose cartoons attacking Tammany corruption had appeared occasionally since 1867, intensified his focus on the four principal players in 1870 and especially in 1871.\nTweed so feared Nast's campaign that he sent an emissary to offer the artist a bribe of $100,000, which was represented as a gift from a group of wealthy benefactors to enable Nast to study art in Europe. Feigning interest, Nast negotiated for more before finally refusing an offer of $500,000 with the words, \"Well, I don't think I'll do it. I made up my mind not long ago to put some of those fellows behind the bars\". Nast pressed his attack in the pages of \"Harper's\", although starting in 1870 his efforts were also supplemented by an editorial attack from \"the New York Times\", which would eventually deliver tangible evidence of the Ring's fraud in the form of copies of files from Connolly's office.\nThe Ring's power dissolved in the election of November 7, 1871, when Tammany Hall lost its majority in both houses of the New York State legislature. Tweed was arrested in 1873 and convicted of fraud. When Tweed attempted to escape justice in December 1875 by fleeing to Cuba and from there to Spain, officials in Vigo were able to identify the fugitive by using one of Nast's cartoons. Besides Tweed, however, the other main Ring members mostly escaped punishment. Connolly resigned from his position and fled for Paris, while Sweeney travelled to Canada. Hall lost his bid for reelection as mayor in 1872 and was tried on three separate occasions but ultimately acquitted of his crimes.\nParty politics.\nNast was the first journalist who did not own his newspaper to play a major role in shaping public opinion. His cartoons were influential in deciding five presidential elections: Abraham Lincoln (1864); Ulysses S. Grant (1868 and 1872); Rutherford B. Hayes (1876)\u2014all Republicans\u2014and Democrat Grover Cleveland (1884). His biting cartoons ridiculed the losers: George B. McClellan (1864); Horatio Seymour (1868); Horace Greeley (1872); Samuel J. Tilden (1876); and James G. Blaine (1884). Nast effectively sat out the 1880 election because he distrusted Republican James A. Garfield (who won) and admired Democrat Winfield Scott Hancock, a Civil War hero and Nast's personal friend. \nIn addition to his talent, creativity and the repetitive impact of his cartoons, Nast benefited from his lack of meaningful competition before \"Puck\" arrived in 1877, and from the financial strength, editorial consistency and reach of \"Harper's Weekly\". America's leading illustrated newspaper's circulation was about 120,000 during the Civil War, 200,000 during subsequent presidential elections, and almost 300,000 during the height of the Tweed campaign. With passalong readership, Nast's audience reached 500,000 to more than a million viewers.\nThe single most important and influential cartoon that Nast ever drew appeared in \"Harper's Weekly\" on August 24, 1864 (post-dated September 3) as the Democratic National Committee was assembling in Chicago to nominate McClellan (whom Lincoln had fired as his top Union general two years earlier) for president. \"Compromise with the South\u2014Dedicated to the Chicago Convention\" captured the very crux of the existential emotional and political stake at issue in the forthcoming election.\nNast's scathing caricature featured an arrogant, exultant Jefferson Davis shaking hands with a crippled Union soldier who\u2014with his head bowed and his only leg shackled to a ball and chain\u2014humbly accepted it. Columbia, representing the Union and modeled by Nast's wife Sallie, wept at the gravestone marked \"In Memory of Our Union Heroes Who Fell in a Useless War.\" As Davis's boot stomped on a Union grave and broke the sword of Northern Power, the cat-o'-nine-tails in his left hand was ready to flog his vanquished enemies. A Black family in chains despaired behind Davis. The Union flag, upside down in distress, recited its successes, including emancipation, on its stripes; the Confederate flag detailed a list of atrocities.\nOn October 16\u2014almost eight weeks after Nast's cartoon appeared\u2014the \"Richmond Enquirer\" published some more extreme demands which were not in the Democratic platform. Lincoln's reelection managers took Nast's cartoon, added \"The Rebel Terms of Peace,\" and made more than a million copies as campaign posters. In combination with General William T. Sherman's capture of Atlanta on September 1 and General Phil Sheridan's victory in the Shenandoah Valley on October 19, \"A Traitor's Peace\" probably was the single most effective visual campaign advertisement in any American presidential election before or since.\nNast played an important role during the presidential election in 1868, and Ulysses S. Grant attributed his victory to \"the sword of Sheridan and the pencil of Thomas Nast.\" In the 1872 presidential campaign, Nast's ridicule of Horace Greeley's candidacy was especially merciless. After Grant's victory in 1872, Mark Twain wrote the artist a letter saying: \"Nast, you more than any other man have won a prodigious victory for Grant\u2014I mean, rather, for Civilization and Progress.\" Nast became a close friend of President Grant and the two families shared regular dinners until Grant's death in 1885.\nNast and his wife moved to Morristown, New Jersey in 1872 and there they raised a family that eventually numbered five children. In 1873, Nast toured the United States as a lecturer and a sketch-artist. His activity on the lecture circuit made him wealthy. Nast was for many years a staunch Republican. Nast opposed inflation of the currency, notably with his famous rag-baby cartoons, and he played an important part in securing Rutherford B. Hayes' ultimate victory in the presidential election in 1876. Hayes later remarked that Nast was \"the most powerful, single-handed aid [he] had\", but Nast quickly became disillusioned with President Hayes, whose lenient policy towards the South in removing federal troops he opposed.\nThe death of the \"Weekly\"'s publisher, Fletcher Harper, in 1877 resulted in a changed relationship between Nast and his editor George William Curtis. His cartoons appeared less frequently, and he was not given free rein to criticize Hayes or his policies. Beginning in the late 1860s, Nast and Curtis had frequently differed on political matters and particularly on the role of cartoons in political discourse. Curtis believed that the powerful weapon of caricature should be reserved for \"the Ku-Klux Democracy\" of the opposition party, and did not approve of Nast's cartoons assailing Republicans such as Carl Schurz and Charles Sumner who opposed policies of the Grant administration. Nast said of Curtis: \"When he attacks a man with his pen it seems as if he were apologizing for the act. I try to hit the enemy between the eyes and knock him down.\" Fletcher Harper consistently supported Nast in his disputes with Curtis. After his death, his nephews, Joseph W. Harper Jr. and John Henry Harper, assumed control of the magazine and were more sympathetic to Curtis's arguments for rejecting cartoons that contradicted his editorial positions.\nBetween 1877 and 1884, Nast's work appeared only sporadically in \"Harper's\", which began publishing the milder political cartoons of William Allen Rogers. Although his sphere of influence was diminishing, from this period date dozens of his pro-Chinese immigration drawings, often implicating the Irish as instigators. Nast blamed U.S. Senator James G. Blaine (R-Maine) for his support of the Chinese Exclusion Act and depicted Blaine with the same zeal used against Tweed. Nast was one of the few editorial artists who took up for the cause of the Chinese in America.\nDuring the presidential election of 1880, Nast felt that he could not support the Republican candidate, James A. Garfield, because of Garfield's involvement in the Cr\u00e9dit Mobilier scandal; and did not wish to attack the Democratic candidate, Winfield Scott Hancock, his personal friend and a Union general whose integrity commanded respect. As a result, \"Nast's commentary on the 1880 campaign lacked passion\", according to Halloran. He submitted no cartoons to \"Harper's\" between the end of March 1883 and March 1, 1884, partly because of illness.\nIn 1884, Curtis and Nast agreed that they could not support the Republican candidate James G. Blaine, a proponent of high tariffs and the spoils system whom they perceived as personally corrupt. Instead, they became Mugwumps by supporting the Democratic candidate, Grover Cleveland, whose platform of civil service reform appealed to them. Nast's cartoons helped Cleveland become the first Democrat to be elected president since 1856. In the words of the artist's grandson, Thomas Nast St Hill, \"it was generally conceded that Nast's support won Cleveland the small margin by which he was elected. In this his last national political campaign, Nast had, in fact, 'made a president'.\"\nNast's tenure at \"Harper's Weekly\" ended with his Christmas illustration of December 1886. It was said by the journalist Henry Watterson that \"in quitting \"Harper's Weekly\", Nast lost his forum: in losing him, \"Harper's Weekly\" lost its political importance.\" Fiona Deans Halloran says \"the former is true to a certain extent, the latter unlikely.\"\nNast lost most of his fortune in 1884 after investing in a banking and brokerage firm operated by the swindler Ferdinand Ward. In need of income, Nast returned to the lecture circuit in 1884 and 1887. Although these tours were successful, they were less remunerative than the lecture series of 1873.\nAfter \"Harper's Weekly\".\nIn 1890, Nast published \"Thomas Nast's Christmas Drawings for the Human Race\". He contributed cartoons in various publications, notably the \"Illustrated American\", but was unable to regain his earlier popularity. His mode of cartooning had come to be seen as outdated, and a more relaxed style exemplified by the work of Joseph Keppler was in vogue. Health problems, which included pain in his hands which had troubled him since the 1870s, affected his ability to work.\nIn 1892, he took control of a failing magazine, the \"New York Gazette\", and renamed it \"Nast's Weekly\". Now returned to the Republican fold, Nast used the \"Weekly\" as a vehicle for his cartoons supporting Benjamin Harrison for president. The magazine had little impact and ceased publication seven months after it began, shortly after Harrison's defeat.\nThe failure of \"Nast's Weekly\" left Nast with few financial resources. He received a few commissions for oil paintings and drew book illustrations. In 1902, he applied for a job in the State Department, hoping to secure a consular position in western Europe. Although no such position was available, President Theodore Roosevelt was an admirer of the artist and offered him an appointment as the United States' Consul General to Guayaquil, Ecuador in South America. Nast accepted the position and traveled to Ecuador on July 1, 1902. During a subsequent yellow fever outbreak, Nast remained on the job, helping numerous diplomatic missions and businesses escape the contagion. He contracted the disease and died on December 7 of that year. His body was returned to the United States, where he was interred in the Woodlawn Cemetery in The Bronx, New York City.\nLegacy.\nNast's depictions of iconic characters, such as Santa Claus and Uncle Sam, are widely credited as forming the basis of popular depictions used today. Additional contributions by Nast include:\nIn December 2011, a proposal to include Nast in the New Jersey Hall of Fame in 2012 caused controversy. \"The Wall Street Journal\" reported that because of his stereotypical cartoons of the Irish, a number of objections were raised about Nast's work. For example, \"The Usual Irish Way of Doing Things\" portrays an Irishman as being sub-human, drunk, and violent.\nThomas Nast Award.\nThe Thomas Nast Award has been presented each year since 1968 by the Overseas Press Club to an editorial cartoonist for the \"best cartoons on international affairs.\" Past winners include Signe Wilkinson, Kevin (KAL) Kallaugher, Mike Peters, Clay Bennett, Mike Luckovich, Tom Toles, Herbert Block, Tony Auth, Jeff MacNelly, Dick Locher, Jim Morin, Warren King, Tom Darcy, Don Wright and Patrick Chappatte.\nIn December 2018, The OPC Board of Governors decided to remove Nast's name from the award noting that Nast \"exhibited an ugly bias against immigrants, the Irish and Catholics\". OPC President Pancho Bernasconi stated \"Once we became aware of how some groups and ethnicities were portrayed in a manner that is not consistent with how journalists work and view their role today, we voted to remove his name from the award.\"\nThomas Nast Prize.\nThe Thomas Nast Prize for editorial cartooning has been awarded by the Thomas Nast Foundation (located in Nast's birthplace of Landau, Germany) since 1978 when it was first given to Jeff MacNelly. The prize is awarded periodically to one German cartoonist and one North American cartoonist. Winners receive 1,300 Euros, a trip to Landau, and the Thomas Nast medal. The American advisory committee includes Nast's descendant Thomas Nast III of Fort Worth, Texas. Other winners of the Thomas Nast Prize include Jim Borgman, Paul Szep, Pat Oliphant, David Levine, Jim Morin, and Tony Auth.\nSupposed connection to the word \"Nasty\".\nThe word \"nasty\" is erroneously thought to derive from Nast's name, due to the cynical tone of many of his cartoons. In reality, the word's origins are unclear, but it is ancient, with written evidence that dates to the 1400s. Chief etymological theories prominently include derivation from Old Norse, Old French and/or some relation to a Dutch term.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30776", "revid": "50798811", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30776", "title": "Teutonic Order", "text": "Medieval military order\nMilitary unit\nThe Teutonic Order is a Catholic religious institution founded as a military society c.\u20091190 in Acre, Kingdom of Jerusalem. The Order of Brothers of the German House of Saint Mary in Jerusalem was formed to aid Christians on their pilgrimages to the Holy Land and to establish hospitals. Its members have commonly been known as the Teutonic Knights, having historically served as a crusading military order for supporting Catholic rule in the Holy Land and the Northern Crusades during the Middle Ages, as well as supplying military protection for Catholics in Eastern Europe.\nPurely religious since 1810, the Teutonic Order still confers limited honorary knighthoods. The Bailiwick of Utrecht of the Teutonic Order, a Protestant chivalric order, is descended from the same medieval military order and also continues to award knighthoods and perform charitable work.\nName.\nThe name of the Order of Brothers of the German House of Saint Mary in Jerusalem is in and in Latin . Thus the term \"Teutonic\" echoes the German origins of the order () in its Latin name. German-speakers commonly refer to the (official short name, literally \"German Order\"), historically also as (\"German Order of Knights\"), (\"Order of the German Lords\"), (\"Order of the German Knights\"), (\"Knights of Mary\"), (\"The lords in white capes\"), \"etc.\".\nThe Teutonic Knights have been known as in Polish (\"Order of the Cross\") and as in Lithuanian, in Latvian, or, simply, (\"The Order\") in Estonian.\nHistory.\nThe fraternity which preceded the formation of the Order was formed in the year 1191 in Acre, Israel by German merchants from Bremen and L\u00fcbeck. After the capture of Acre they took over a hospital in the city in order to take care of the sick and began to describe themselves as the \"Hospital of St. Mary of the German House in Jerusalem.\" Pope Clement III approved it and the Order started to play an important role in Outremer (the general name for the Crusader states), controlling the port tolls of Acre. In 1211, during the second, much weaker Crusader kingdom in the Holy Land, but still long before its final demise in 1291, the Order was \"invited\" to the Burzenland (southeastern Transylvania) to help defend the southeastern borders of the Kingdom of Hungary against the Cumans. The Order \"invited\" German planters to help build up settlements to provide support. As the Order pushed back the invaders, the settlements expanded. King Andrew II of Hungary became concerned he was losing influence. So, in 1225, after Pope Honorius III's papal bull claiming his authority over the Order's territory in Transylvania and its tax exemption toward the king, Andrew expelled the Order.\nThe Order's next \"assignment}}\" concerned Konrad I of Masovia, who was settling a frontier around Prussia, a region named for the Prussians who lived there. Konrad was unable to stop the Prussian raids and the Dobrzy\u0144 knights he had gathered for this purpose were defeated, in 1228. So, in coordination with the Holy Roman Empire and Konrad, the Grand Master Hermann von Salza and his Teutonic Order arrived in the region, in 1230. Along with Konrad's forces, the Order pushed back the Prussians and began to push further to conquer and Christianize them.\nThrough the Golden Bull of Rimini and Treaty of Kruszwica, the Order asserted its claims to the territory that was now secure, the Che\u0142mno Land (also: Ziemia Che\u0142mi\u0144ska or Kulmerland). From this, the Order created the independent State of the Teutonic Order, to which conquered territory was continuously added. Through the incorporation of the Livonian Brothers of the Sword and further crusading, the added territory included Livonia. Over time, certain kings and dukes of Poland would challenge the Order's land claims, specifically Che\u0142mno Land and, later, Pomerelia (also Pomorze Gda\u0144skie or Vistula Pomerania), Kuyavia, and Dobrzy\u0144 Land.\nFollowing the Christianization of Lithuania, the Order State was no longer crusading. It was instead recruiting planters from the Holy Roman Empire and a fighting force to augment feudal levies. There were also wars against the Kingdom of Poland, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, and the Novgorod Republic. Through its control of port cities and trade, specifically with the Hanseatic League, the Order State built up its economic base. The Order State also built ships and had a naval presence in the Baltic Sea. In 1410, a Polish-Lithuanian army decisively defeated the Order State and broke its military power at the Battle of Grunwald. However, the Order State successfully defended its capital in the following Siege of Marienburg (Malbork) and was saved from collapse.\nIn 1515, Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I made a marriage alliance with Sigismund I of Poland-Lithuania. Thereafter, the empire did not support the Order against Poland. In 1525, Grand Master Albert of Brandenburg resigned and converted to Lutheranism, becoming Duke of Prussia as a vassal of Poland. Soon after, the Order lost Livonia and its holdings in the Protestant areas of Germany. The Order did keep its considerable holdings in Catholic areas of Germany until 1809, when Napoleon Bonaparte ordered its dissolution and the Order lost its last secular holdings.\nHowever, the Order continued to exist as a charitable and ceremonial body. It was outlawed by Nazi Germany in 1938, but re-established in 1945. Today it operates primarily with charitable aims in Central Europe.\nThe Knights wore white surcoats with a black cross. A cross patt\u00e9e was sometimes used as their coat of arms; this emblem was later used for military decoration and insignia by the Kingdom of Prussia and Germany as the Iron Cross. The motto of the Order was: \"Helfen, Wehren, Heilen\" (\"Help, Defend, Heal\").\nFoundation 1143-1192.\nIn 1143, Pope Celestine II ordered the Knights Hospitaller to take over management of a German hospital in Jerusalem, which, according to the chronicler Jean d'Ypres, accommodated the countless German pilgrims and crusaders who could neither speak the local language nor Latin (\"patri\u00e6 linguam ignorantibus atque Latinam\"). Although formally an institution of the Hospitallers, the pope commanded that the prior and the brothers of the \"domus Theutonicorum\" (house of the Germans) should always be Germans themselves, so a tradition of a German-led religious institution could develop during the 12th century in the Kingdom of Jerusalem.\nAfter the loss of Jerusalem in 1187, some merchants from L\u00fcbeck and Bremen took up the idea and founded a field hospital for the duration of the Siege of Acre in 1190, which became the nucleus of the order; Pope Celestine III recognized it in 1192 by granting the monks Augustinian Rule. However, based on the model of the Knights Templar, it was transformed into a military order in 1198 and the head of the order became known as the Grand Master (\"magister hospitalis\"). It received papal orders for crusades to take and hold Jerusalem for Christianity and defend the Holy Land against the Muslim Saracens. During the rule of Grand Master Hermann von Salza (1209\u20131239) the Order changed from being a hospice brotherhood for pilgrims to primarily a military order.\nThe Order was founded in Acre, and the Knights purchased Montfort Castle, northeast of Acre, in 1220. This castle, which defended the route between Jerusalem and the Mediterranean Sea, was made the seat of the Grand Masters in 1229, although they returned to Acre after losing Montfort to Muslim control in 1271. The Order received donations of land in the Holy Roman Empire (especially in present-day Germany and Italy), Frankokratia, and the Kingdom of Jerusalem.\nFrederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, elevated his close friend Hermann von Salza to the status of \"Reichsf\u00fcrst\", or \"Prince of the Empire\", enabling the Grand Master to negotiate with other senior princes as an equal. During Frederick's coronation as King of Jerusalem in 1225, Teutonic Knights served as his escort in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre; von Salza read the emperor's proclamation in both French and German. However, the Teutonic Knights were never as influential in Outremer as the older Knights Templar and Knights Hospitaller.\nTeutonic Order domains in 13th century Levant were as follows \nTransylvania, Kingdom of Hungary, 1211 onward.\nIn 1211, Andrew II of Hungary accepted the services of the Teutonic Knights and granted them the district of Burzenland in Transylvania, where they would be exempt from fees and duties and could administer their own justice. Andrew had been involved in negotiations for the marriage of his daughter with the son of Hermann, Landgrave of Thuringia, whose vassals included the family of Hermann von Salza. Led by a brother called Theoderich or Dietrich, the Order defended the south-eastern borders of the Kingdom of Hungary against the neighbouring Cumans. Many forts of wood and mud were built for defence. They settled new German peasants among the existing Transylvanian Saxon inhabitants. The Cumans had no fixed settlements for resistance, and soon the Teutons were expanding into their territory. By 1220, the Teutonics Knights had built five castles, some of them made of stone. Their rapid expansion made the Hungarian nobility and clergy, who were previously uninterested in those regions, jealous and suspicious. Some nobles claimed these lands, but the Order refused to share them, ignoring the demands of the local bishop.\nAfter the Fifth Crusade, King Andrew returned to Hungary and found his kingdom full of resentment because of the expenses and losses of the failed military campaign. When the nobles demanded that he cancel the concessions made to the Knights, he concluded that they had exceeded their task and that the agreement should be revised, but did not revert the concessions. However, Prince B\u00e9la, heir to the throne, was allied with the nobility. In 1224, the Teutonic Knights, seeing that they would have problems when the Prince inherited the Kingdom, petitioned Pope Honorius III to be placed directly under the authority of the Papal See, rather than that of the King of Hungary. This was a grave mistake, as King Andrew, angered and alarmed at their growing power, responded in 1225 by expelling the Teutonic Knights, although he allowed the ethnically German commoners and peasants settled here by the Order to remain and these became part of the larger group of the Transylvanian Saxons. Lacking the military organization and experience of the Teutonic Knights, the Hungarians failed to replace them with adequate defence against the attacking Cumans. Soon, the steppe warriors would be a threat again.\nPrussia, 13th century.\nIn 1226, Konrad I, Duke of Masovia in north-eastern Poland, appealed to the Knights to defend his borders and subdue the pagan Baltic Old Prussians, allowing the Teutonic Knights use of Che\u0142mno Land as a base for their campaign. This being a time of widespread crusading fervor throughout Western Europe, Hermann von Salza considered Prussia a good training ground for his knights for the wars against the Muslims in Outremer. With the Golden Bull of Rimini, Emperor Frederick II bestowed on the Order a special imperial privilege for the conquest and possession of Prussia, including Che\u0142mno Land, with nominal papal sovereignty. In 1235 the Teutonic Knights assimilated the smaller Order of Dobrzy\u0144, which had been established earlier by Christian, the first Bishop of Prussia.\nThe conquest of Prussia was accomplished with much bloodshed over more than fifty years, during which native Prussians who remained unbaptised were subjugated, killed, or exiled. Fighting between the Knights and the Prussians was ferocious; chronicles of the Order state the Prussians would \"roast captured brethren alive in their armour, like chestnuts, before the shrine of a local god\". Their population was already in decline due to the Ostsiedlung. German peasants, artisans, and merchant settlers were predominantly concentrated in the southern part of the Teutonic State and did not move into the lands of Nadruva, Skalva, and the southern Curonian mountains until the 18th century. Due to invasions by the army of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the Prussians had become completely Germanized by the early to mid-18th century.\nThe native nobility who submitted to the crusaders had many of their privileges confirmed by the Treaty of Christburg. After the Prussian uprisings of 1260\u201383, however, much of the Prussian nobility emigrated or were resettled, and many free Prussians lost their rights. The Prussian nobles who remained were more closely allied with the German landowners and were gradually assimilated. Peasants in frontier regions, such as Samland, had more privileges than those in more populated lands, such as Pomesania. The crusading knights often accepted baptism as a form of submission by the natives. Christianity along western lines slowly spread through Prussian culture. Bishops were reluctant to have pagan Prussian religious practices integrated into the new faith, while the ruling knights found it easier to govern the natives when they were semi-pagan and lawless. After fifty years of warfare and brutal conquest, the end result was that most of the Prussian natives were either killed or deported. The conquest of the Sambians during the Prussian Crusade was delayed by the First Prussian Uprising which broke out in 1242. The uprising technically ended in 1249 with the signing of the Treaty of Christburg, but skirmishes continued for four more years. Only in 1254\u20131255 were the knights able to mount a major campaign against the Sambians. King Ottokar II of Bohemia took part in the expedition and as a tribute the knights named the newly founded K\u00f6nigsberg Castle after him. The Sambians rose up against the knights during the Great Prussian Uprising (1260\u20131274), but were the first to surrender. When other clans attempted to revive the uprising in 1276, Theodoric, vogt of Sambia, persuaded the Sambians not to join the insurrection; the Natangians and Warmians followed the Sambian example, and the uprising was crushed within a year. In 1243, the Bishopric of Samlandia (Sambia) was established as the ecclesiastical administration of the region, as directed by the papal legate William of Modena. By the end of the 13th century, there were only 22,000 Sambians.\nThe Order ruled Prussia under charters issued by the Pope and the Holy Roman Emperor as a sovereign monastic state, comparable to the arrangement of the Knights Hospitallers in Rhodes and later in Malta.\nTo make up for losses from the plague and to replace the partially exterminated native population, the Order encouraged immigration from the Holy Roman Empire (mostly Germans, Flemish, and Dutch) and from Masovia (Poles), the later Masurians. These included nobles, burghers, and peasants, and the surviving Old Prussians were gradually assimilated through Germanization. The settlers founded numerous towns and cities on former Prussian settlements. The Order itself built a number of castles (\"Ordensburgen\") from which it could defeat uprisings of Old Prussians, as well as continue its attacks on the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland, with which the Order was often at war during the 14th and 15th centuries. Major towns founded by the Order included Thorn (Toru\u0144), Kulm (Che\u0142mno), Allenstein (Olsztyn), Elbing (Elbl\u0105g), Memel (Klaip\u0117da), and K\u00f6nigsberg, founded in 1255 in honor of King Otakar II of Bohemia on the site of a destroyed Prussian settlement.\nLivonia, 1237 until 1346 purchase.\nAfter suffering a devastating defeat in the Battle of Saule, the Livonian Brothers of the Sword were absorbed by the Teutonic Knights in 1237. The Livonian branch subsequently became known as the Livonian Order.\nAlthough the Northern Crusades were aimed at pagan Balts and Finns, rather than Orthodox Russians, several unsuccessful attempts were made to persuade Novgorod to convert to Catholicism after the capture of Tartu. Livonian missionary and Crusade activity in Estonia caused conflicts with Novgorod, which had also attempted to subjugate, raid and convert the pagan Estonians. Hoping to exploit Novgorod's weakness in the wake of the Mongol and Swedish invasions, the Teutonic Knights penetrated deep into Novgorodian territory; however, in 1242, they were defeated in the Battle of the Ice at the hands of Prince Alexander Nevsky. The \"Livonian Rhymed Chronicle\" describes the events:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is a city in Russia called Novgorod, and when its king [Alexandre] heard what had happened he marched towards Pskov with many troops. He arrived there with a mighty force of many Russians to free the Pskovians and these latter heartily rejoiced. When he saw the Germans he did not hesitate long. They drove away the two Brothers, removed them from their governorship and routed their troops. The Germans fled and allowed the land to revert to the Russians. Thus it went for the Teutonic Knights, but if Pskov had been protected it would have benefited Christianity until the end of the world. It is a mistake to take a fair land and fail to occupy it properly. It is deplorable, for the result is sure to be disastrous. The king of Novgorod then returned home.\u2014\u200a\nOver the next decades the Order focused on the subjugation of the Curonians and Semigallians. In 1260 it suffered a disastrous defeat in the Battle of Durbe against Samogitians, and this inspired rebellions throughout Prussia and Livonia. After the Knights won a crucial victory in the Siege of K\u00f6nigsberg from 1262 to 1265, the war had reached a turning point. The Curonians were finally subjugated in 1267 and the Semigallians in 1290. The Order suppressed a major Estonian rebellion in 1343\u20131345, and in 1346 purchased the Duchy of Estonia from Denmark.\nAgainst Lithuania, 1291-1500.\nThe Teutonic Knights began to direct their campaigns against the pagan Grand Duchy of Lithuania (see Lithuanian mythology), due to the long existing conflicts in the region (including constant incursions into the Holy Roman Empire's territory by pagan raiding parties) and the lack of a proper area of operation for the Knights, after the fall of the Kingdom of Jerusalem at Acre in 1291 and their later expulsion from Hungary. At first the knights moved their headquarters to Venice, from which they planned the recovery of Outremer; this plan was, however, soon abandoned, and the Order later moved its headquarters to Marienburg, so it could better focus its efforts on the region of Prussia. Because \"Lithuania Propria\" remained non-Christian until the end of the 14th century, much later than the rest of eastern Europe, the conflicts were dragged out over a longer time, and many Knights from western European countries, such as England and France, journeyed to Prussia to participate in the seasonal campaigns (\"reyse\") against the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. In 1348, the Order won a great victory over the Lithuanians in the Battle of Str\u0117va, severely weakening them. In 1370 it won a decisive victory over Lithuania in the Battle of Rudau.\nWarfare between the Order and the Lithuanians was particularly brutal. It was common practice for Lithuanians to torture captured enemies and civilians. It is recorded by a Teutonic chronicler that they had the habit of tying captured knights to their horses and having both of them burned alive, while sometimes a stake would be driven into their bodies or the knight would be flayed. Lithuanian pagan customs included ritualistic human sacrifice, the hanging of widows, and the burying of a warrior's horses and servants with him after his death. The knights would also, on occasion, take captives from defeated Lithuanians, whose condition (as that of other war captives in the Middle Ages) was extensively researched by Jacques Heers. The conflict had much influence in the political situation of the region and was the source of many rivalries between Lithuanians or Poles and Germans; the degree to which it impacted the mentalities of the time can be seen in the lyrical works of men such as the contemporary Austrian poet Peter Suchenwirt.\nOverall, the conflict lasted over 200 years (although with varying degrees of active hostility during that time), its front line extending along both banks of the Neman River, with as many as twenty forts and castles between Sered\u017eius and Jurbarkas alone.\nBattle of Legnica, 1241.\nIn 1236, the Knights of Saint Thomas, an English order, adopted the rules of the Teutonic Order. A contingent of Teutonic Knights of indeterminate number is traditionally believed to have participated at the Battle of Legnica in 1241 during the first Mongol invasion of Poland. The combined Polish-German army was crushed by the Mongol army and their superior tactics, with few survivors.\nAgainst Poland, 1308-1343.\nA dispute over the claims to Pomerelia embroiled the Order in further conflict at the beginning of the 14th century. Duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw I the Elbow-high of Poland wanted the region, citing inheritance from Przemys\u0142 II. He was opposed by some Pomeranian nobles, but also a Danish prince, who supported the Margrave of Brandenburg's claim that the region had been granted to Brandenburg as a fief by King Wenceslaus. Forces from Denmark and Brandenburg had tried and failed to take the site in 1301 and 1306 but, in the summer of 1308, Brandenburg's forces tried again, targeting the present-day site of Gda\u0144sk, where a rebellion had erupted in their favor. W\u0142adys\u0142aw pressed the Teutonic Order for help and the Teutonic Knights, led by Grand Master Siegfried von Feuchtwangen, drove Brandenburg out. The Knights requested payment in exchange and W\u0142adys\u0142aw refused.\nBy November, the Order forces under a Prussian Landmeister Heinrich von Pl\u00f6tzke took the site for themselves. According to some sources, they massacred the town's inhabitants, although the exact extent of the violence is unknown and widely recognized by historians to be an unsolvable mystery. The estimates range from 60 rebellious leaders, reported by dignitaries of the region and Knight chroniclers, to 10,000 civilians, a number cited in a papal bull (of dubious provenance) that was used in a legal process installed to punish the Order for the event; the legal dispute went on for a time, but the Order was eventually absolved of the charges. In the Treaty of Soldin, the Teutonic Order purchased the castles of Gda\u0144sk, \u015awiecie, and Tczew and their hinterlands from the margraves for 10,000 marks on 13 September 1309.\nControl of Pomerelia allowed the Order to connect their monastic state with the borders of the Holy Roman Empire. Crusading reinforcements and supplies could travel from the Imperial territory of Hither Pomerania through Pomerelia to Prussia, while Poland's access to the Baltic Sea was blocked. While Poland had mostly been an ally of the knights against the pagan Prussians and Lithuanians, the capture of Pomerelia turned the kingdom into a determined enemy of the Order.\nThe capture of Gda\u0144sk marked a new phase in the history of the Teutonic Knights. The persecution and abolition of the powerful Knights Templar, which began in 1307, worried the Teutonic Knights, but control of Pomerelia allowed them to move their headquarters in 1309 from Venice to Marienburg (Malbork) on the Nogat River, outside the reach of secular powers. The position of Prussian Landmeister was merged with that of the Grand Master. The Pope began investigating misconduct by the knights, but no charges were found to have substance. Along with the campaigns against the Lithuanians, the knights faced a vengeful Poland and legal threats from the Papacy.\nThe Treaty of Kalisz of 1343 ended the open war between the Teutonic Knights and Poland. The Knights relinquished Kuyavia and Dobrzy\u0144 Land to Poland, but retained Che\u0142mno Land and Pomerelia with Gda\u0144sk (Germanized as \"Danzig\").\nHeight of power, 1337-1407.\nIn 1337, Emperor Louis IV allegedly granted the Order the imperial privilege to conquer all Lithuania and Russia. During the reign of Grand Master Winrich von Kniprode (1351\u20131382), the Order reached the peak of its international prestige and hosted numerous European crusaders and nobility.\nKing Albert of Sweden ceded Gotland to the Order as a pledge (similar to a fiefdom), with the understanding that they would eliminate the pirating Victual Brothers from this strategic island base in the Baltic Sea. An invasion force under Grand Master Konrad von Jungingen conquered the island in 1398 and drove the Victual Brothers out of Gotland and the Baltic Sea.\nIn 1386, Grand Duke Jogaila of Lithuania was baptised into Christianity and married Queen Jadwiga of Poland, taking the name W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o and becoming King of Poland. This created a personal union between the two countries and a potentially formidable opponent for the Teutonic Knights. The Order initially managed to play W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o and his cousin Vytautas against each other, but this strategy failed when Vytautas began to suspect that the Order was planning to annex parts of his territory.\nThe baptism of Jogaila began the official conversion of Lithuania to Christianity. Although the crusading rationale for the Order's state ended when Prussia and Lithuania had become officially Christian, the Order's feuds and wars with Lithuania and Poland continued. The Lizard Union was created in 1397 by Prussian nobles in Che\u0142mno Land to oppose the Order's policy.\nIn 1407, the Teutonic Order reached its greatest territorial extent and included the lands of Prussia, Pomerelia, Samogitia, Courland, Livonia, Estonia, Gotland, Dag\u00f6, \u00d6sel, and the Neumark, pawned by Brandenburg in 1402.\nDecline, 1410-1440.\nIn 1410, at the Battle of Grunwald a combined Polish\u2013Lithuanian army, led by W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o and Vytautas, decisively defeated the Order in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian\u2013Teutonic War. Grand Master Ulrich von Jungingen and most (50 out of 60) of the Order's higher dignitaries fell on the battlefield. The Polish\u2013Lithuanian army then began the Siege of Marienburg (Malbork), the capital of the Order, but was unable to take Marienburg owing to the resistance of Heinrich von Plauen. When the First Peace of Thorn was signed in 1411, the Order managed to retain essentially all of its territories, although the Knights' reputation as invincible warriors was irreparably damaged.\nWhile Poland and Lithuania were growing in power, that of the Teutonic Knights dwindled through infighting. They were forced to impose high taxes to pay a substantial indemnity but did not give the cities sufficient requested representation in the administration of their state. The authoritarian and reforming Grand Master Heinrich von Plauen was forced from power and replaced by Michael K\u00fcchmeister von Sternberg, but the new Grand Master was unable to revive the Order's fortunes. After the Gollub War the Knights lost some small border regions and renounced all claims to Samogitia in the 1422 Treaty of Melno. Austrian and Bavarian knights feuded with those from the Rhineland, who likewise bickered with Low German-speaking Saxons, from whose ranks the Grand Master was usually chosen. The western Prussian lands of the Vistula River Valley and the Brandenburg Neumark were ravaged by the Hussites during the Hussite Wars. Some Teutonic Knights were sent to battle the invaders but were defeated by the Bohemian infantry. The Knights also sustained a defeat in the Polish-Teutonic War (1431\u20131435).\nIn 1440, the Prussian Confederation was founded by gentry and burghers of the State of the Teutonic Order. In 1454, it rose up against the Order and asked Polish King Casimir IV Jagiellon to incorporate the region into the Kingdom of Poland, to which the King agreed and signed an act of incorporation in Krak\u00f3w. Mayors, burghers and representatives from the region pledged allegiance to the Polish King during the incorporation in March 1454 in Krak\u00f3w. This marked the beginning of the Thirteen Years' War between the Teutonic Order and Poland. The main cities of the incorporated territory were authorized by Casimir IV to mint Polish coins. Much of Prussia was devastated in the war, during the course of which the Order returned Neumark to Brandenburg in 1455 to raise funds for war. Because Marienburg Castle was handed over to mercenaries in lieu of their pay, and eventually passed to Poland, the Order moved its base to K\u00f6nigsberg in Sambia. In the Second Peace of Thorn (1466), the defeated Order renounced any claims to the territories of Gda\u0144sk/Eastern Pomerania and Che\u0142mno Land, which were reintegrated with Poland, and the region of Elbl\u0105g and Malbork, and the Prince-Bishopric of Warmia, which were also recognized as part of Poland, while retaining the eastern territories in historic Prussia, but as a fief and protectorate of Poland, also considered an integral part of \"one and indivisible\" Kingdom of Poland. From now on, every Grand Master of the Teutonic Order was obliged to swear an oath of allegiance to the reigning Polish king within six months of taking office. The Grand Master became a prince and counselor of the Polish king and the Kingdom of Poland.\nOusted from Prussia, after 1519.\nAfter the Polish\u2013Teutonic War (1519\u20131521), the Order was completely ousted from Prussia when Grand Master Albert of Brandenburg converted to Lutheranism in 1525. He secularized the Order's remaining Prussian territories and assumed from his uncle Sigismund I the Old, King of Poland, the hereditary rights to the Duchy of Prussia as a personal vassal of the Polish Crown, the Prussian Homage. Ducal Prussia retained its currency, laws and faith. The aristocracy was not present in the Sejm.\nAlthough it had lost control of all of its Prussian lands, the Teutonic Order retained its territories within the Holy Roman Empire and Livonia, although the Livonian branch retained considerable autonomy. Many of the Imperial possessions were ruined in the German Peasants' War from 1524 to 1525 and subsequently confiscated by Protestant territorial princes. The Livonian territory was then partitioned by neighboring powers during the Livonian War; in 1561 the Livonian Master Gotthard Kettler secularized the southern Livonian possessions of the Order to create the Duchy of Courland, also a vassal of Poland.\nAfter the loss of Prussia in 1525, the Teutonic Knights concentrated on their possessions in the Holy Roman Empire. Since they held no contiguous territory, they developed a three-tiered administrative system: holdings were combined into commanderies that were administered by a commander (\"Komtur\"). Several commanderies were combined to form a bailiwick headed by a \"Landkomtur\". All of the Teutonic Knights' possessions were subordinate to the Grand Master, whose seat was in Bad Mergentheim.\nThere were twelve German bailiwicks:\nOutside of German areas were the bailiwicks of\nThe Order gradually lost control of these holdings until, by 1809, only the seat of the Grand Master at Mergentheim remained.\nFollowing the abdication of Albert of Brandenburg, Walter von Cronberg became \"Deutschmeister\" in 1527, and later Administrator of Prussia and Grand Master in 1530. Emperor Charles V combined the two positions in 1531, creating the title \"Hoch- und Deutschmeister\", which also had the rank of Prince of the Empire. A new Grand Magistery was established in Mergentheim in W\u00fcrttemberg, which was attacked during the German Peasants' War. The Order also helped Charles V against the Schmalkaldic League. After the Peace of Augsburg in 1555, membership in the Order was open to Protestants, although the majority of brothers remained Catholic. The Teutonic Knights became tri-denominational, with Catholic, Lutheran and Reformed bailiwicks.\nThe Grand Masters, often members of the great German families (and, after 1761, members of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine), continued to preside over the Order's considerable holdings in Germany. Teutonic Knights from Germany, Austria, and Bohemia were used as battlefield commanders leading mercenaries for the Habsburg monarchy during the Ottoman wars in Europe.\nThe military history of the Teutonic Knights was to end in 1805 by the Article XII of the Peace of Pressburg, which ordered the German territories of the Knights converted into a hereditary domain and gave the Austrian Emperor responsibility for placing a Habsburg prince on its throne. These terms had not been fulfilled by the time of the Treaty of Sch\u00f6nbrunn in 1809, and therefore Napoleon Bonaparte ordered the Knights' remaining territory to be disbursed to his German allies, which was completed in 1810.\nMedieval organization.\nUniversal leadership.\nGeneralkapitel.\nThe \"Generalkapitel\" (general chapter) was the collection of all the priests, knights and half-brothers (). Because of the logistical problems in assembling the members, who were spread over large distances, only deputations of the bailiwicks and commandries gathered to form the General chapter. The General chapter was designed to meet annually, but the conventions were usually limited to the election of a new Grandmaster. The decisions of the \"Generalkapitel\" had a binding effect on the \"Gro\u00dfgebietigers\" of the order.\nHochmeister.\nThe \"Hochmeister\" (Grand Master) was the highest officer of the order. Until 1525, he was elected by the \"Generalkapitel\". He had the rank of the ruler of an ecclesiastic imperial state and was sovereign prince of Prussia until 1466. Despite this high formal position, in practice, he was only a kind of first among equals.\nGro\u00dfgebietige.\nThe \"Gro\u00dfgebietige\" were high officers with competence on the whole order, appointed by the \"Hochmeister\". There were five offices.\nNational leadership.\nLandmeister.\nThe order was divided into three national chapters, Prussia, Livonia and the territory of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation. The highest officer of each chapter was the \"Landmeister\" (country master). They were elected by the regional chapters. In the beginning, they were only substitutes of the Grandmaster but were able to create a power of their own so that, within their territory, the Grandmaster could not decide against their will. At the end of their rule over Prussia, the Grandmaster was only \"Landmeister\" of Prussia. There were three Landmeisters:\nRegional leadership.\nBecause the properties of the order within the rule of the \"Deutschmeister\" did not form a contiguous territory, but were spread over the whole empire and parts of Europe, there was an additional regional structure, the bailiwick. \"Kammerballeien\" (\"Chamber Bailiwicks\") were governed by the Grandmaster himself. Some of these bailiwicks had the rank of imperial states:\nLocal leadership.\nKomtur.\nThe smallest administrative unit of the order was the Kommende. It was ruled by a Komtur, who had all administrative rights and controlled the \"Vogteien\" (district of a reeve) and \"Zehnth\u00f6fe\" (tithe collectors) within his rule. In the commandry, all kinds of brothers lived together in a monastic way. Noblemen served as Knight-brothers or Priest-brothers. Other people could serve as Sariantbrothers, who were armed soldiers, and as Half-brothers, who were working in the economy and healthcare.\nModern organization.\nEvolution and reconfiguration as a Catholic religious order.\nThe Catholic order continued to exist in the various territories ruled by the Austrian Empire, out of Napoleon's reach. From 1804 the Order was headed by members of the Habsburg dynasty.\nThe collapse of the Habsburg monarchy and the Empire it governed in Austria, the Italian Tyrol, Bohemia and the Balkans brought a shattering crisis to the Order. While in the new Austrian Republic, the Order seemed to have some hope of survival, in the other former parts of the Habsburg territories, the tendency was to regard the Order as an honorary chivalric Order of the House of Habsburg. The consequence of this risked being the confiscation of the Order's property as belongings of the House of Habsburg. So as to make the distinction clearer, in 1923 the then High Master, Field Marshal Eugen of Austria-Teschen, Archduke of Austria, a member of the House of Habsburg and an active army commander before and during the First World War, had one of the Order's priests, Norbert Klein, at the time Bishop of Brno (Br\u00fcnn) elected his Coadjutor and then abdicated, leaving the Bishop as High Master of the Order.\nAs a result of this move, by 1928 the now-independent former Habsburg territories all recognized the Order as a Catholic religious order. The Order itself introduced a new Rule, approved by Pope Pius XI in 1929, according to which the government of the Order would in the future be in the hands of a priest of the Order, as would its constituent provinces, while the women religious of the Order would have women superiors. In 1936 the situation of the women religious was further clarified and the Congregation of the Sisters of the Order was given as their supreme moderator the High Master of the Order, the Sisters also having representation at the Order's general chapter.\nThis completed the transformation of what remained in the Catholic Church of the Teutonic knights into a Catholic religious order now renamed simply the \"Deutscher Orden\" (\"German Order\"). However, further difficulties were in store.\nThe Fascist rule in Italy, which since the end of the First World War had absorbed the Southern Tyrol, was not a propitious setting, but following the end of hostilities, a now democratic Italy provided normalized conditions. In 1947, Austria legally abolished the measures taken against the Order and restored confiscated property. Despite being hampered by the Communist regimes in Yugoslavia and in Czechoslovakia, the Order was now broadly in a position to take up activities in accordance with elements of its tradition, including care for the sick, for the elderly, for children, including work in education, in parishes and in its own internal houses of study. In 1957 a residence was established in Rome for the Order's Procurator General to the Holy See, to serve also as a pilgrim hostel. Conditions in Czechoslovakia gradually improved and in the meanwhile, the forced exile of some members of the Order led to the Order's re-establishing itself with some modest, but historically significant, foundations in Germany. The Sisters, in particular, gained several footholds, including specialist schools and care of the poor and in 1953 the former house of Augustinian Canons, St. Nikola, in Passau became the Sisters' Motherhouse. Although the reconstruction represented by the reformed Rule of 1929 had set aside categories such as the knights, over time the spontaneous involvement of laypeople in the Order's apostolates has led to their revival in a modernized form, a development formalized by Pope Paul VI in 1965.\nWith the official title of \"Brethren of the German House of St Mary in Jerusalem\", the Order today is unambiguously a Catholic religious order, though sui generis. Various features of its life and activities recall those of monastic and mendicant orders. At its core are priests who make a solemn religious profession, along with lay brothers who make a perpetual simple profession. Also part of the Order are the Sisters, with internal self-government within their own structures but with representation in the Order's General Chapter. Their ultimate superior is the High Master of the Order. The approximately 100 Catholic priests and 200 nuns of the Order are divided into five provinces, namely, Austria-Italy, Slovenia, Germany, Czech Republic and Slovakia. While the priests predominantly provide spiritual guidance, the nuns primarily care for the ill and the aged. Many of the priests care for German-speaking communities outside of Germany and Austria, especially in Italy and Slovenia; in this sense, the Teutonic Order has returned to its 12th-century roots: the spiritual and physical care of Germans in foreign lands.\nThere is an Institute of \"Familiares\", most of whom are laypeople, and who are attached by spiritual bonds to the Order but do not take vows. The \"Familiares\" are grouped especially into the bailiwicks of Germany, Austria, Southern Tyrol, Ad Tiberim (Rome), and the bailiwick of the Czech Republic and Slovakia, as also in the independent commandry of Alden Biesen in Belgium, though others are dispersed throughout the world. Overall, there are in recent years some 700.\nBy the end of the 20th century, then, this religious Order had developed into a charitable organization and established numerous clinics, as well as sponsoring excavation and tourism projects in Israel. In 2000, the German chapter of the Teutonic Order declared bankruptcy, and its upper management was dismissed; an investigation by a special committee of the Bavarian parliament in 2002 and 2003 to determine the cause was inconclusive.\nThe current Abbot General of the Order, who also holds the title of High Master, is Father Frank Bayard. The current seat of the High Master is the \"Church of the German Order\" (\"Deutschordenskirche\") in Vienna. Near the St Stephen's Cathedral (\"Stephansdom\") in the Austrian capital is the Treasury of the Teutonic Order, which is open to the public, and the Order's central archive. Since 1996, there has also been a museum dedicated to the Teutonic Knights at their former castle in Bad Mergentheim in Germany, which was the seat of the High Master from 1525 to 1809.\nHonorary Knights.\nHonorary Knights of the Teutonic Order have included:\nProtestant Bailiwick of Utrecht.\nA portion of the Order retains more of the character of the knights during the height of its power and prestige. Der \"Balije van Utrecht\" (\"Bailiwick of Utrecht\") of the \"Ridderlijke Duitsche Orde\" (\"Chivalric German [i.e., 'Teutonic'] Order\") became Protestant at the Reformation, and it remained an aristocratic society. The relationship of the Bailiwick of Utrecht to the Catholic \"Deutscher Orden\" resembles that of the Protestant Bailiwick of Brandenburg to the Catholic Order of Malta: each is an authentic part of its original order, though differing from and smaller than the Catholic branch.\nInsignia.\nThe Knights wore white surcoats with a black cross, granted by Innocent III in 1205. A cross patt\u00e9e was sometimes used. The coat of arms representing the grandmaster (\"Hochmeisterwappen\") is shown with a golden cross fleury or cross potent superimposed on the black cross, with the imperial eagle as a central inescutcheon. The golden cross fleury overlaid on the black cross became widely used in the 15th century. A legendary account attributes its introduction to Louis IX of France, who is said to have granted the master of the order this cross as a variation of the Jerusalem cross, with the fleur-de-lis symbol attached to each arm, in 1250. While this legendary account cannot be traced back further than the early modern period (Christoph Hartknoch, 1684), there is some evidence that the design does indeed date to the mid 13th century.\nThe black cross patt\u00e9e was later used for military decoration and insignia by the Kingdom of Prussia and Germany as the Iron Cross.\nThe motto of the Order is \"Helfen, Wehren, Heilen\" (\"to help, to defend, to heal\").\nInfluence on German and Polish nationalism and Soviet patriotism.\nThe German historian Heinrich von Treitschke used imagery of the Teutonic Knights, a Germanic myth, to promote pro-German and anti-Polish rhetoric. Many middle-class German nationalists adopted this imagery and its symbols. During the Weimar Republic, associations and organisations of this nature contributed to laying the groundwork for the formation of Nazi Germany.\nAn organization predating the Nazi Party itself,\u03b1 as well as Nazi-supported preceding and Nazi preceding and during&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[\u03b2] World War II propaganda made use of the Teutonic Knights' imagery, with the common goal of instilling the importance of for the future of Germany and the German people. According to medieval historian Erik Christiansen, \"Himmler's plan to mould the SS as a reincarnation of [The Teutonic Order] proved [...] the irresistible strength of bad history.\" Though gradually taking hold ever since with one of Prince Adalbert of Prussia's 1849 proposals, after a lull during the Weimar Republic, whereupon it reverted to a simple tricolor overlaid with an Iron Cross (though itself also derivative), a version of Germany's Reichskriegsflagge (war ensign)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[\u03b2] emerged more closely resembling The State of the Teutonic Order's cross's original shape with a circle-overlaid balkenkreuz. Hitler based his German Order on the Teutonic Order, while especially the Hochmeister's ceremonial regalia, also the Marian Cross of the Teutonic Order, the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross and of the cross of the Knight of Justice of the Order of St. John (Bailiwick of Brandenburg).\nAfter Hitler approved the \"Generalplan Ost\" (GPO), Germanization campaigns were extolled as the modern adaptation of what it portrayed as \"civilizing missions\" of the Teutonic Order.\nYet, despite these references to the Teutonic Order's history in Nazi propaganda, the Order itself was abolished in 1938 and its members were persecuted by the German authorities. This occurred mostly due to Hitler's and Himmler's belief that, throughout history, Catholic military-religious orders had been tools of the Holy See and as such constituted a threat to the Nazi regime.\nThe converse was true for Polish nationalism, for example \"The Knights of the Cross\" by Henryk Sienkiewicz, which used the Teutonic Knights as symbolic shorthand for Germans in general, conflating the two into an easily recognisable image of the hostile. After the Battle of Grunwald, the Teutonic Order was portrayed as the medieval forerunners of Hitler's armies.\nIn the Soviet Union, the image of Alexander Nevsky became a national symbol of the struggle against German occupation during World War II, and many Soviet historians portrayed him as a Russian bastion against both German and papal aggression. The government sought historical continuity by referring to the Soviet struggle as the Great Patriotic War. The Order of Alexander Nevsky was re-established in 1942 by the Soviet government during the war, which would be awarded to servicemen in the Soviet army. The 1938 film \"Alexander Nevsky\" by Sergei Eisenstein, which depicts the Battle on the Ice, was re-released in 1941 following the German invasion. Joseph Stalin used the film to mobilize feelings of Russian patriotism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30777", "revid": "486612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30777", "title": "Two-step", "text": "Two-step or two step may refer to:\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30778", "revid": "49551731", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30778", "title": "Universe of The Legend of Zelda", "text": "Fictional universe\n\"The Legend of Zelda\" is a video game franchise created by video game designers Shigeru Miyamoto and Takashi Tezuka and mainly developed and published by Nintendo. The universe of the \"Legend of Zelda\" series consists of various lands, the most predominant being The franchise is set within a fantasy world reminiscent of medieval Europe which consists of several recurring locations, races and creatures. The world was also partially inspired by Miyamoto and designer Hidemaro Fujibayashi's home town, Kyoto. The most prominent race in the series are the Hylians, a humanoid race with elfin features identifiable by their long, pointed ears. The series' lore contains a creation myth, several fictional alphabets, the most prominent being Hylian, and a fictional almost-universal currency, the rupee. The games involve the protagonists Link and Princess Zelda battling monsters to save the various lands they are in, and defeat a villain, which is often the series' main antagonist, Ganon. Link is usually the main player character in these settings, but players primarily play as Zelda in 2024's \"\". Nintendo developed the series' lore into a timeline that spans thousands of years across its history.\nHyrule was created as the original setting for 1986's \"The Legend of Zelda\" and has remained the main environment for successive games in the series. Inspired by dungeon crawlers, Miyamoto and Tezuka developed a high fantasy world in the form of a 2D map filled with monsters, puzzles and dungeons. Hyrule transitioned to a 3D environment with the development of \"\", released on the Nintendo 64 in 1998. For \",\" released on the Wii U and Nintendo Switch in 2017, Nintendo developed Hyrule into a seamless open world. Since the launch of the original game, the series has been a commercial and critical success and introduced landmark innovations in world design that have influenced numerous developers in the video game industry.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOverview.\nThe \"Legend of Zelda\" series is set in a fantasy world that first appeared in the original \"The Legend of Zelda\", which was developed and published by Nintendo. The game introduced Hyrule as the series' primary setting along with the series' protagonists Link and Princess Zelda, and primary antagonist Ganon. Link has been the primary player character since the start of the series, though he is only playable in the prologue of '. The storyline of each game varies, but follows a common overarching plot that involves Link, a Hylian boy or young man, traveling through Hyrule or another land to save the world from evil, which is typically Ganon. He is often guided in these plots by Zelda, a Hylian girl or young woman, usually from Hyrule's royal family, who appears in every game in the series except for ' and ', and is the main player character in \"Echoes of Wisdom\". A recurring plot element in the games is Ganon's attempts to obtain the Triforce, a mystical artifact introduced in the first \"Legend of Zelda\" that will enable him to possess ultimate power. Although Link and Zelda have similar appearances in each game, there are different characters who go by those names throughout the series who appear whenever evil threatens the world. ' was established as the beginning of the series' history and involves the antagonist Demise cursing the first incarnations of Link and Zelda so they reincarnate in an endless cycle to protect Hyrule from evil.\nHyrule.\nConcept and design.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI went hiking and found a lake. It was quite a surprise for me to stumble upon it. When I traveled around the country without a map, trying to find my way, stumbling on amazing things as I went, I realized how it felt to go on an adventure like this[.]\n Shigeru Miyamoto, on his inspiration for \"The Legend of Zelda\"\nJapanese video game designer Shigeru Miyamoto conceived the land of Hyrule as the setting for the original \"The Legend of Zelda\" (1986), describing it as \"a miniature garden that you can put into a drawer and revisit anytime you like\". He drew his inspiration from the Kyoto countryside that he had explored in his childhood and wanted to recreate the experience of adventure and discovery. Alongside writer Takashi Tezuka, Miyamoto created a fantasy world in the style of fantasy authors like Tolkien, which was viewed from a top-down perspective. It was populated with colourful characters, monsters and dungeons for the player to explore.\n2D world design.\nMiyamoto and Tezuka started working on \"The Legend of Zelda\" during the development of \"Super Mario Bros.\" (1985). Initially, the game did not feature an overworld. In \"Hyrule Historia\", Miyamoto said that Nintendo aimed to develop a launch title for the Famicom Disk System. An early game was initially designed to make use of the Disk System's ability to rewrite data, allowing players to create dungeons and explore other players' creations. He explained: \"We made a one-player game with dungeons under mountains that surrounded Death Mountain, but we couldn't shake that \"I want to play above ground, too!\" feeling, so we added forests and lakes, and eventually Hyrule Field\".\nThe first specifications were drawn up on a whiteboard by Miyamoto and then copied onto a document on 1 February 1985. The document detailed early concepts for items and enemies that would later feature in the game, such as a compass, bows and arrows and a boomerang, and \"Hakkai\", an early name given to Ganon. This was developed into rough sketches for various items and enemies within the following two weeks. The name for the game had not yet been decided, so the title was simply labelled \"Adventure\". Long paper was used to create the first land map of Hyrule, which was developed by Tezuka and Miyamoto sitting side by side and drawing together. Miyamoto said that the name \"Hyrule\" seemed like the perfect choice during a discussion to find a name for a high-fantasy region. In Japan, \"The Legend of Zelda\" game was released as \"The Hyrule Fantasy\", which was almost chosen as the name for the entire franchise, but was dropped after the first game. Miyamoto said this could have been due to the name being too similar to \"Final Fantasy\", which was released in December 1987. \nThe original Hyrule map was designed to encourage exploration and discovery, requiring up to several hours to navigate. The map is nonlinear, so players are free to choose from several unmarked paths, with just a few areas being inaccessible at the start. Miyamoto was influenced by \"The Black Onyx\" (1984) and \"\" (1981), two games that centre around fantasy dungeon crawling. The \"Zelda\" world was defined by its mazes, hidden rooms and treasures. The game's nine dungeons were designed to be difficult to locate, forcing players to uncover the secrets of the map with little help. In addition to its underworld, the Hyrule map consists of a large overworld created out of a grid structure that is much larger than can be displayed on a single screen. It is 16 blocks wide and eight blocks high and comprises 128 areas. Miyamoto said that maps for the game were included in North America: \"The maps included various hints, but to be honest, I thought it would be more enjoyable to play the game without any help. So we sealed the map, with a message reading 'You should only use the map and strategic tips as a last resort'\". Players were required to begin their adventure in the centre of Hyrule and use instinct alone to find an old man inside a cave who gives Link a sword and declares, \"It's dangerous to go alone!\". While navigating Hyrule's overworld and its many dangerous enemies, players must eventually find the dungeons, which each feature various enemies, items and a boss.\nThe concept of a role-playing game was a new experience for players in the 1980s. The gameplay diverged from the fast-paced games typically found in arcades, or home console games with a similar \"infectious energy\" to them like \"Super Mario Bros.\" By offering players an open world to explore, puzzles to solve and a fantasy story that centres on a protagonist embarking on an adventure to save a princess from an evil villain and bring peace to Hyrule. The new game concept caused concern with Nintendo's management. In 2003, Miyamoto stated in an interview for Superplay magazine: \"I remember that we were very nervous, because \"The Legend Of Zelda\" was our first game that forced the players to think about what they should do next. We were afraid that gamers would become bored and stressed by the new concept\". During the testing phase, players complained about getting lost inside the game's dungeons, but rather than making the game more simplistic, Miyamoto decided to make it more challenging by removing Link's sword at the beginning of the game and forcing players to locate it. He wanted to encourage players to communicate with each other while solving the game's puzzles.\n\"\" (1991) introduced a dark version of Hyrule Kingdom: a corrupted land, often caused by Ganon, known in its first iteration as the Dark World. The game, as well as some later installments, had Link travel between similar-looking versions of Hyrule or other lands\u2014one version without an evil influence and one with\u2014as \"a clever way to re-use assets and save precious cartridge space\" while investing the player in their resolve to save the world.\nThe fantasy characters of Hyrule, and the universe of \"The Legend of Zelda\" as a whole, were partially inspired by the American television series \"Twin Peaks\" (1990\u20132017). In a joint interview, \"Zelda\" producer Eiji Aonuma and SRD president Toshihiko Nakago considered \"\" (1993), with Yoshiaki Koizumi in charge of the story, to be the first time the series had a proper plot. Tezuka had made the suggestion to make the characters of \"Link's Awakening\" \"suspicious types\" like in \"Twin Peaks\". Aonuma and the interviewer, former Nintendo president Satoru Iwata, believed that this broadened the possibilities of characters and stories that could appear in later \"Legend of Zelda\" games.\nTransition to 3D.\nHyrule continued to evolve over the course of successive games. The transition from a 2D to 3D world occurred with the release of \"Ocarina of Time\" (1998), due to the capabilities of the Nintendo 64, which gave players the opportunity to experience a more realistic game environment. The 3D world was also accompanied by an expanding fictional lore that laid the foundation for other games in the series within an official fictional timeline. The game's dungeons were each unique and connected to a specific area of Hyrule and its inhabitants. Several recurring races, such as the Gorons, Zora and Gerudo were introduced and given a distinct history and culture. an expansive open grassy area, was positioned at the centre of Hyrule, acting as a hub that connects other areas to create the illusion of a vast world.\nDue to concerns about the limitations of the Nintendo 64, Miyamoto initially conceived the game taking place within a central hub in the confines of Ganon's Castle, similar to Peach's Castle in \"Super Mario 64\" (1996). He described \"Ocarina of Time\" as a \"huge project\" due to the fact that it involved making the game environment from 3D polygons and was larger in scale than anything that he had previously worked on. He said that he had approached the game by first focusing on what types of characters he wanted to include, rather than on the story or the game functions. \"Ocarina of Time\" was designed with several innovations to help the player navigate the expansive 3D world and interact with the environment. The camera system was designed to integrate with the 3D world of Hyrule, giving the player a sense of perspective and tracking the movements of Link. The game's Z-targeting system was created to provide the player with a simple way to lock on and interact with objects, characters and enemies in the game world. The game also made use of context sensitive controls by using the A button for a range of interactions, such as mounting a horse or opening a treasure chest. These features were landmarks for Nintendo and influenced 3D world development within the games industry.\nDuring development, the staff spent less time on developing the dungeons. According to Miyamoto: \"Instead of mapping your way through a maze, I think what's more important is a sense of dread, a sense of pressure, and of course an opportunity for finding secrets and solving puzzles\u2014we should be pursuing an emotional immediacy, the sense that you are really there\". Hyrule and its characters in \"Ocarina of Time\" were depicted in an art style that drifted towards Western fantasy, although Miyamoto said there was no intentional replication of cultural elements from one specific country.\nOpen air concept.\nAonuma approached \"Breath of the Wild\" (2017) by breaking the conventions of previous games. He explained that in \"Ocarina of Time\", the game world featured \"routes\" to help players navigate the 3D environment without getting lost, but that certain handholding and blockages had caused players to feel frustrated. By contrast, \"Breath of the Wild\"'s Hyrule was designed to allow the player to explore a vast world in any way they liked. Nintendo's senior product marketing manager Bill Trinen described the game as \"open air\": \"I look at this game and I see a world that is fully integrated into the exploration and the adventure. It's not just a world that you're passing through. It's sort of a world that you're a part of\". The game world benefited from advancements in Nintendo hardware. Earlier games had been restricted by the available technology, creating the need to separate Hyrule into individual connecting areas, but \"Breath of the Wild\"'s game world could be experienced as a seamless environment on the Wii U and Nintendo Switch. The concept of an \"open air\" environment began during work on \"The Wind Waker\" (2002). Aonuma said that he wanted to remove the small connecting areas of \"The Wind Waker\" and replace them with open expanses, but the world ended up feeling smaller than he intended. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn \"Breath of the Wild\", the fact that the world is supported by a coherent physics engine has a major effect on the possible actions. It sounds obvious, but for example, if you push down a rock, it's going to roll according to the slope. We wanted people to be able to feel things in a \"realistic\" way, to break or move around big objects in the game and believe they could have had the same feeling in real life. This physically lived experience is very important[.]\n Eiji Aonuma on realism in \"Breath of the Wild\"'s game world\n\"Breath of the Wild\"'s open world was inspired by other video games. The game's director Hidemaro Fujibayashi named \"Minecraft\" and \"Terraria\" (2011) as his inspirations for \"the sense of adventure, exploration and how it inspired curiosity\". Aonuma also mentioned several other games that he had played, including \"The Witcher\" (2007\u2013), \"Far Cry\" (2004\u2013) and \"\" (2011). He also cited \"Skyward Sword\" (2011) as the basis for many of the world's mechanics, such as the ability to climb and explore between areas. The development team began \"Breath of the Wild\" by working on a prototype of Hyrule that looked 2D to test interactions between objects. This was developed into a complex physics and chemistry engine that would present a higher level of realism. The chemistry engine allowed for elements, such as fire, water and electricity to interact with each other and objects in the game world. This was designed to provide the player with a more interactive gameplay that was coined \"chemical reaction play\". Hyrule in \"Breath of the Wild\" was depicted using an art style that was based on the stylised visuals of \"The Wind Waker\" but developed into a more realistic, detailed style. The civilization of the Hylians was developed with a focus on their castle in the style of medieval Europe to return to the roots of the series, while the ancient technological features of the Sheikah were inspired by the J\u014dmon period of Japanese history.\nFujibayashi stated that the layout of Hyrule in \"Breath of the Wild\" was inspired in part by his hometown of Kyoto: \"I took a map of Kyoto and overlaid it on the game world, and I tried to imagine going to places that I know in Kyoto. I'd think 'It takes this much time to get from point A to point B, so how does that translate to the game?' And that's how we started mapping out the world in \"Breath of the Wild\"\". The development team used landmarks in Kyoto as a way of comparing the distance between landmarks in the game world, which helped staff during the development of the game. This measurement of distance allowed Hyrule to be scaled up to an enormous world that appears twelve times the size of its predecessor in \"Twilight Princess\" (2006). \nFor \"Tears of the Kingdom\" (2023), Aonuma and Fujibayashi used the same map of Hyrule as the one players experienced in \"Breath of the Wild\" to create a continuation of the same world. Hyrule was extensively expanded, by introducing Sky Islands to the map to place emphasis on vertical gameplay. In addition to its sky expansion, the game introduced the Depths, a vast pitch-black area beneath the surface of Hyrule. Aonuma said the development team had learned lessons from \"Skyward Sword\", where Link was restricted by the hardware to descend from particular points. He explained that the team had wanted to create the ability to \"traverse a world that's not only horizontally connected in a single world, but vertically connected as well\", noting the sense of freedom the player experiences by diving into that.\nDepiction.\nThe a medieval-based fantasy land, is the main setting of the series, which first appeared in \"The Legend of Zelda\". Many of its areas have appeared throughout the series, such as Hyrule Castle, the Lost Woods, Kakariko Village, Death Mountain and Lake Hylia.\nHyrule was formed by three goddesses: and It is established in ' that Din created the physical geography of the realm, Nayru created the physical laws to govern it, and Farore created the races to uphold the law and the flora and fauna that inhabit the world. After the goddesses completed their tasks, they departed for the heavens, leaving behind three golden triangles containing their power to govern all things; this relic became known as the Triforce. The creation myth was elaborated upon in ', with the goddesses creating the world to be a prison for a primordial chaos entity named Null that had previously consumed anything that tried to form within the void. \"Skyward Sword\" expanded on this history by detailing the rise of Demon King Demise and his dark forces, who attempt to take the Triforce and destroy the world. The goddess Hylia stays to protect the Triforce and leads an army of free people into battle to weaken Demise and seal him away from the world. The realm was eventually named Hyrule after its dominant race, the Hylians, who established a kingdom across the land. The kingdom is ruled by the Royal Family of Hyrule, into which the various incarnations of Princess Zelda are often born.\nThe Hylian alphabet is a cipher of either English or Japanese that first appears in \"\", where it is identified as \"the ancient language of the Hylians\" and is composed of symbols that Link must translate to progress. In Japan, an explanation of the Hylian alphabet was written on the back of the instruction manual for \"The Wind Waker\" with a phonographic writing system, or syllabary, like the Japanese language. Since its first appearance, five more Hylian scripts have been developed and deciphered: the Old Hylian Syllabary used in \"Ocarina of Time\", the Modern Hylian Syllabary used in \"The Wind Waker\", the Hylian Alphabet used in \"Skyward Sword\", the Hylian Alphabet used in \"A Link Between Worlds\", and the Hylian Alphabet used in \"Twilight Princess\". The first three are used for transcribing Japanese, while the latter three are used to transcribe English, totaling six variations of written Hylian. Additional languages have subsequently appeared in the series. The language of the Gerudo was introduced in \"Ocarina of Time\", a written and spoken language that is similar to Hylian and is written in elongated, wispy letters. The Sheikah language was introduced in \"Breath of the Wild\" and consists of a complete alphabet of square-shaped symbols. Players have deciphered these languages to translate numerous signs and inscriptions commonly found around Hyrule.\nThe almost-universal currency of Hyrule is the rupee. Although it shares its name with the real-world currency, Miyamoto said in an interview that this was not intentional and that he chose the word because it seemed cute and sounded like \"rubies\". Rupees resemble hexagonal crystals or gems and come in various colors that determine their value. In the manual for the original game, the currency was called rubies, but this was changed to rupees in later games. Subsequent games introduced more colors and sizes for rupees, each denoting a specific value. Generally, green rupees have the least value, while gold and silver rupees have the most.\nHyrulean geography.\nAlthough the geography of Hyrule varies from game to game, it typically features several recurring geographical landmarks, which appear in different locations relative to each other depending on the game.\nObjects.\nTriforce.\nThe also called the \"Power of the Gods\" and the \"Golden Triangle\", is a triangular sacred relic left behind by the three Golden Goddesses after they created Hyrule. It is made up of three smaller triangles known as the Triforce of Power, the Triforce of Wisdom, and the Triforce of Courage. These embody the essences of their respective goddesses, and present a power struggle and balance of morality between the central characters, Ganon, Zelda and Link. The Triforce first appeared in the original game as a focal point of the plot, which involves Ganon stealing the Triforce of Power and Link searching for the scattered pieces of the Triforce of Wisdom to stop him and protect Hyrule from evil. The Triforce of Courage was introduced in \"The Adventure of Link\" as the third piece. When united, the Triforce allows the person who touches it to make a wish that usually lasts until they die or the wish is granted. If the person who finds it does not possess a balance of the three virtues it represents, the pieces will split into its three components, leaving the finder with the one that represents the characteristic they value most.\nMaster Sword.\nThe also known as \"The Blade of Evil's Bane\", the \"Sword of Resurrection\", or the \"sword that seals the darkness\" is a divine, magic sword and Link's signature weapon. It is one of the few weapons capable of harming Ganon and acts as a key to the Sacred Realm. It was first introduced in \"A Link to the Past\", it has the power to \"repel evil\", which enables it to overcome powerful dark magic and slay evil and demonic beings that cannot be harmed by conventional weaponry. \"\" reveals that it was originally known as the Goddess Sword, which is inhabited by a sentient female spirit named Fi. Near the end of the game, the Goddess Sword transforms into the Master Sword after being infused with the Three Sacred Flames, with Fi's spirit form ceasing to be after the Master Sword absorbs Demise's remains. The sword traditionally rests in a stone pedestal hidden in sacrosanct locations indigenous to Hyrule, such as the Temple of Time or the Lost Woods. Like the Sword in the Stone, the Master Sword can only be removed by someone who is worthy of wielding it.\nOther lands and worlds.\nHyrule is the main recurring setting of \"The Legend of Zelda\" series, but several games are set outside Hyrule in other lands, realms and parallel worlds. The geographical relationship between Hyrule and these other worlds is not clearly defined.\nCharacters.\nDespite most games in the series nominally taking place centuries apart, \"The Legend of Zelda\" often features many recurring characters. The silent protagonist Link and Princess Zelda are reincarnated in most \"Zelda\" games, while the antagonistic force Ganon, the final boss of most \"Zelda\" games, born from the primordial evil Demise, repeatedly returns in a new form as well. Other figures who reappear across the series include Zelda's caretaker Impa and the fairy-obsessed man Tingle. In ', ', and \"\", Link obtains a horse named Epona. She is also unlocked as a ridable steed by scanning an Amiibo toy in \"Breath of the Wild\" and \"Tears of the Kingdom\".\nLink is frequently accompanied by a companion in \"Zelda\" games, starting with Navi in \"Ocarina of Time\". Characters like her, Midna in \"Twilight Princess\", and Fi in ', serve a tutorial function in their respective games and comment on events as they transpire in the story. In \"Echoes of Wisdom\", Zelda is followed a similar companion called Tri. The supporting cast of ', featuring characters such as Purah, Prince Sidon, and Urbosa, has proven to be popular among fans of the series.\nLink.\nLink is the silent protagonist of the series and the main playable character. He is a Hylian youth of varying age who has traditionally been depicted wearing a green cap and tunic. He has appeared as the hero of nearly every game in the series, usually as a new iteration of the character, though some iterations have made more than one appearance. While the details vary, he typically embarks on a journey across Hyrule to save Princess Zelda and defeat evil, usually in the form of Ganon. To defeat his enemies, he typically obtains and wields the legendary Master Sword. Each incarnation of Link is humble, brave, and worthy to bear the Triforce of Courage, one of the three pieces that form the Triforce. As protagonist, Link has appeared in related media, including spin-off games such as \"Hyrule Warriors\", comics and manga, and other video game series, such as \"Mario Kart 8\" and the \"Super Smash Bros.\" series. Although he is mainly silent in the video games, he does speak in the \"Legend of Zelda\" cartoon series and the CD-i games from \"The Legend of Zelda\" series produced by Philips. Link was recognised as the second greatest video game character of all time behind Mario in the \"Guinness World Records Gamer's Edition\" 2011. \"Nintendo Life\" describes Link as \"one of gaming's most iconic heroes\", while \"GamesRadar\" describes him as, \"one of the most enduring heroic archetypes\". \"Time\" named him as one of the most influential video game characters of all time.\nPrincess Zelda.\nPrincess Zelda is Hyrule's princess and the guardian of the Triforce of Wisdom. While older titles portray her as a \"princess in peril\" who Link needed to save from Ganon, since \"Ocarina of Time\" she has been developed as a more fully realized character, particularly in \"Breath of the Wild\". Zelda is the reincarnation of the goddess Hylia in mortal form and usually depicted as the bearer of the Triforce of Wisdom. She is capable of using various magical powers to aid Link, including light magic to seal away Ganon, although several games have depicted her using the Bow of Light. Zelda occasionally has aliases and alter egos, including Sheik in \"Ocarina of Time\" and Tetra in \"The Wind Waker\" and \"Phantom Hourglass\". Despite being the titular character, Zelda has only been playable in \"Spirit Tracks\" and in the main series and \"\" and \"Zelda's Adventure\" of the CD-i games. However, she is playable in the \"Hyrule Warriors\" spin-off games, \"Cadence of Hyrule\", and in the \"Super Smash Bros.\" series since \"Melee\". She was named as one of the most iconic female game characters of all time by Digital Spy. Along with Link, she was counted as one of the greatest video game characters of all time by the 2011 \"Guinness World Record Gamer's Edition\".\nGanon.\nGanon is the series' primary villain and final boss. His specific motives vary across games, but general themes include seeking the Triforce for power and destruction and to conquer Hyrule. Like Link and Zelda, he is the bearer of one third of the Triforce: the Triforce of Power. Ganon was introduced as the main antagonist of the original \"The Legend of Zelda\" in the form of a blue boar and his role and appearance has since evolved over time. Over the course of the series, he has generally appeared in two forms: Ganon, a monstrous, demonic pig-like form, and Ganondorf, a humanoid Gerudo form first introduced in \"Ocarina of Time\". In \"Breath of the Wild\", he appears in two forms in the final boss fight as Calamity Ganon and Dark Beast Ganon. In \"Tears of the Kingdom\", Ganondorf is known as the Demon King. His portrayal varies across each game in the series, ranging from a mute beast to a powerful warlock with formidable sword skills, but generally he is so powerful that only Link and Zelda are capable of defeating him. In addition to the main \"Zelda\" series, Ganon/Ganondorf appears as a playable character in the \"Hyrule Warriors\" spin-off games and the \"Super Smash Bros.\" series since \"Melee\". Ganon was recognized as one of the greatest video game villains of all time in a 2013 poll for \"Guinness World Records 2013 Gamer's Edition\". In 2022, \"GamesRadar\" named him as one of the most iconic gaming villains of all time.\nImpa.\n was introduced in the game manual for the original \"The Legend of Zelda\" as an elderly woman and member of the Sheikah who acts as caretaker to Princess Zelda and seeks out Link to save her from Ganon. She returns in \"\", where she acts as a guide to Link. In \"Ocarina of Time\", she plays a major role as a young warrior and Zelda's guardian. Her character design is similar in \"Skyward Sword\", where she appears in both a young and elderly form. \"Breath of the Wild\" depicts her as a Sheikah elder in Kakariko Village, where she is about 120 years old. She is a playable character in \"Hyrule Warriors\" and \"Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity\" as a young warrior. In \"Tears of the Kingdom\", she has retired and is investigating the Geoglyphs that have appeared around Hyrule, tasking Link with finding the Dragon's Tears and the memories they hold. Impa's characterisation was praised by Jenni Lada of \"Siliconera\", who admired her for being an intelligent warrior and a respected character.\nImpa's character design has evolved significantly over the course of the series, having been depicted in various forms and ages to fulfill various roles in the games. In her first appearance, Impa was created as an elderly woman for the instruction manual of \"The Legend of Zelda\". In \"Ocarina of Time\", she appears as a slimmer, younger character with a sturdy build and hair tied back in a ponytail. By contrast, she was designed as an overweight woman for \"Oracle of Seasons\". In \"Skyward Sword,\" she appears as younger and older versions of the same character due to the storyline shifting in time and is dressed in Sheikah attire. The younger version of Impa was given an androgynous appearance, while her older version wears a costume designed to reflect the passage of time, including a pendulum braid and a triangular robe that becomes a sundial. In \"Breath of the Wild\", she appears as a much older village elder with a short, shrunken stature. In \"Hyrule Warriors,\" she is depicted as an athletic warrior, which is similar to her appearance in \"Ocarina of Time\" and her younger form in \"Skyward Sword\". In \"Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity,\" which features the younger self of her \"Breath of the Wild\" incarnation\",\" she is portrayed as a powerful fighter and strongly resembles her future granddaughter, Paya. Impa's design, abilities, and gestures in \"Age of Calamity\" drew heavy inspiration from Naruto Uzumaki.\nThroughout her many incarnations, she bears the typical traits of the Sheikah tribe, having white hair and red eyes. She also typically displays the Sheikah symbol, an eye with three triangles above and a teardrop below, on her forehead or clothing. As a representative of her people, she wears the unique garments of the Sheikah, which take inspiration from historical Japanese clothing. As a member of the Sheikah, Impa is highly skilled in combat and the use of magic.\nKing of Hyrule.\nThe King of Hyrule is the title given to the various ruling monarchs of Hyrule, who are generally the father of Princess Zelda in most incarnations. He appears in many entries, but his presence is often relegated to cameos, backstory, lore, or posthumous appearances as a ghost. In \"The Minish Cap,\" Link must rescue King Daltus after Vaati turns him to stone and imprisons him. In \"The Wind Waker,\" Daphnes Nohansen Hyrule is later revealed to be the true identity of The King of Red Lions, the sentient red sailboat that accompanies Link and leads him to the Triforce of Courage, also helping Tetra to uncover her true identity as Zelda, ultimately usurping the Triforce to sink Hyrule. He later appears as a playable character in \"Hyrule Warriors Legends\". In \"Breath of the Wild\", the Old Man guides Link throughout the Great Plateau and helps him obtain the paraglider and is eventually revealed to be the spirit of King Rhoam Bosphoramus Hyrule. In the game's backstory, he prepared for the return of Calamity Ganon and put pressure on his daughter Zelda to awaken her sealing powers, but his efforts ended in failure and his death. King Rhoam returns as a playable character in \"Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity\".\nBeedle.\nBeedle, also known as Terry in other localizations, is a traveling merchant who sells Link items. He also values his consumers with rewards discounts. He first appears in \",\" where he can be found on islands in the Great Sea on his boat shop. In ', he appears in Hyrule Town selling Picolyte after Link fuses kinstones and clears the area with the Gust Jar. In ', he sells boat parts. In ', he is seen soaring above in a balloon across New Hyrule. In ', he travels from his island home to Skyloft in a pedal-powered wooden shack with helicopter-type propellers, which also serves as his shop. In ' and ', he travels on foot with a large backpack, and is often seen at stables. \"IGN\" ranked him number 14 on its list of the weirdest \"Zelda\" characters.\nTingle.\nTingle is a eccentric middle-aged man who is obsessed with fairies and believes himself to be the reincarnation of one. He first appears in ' where he wears a green body suit and floats around on a balloon selling maps. He reappears in ', first in a jail room located on Windfall Island, and then in a tall wooden tower, where he acts as a map maker. He also appears in ', ' and '. He makes cameo appearances in ' as a poster, in ' as a shop figurine, and in ' as a doll in Zelda's room at the Knight Academy. Tingle has gained notoriety due to being disliked by American players and has not appeared in the main series in a non-cameo capacity since \"The Minish Cap\". He is referenced in the \"Twilight Princess\" character Purlo, whose design is based on how a realistic Tingle would look. He ranked first on \"IGN\"'s list of the weirdest \"Zelda\" characters. \"IGN\" staff expressed their disdain for the character with a 2004 \"Die, Tingle, Die! Die!\" Campaign\", describing him as a \"nutty clown freak\" and stating, \"we hate Tingle, we want him dead, and we're not going to stand for him in another Zelda game\". He has starred in his own games, including \"Freshly-Picked Tingle's Rosy Rupeeland and Ripened Tingle's Balloon Trip of Love\". He is also a playable character via downloadable content in \"Hyrule Warriors\". His suit is an obtainable armour set in \"Breath of the Wild\" and \"Tears of the Kingdom\".\nVaati.\n is the antagonist of \"\", \"Four Swords Adventures\" and \"The Minish Cap\". His most common appearance is a black orb with a single eye, though he was originally a human sorcerer. In \"Four Swords\", Vaati is initially sealed in the Four Sword, but escapes and captures Princess Zelda, only for Link, who was split into four by the sword's power, to return him to it. In the sequel, \"Four Swords Adventures\", he escapes with Princess Zelda with help from Ganon, forcing Link to be split up again to defeat him. Before the events of \"The Minish Cap\", Vaati was a Picori that became corrupted by the evil in the hearts of mankind. He used the Wishing Cap created by his master, Ezlo, to transform into a Hylian sorcerer and curse him into his current hat-like form, now seeking the power of the Light Force.\nRaces.\nSince the release of the original game, the series has featured several races. Alongside the Hylian race, which established the land of Hyrule, there are various other prominent races, such as the Gorons, Gerudo, Rito and Zora.\nEnemies.\nThe appearance of some creatures varies across different titles of the series:\nReception.\nIn their January 2010 issue, \"Nintendo Power\" listed the \"wonderful worlds\" of Hyrule, together with the Mushroom Kingdom from the \"Super Mario\" series, Planet Zebes from the \"Metroid\" series, the player's town from the \"Animal Crossing\" series, and Metro City from the \"Final Fight\" series, as five of their 50 \"reasons to love Nintendo\". Steve Watts of \"GameSpot\" praised the original game world, commenting that although it is minimalist, it, \"conveys the feeling of going on a grand adventure through the wilderness, and the lack of hand-holding that would come to define later \"Zelda\" games makes the world feel that much more expansive and mysterious\". Yannick LeJacq for \"Kotaku\" commented in 2014 that \"Hyrule is one of the most iconic settings in the history of video games. \"The Legend of Zelda\" players have been poring over it in one way or another for almost 30 years now\".\nCritics celebrated \"Ocarina of Time\"'s game world's impact on both gamers and the subsequent depictions of 3D game worlds. The open world of Hyrule in \"Breath of the Wild\" has received praise for its design. In 2021 Noelle Warner of \"Destructoid\" praised its cozy appeal while recovering from the post-quarantine period and felt that she would be happy living in seven out of the nine towns she ranked for coziness. She praised Tarrey Town\u2014which was surrounded by a lake, contained a circle of houses facing one another, and had a view of autumnal trees\u2014the most, but praised the beauty and visuals of many of the other towns. Other critics praised the scale of the open world, its beauty, and its clever sense of navigation.\nIn 2020, senior editor Caty McCarthy of \"USgamer\" ranked the in-game map of \"A Link to the Past\" as the best video game map. \"IGN\" ranked Hyrule as the sixth greatest game world. In 2021, Evan Narcisse of \"Kotaku\" listed Hyrule as one of the richest sci-fi and fantasy worlds in video games.\nInfluence and legacy.\nSince the release of the original \"The Legend of Zelda\" game, critics have commented on the influence and legacy of \"The Legend of Zelda\" universe on the gaming industry. Critics noted the first \"Zelda\" game influenced \"World of Warcraft\", \"Grand Theft Auto\" (1997\u2013present), \"\" (2011), \"Dark Souls\" (2011\u20132016), and the entire action RPG genre. The original game was a phenomenal commercial success for Nintendo, selling over 6.5 million copies, and has been described by many critics as one of the greatest video games of all time.\nCritics defined \"Ocarina of Time\" as foundational to 3D games in the adventure genre, particularly with regard to technical innovations including the \"Z-targeting\" mechanic, with \"The Guardian\"'s Keza MacDonald noting a version of the 1998 game's mechanic being used in \"Red Dead Redemption 2\" (2018). Its remapping controls and quick-mapping of buttons was also noted by Tom Power in \"GamesRadar+\" as having crossed into other gaming genres such as the first-person shooter series \"Halo\" (2001\u2013present) and \"Call of Duty\" (2003\u2013present), as well as \"Gears of War\" (2006\u20132019). The sense of wonder as a first-time player enters Hyrule Field has been cited as an influence on similar moments in \"Grand Theft Auto III\" (2001), \"Red Dead Redemption 2\", \"Crackdown\" (2007), and \"Fallout 3\" (2008).\nIn the months following the release of \"Breath of the Wild\" in 2017, many video game developers were influenced by its open world design. Alx Preston, creator of \"Hyper Light Drifter\", remarked that \"the sense of freedom and experimentation is incredibly inspiring\". Adam Saltsman, creator of \"Canabalt\", commented on the consistency of the game environment and the player's ability to experiment. Vlambeer's Rami Ismail said that \"no game has done verticality as well as \"BotW\"\". Critics and developers cited \"Breath of the Wild\" as an influence on the game worlds of \"Genshin Impact\" (2020), \"Immortals Fenyx Rising\" (2020), \"Horizon Forbidden West\" (2022), \"Death Stranding\" (2019), and \"Elden Ring\" (2022), along with the free-form storytelling of the narrative game \"Telling Lies\" (2019). Upon its release, \"Breath of the Wild\" achieved critical acclaim and was the biggest commercial success of the franchise and one of the best-selling video games, selling 29 million copies on the Nintendo Switch as of \u00a02022[ [update]] and over 1.6 million copies on the Wii U as of \u00a02022[ [update]].\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30780", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30780", "title": "Traducianism", "text": "Christian belief about the origin of the soul\nIn Christian theology, Traducianism is a doctrine about the origin of the soul holding that this immaterial aspect is transmitted through natural generation along with the body, the material aspect of human beings. That is, human propagation is of the whole being, both material and immaterial aspects: an individual's soul is derived from the soul of one or both parents. This implies that only the soul of Adam was created directly by God (with Eve's substance, material and immaterial, being taken from out of Adam), in contrast with the idea of creationism of the soul, which holds that all souls are created directly by God.\nHistory.\nAll Church Fathers agreed that the soul of Adam was directly created by God; they disagreed about whether humans thereafter were each given souls as a special act of creation, or whether souls were passed on to them the same way their bodies were. Tertullian actively advocated traducianism, the parental generation of souls. After the rise of Pelagianism, some theologians hesitated between traducianism and creationism, believing the former to offer a better, if not the only, explanation of the transmission of original sin. For Augustine, traducianism suggested a simple explanation for original sin, but he could not decide between it and creationism. In his writing to Saint Jerome, Augustine said, \"If that opinion of the creation of new souls is not opposed to this established article of faith let it be also mine; if it is, let it not be thine.\" Jerome condemned it and said that creationism was the opinion of the Church, but he admitted that most of the Western Christians held traducianism. Gregory of Nyssa alone among the Greek Fathers leaned toward traducianism. Theodore Abu Qurrah, Macarius, Rufinus and Nemesius also favored that view. Clement of Alexandria laid the foundations for the creationist view. Ambrose of Milan drew a distinction between the creation of Eve's body from Adam's rib and the creation of her soul by citing Genesis 2:22: \"the man said: \"This one, at last, is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh.\" He noted that it did not say \"soul of my soul\", but that can only mean that the souls of the first man and the first woman were both created separately and independently.\nCreationism always prevailed in the East and became the general opinion of medieval theologians. Amongst the Scholastics, there were no defenders of traducianism. Alexander of Hales characterized creationism as the more probable opinion. All the other scholastics held creationism as certain and differed only in regard to the censure that should be attached to the opposite error. Accordingly, Peter Lombard asserted, \"The Catholic Church teaches that souls are created at their infusion into the body.\" Saint Thomas Aquinas was more emphatic: \"It is heretical to say that the intellectual soul is transmitted by process of generation.\" Hugh of Saint Victor and Hilary of Poitiers were creationists. Anselm of Canterbury was against traducianism.\nThere was a diversity of opinions among the remaining scholastics. Some held that the soul of a child is produced by the soul of the parents just as the body is generated by the parent body. Others maintained that all souls are created apart and are then united with their respective bodies, either by their own volition or by the command and action of God. Still others declared that the soul in the moment of its creation is infused into the body. Although for a time, the several views were upheld, and it was doubtful which came nearest the truth, the Church subsequently condemned the first two and approved the third. Gregory of Valencia spoke of \"Generationism\" as \"certainly erroneous.\" Although there are no explicit definitions authoritatively put forth by the Catholic Church that would warrant calling Creationism to be \"de fide\" doctrine, there can be no doubt as to which view has been favored by ecclesiastical authority.\nThat the soul sinned in its pre-existent state and on that account was incarcerated in the body is regarded by the Catholic Church as a fiction that has been repeatedly condemned. Divested of that fiction, the theory that the soul exists prior to its infusion into the organism, while not explicitly reprobated, is obviously opposed to the doctrine of the Catholic Church according to which souls are multiplied correspondingly with the multiplication of human organisms. However, whether the rational soul is infused into the organism at conception, as the modern opinion holds, or some weeks subsequently, as medieval scholastics supposed, is an open question to some theologians.\nMartin Luther, like Augustine, was unwilling to make a dogmatic statement but at least later in his life moved away from the medieval consensus and favored the Traducian position. In the theses Luther prepared for Peter Hegemon's doctoral disputation in 1545 concerning the origin of souls, Luther argues for the view that the soul of the child is generated from the souls of the parents in a way that is analogous to the generation of the body from the parents, believing this to be more consistent with the Biblical testimony than an immediate direct creation of each individual soul by God. The Lutheran dogmatic tradition that followed was decidedly traducian, with Johann Gerhard, David Hollatz, Johannes Andreas Quenstedt all clearly articulating traducianism. John Calvin favoured creationism, as did Robert Baron. The Catholic Church postulates that the souls are created immediately at the moment of the conception. Pope Pius XII stated: \"That the souls are created by God, it is the Catholic Faith that obliges us to accept.\"\nSupporters.\nTraducianism was developed initially by Tertullian, who took a semi-materialistic view of the nature of the soul. It has been endorsed by Church Fathers such as Saint Gregory of Nyssa, Saint Anastasius Sinaita, and other theological figures in the early centuries of Christianity. Protestant advocates include various Lutheran Churches as well as some modern theologians such as Augustus H. Strong (Baptist), and Gordon Clark (Presbyterian), Lewis Sperry Chafer, Millard Erickson, Norman L. Geisler, and Robert L. Reymond.\nW. G. T. Shedd says that the soul of any given individual is a part of the original soul given to Adam, and therefore is not originated in the act of procreation.\nIn \"Evil, Sin and Christian Theism\" (2022), Andrew Loke argues for a modified hylomorphic theory that combines the merits of both Traducianism and Creationism. According to this view, a unique soul is generated when the gametes of parents that carry soulish potentialities meet (Traducian account), but it is God who gives a unique shape to the soul (Creationist account). Thus, while the \"soul-stuffs\" are ancestrally passed on, the soul-shape is divinely caused.\nArguments in opposition.\nReasons for opposing the traducianism of human beings include the metaphysical argument that since humans cannot control their own existence, their existence cannot be caused by themselves; it must rather be caused by a necessary being otherwise known as God. Creation, in other words, includes God's on-going causation of human existence. This causation is through the human soul because, as Saint Thomas Aquinas argues, the human Soul has activities beyond the capacity of matter and the existence of these activities shows that the human soul is both immaterial and immortal---but not independent of God's causality. The Roman Catholic Church teaches that \"every spiritual soul is created immediately by God - it is not \"produced\" by the parents, and also that it is immortal...\" This argument, however, isn't contradictory with the idea that Souls can give existence to new Souls the same way there is intentionality, action and causation in the material nature. Humans have, however, free will and thus control over their own existence, as much as they are responsible for the act of procreation.\nTraducianism contradicts the concept of the indivisibility of the soul, but this is a merging and creation of two souls. If the souls are incapable of division, then it is impossible for the soul of the child to be derived from the souls of the parents. But this is a merging and creation by two souls, and God would also have to divide himself in order to create a new one through his own substance. To God, nothing is impossible, as it is possible to God to create a new one from nothing perhaps from himself. Such is being divided from something, even two rather than one, both parents souls being that powerful. Also, in the Nicene Creed, the Son was generated, not created, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father.\nThe weakness of traducianism, to many theologians, is that it makes the generation of the soul dependent as it is parallel to of the transmission of matter. Presbyterian theologian Charles Hodge held that since the nature of the soul is immaterial it could not be transmitted by natural generation. To others, however, it is not a weakness of argument, since to God that is not impossible, Spirit isn't like matter, not being the same process, and since any way of existence of soul is as good as any other, and since for every human body there is a soul, regardless of how and what made it come into existence, and that soul comes in to existence because there is a transmission of matter to create a human being, there is not any issue about God making his generation of the soul dependent of the transmission of matter. Also, in the Nicean Creed, the Son was generated, not created, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from both the Father and the Son.\nYet another argument for opposing traducianism is from the Genesis' accounts of Creation. If it took divine action to create human beings in the beginning, it takes divine action now because neither in the beginning nor in the present is it possible for mortal beings to make immortal souls. This argument, however, isn't contradictory with the idea that, if the first souls had to be created by God, that was simply because they were the first, and it doesn't mean the can't originate new ones on their own.\nTraducianism proceeds on the unproven assumption that God only works in a managerial manner after completing the creation of the world, as creacionism proceeds on the unproven opposite assumption. Louis Berkhof points out that God continues to work immediately both in the performance of miracles and in some parts of the work of redemption.\nSome Calvinist Reformed Protestants oppose traducianism by contending that it means that if the parents of the child are Regenerate, then the soul of the child must also be Regenerate, which obscures the doctrine of Original Sin as articulated by Augustinian theologians of the Calvinist Tradition. This argument, however, isn't contradictory to the idea that the parents are responsible for their own Regeneration the same way their offspring is responsible for its own Regeneration. It can also be argued that, if there is an Original Sin, newly created souls are bounded to something that was not caused by anyone that has given origin to them, thus contradicting the same doctrine.\nThe Charismatic Movement also generally supports the idea that the Holy Spirit is the \"Creator\" of every individual soul, citing the traditional hymn Veni Creator Spiritus as evidence that Christians have long invoked the divine soul-making properties of the spirit. states: \"But Jesus answered them, \"My Father is still working, so I am working, too,\" indicating that God is still at work giving life at the time Jesus' words are spoken. But working can simply have the meaning that God is simply working for the salvation of mankind. In its origin it was an allusion to the Jewish belief that God remained actively working in the Universe even after its creation and does not necessarily mean soul creation or the creation of anything new.\nSome might oppose crerationism based on the fact that God is not a constant automatic and other-dependent machine of soul creation, including the souls of those born from sin, such as rape and incest.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30783", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30783", "title": "Transformation", "text": "Transformation may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30784", "revid": "48442598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30784", "title": "Taxation law", "text": ""}
{"id": "30785", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30785", "title": "Tulsa race massacre", "text": "1921 mass violence in Oklahoma, US\nThe Tulsa race massacre was a two-day-long white supremacist terrorist massacre that took place in the Greenwood District in Tulsa, Oklahoma, United States, between May 31 and June 1, 1921. Mobs of white residents, some of whom had been appointed as deputies and armed by city government officials, attacked black residents and destroyed homes and businesses. The event is considered one of the worst incidents of racial violence in American history. The attackers burned and destroyed more than 35 square blocks of the neighborhood\u2014at the time, one of the wealthiest black communities in the United States, colloquially known as \"Black Wall Street.\"\nMore than 800 people were admitted to hospitals, and as many as 6,000 black residents of Tulsa were interned, many of them for several days. The Oklahoma Bureau of Vital Statistics officially recorded 36 dead. The 2001 Tulsa Reparations Coalition examination of events identified 39 dead, 26 black and 13 white, based on contemporary autopsy reports, death certificates, and other records. The commission reported estimates ranging from 36 up to around 300 dead.\nThe massacre began during Memorial Day weekend after 19-year-old Dick Rowland, a black shoeshiner, was accused of assaulting Sarah Page, a white 21-year-old elevator operator in the nearby Drexel Building. He was arrested and rumors that he was to be lynched spread. The most widely reported and corroborated inciting incident occurred as the group of black men left when an elderly white man approached O. B. Mann, a black man, and demanded that he hand over his pistol. Mann refused, and the old man attempted to disarm him. A gunshot went off, and then, according to the sheriff's reports, \"all hell broke loose.\" The two groups shot at each other until midnight when the group of black men was greatly outnumbered and forced to retreat to Greenwood. At the end of the exchange of gunfire, 12 people were dead, 10 white and 2 black. Alternatively, another eyewitness account was that the shooting began \"down the street from the Courthouse\" when black business owners came to the defense of a lone black man being attacked by a group of around six white men. It is possible that the eyewitness did not recognize the fact that this incident was occurring as a part of a rolling gunfight that was already underway. As news of the violence spread throughout the city, mob violence exploded. White rioters invaded Greenwood that night and the next morning, killing men and burning and looting stores and homes. Around noon on June 1, the Oklahoma National Guard imposed martial law, ending the massacre.\nAbout 10,000 black people were left homeless, and the cost of the property damage amounted to more than $1.5 million in real estate and $750,000 in personal property (equivalent to $ million in 2024). By the end of 1922, most of the residents' homes had been rebuilt, but the city and real estate companies refused to compensate them. Many survivors left Tulsa. The massacre was largely omitted from local, state, and national histories for years. In 1996, a bipartisan group in the state legislature authorized the formation of the Oklahoma Commission to Study the riot. The commission's final report, published in 2001, was unable to establish that the city had conspired with the racist mob; however it recommended a program of reparations to survivors and their descendants. The state passed legislation to establish scholarships for the descendants of survivors and develop a park in memory of the victims, which was dedicated in 2010. Schools in Oklahoma have been required to teach students about the massacre since 2002, and in 2020, the massacre officially became a part of the Oklahoma school curriculum.\nBackground.\nIn 1921, Oklahoma had a racially, socially, and politically tense atmosphere. The territory of northern Oklahoma had been established for the forced resettlement of Native Americans from the southeast, some of whom had owned slaves. The slaves were the first black inhabitants of Indian Territory, having been brought in by their native owners. Other areas had received many settlers from the South whose families had been slaveholders before the Civil War. Oklahoma was admitted as a state on November 16, 1907. The newly created state legislature, which had a large Democratic majority, passed racial segregation laws, commonly known as Jim Crow laws, as its first order of business. The 1907 Oklahoma Constitution did not call for strict segregation; delegates feared that U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt would veto the document if they included such restrictions. Still, the first law passed by the new legislature segregated all rail travel, and voter registration rules effectively disenfranchised non-whites. This meant that they were also barred from either serving on juries or serving in local public offices. These laws were enforced until they were ruled unconstitutional after the passage of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965. Major cities passed laws that imposed additional restrictions.\nOn August 4, 1916, Tulsa passed an ordinance that mandated residential segregation by forbidding members of either race from residing on any block where three-quarters or more of the residents were members of the other race. Although the United States Supreme Court declared such an ordinance unconstitutional the following year, Tulsa and many other cities continued to establish and enforce segregation for the next three decades.\nMany servicemen returned to Tulsa following the end of the First World War in 1918. As they tried to re-enter the labor force, social tensions and white supremacist sentiment increased in cities where job competition was fierce. An economic slump in Northeastern Oklahoma increased the level of unemployment. The Civil War, which ended in 1865, was still in living memory; civil rights for African Americans were lacking.\nThe Ku Klux Klan was resurgent (influenced by the popular 1915 film \"The Birth of a Nation\"). Since 1915, the Ku Klux Klan had been growing in urban chapters across the country. Its first significant appearance in Oklahoma occurred on August 12, 1921. By the end of 1921, 3,200 of Tulsa's 72,000 residents were Klan members, according to one estimate. In the early 20th century, lynchings were common in Oklahoma as part of a continuing effort to assert and maintain white supremacy. By 1921, at least 31 people, mostly men and boys, had been lynched in the newly formed state; 26 were black.\nAt the same time, black veterans pushed to have their civil rights enforced, believing that they had earned full citizenship as the result of their military service. In what became known as the \"Red Summer\" of 1919, industrial cities across the Midwest and Northeast experienced severe race riots in which whites attacked black communities, sometimes with the assistance of local authorities.\nAs a booming oil city, Tulsa also supported a large number of affluent, educated, and professional African American residents. Greenwood was a district in Tulsa that was organized in 1906 following Booker T. Washington's 1905 tour of Arkansas, Indian Territory, and Oklahoma. It was a namesake of the Greenwood District, which Washington had established as his own district in Tuskegee, Alabama, five years earlier. Greenwood became so prosperous that it came to be known as \"the Negro Wall Street\" (now commonly referred to as \"the Black Wall Street\"). Most black people lived together in the district. Black Americans had created their own businesses and services in this enclave, including several grocers, two newspapers, two movie theaters, nightclubs, and numerous churches. Black professionals, including doctors, dentists, lawyers, and clergy, served the community. During his trip to Tulsa in 1905, Washington encouraged the cooperation, economic independence, and excellence being demonstrated there. Greenwood residents selected their own leaders and raised capital there to support economic growth. In the surrounding areas of northeastern Oklahoma, they also enjoyed relative prosperity and participated in the oil boom.\nMonday, May 30 (Memorial Day).\nEncounter in the elevator.\nOn May 30, 1921, 19-year-old Dick Rowland, a black shoeshiner who was employed at a Main Street shine parlor, entered the only elevator in the nearby Drexel Building at 319 South Main Street in order to use the top-floor \"colored\" restroom, which his employer had arranged for use by his black employees. There, he encountered Sarah Page, the 21-year-old white elevator operator who was on duty. Whether\u2014and to what extent\u2014Rowland and Page knew each other has long been a matter of speculation. The two likely knew each other at least by sight because Rowland would have regularly ridden in Page's elevator on his way to and from the restroom. A clerk at Renberg's, a clothing store on the first floor of the Drexel, heard what sounded like a woman's scream and saw a young black man rushing from the building. The clerk went to the elevator and found Page in a distraught state. Thinking that she had been sexually assaulted, he summoned the authorities. Apart from the clerk's interpretation that Rowland had attempted to rape Page, many explanations have been given for the incident, with the most common explanation being that Rowland tripped as he got onto the elevator, and as he tried to catch his fall, he grabbed onto the arm of Page, who then screamed. Others suggested that Rowland and Page had a lover's quarrel.\nThe 2001 Oklahoma Commission Final Report notes that it was unusual for both Rowland and Page to be working downtown on Memorial Day when most stores and businesses were closed. But it has been speculated that Rowland was there because the shine parlor where he worked may have been open to draw in some of the parade traffic, while Page had been required to work in order to transport Drexel Building employees and their families to choice parade viewing spots on the building's upper floors.\nBrief investigation.\nAlthough the police questioned Page, no written account of her statement has been found, but apparently, she told the police that Rowland had grabbed her arm and nothing more, and would not press charges. The police determined that what happened between the two individuals was less than an assault. They conducted a low-key investigation rather than launching a man-hunt for her alleged assailant.\nRegardless of whether or not assault had occurred, Rowland had reason to be fearful, as African American men accused of raping white women were often prime targets for lynch mobs. Realizing the gravity of the situation, Rowland fled to his mother's house in the Greenwood neighborhood.\nTuesday, May 31.\nArrest of Rowland.\nOn the morning after the incident, Henry Carmichael, a white detective, and Henry C. Pack, a black patrolman, located Rowland on Greenwood Avenue and detained him. Rowland was initially taken to the Tulsa city jail at the corner of First Street and Main Street. Late that day, Police Commissioner J. M. Adkison said he had received an anonymous telephone call threatening Rowland's life. He ordered Rowland transferred to the more secure jail on the top floor of the Tulsa County Courthouse.\nRowland was well known among attorneys and other legal professionals within the city, many of whom knew him through his work as a shoeshiner. Some witnesses later recounted hearing several attorneys defend Rowland in their conversations with one another. One of the men said, \"Why, I know that boy, and have known him a good while. That's not in him.\"\nNewspaper coverage.\nThe \"Tulsa Tribune\", owned, published, and edited by Richard Lloyd Jones, and one of two white-owned papers that were published in Tulsa, broke the story in that afternoon's edition with the headline: \"Nab Negro for Attacking Girl In an Elevator\", describing the alleged incident. According to some witnesses, the same edition of the \"Tribune\" included an editorial warning of a potential lynching of Rowland, titled \"To Lynch Negro Tonight\". The paper was known at the time to have a \"sensationalist\" style of news writing. Allegedly, all original copies of that issue of the paper have apparently been destroyed, and the relevant page is missing from the microfilm copy. The Tulsa Race Riot Commission in 1997 offered a reward for a copy of the editorial, which went unclaimed. A copy of the \"Tulsa Tribune\" of June 1, 1921, was found: on the front page was an article headlined \"Nab Negro for attacking girl in an Elevator\" [right]. The editorial page was also found: it did not have an article headlined \"To Lynch A Negro Tonight\". Other newspapers of the time like \"The Black Dispatch\" and the \"Tulsa World\" did not call attention to any such editorial after the event. So, the exact content of the column\u2014and whether or not it existed at all\u2014remains in dispute. However, Chief of Detectives James Patton attributed the cause of the riots entirely to the newspaper account and stated, \"If the facts in the story as told the police had only been printed I do not think there would have been any riot whatsoever.\"\nStand-off at the courthouse.\nThe afternoon edition of the \"Tribune\" hit the streets shortly after 3 p.m., and soon, news spread of a potential lynching. By 4 p.m., local authorities were on alert. White residents began congregating at and near the Tulsa County Courthouse. By sunset, around 7:30\u00a0p.m., the several hundred white residents assembled outside the courthouse appeared to have the makings of a lynch mob. Willard M. McCullough, the newly elected sheriff of Tulsa County, was determined to avoid events such as the 1920 lynching of white murder suspect Roy Belton in Tulsa, which had occurred during the term of his predecessor. The sheriff took steps to ensure Rowland's safety. McCullough organized his deputies into a defensive formation around Rowland, who was terrified. The \"Guthrie Daily Leader\" reported that Rowland had been taken to the county jail before crowds started to gather. The sheriff positioned six of his men, armed with rifles and shotguns, on the roof of the courthouse. He disabled the building's elevator and had his remaining men barricade themselves at the top of the stairs with orders to shoot any intruders in sight. The sheriff went outside and tried to talk the crowd into going home, but to no avail. According to an account by Scott Ellsworth, the sheriff was \"hooted down\". At about 8:20\u00a0p.m., three white men entered the courthouse, demanding that Rowland be turned over to them. Although vastly outnumbered by the growing crowd out on the street, Sheriff McCullough turned the men away.\nA few blocks away on Greenwood Avenue, members of the black community gathered to discuss the situation at Gurley's Hotel. Given the recent lynching of Belton, a white man accused of murder, they believed that Rowland was greatly at risk. Many black residents were determined to prevent the crowd from lynching Rowland, but they were divided about tactics. Young World War I veterans prepared for a battle by collecting guns and ammunition. Older, more prosperous men feared a destructive confrontation that likely would cost them dearly. O. W. Gurley stated that he had tried to convince the men that there would be no lynching, but the crowd responded that Sheriff McCullough had personally told them their presence was required. At about 9:30\u00a0p.m., a group of approximately 50\u201360 black men, armed with rifles and shotguns, arrived at the jail to support the sheriff and his deputies in defending Rowland from the mob. Corroborated by ten witnesses, attorney James Luther submitted to the grand jury that they were following the orders of Sheriff McCullough, who publicly denied he gave any orders:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTaking up arms.\nHaving seen the armed black men, some of the more than 1,000 whites who had been at the courthouse went home for their own guns. Others headed for the National Guard armory at the corner of Sixth Street and Norfolk Avenue, where they planned to arm themselves. The armory contained a supply of small arms and ammunition. Major James Bell of the 180th Infantry Regiment learned of the mounting situation downtown and the possibility of a break-in, and he consequently took measures to prevent it. He called the commanders of the three National Guard units in Tulsa, who ordered all the Guard members to put on their uniforms and report quickly to the armory. When a group of whites arrived and began pulling at the grating over a window, Bell went outside to confront the crowd of 300 to 400 men. Bell told them that the Guard members inside were armed and prepared to shoot anyone who tried to enter. After this show of force, the crowd withdrew from the armory.\nAt the courthouse, the crowd had swollen to nearly 2,000, many of them now armed. Several local leaders, including Reverend Charles W. Kerr, pastor of the First Presbyterian Church, tried to dissuade mob action. Chief of Police John A. Gustafson later claimed that he tried to talk the crowd into going home.\nAnxiety on Greenwood Avenue was rising. Many black residents worried about the safety of Rowland. Small groups of armed black men ventured toward the courthouse in automobiles, partly for surveillance and to demonstrate they were prepared to take necessary action to protect Rowland. Many white men interpreted these actions as a \"Negro uprising\" and became concerned. Eyewitnesses reported gunshots, presumably fired into the air, increasing in frequency during the evening.\nIn Greenwood, rumors began to fly\u2014in particular, a report that whites were storming the courthouse. Shortly after 10 p.m., a second, larger group of approximately 75 armed black men decided to go to the courthouse. They offered their support to the sheriff, who declined their help.\nThere are conflicting reports about the exact time and nature of the incident, or incidents, that immediately precipitated the massacre. According to the 2001 Commission, \"As the black men were leaving, a white man attempted to disarm a tall, African American World War I veteran. A struggle ensued, and a shot rang out.\" Then, according to the sheriff, \"all hell broke loose.\" At the end of the exchange of gunfire, 12 people were dead, 10 white and two black.\nAnother firsthand account originates from Eloise Taylor Butler\u2014the daughter of the famed \"Peg Leg\" Taylor\u2014who was nineteen years old and in Greenwood on that day. According to Eloise's great-granddaughter, who passed on the story that Eloise told her, while \"the initial story was that it started at the Courthouse,\" in fact, \"It escalated \"to\" the Courthouse. It started like down the street from the Courthouse.\" This key inciting incident reportedly occurred when a group of around six white men approached and beat down a lone black man. Black store owners reportedly then came out of nearby shops to help defend the black man, and \"once they started defending him, they ended up having to shoot.\" The account further notes, \"[The black store owners] fought back the best they could. But...[the white mob] started on that end of town, where the black people started fighting, [the white mob] set those initial shops on fire at the very beginning.\" The 2001 Commission itself does note that \"African American homes and businesses along Archer were the first targets\" of the white mob's arson. These could possibly be the same shops \"down the street from the Courthouse\" where this inciting incident reportedly took place, and it establishes an immediate motive for those particular shops being targeted first. Of course, it may simply be the case that they were targeted first only out of convenience\u2014Archer being the first street on Greenwood's side of the Frisco Tracks. Moreover, while the Taylor account seems adamant that this incident occurred before the initial gunfight at the Courthouse (and then \"escalated \"to\" the Courthouse\"), it's still possible that the incident Taylor witnessed was itself simply a product of the rolling gunfight that is known to have ensued across the streets of Tulsa following that first widely reported exchange of gunfire.\nOutbursts of violence.\nThe gunshots triggered an almost immediate response, with both sides firing on each other. The first \"battle\" was said to last a few seconds or so, but it took a toll, because ten whites and two black men lay dead or dying in the street. The black men who had offered to provide security retreated toward Greenwood. A rolling gunfight ensued. The armed white mob pursued the black contingent toward Greenwood, with many stopping to loot local stores for additional weapons and ammunition. Along the way, bystanders, many of whom were leaving a movie theater after a show, were caught off guard by the mobs and fled. Panic set in as the white mob began firing on any black people in the crowd. The white mob also shot and killed at least one white man in the confusion. According to the Oklahoma Historical Society, some in the mob were deputized by a police officer and instructed to \"get a gun and get a nigger\". So began a major attack on the African-American community.\nAt around 11 p.m., members of the National Guard unit began to assemble at the armory to organize a plan to subdue the rioters. Several groups were deployed downtown to set up guard at the courthouse, police station, and other public facilities. Members of the local chapter of the American Legion joined in on patrols of the streets. The forces appeared to have been deployed to protect the white districts adjacent to Greenwood. The National Guard rounded up numerous black people and took them to the Convention Hall on Brady Street for detention.\nAt around midnight, a small crowd of whites assembled outside the courthouse. Members of the crowd were heard yelling expletives and calling for Rowland to be lynched, but ultimately did not storm the courthouse.\nWednesday, June 1.\nThroughout the early morning hours, groups of armed white and black men squared off in gunfights. The fighting was concentrated along sections of the Frisco tracks, a dividing line between the black and white commercial districts. A rumor circulated that more black people were coming by train from Muskogee to help with an invasion of Tulsa. At one point, passengers on an incoming train were forced to take cover on the floor of the train cars, as they had arrived amid crossfire, with the train taking hits on both sides. Small groups of whites made brief forays by car into Greenwood, indiscriminately firing into businesses and residences. They often received return fire. Meanwhile, white rioters threw lighted oil rags into several buildings along Archer Street, igniting them.\nAs unrest spread to other parts of the city, many middle-class white families who employed black people in their homes as live-in cooks and servants were accosted by white rioters. They demanded the families turn over their employees to be taken to detention centers around the city. Many white families complied, but those who refused were subjected to attacks and vandalism in turn.\nFires begin.\nAt around 1 a.m., the white mob began setting fires, mainly in businesses on commercial Archer Street at the southern edge of the Greenwood district. As news traveled among Greenwood residents in the early morning hours, many began to take up arms in defense of their neighborhood, while others began a mass exodus from the city. Throughout the night both sides continued fighting, sometimes only sporadically.\nAs crews from the Tulsa Fire Department arrived to put out fires, they were turned away at gunpoint. Scott Elsworth makes the same claim, but his reference makes no mention of firefighters. Mary E. Jones Parrish, a survivor of the massacre, gave only praise for the National Guard. Another reference Elsworth gives to support the claim of holding firefighters at gunpoint is only a summary of events in which they suppressed the firing of guns by the rioters and disarmed them of their firearms. Yet another of his references states that they were fired upon by the white mob, \"It would mean a fireman's life to turn a stream of water on one of those negro buildings. They shot at us all morning when we were trying to do something but none of my men was hit. There is not a chance in the world to get through that mob into the negro district.\" By 4 a.m., an estimated two dozen black-owned businesses had been set ablaze.\nTulsa co-founder and Ku Klux Klan member W. Tate Brady participated in the riot as a night watchman. \"This Land Press\" reported that previously, Brady led the Tulsa Outrage, the November 7, 1917, tarring and feathering of members of the Industrial Workers of the World\u2014an incident understood to be economically and politically, rather than racially, motivated.\nDaybreak.\nUpon sunrise, around 5 a.m., a train whistle sounded (Hirsch said it was a siren). Some rioters believed this sound to be a signal for the rioters to launch an all-out assault on Greenwood. A white man stepped out from behind the Frisco depot and was fatally shot by a sniper in Greenwood. Crowds of rioters poured from their shelter, on foot, and by car, into the streets of the neighborhood. Five white men in a car led the charge but were killed by a fusillade of gunfire before they had traveled one block.\nOverwhelmed by the sheer number of attackers, black residents retreated north on Greenwood Avenue to the edge of town. Chaos ensued as terrified residents fled. The rioters shot indiscriminately and killed many along the way. Splitting into small groups, they began breaking into houses and buildings, looting. Several residents later testified the rioters broke into occupied homes and ordered the residents out to the street, where they could be driven or forced to walk to detention centers. A rumor spread among the rioters that the new Mount Zion Baptist Church was being used as a fortress and armory. Purportedly twenty caskets full of rifles had been delivered to the church, though no evidence was found.\nAttack by air.\nNumerous eyewitnesses described airplanes carrying white assailants, who fired rifles and dropped firebombs on buildings, homes, and fleeing families. The privately owned aircraft had been dispatched from the nearby Curtiss-Southwest Field outside Tulsa. Law enforcement officials later said that the planes were to provide reconnaissance and protect against a \"Negro uprising\". Law enforcement personnel were thought to be aboard at least some flights. Eyewitness accounts, such as testimony from the survivors during Commission hearings and a manuscript by eyewitness and attorney Buck Colbert Franklin, discovered in 2015, said that on the morning of June 1, at least \"a dozen or more\" planes circled the neighborhood and dropped \"burning turpentine balls\" on an office building, a hotel, a filling (gas) station, and multiple other buildings. Men also fired rifles at black residents, gunning them down in the street.\nRichard S. Warner concluded in his submission to The Oklahoma Commission that contrary to later reports by claimed eyewitnesses of seeing explosions, there was no reliable evidence to support such attacks. Warner noted that while a number of newspapers targeted at black readers heavily reported the use of nitroglycerin, turpentine, and rifles from the planes, many cited anonymous sources or second-hand accounts. Beryl Ford, one of the pre-eminent historians of the disaster, concluded from his large collection of photographs that there was no evidence of any building damaged by explosions. Danney Goble commended Warner on his efforts and supported his conclusions. State representative Don Ross (born in Tulsa in 1941), however, dissented from the evidence presented in the report concluding that bombs were in fact dropped from planes during the violence.\nIn 2015, a previously unknown written eyewitness account of the events of May 31, 1921, was discovered and subsequently obtained by the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture. The 10-page typewritten letter was authored by Buck Colbert Franklin, noted Oklahoma attorney and father of John Hope Franklin.\nNotable quotes include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Lurid flames roared and belched and licked their forked tongues into the air. Smoke ascended the sky in thick, black volumes and amid it all, the planes\u2014now a dozen or more in number\u2014still hummed and darted here and there with the agility of natural birds of the air.\nPlanes circling in midair: They grew in number and hummed, darted, and dipped low. I could hear something like hail falling upon the top of my office building. Down East Archer, I saw the old Mid-Way hotel on fire, burning from its top, and then another and another and another building began to burn from their tops.\nThe sidewalks were literally covered with burning turpentine balls. I knew all too well where they came from, and I knew all too well why every burning building first caught fire from the top.\nI paused and waited for an opportune time to escape. 'Where oh where is our splendid fire department with its half dozen stations?' I asked myself, 'Is the city in conspiracy with the mob?'\nFranklin reports seeing multiple machine guns firing at night and hearing \"thousands and thousands of guns\" being fired simultaneously from all directions. He states that he was arrested by \"a thousand boys, it seemed... firing their guns every step they took.\" An account of Franklin's experiences during this event appears in his autobiography, \"My Life and an Era\".\nArrival of National Guard troops.\nAdjutant General Charles F. Barrett of the Oklahoma National Guard arrived by special train at about 9:15\u00a0a.m., with 109 troops from Oklahoma City. Ordered in by the governor, he could not legally act until he had contacted all the appropriate local authorities, including Mayor T. D. Evans, the sheriff, and the police chief. Meanwhile, his troops paused to eat breakfast. Barrett summoned reinforcements from several other Oklahoma cities. Barrett declared martial law at 11:49\u00a0a.m., and by noon the troops had managed to suppress most of the remaining violence.\nThousands of black residents had fled the city; another 4,000 people had been rounded up and detained at various centers. Under martial law, the detainees were required to carry identification cards. As many as 6,000 Greenwood residents were interned at three local facilities: Convention Hall (now known as the Tulsa Theater), the Tulsa County Fairgrounds (then located about a mile northeast of Greenwood) and McNulty Park (a baseball stadium at Tenth Street and Elgin Avenue).\nA 1921 letter from an officer of the Service Company, Third Infantry, Oklahoma National Guard, who arrived on May 31, 1921, reported numerous events related to the suppression of the riot:\nCaptain John W. McCune reported that stockpiled ammunition within the burning structures began to explode, which might have further contributed to casualties.\nUnder Field Order No. 7, martial law was withdrawn on June 4, despite an appeal by the local Chamber of Commerce to Adj. Gen. Barrett to maintain State troop levels for at least a week longer.\nAftermath.\nCasualties.\nThe massacre was covered by national newspapers, and the reported number of deaths varies widely. On June 1, 1921, the \"Tulsa Tribune\" reported that nine white people and 68 black people had died in the riot, but shortly afterwards it changed that number to a total of 176 dead. The next day, the same paper reported the count as nine white people and 21 black people. The \"Los Angeles Express\" headline said \"175 Killed, Many Wounded\". \"The New York Times\" said that 77 people had been killed, including 68 black people, but it later lowered the total to 33. The \"Richmond Times Dispatch\" of Virginia reported that 85 people (including 25 white people) were killed; it also reported that the police chief had reported to Governor Robertson that the total was 75; and that a police major put the figure at 175. The Oklahoma Department of Vital Statistics put the number of deaths at 36 (26 black and 10 white). Very few people, if any, died as a direct result of the fire. Official state records show five deaths by conflagration for the entire state in 1921.\nWalter Francis White of the NAACP traveled to Tulsa from New York and reported that, although officials and undertakers said that the fatalities numbered 10 white and 21 black, he estimated the number of the dead to be 50 whites and between 150 and 200 blacks; he also reported that 10 white men were killed on Tuesday; six white men drove into the black section and never came out, and 13 whites were killed on Wednesday; he reported that Major O.T. Johnson of the Salvation Army in Tulsa, said that 37 blacks were employed as gravediggers to bury 120 blacks in individual graves without coffins on Friday and Saturday. The Oklahoma Commission described Johnson's statement being that his crew was over three dozen grave diggers who dug \"about\" 150 graves. Ground-penetrating radar was used to investigate the sites purported to contain these mass graves. Multiple eyewitness reports and \"oral histories\" suggested the graves could have been dug at three different cemeteries across the city. The sites were examined, and no evidence of ground disturbance indicative of mass graves was found. However, at one site, the ground disturbance was found in a five-meter square area, but cemetery records indicate that three graves had been dug and bodies buried within this envelope before the riot.\nOklahoma's 2001 Commission into the riot provides multiple contradicting estimates. Goble estimates 100\u2013300 deaths, and Franklin and Ellsworth estimate 75\u2013100 deaths and describe some of the higher estimates as dubious as the low estimates. C. Snow was able to confirm 39 casualties, all listed as male although four were unidentifiable; 26 were black and 13 were white. The 13 white fatalities were all taken to hospitals. Eleven of them had come from outside of Oklahoma, and possibly as many as half were petroleum industry workers. Only eight of the confirmed 26 black fatalities were brought to hospitals, and as hospitals were segregated, and with the black Frissell Memorial Hospital having burned down, the only place where the injured blacks were treated was at the basement of Morningside Hospital. Several hundred were injured.\nThe Red Cross, in their preliminary overview, mentioned wide-ranging external estimates of 55 to 300 dead; however, because of the hurried nature of undocumented burials, they declined to submit an official estimate, stating, \"The number of dead is a matter of conjecture.\" The Red Cross registered 8,624 persons; 183 people were hospitalized, mostly for gunshot wounds or burns (they are differentiated in their records on the basis of triage category not the type of wound), while a further 531 required first aid or surgical treatment; eight miscarriages were attributed to be a result of the tragedy; 19 died in care between June 1 and December 30, 1921.\nThe nearly 10,000 people in Greenwood who were affected relied, in large part, on the relief efforts of the Red Cross. Important for the future survival of this district, they worked to create \"a large-scale plan in order to provide security, food, shelter, job training and placement, health coverage, and legal support for all of them [the survivors].\" The Red Cross was working in the aftermath of a tragedy, the victims of which \"had all the characteristics of prisoners of war: homeless and helpless, abandoned by their home country, confined in specific areas, denied basic human rights, treated without respect and deprived of their possessions\". In less than a year of being in Tulsa, the Red Cross had set up a hospital for black patients, which was the first in Oklahoma's history; performed mass vaccinations for illnesses that could have been easily spread in the camps where survivors found themselves, as well as built infrastructure to provide fresh water, adequate food, and sufficient housing for those who no longer had a place of residence.\nProperty losses.\nThe commercial section of Greenwood was destroyed. Losses included 191 businesses, a junior high school, several churches, and the only hospital in the district. The Red Cross reported that 1,256 houses were burned and another 215 were looted but not burned. The Tulsa Real Estate Exchange estimated property losses amounted to US$1.5 million in real estate and $750,000 in personal property (equivalent to a total of $ million in 2024).\nThe Red Cross report in December 1921 estimated that 10,000 people were made homeless by the destruction. Over the next year, local citizens filed more than US$1.8 million (equivalent to $ million in 2024) in riot-related claims against the city.\nIdentities of the African American victims.\nOn June 3, the \"Morning Tulsa Daily World\" reported major points of their interview with Deputy Sheriff Barney Cleaver concerning the events leading up to the Tulsa riot. Cleaver was a deputy sheriff for Okmulgee County and not under the supervision of the city police department; his duties mainly involved enforcing the law among the \"colored people\" of Greenwood, but he also operated a business as a private investigator. He had previously been dismissed as a city police investigator for assisting county officers with a drug raid at Gurley's Hotel but not reporting his involvement to his superiors. He had considerable land holdings and suffered tremendous financial damages as a result of the riot. Among his holdings were several residential properties and Cleaver Hall, a large community gathering place and function hall. He reported personally evicting a number of armed criminals who had taken to barricading themselves within properties he owned. Upon eviction, they merely moved to Cleaver Hall. Cleaver reported that the majority of violence started at Cleaver Hall along with the rioters barricaded inside. Charles Page offered to build him a new home.\nThe \"Morning Tulsa Daily World\" stated, \"Cleaver named Will Robinson, a dope peddler and all-around bad negro, as the leader of the armed blacks. He has also the names of three others who were in the armed gang at the courthouse. The rest of the negroes participating in the fight, he says, were former servicemen who had an exaggerated idea of their own importance... They did not belong here, had no regular employment, and were simply a floating element with seemingly no ambition in life but to foment trouble.\" O.W. Gurley, owner of Gurley's Hotel, identified the following men by name as arming themselves and gathering in his hotel: Will Robinson, Peg Leg Taylor, Bud Bassett, Henry Van Dyke, Chester Ross, Jake Mayes, O. B. Mann, John Suplesox, Fatty, Jack Scott, Lee Mable, John Bowman and W. S. Weaver.\nPublic Safety Committee.\nBy June 6, the Associated Press reported that a citizens' Public Safety Committee had been established, made up of 250 white men who vowed to protect the city and put down any more disturbance. A white man, R.L. Osborne, was shot and killed that day after he failed to stop as ordered by a National Guardsman.\nRebuilding.\nGovernor James B. A. Robertson had gone to Tulsa during the riot to ensure order was restored. Before returning to the capital, he ordered an inquiry into events, especially of the City and Sheriff's Office. He called for a Grand Jury to be empaneled, and Judge Valjean Biddison said that its investigation would begin June 8. The jury was selected by June 9. Judge Biddison expected that the state attorney general would call numerous witnesses, both black and white, given the large scale of the riot.\nState Attorney General Sargent Prentiss Freeling initiated the investigation, and witnesses were heard over 12 days. In the end, the all-white jury attributed the riot to the black mobs, while noting that law enforcement officials had failed in preventing the riot. A total of 27 cases were brought before the court, and the jury indicted more than 85 individuals. In the end, no one was convicted of charges for the deaths, injuries or property damage.\nOn June 3, a group of over 1,000 businessmen and civic leaders met, resolving to form a committee to raise funds and aid in rebuilding Greenwood. Judge Loyal J. Martin, a former mayor of Tulsa, was chosen as the chairman of the group. He said at the mass meeting:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMany black families spent the winter of 1921\u20131922 in tents as they worked to rebuild. Charles Page was commended for his philanthropic efforts in the wake of the riot in the assistance of 'destitute blacks'.\nA group of influential white developers persuaded the city to pass a fire ordinance that would have prohibited many black people from rebuilding in Greenwood. Their intention was to redevelop Greenwood for more business and industrial use and force black people further to the edge of the city for residences. The case was litigated and appealed to the Oklahoma Supreme Court by Buck Colbert Franklin, where the ordinance was ruled unconstitutional. Most of the promised funding was never raised for the black residents, and they struggled to rebuild after the violence. Willows, the regional director of the Red Cross, noted this in his report, explaining his slow initial progress to facilitate the rehabilitation of the refugees. The fire code was officially intended to prevent another tragedy by banning wooden frame construction houses in place of previously burnt homes. A concession was granted to allow temporary wooden frame dwellings while a new building, which would meet the more restrictive fire code, was being constructed. This was quickly halted as residents within two weeks had started to erect full-sized wooden frame dwellings in contravention of the agreement. It took a further two-month delay to secure the court decision to reinstate the previous fire code. Willows heavily criticized the Tulsa city officials for interfering with his efforts, for their role in the Public Welfare Committee, which first sought to rezone the \"burned area\" as industrial, and for constructing a union station in its place with no consideration for the refugees. Then he criticized them again for the dissolution of the Public Welfare Committee in favor of the formation of the Reconstruction Committee, which failed to formulate a single plan, leaving the displaced residents prohibited from beginning reconstruction efforts for several months.\nTulsa Union Depot.\nDespite the Red Cross's best efforts to assist with the reconstruction of Greenwood's residential area, the considerably altered present-day layout of the district and its surrounding neighborhoods, as well as the extensive redevelopment of Greenwood by people unaffiliated with the neighborhood prior to the riot, stand as proof that the Red Cross relief efforts had limited success.\nTulsa's main industries at the time of the riot were banking (BOK Financial Corporation), administrative (PennWell, Oklahoma Natural Gas Company), and petroleum engineering services (Skelly Oil), earning Tulsa the title of \"Oil Capital of the World\". Joshua Cosden is also regarded as a founder of the city, having constructed the tallest building in Tulsa, the Cosden Building. The construction of the Cosden Building and Union Depot was overseen by the Manhattan Construction Company, which was based in Tulsa. Francis Rooney is the great-grandson and beneficiary of the estate of Laurence H. Rooney, founder of the Manhattan Construction Company.\nCity planners immediately saw the fire that destroyed homes and businesses across Greenwood as a fortunate event for advancing their objectives, meanwhile showing a disregard for the welfare of affected residents. Plans were made to rezone 'The Burned Area' for industrial use. The \"Tulsa Daily World\" reported that the mayor and city commissioners expressed that, \"a large industrial section will be found desirable in causing a wider separation between negroes and whites.\" The reconstruction committee organized a forum to discuss their proposal with community leaders and stakeholders. Naming, among others, O.W. Gurley, Rev. H.T.F. Johnson, and Barney Cleaver as participants in the forum, it was reported that all members were in agreement with the plan to redevelop the burned district as an industrial section and agreed that the proposed union station project was desirable. \"...not a note of dissension was expressed.\" The article states that these community leaders would again meet at the First Baptist Church in the following days. \"The Black Dispatch\" describes the content of the following meeting at the First Baptist Church. The reconstruction committee had intended to have the black landholders sign over their property to a holding company managed by black representatives on behalf of the city. The properties were then to be turned over to a white appraisal committee, which would pay residents for the residentially zoned land at the lower industrial zoned value in advance of the rezoning. Professor J.W. Hughes addressed the white reconstruction committee members in opposition to their proposition, coining a slogan that would come to galvanize the community, \"I'm going to hold what I have until I get What I've lost.\"\nConstruction of the Tulsa Union Depot, a large central rail hub connecting three major railroads, began in Greenwood less than two years after the riot. Prior to the riot, construction had already been underway for a smaller rail hub nearby. However, in the aftermath of the riot, land on which homes and businesses had been destroyed by the fires suddenly became available, allowing for a larger train depot near the heart of the city to be built in Greenwood instead.\n1921 grand jury investigation.\nAllegations of corruption.\nThe Tulsa Police Department, in the words of Chief Chuck Jordan, \"did not do their job then, y'know, they just didn't\". Parrish, an African-American citizen of Tulsa, summarized the lawlessness in Oklahoma as a contributing factor in 1922 as, \"if ... it were not for the profitable alliance of politics and vice or professional crime, the tiny spark which is the beginning of all these outrages would be promptly extinguished.\" Clark, a prominent Oklahoma historian and law professor, completed his doctoral dissertation in law on the subject of lawlessness in Oklahoma specifically on this period of time and how lawlessness had led to the rise of the second KKK, in order to illustrate the need for effective law enforcement and a functional judiciary.\nJohn A. Gustafson.\nChief of Police John A. Gustafson was the subject of an investigation. Official proceedings began on June 6, 1921. He was prosecuted on multiple counts: refusing to enforce prohibition, refusing to enforce anti-prostitution laws; operating a stolen automobile-laundering racket and allowing known automobile thieves to escape justice, for the purpose of extorting the citizens of Tulsa for rewards relating to their return; repurposing vehicles for his own use or sale; operating a fake detective agency for the purpose of billing the city of Tulsa for investigative duties he was already being paid for as chief of police; failing to enforce gun laws; and failure to take action during the riots.\nThe attorney general of Oklahoma received numerous letters alleging members of the police force had conspired with members of the justice system to threaten witnesses in corruption trials stemming from the Grand Jury investigations. In the letters, various members of the public requested the presence of the state attorney general at the trial. An assistant of the attorney general replied to one such letter by stating that their budget was too stretched to respond and recommending instead that the citizens of Tulsa simply vote for new officers.\nGustafson was found to have a long history of fraud pre-dating his membership in the Tulsa Police Department. His previous partner in his detective agency, Phil Kirk, had been convicted of blackmail. Gustafson's fake detective agency ran up high billings on the police account. Investigators noted that many blackmail letters had been sent to members of the community from the agency. One particularly disturbing case involved the frequent rape, by her father, of an 11-year-old girl who had since become pregnant. Instead of prosecuting, they sent a \"Blackhand letter\". On July 30, 1921, out of five counts of an indictment, Gustafson was found guilty of two counts: negligence for failing to stop the riot (which resulted in dismissal from police force), and conspiracy for freeing automobile thieves and collecting rewards (which resulted in a jail sentence).\nBreaking the silence.\nThree days after the massacre, President Warren G. Harding spoke at the all-black Lincoln University in Pennsylvania. He declared, \"Despite the demagogues, the idea of our oneness as Americans has risen superior to every appeal to mere class and group. And so, I wish it might be in this matter of our national problem of races.\" Speaking directly about the events in Tulsa, he said, \"God grant that, in the soberness, the fairness, and the justice of this country, we never see another spectacle like it.\"\nThere were no convictions for any of the charges related to violence. There were decades of silence about the terror, violence, and losses of this event. The riot was largely omitted from local, state, and national histories: \"The Tulsa race riot of 1921 was rarely mentioned in history books, classrooms, or even in private. Black and white people alike grew into middle age, unaware of what had taken place.\"&lt;ref name=\"NYT 2011/06/20\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It was not recognized in the \"Tulsa Tribune\" feature of \"Fifteen Years Ago Today\" or \"Twenty-five Years Ago Today\". A 2017 report detailing the history of the Tulsa Fire Department from 1897 until the date of publication makes no mention of the 1921 massacre.\nSeveral people tried to document the events, gather photographs, and record the names of the dead and injured. Mary Elizabeth Jones Parrish, a young black teacher and journalist from Rochester, New York, was hired by the Inter-racial Commission to write an account of the riot. Parrish was a survivor, and she wrote about her experiences, collected other accounts, gathered photographs and compiled \"a partial roster of property losses in the African American community\". She published these in \"Events of the Tulsa Disaster\", in 1922. It was the first book to be published about the riot. The first academic account was a master's thesis written in 1946 by Loren L. Gill, a veteran of World War II, but the thesis did not circulate beyond the University of Tulsa.\nIn 1971, a small group of survivors gathered for a memorial service at Mount Zion Baptist Church with black and white people in attendance. That same year, the Tulsa Chamber of Commerce decided to commemorate the riot, but when they read the accounts and saw photos gathered by Ed Wheeler, host of a radio history program, detailing the specifics of the riot, they refused to publish them. He then took his information to the two major newspapers in Tulsa, both of which also refused to run his story. His article, \"Profile of a Race Riot\" was published in \"Impact Magazine\", a publication aimed at black audiences, but most of Tulsa's white residents never knew about it.\nIn the early 1970s, along with Henry C. Whitlow, Jr., a history teacher at Booker T. Washington High School, Mozella Franklin Jones helped to desegregate the Tulsa Historical Society by mounting the first major exhibition on the history of African Americans in Tulsa. Jones also created, at the Tulsa Historical Society, the first collection of massacre photographs available to the public. While researching and sharing the history of the riot, Jones collaborated with a white woman named Ruth Sigler Avery, who was also trying to publicize accounts of the riot. The two women, however, encountered pressure, particularly among whites, to keep silent.\nSurvivors.\nThe Tulsa massacre claimed an estimated 150\u2013300 lives; over 800 people were seriously injured, and many more are estimated to have had their lives drastically changed forever. By April 2024, Viola Ford Fletcher and Lessie Benningfield Randle were the only two remaining survivors with memory of the Tulsa race massacre. Fletcher and Randle were still reported as the two last remaining survivors with memory of the event by November 2025 as well. Fletcher later died on November 24, 2025. thus making Randle now the last remaining Tulsa race massacre survivor with memory of the event.\nOlivia Hooker.\nOlivia Hooker was born on February 12, 1915, in Muskogee, Oklahoma. Her family was one of the many families affected by the Tulsa Race Massacre of 1921 when she was only six years old. Her family's home in the Greenwood District of Tulsa, Oklahoma was broken into by a group of white men with torches and was torn apart. Many of her family's belongings were destroyed. One item that Hooker recalled was her sister's piano. She remembered hearing a group of white men whacking into the piano as she and her four other siblings hid under the dining room table, which their mother covered with a tablecloth. Her father owned a store in Tulsa, which she recalled was absolutely destroyed and only one safe was left standing. The only reason it was left standing was that it was too big and heavy to be destroyed or stolen. Hooker also remembered vividly her schoolhouse being destroyed and blown up with dynamite. After the massacre, Hooker and her family moved to Topeka, Kansas to rebuild their lives. Hooker recalled her mother telling her, \"don't spend your time agonizing over the past.\" With a new fresh start in Topeka, Kansas, Hooker was the first African American woman to join the Coast Guard (in February 1945). After leaving the Coast Guard, Hooker went on to earn her Master's degree in psychology from Teacher's College, Columbia University. She earned her doctorate in clinical psychology at the University of Rochester. Hooker went on to have multiple jobs with her degree in psychology, mostly basing her work on the Tulsa Race Massacre of 1921. Olivia Hooker retired from work at the age of 87. She died at the age of 103 on November 21, 2018, in her home in New York.\nEldoris McCondichie.\nEldoris McCondichie was born on September 1, 1911, in Tyler, Texas. She was four years old when she and her family moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma in the Greenwood district. Her family was part of the working class. Her father had worked in a field and her mother did housework. On May 31, 1921, McCondichie was nine years old. She remembered being frantically awakened by her mother. She remembered her mother saying, \"the white people are killing the colored people.\" McCondichie and her family evacuated their Tulsa home to find refuge up north from the massacre. McCondichie described how \"airplanes were raining down bullets\", and how no one had enough time to even put clothes on and evacuate their homes. She recalled seeing women walking on the railroad track with no shoes in their nightgowns. She remembered finding shelter in a chicken coop during the riots to protect herself from machine gun fire. After McCondichie and her family evacuated Tulsa, they found refuge in a farmer's home overnight. Her family traveled to Pawhuska, Oklahoma, where they stayed for about 2\u20133 days until they knew it was safe to return home. Upon returning to Tulsa, Eldoris described what was left of the Greenwood district as \"war-torn\". She recalled many businesses and homes were burnt to the ground. Her family slowly rebuilt their lives in Tulsa and never left, referring to it as their \"forever home\". Eldoris was married to Arthur McCodichie for 67 years and had four children; two sons and two daughters. She died on September 12, 2010, several days after celebrating her 99th birthday. Her final resting place is in the Crownhill Cemetery in Tulsa, Oklahoma.\nGeorge Monroe.\nGeorge Monroe was five years old during the attack on the Greenwood district. He claimed some images could never leave his mind. He remembered seeing people getting shot and his own curtains being set on fire by a mob of white men. He also recalled hiding under a bed with his older sister, when a rioter stepped on his finger, causing his sister to throw her hand over his mouth to prevent the men from hearing his screams. George Monroe lived out the rest of his life in Tulsa, Oklahoma. He became a musician, owner of a Tulsa nightclub, and the first black man in Tulsa to sell Coca-Cola. George Monroe died in 2001.\nMary E. Jones Parrish.\nMary Elizabeth Jones Parrish (1892\u20131972) was born in 1892 in Yazoo City, Mississippi. She moved to Tulsa around 1919 and worked teaching typing and shorthand at a branch of the YMCA. Parrish was reading in her home when the Tulsa race massacre began on the evening of May 31, 1921. Parrish's daughter, Florence Mary, called the young journalist and teacher to the window. \"Mother,\" she said, \"I see men with guns.\" The two eventually fled into the night under a hail of bullets. Mary Parrish wrote a first-person account and collected eye-witness statements from dozens of others and published them immediately following the tragedy under the title \"The Events of the Tulsa Disaster\". Parrish documented the magnitude of the loss of human life and property at the hands of white vigilantes. Parrish hoped that her book would \"open the eyes of the thinking people to the impending danger of letting such conditions exist and in the 'Land of the Free and the Home of the Brave.' A new edition was published in 2021 by Trinity University Press under the title, \"The Nation Must Awake: My Witness to the Tulsa Race Massacre of 1921. \"The new edition includes a new afterword by Anneliese M. Bruner, Parrish's great-granddaughter. \"The New York Times\" called Parrish's \"a story of survival... remains relevant a century later\" while \"The New Yorker\" called it \"The first and most visceral long-form account of how Greenwood residents experienced the massacre.\"\nLessie Benningfield (\"Mother Randle\").\nLessie Benningfield, also known as Mother Randle, was born in Morris, Oklahoma on November 10, 1914. Her parents were farmers; she had three sisters and a brother. Benningfield does not recall much due to her young age during the massacre. She remembers a mob of white men barging into her home and then destroying her family's house. She has memories of feelings of intense fear while trying to evacuate her home and get somewhere safe with her family. She spent the rest of her childhood and young adulthood in Tulsa and graduated from Booker T. Washington High School. Benningfield is now a part of an active lawsuit with the Greenwood Advocates, which is a team of human and civil rights lawyers fighting for justice for victims and their families. Benningfield states she still has nightmares of seeing the piles of dead bodies she saw during the massacre. For her 106th birthday, which took place in 2020, the community raised thousands of dollars for her to remodel her home. Since then, she has been interviewed several times and remained in the public eye during the 2021 centennial anniversary of the massacre at the age of 107.\nAfter the death of Viola Fletcher in November 2025, Lessie Benningfield became the last known living survivor of the Tulsa Race Massacre, and is now years old.\nHal Singer.\nHal Singer was born on October 8, 1919, in Tulsa, Oklahoma to two working-class parents. His mother worked in a wealthy white resident's home as a cook and his father worked producing oil rigging tools. Singer was 18 months old when the Tulsa Race Massacre of 1921 took place. A white woman, for whom his mother worked, put his family on a train to Kansas City during the massacre so the Singer family would have a safe place to wait it out. Up to the day of his passing, Singer recalled how forever grateful he was for the woman's kindness. When his family returned to their home, it was burnt to the ground. They had to rebuild their whole lives again from scratch. However, they stayed in Tulsa in the Greenwood district all through his childhood. As a young boy, Singer hung out by the rail tracks and invited jazz bands to come over and have some of his mother's cooking. This helped him in the long run as he became an iconic saxophonist of his generation. Singer went on to play with and for Duke Ellington, Ray Charles, and Billie Holiday. He was married for over 50 years to his wife Arlette Singer. On August 18, 2020, just months before his 101st birthday, he died in Chatou, a suburb of Paris, France.\nEssie Lee Johnson Beck.\nEssie Johnson (1916\u20132006) was five years old when the Tulsa Race Massacre of 1921 took place. Her family evacuated their Tulsa home in the early hours of May 31. Beck remembers her parents making her and her siblings stay away from the windows because there were active shooters targeting the windows of homes. She describes the feelings of fright and confusion. Her family had to evacuate their home since almost all homes were being burnt to the ground in her neighborhood. Her mother took Beck and her four other siblings and started running to find shelter elsewhere. Beck recalls watching airplanes above her dropping bombs onto the roof of houses causing them to catch on fire. Her mother was trying to get her and her siblings to Golden Gate Park. Beck's father stayed behind to help as much as possible and to assist injured people. Beck recalls once they got to Golden Gate Park, they hid behind trees. Beck and her family soon after that found shelter in churches and school basements for the remaining days. Once they were cleared to go back, their home was burnt to the ground. Beck recalls having to live in a tent on the dirt waiting for their house to be rebuilt. She describes the whole experience to be awful.\nVernice Simms.\nVernice Simms was seventeen years old when the Massacre took place. She lived in the Greenwood district with her family as she attended Booker T. Washington High School, where she was preparing for her prom. Simms remembers vividly being in her backyard when bullets started raining down and everyone was cautioned to get into the house as quickly as possible. As the riots and massacre progressed, Simms and her family found refuge at a white family's home, where they were safe from the massacre. When they returned to their Greenwood home, everything was burnt to the ground. Simms and her family had to live in a tent. She recalls Booker T. Washington High School being turned into a hospital for the wounded. Simms volunteered at the hospital where she fed and gave water to people who were injured during the massacre. While her house was being rebuilt by her father, she finished high school in Oklahoma City. Afterward, Simms studied at Langston University. After she graduated from university, she came home to see her house finally rebuilt. She recalls never getting any money from insurance or the government to help. Simms described the events as devastating and scary.\nLena Eloise Taylor Butler.\nEloise Taylor was nineteen years old and she lived in Greenwood when the Massacre took place. She was the daughter of the famed Horace Greeley Beecher Taylor, better known as \"Peg Leg\" Taylor. According to Taylor's great-granddaughter, who has passed on Eloise's story, Eloise witnessed some of the first gunfighting of the Massacre. She recounts how Peg Leg Taylor \"fought his way to\" Eloise and helped her escape into the woods north of the city, where they then lay and hid while White rioters continued to hunt down and kill other survivors around them. \"...they found some of the people that were out there in the woods laying on their stomach\u2014Lord help these people!\u2014and they just shot 'em. Right there on the ground where they lay. I'm talking about kids...women. They didn't care. Old people. People who had breastfed them. They didn't give a damn. They killed 'em right there on the ground...\" Eloise was reportedly so terrified that when \"...finally her daddy told her to 'get up...get up and c'mon,' she said [in order] for them to move, he had to hurt her. She said he had to hurt her to make her stand up.\" Eloise and her father then walked several miles to a nearby town, where they \"got help, got warm, got clothes, got food, and moved on\", and where they also \"decided that they would never talk about it again\". Eloise finally opened up to her great-granddaughters about her experience in 1997, only a few short years before she died in 2000 at the age of 98.\nTulsa Race Massacre Commission.\nIn 1996, as the riot's 75th anniversary neared, the state legislature authorized an Oklahoma Commission to investigate the Tulsa Race Riot, by appointing individuals to study and prepare a report detailing a historical account of the riot. Authorization of the study \"enjoyed strong support from members of both political parties and all political persuasions\". The commission had originally been called the \"Tulsa Race Riot Commission\", but in November 2018, the name was changed to \"Tulsa Race Massacre Commission\". The commission conducted interviews and heard testimony in order to thoroughly document the causes and damages.\nThe commission delivered its final report on February 21, 2001. The report recommended actions for substantial restitution to the black residents, listed below in order of priority:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;# Direct payment of reparations to survivors of the 1921 Tulsa race riot;\nPost-commission actions.\nSearch for mass graves.\nThe Tulsa Race Massacre Commission arranged for archaeological, non-invasive ground surveys of Newblock Park, Oaklawn Cemetery, and Booker T. Washington Cemetery, which were identified as possible locations for mass graves of black victims of the violence. Oral histories, other sources and timing suggested that whites would have buried blacks at the first two locations; black people were said to have buried black victims at the third location after the riot was over. The people who were buried at Washington Cemetery, which is reserved for black people, were probably thought to be those victims who had died of their wounds after the riot had ended, since it was the most distant suspected burial location from downtown.\nInvestigations of the three potential mass grave sites were performed in 1997 and 1998. Even though the total area of all three of these locations could not be surveyed, preliminary data suggested that they contained no mass graves. In 1999, an eyewitness who had seen whites burying black victims at Oaklawn Cemetery was found. A team investigated the potential area with more equipment. In the end, searches for mass graves were made with the aid of technology that included ground-penetrating radar, followed by core sampling. The experts' report, presented to the Commission in December 2000, could not substantiate claims of mass graves in Oaklawn Cemetery, Washington Cemetery, or Newblock Park. A promising spot in Washington Cemetery had turned out to be a layer of clay, and another promising spot in Newblock Park had turned out to be an old basement. The suggestion that the bodies had been burned in the city incinerator was also considered unfeasible and discounted, given the incinerator's capacity and logistical considerations.\nIn preparation for the 100th anniversary of the massacre, state archaeologists, using ground-penetrating radar, probed Oaklawn Cemetery for \"long-rumored\" mass graves. Mayor G. T. Bynum calls it \"a murder investigation\". After input from the public, officials from the Oklahoma Archeological Survey used three subsurface scanning techniques to survey Newblock Park, Oaklawn Cemetery, and an area known as The Canes along the Arkansas River. The Oklahoma Archeological Survey subsequently announced that they were discontinuing search efforts at Newblock Park after not finding any evidence of graves. On December 17, 2019, the team of forensic archaeologists announced that they had found anomalies consistent with that of human-dug pits beneath the ground at Oaklawn Cemetery and the ground where the Interstate 244 bridge crosses the Arkansas River. They announced that the anomalies are likely candidates for mass graves, but further radar surveys and physical excavations of the sites are needed. Researchers secured permission to perform \"limited excavations\" from the city and as a result, they will be able to determine what the contents of these sites are, beginning in April 2020, and while they do not expect to dig up any human remains, they asserted that if they find any human remains in the course of their excavations, they will treat them with the proper respect. An initial dig at a suspected area of the Oaklawn Cemetery in July 2020 found no human remains.\nOn October 21, 2020, a forensic team said that it had unearthed 11 coffins in Oaklawn Cemetery; records and research suggested that as many as 18 victims would be found. The forensic team will need to do more work in order to determine if the coffins contain the remains of massacre victims. As stated by Kary Stackelbeck, a state archaeologist, the remains will not be moved until they can be properly exhumed because their deterioration needs to be prevented. She also stated that the site where the remains were discovered \"constitutes a mass grave... We have a high degree of confidence that this is one of the locations we were looking for. But we have to remain cautious because we have not done anything to expose the human remains beyond those that have been encountered.\" The team planned to exhume the remains in June 2021. Forensic anthropologist Phoebe Stubblefield later planned to analyze the remains in order to determine if they are the remains of people who were killed in the 1921 massacre. In June 2021, after scientists resumed work at the site, 35 coffins were recovered from the mass grave. The remains of 19 people were taken to an on-site science lab. Officials stated that they have completed a preliminary analysis of nine of those human remains.\nStackelbeck announced in September 2023 a completed survey identified 59 gravesites, 57 of which were previously undiscovered. Seven sets of remains were recovered, each found in simple wooden boxes. C. L. Daniel was the first victim identified in July 2024 from the remains exhumed. He was a World War I veteran from Georgia who was a resident of Utah. By August 3, 2024, remains believed to be two additional victims of the riot were found. By August 16, 2024, the remains of eleven riot victims had been recovered from Oaklawn Cemetery.\nReconciliation.\nIn March 2001, each of the 118 known survivors of the riot still alive at the time, the youngest of whom was 85, was given a gold-plated medal bearing the state seal, as had been approved by bi-partisan state leaders. The Tulsa Reparations Coalition, sponsored by the Center for Racial Justice, Inc., was formed on April 7, 2001, to obtain restitution for the damages suffered by Tulsa's black community, as recommended by the Oklahoma Commission.\nOn June 1, 2001, Governor Frank Keating signed the \"1921 Tulsa Race Riot Reconciliation Act\" into law. The act acknowledged that the event occurred but failed to deliver any substantial reparations to the victims or their descendants. In spite of the commission's recommendation for reparations in their report on the riot, the Oklahoma state legislature did not agree that reparations were appropriate and thus did not include them in the reconciliation act. The act provided for the following:\nSurvivors' lawsuit.\nFive survivors, represented by a legal team that included Johnnie Cochran and Charles Ogletree, filed suit against the city of Tulsa and the state of Oklahoma (\"Alexander, et al. v. Oklahoma, et al.\") in February 2003, based on the findings of the 2001 report. Ogletree said the state and city should compensate the victims and their families \"to honor their admitted obligations as detailed in the commission's report\". The federal district and appellate courts dismissed the suit on the grounds that a recommendation was not an \"admitted obligation\" and noting the statute of limitations had been exceeded on the 80-year-old case. The state requires that civil rights cases be filed within two years of the event. For that reason, the court did not rule on the issues. The Supreme Court of the United States declined to hear the appeal.\nIn April 2007, Ogletree appealed to the U.S. Congress to pass a bill extending the statute of limitations for the case, given the state and city's accountability for the destruction and the long suppression of material about it. The bill was introduced by John Conyers of Michigan and heard by the Judiciary Committee of the House but it did not pass, because of concerns about ex post facto legislation.\nJohn Hope Franklin Reconciliation Park.\nA park was developed in 2010 in the Greenwood area as a memorial to victims of the riot. In October 2010, the park was named for noted historian John Hope Franklin, who was born and raised in Tulsa. He became known as a historian of the South. The park includes three statues of figures by sculptor Ed Dwight, representing \"Hostility\", \"Humiliation\" and \"Hope\".\nRenewed calls for restitution.\nAn extensive curriculum on the event was provided to Oklahoma school districts in 2020.\nOn May 29, 2020, the eve of the 99th anniversary of the event and the onset of the George Floyd protests, Human Rights Watch released a report titled \"The Case for Reparations in Tulsa, Oklahoma: A Human Rights Argument\", demanding reparations for survivors and descendants of the violence because the economic impact of the massacre is still visible as illustrated by the high poverty rates and lower life expectancies in north Tulsa. Several documentary projects were also announced at this time with plans to release them on the 100th anniversary of the event, including \"Black Wall Street\" by Dream Hampton, and another documentary by Salima Koroma.\nIn September 2020, a 105-year old survivor of the massacre, Viola Fletcher, filed a lawsuit with two other survivors against the city for reparations caused by damages to the city's black businesses.\nIn 2021, Oklahoma librarians persuaded the Library of Congress to change the official subject headings, which place limits on the terms that people are allowed to use whenever they conduct searches for some of the information, for the event from \"riot\" to \"massacre\".\nOn May 19, 2021, survivors Fletcher, then 107; her 100-year-old brother, Hughes Van Ellis; and 106-year old Lessie Benningfield Randle testified about their experiences during the massacre and their reparations lawsuit before a House Judiciary subcommittee. The lawsuit was dismissed with prejudice in July 2023, but in November 2023, their lawyers appealed that decision to the Oklahoma Supreme Court.\nOn June 12, 2024, the Oklahoma Supreme Court affirmed the dismissal of the lawsuit, effectively concluding the suit. The Court dismissed the lawsuit stating that although the grievances submitted by the plaintiffs were legitimate, they concluded that Oklahoma's public nuisance statute did not apply to them. Their testimony of the three survivors coincided with pending resolutions before the U.S. House and Senate Judiciary Committees that propose federal recognition of the centennial of the massacre on May 31 and June 1.\nIn September 2024, the Department of Justice opened a federal review of the massacre under the Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights Crime Act. The report was released on January 10, 2025, which found that \"the massacre was the result not of uncontrolled mob violence, but of a coordinated, military-style attack on Greenwood\".\nTulsa's ongoing Beyond Apology Commission is tasked with improving economic mobility and the building of inter-generational wealth for survivors of the massacre and was reported by \"The New York Times\" to be planning new housing benefits in January 2025.\nOn June 2, 2025, Tulsa mayor Monroe Nichols announced a $105 million private trust to benefit descendants of the massacre's victims.\nHouse Bill 1775.\nIn 2021, Oklahoma Governor Kevin Stitt signed Oklahoma House Bill 1775 into law. The bill is typically referred to as a ban on critical race theory. The bill has created confusion for educators regarding classroom content about the Tulsa race massacre. When asked about the impact of the bill on instruction around the massacre, State School Superintendent Ryan Walters said, \"I'd say you'd be judgmental of the issue of the action, of the content of the character of the individual, but let's not tie it to the skin color and say that the skin color determined that.\" In response to criticism of his remarks, Walters said that he was \"referring to individuals who carried out the crime \u2026 They had evil, racist intentions and murdered people \u2026 They didn't act that way because they were white, they acted that way because they were racist\", and that students \"should be able to learn that history\". Walters' confusing responses illustrate the ambiguity of the bill's language resulting in concerns for educators as the stakes are high for violating the statute. The future of education on this topic remains unclear, as the bill is facing several legal challenges.\nPresident Biden's 2021 visit.\nOn June 1, 2021, the 100th anniversary of the massacre, President Joe Biden visited the area, the first sitting president to do so, and during his visit, he made a speech in which he stated, \"Some injustices are so heinous, so horrific, so grievous, they cannot be buried, no matter how hard people try.\" Biden toured the Greenwood Cultural Center and met with survivors Viola Fletcher, Hughes Van Ellis, and Lessie Benningfield Randle.\nTulsa Historical Society and Museum.\nThe Tulsa Historical Society and Museum offer a virtual exhibit of the Tulsa Race Massacre of 1921 that is open at all times during the day and is free of charge to the public. This online exhibit offers many photos, audio recordings, documents, and resources that cannot be found anywhere else. It also offers a traveling exhibit consisting of 4 panels regarding the Tulsa Race Massacre that are allowed to travel to locations within the Tulsa Metropolitan Area. The main goal of the panels is to educate the community.\nPresent-day Black Wall Street.\nBlack Wall Street can still be found today under the Historical Greenwood District in Tulsa, Oklahoma. After the Tulsa Race Massacre of 1921, it took about 10 years to rebuild the district. The historical Vernon AME Church is the only building standing today that is a part of the last remaining structure of the 1921 massacre.\nThe residents of the Greenwood district try to keep the memory of the Tulsa Race Massacre prominent within the community. Today, many memorials stand out of respect for the memory of what was once Black Wall Street. Many investigations are still underway in the Greenwood District in the hope that more unmarked graves can be found and more victims of the Massacre can be identified.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30786", "revid": "31311149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30786", "title": "Tuatara", "text": "Species of reptile\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe tuatara (, ; Sphenodon punctatus) is a species of reptile endemic to New Zealand. Despite its close resemblance to lizards, it is the only extant member of a distinct lineage, the previously highly diverse order Rhynchocephalia. The name is derived from the M\u0101ori language and means \"peaks on the back\".\nThe single extant species of tuatara is the only surviving member of its order, which was highly diverse during the Mesozoic era. Rhynchocephalians first appeared in the fossil record during the Middle Triassic, around 244-241.5 million years ago, and reached worldwide distribution and peak diversity during the Jurassic, when they represented the world's dominant group of small reptiles. Rhynchocephalians declined during the Cretaceous, with their youngest records outside New Zealand dating to the Paleocene. Their closest living relatives are squamates (lizards and snakes). Tuatara are of interest for studying the evolution of reptiles.\nTuatara are greenish brown and grey, and measure up to from head to tail-tip and weigh up to with a spiny crest along the back, especially pronounced in males. They have two rows of teeth in the upper jaw overlapping one row on the lower jaw, which is unique among living species. They are able to hear, although no external ear is present, and have unique features in their skeleton.\nTuatara are sometimes referred to as \"living fossils\". This term is currently deprecated among paleontologists and evolutionary biologists. Although tuatara have preserved the morphological characteristics of their Mesozoic ancestors (240\u2013230\u00a0million years ago), there is no evidence of a continuous fossil record to support the idea that the species has survived unchanged since that time. \nThe species has between five and six billion base pairs of DNA sequence, nearly twice that of humans.\nThe tuatara has been protected by law since 1895. Tuatara, like many of New Zealand's native animals, are threatened by habitat loss and introduced predators, such as the Polynesian rat \"(Rattus exulans)\". Tuatara were extinct on the mainland, with the remaining populations confined to 32\u00a0offshore islands, until the first North Island release into the heavily fenced and monitored Karori Wildlife Sanctuary (now named \"Zealandia\") in 2005. During routine maintenance work at Zealandia in late 2008, a tuatara nest was uncovered, with a hatchling found the following autumn. This is thought to be the first case of tuatara successfully breeding in the wild on New Zealand's North Island in over 200\u00a0years.\nTaxonomy and evolution.\nRelationships of the tuatara to other living reptiles and birds, after Sim\u00f5es et al. 2022\nTuatara, along with other now-extinct members of the order Rhynchocephalia, belong to the superorder Lepidosauria, as do the order Squamata, which includes lizards and snakes. Squamates and tuatara both show caudal autotomy (loss of the tail-tip when threatened), and have transverse cloacal slits.\nTuatara were originally classified as lizards in 1831 when the British Museum received a skull. John Edward Gray used the name \"Sphenodon\" to describe the skull; this remains the current scientific name for the genus. \"Sphenodon\" is derived from the Greek for \"wedge\" (\u03c3\u03c6\u03ae\u03bd, \u03c3\u03c6\u03b7\u03bd\u03cc\u03c2/\"sphenos\") and \"tooth\" (\u1f40\u03b4\u03bf\u03cd\u03c2, \u1f40\u03b4\u03cc\u03bd\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2/\"odontos\"). In 1842, Gray described a member of the species as \"Hatteria punctata\", not realising that it and the skull he received in 1831 were both tuatara. \nThe genus remained misclassified as a lizard until 1867, when Albert C. L. G. G\u00fcnther of the British Museum noted features similar to birds, turtles, and crocodiles. He proposed the order Rhynchocephalia (meaning \"beak head\") for the tuatara and its fossil relatives. Since 1869, \"Sphenodon punctatus\" (or the variation \"Sphenodon punctatum\" in some earlier sources) has been used as the scientific name for the species.\nAt one point, many disparate species were incorrectly referred to the Rhynchocephalia, resulting in what taxonomists call a \"wastebasket taxon\". Williston in 1925 proposed the Sphenodontia to include only tuatara and their closest fossil relatives. However, Rhynchocephalia is the older name and in widespread use today. Many scholars use Sphenodontia as a subset of Rhynchocephalia, including almost all members of Rhynchocephalia, apart from the most primitive representatives of the group.\nThe earliest rhynchocephalian, \"Agriodontosaurus\", is known from the Middle Triassic (Anisian) of England, around https:// 241.5. During the Late Triassic, rhynchocephalians greatly diversified, going on to become the world's dominant group of small reptiles during the Jurassic period, when the group was represented by a diversity of forms, including the aquatic pleurosaurs and the herbivorous eilenodontines. The earliest members of Sphenodontinae, the clade which includes the tuatara, are known from the Early Jurassic of North America. The earliest representatives of this group are already very similar to the modern tuatara. Rhynchocephalians declined during the Cretaceous period, possibly due to competition with mammals and lizards, with their youngest record outside of New Zealand being of \"Kawasphenodon\", known from the Paleocene of Patagonia in South America.\nFossil material that can be referred to as sphenodontine is known from the Miocene Saint Bathans fauna of Otago in the South Island of New Zealand. Whether these specimens are referable to the genus \"Sphenodon\" proper is not entirely clear due to their incomplete nature, but they are likely to be from a taxon that is closely related to tuatara. Therefore, the ancestors of the tuatara were likely already present in New Zealand prior to its separation from Antarctica around 82\u201360 million years ago.\nCladogram of the position of the tuatara within Sphenodontia, after Simoes et al., 2022:\nSpecies.\nWhile there is currently considered to be only one living species of tuatara, two species were previously identified: \"Sphenodon punctatus\", or northern tuatara, and the much rarer \"Sphenodon guntheri\", or Brothers Island tuatara, which is confined to North Brother Island in Cook Strait. The specific name \"punctatus\" is Latin for \"spotted\", and \"guntheri\" refers to German-born British herpetologist Albert G\u00fcnther. A 2009 paper re-examined the genetic bases used to distinguish the two supposed species of tuatara, and concluded they represent only geographic variants, and only one species should be recognised. Consequently, the northern tuatara was re-classified as \"Sphenodon punctatus punctatus\" and the Brothers Island tuatara as \"Sphenodon punctatus guntheri\". The Brothers Island tuatara has olive brown skin with yellowish patches, while the colour of the northern tuatara ranges from olive green through grey to dark pink or brick red, often mottled, and always with white spots. In addition, the Brothers Island tuatara is considerably smaller. However, individuals from Brothers Island could not be distinguished from other modern and fossil samples on the basis of jaw morphology. \nAn extinct species of \"Sphenodon\" was identified in November\u00a01885 by William Colenso, who was sent an incomplete subfossil specimen from a local coal mine. Colenso named the new species \"S. diversum\". Fawcett and Smith (1970) consider it a synonym to the subspecies, based on a lack of distinction.\nDescription.\nTuatara are the largest reptiles in New Zealand. Adult \"S.\u00a0punctatus\" males measure in length and females . Tuatara are sexually dimorphic, males being larger. The San Diego Zoo even cites a length of up to . Males weigh up to , and females up to . Brothers Island tuatara are slightly smaller, weighing up to 660\u00a0g (1.3\u00a0lb).\nTheir lungs have a single chamber with no bronchi.\nThe tuatara's greenish brown colour matches its environment, and can change over its lifetime. Tuatara shed their skin at least once per year as adults, and three or four times a year as juveniles. Tuatara sexes differ in more than size. The spiny crest on a tuatara's back, made of triangular, soft folds of skin, is larger in males, and can be stiffened for display. The male abdomen is narrower than the female's.\nSkull.\nUnlike the vast majority of lizards, the tuatara has a complete lower temporal bar closing the lower temporal fenestra (an opening of the skull behind the eye socket), caused by the fusion of the quadrate/quadratojugal (which are fused into a single element in adult tuatara) and the jugal bones of the skull. This is similar to the condition found in primitive diapsid reptiles. However, because more primitive rhynchocephalians have an open lower temporal fenestra with an incomplete temporal bar, this is thought to be a derived characteristic of the tuatara and other members of the clade Sphenodontinae, rather than a primitive trait retained from early diapsids. The complete bar is thought to stabilise the skull during biting.\nThe tip of the upper jaw is chisel- or beak-like and separated from the remainder of the jaw by a notch, this structure is formed from fused premaxillary teeth, and is also found in many other advanced rhynchocephalians. The teeth of the tuatara, and almost all other rhynchocephalians, are described as acrodont, as they are attached to the apex of the jaw bone. This contrast with the pleurodont condition found in the vast majority of lizards, where the teeth are attached to the inward-facing surface of the jaw. The teeth of the tuatara are extensively fused to the jawbone, making the boundary between the tooth and jaw difficult to discern, and the teeth lack roots and are not replaced during the lifetime of the animal, unlike those of pleurodont lizards. It is a common misconception that tuatara lack teeth and instead have sharp projections on the jaw bone; histology shows that they have true teeth with enamel and dentine with pulp cavities. As their teeth wear down, older tuatara have to switch to softer prey, such as earthworms, larvae, and slugs, and eventually have to chew their food between smooth jaw bones.\nThe tuatara possesses palatal dentition (teeth growing from the bones of the roof of the mouth), which is ancestrally present in reptiles (and tetrapods generally). While many of the original palatal teeth present in reptiles have been lost, as in all other known rhynchocephalians, the row of teeth growing from the palatine bones in the tuatara have been enlarged, and as in other members of Sphenodontinae the palatine teeth are orientated parallel to the teeth in the maxilla; during biting the teeth of the lower jaw slot between the two upper tooth rows. The structure of the jaw joint allows the lower jaw to slide forwards after it has closed between the two upper rows of teeth. This mechanism allows the jaws to shear through chitin and bone.\nThe brain of \"Sphenodon\" fills only half of the volume of its endocranium. This proportion has been used by paleontologists trying to estimate the volume of dinosaur brains based on fossils. However, the proportion of the tuatara endocranium occupied by its brain may not be a very good guide to the same proportion in Mesozoic dinosaurs since modern birds are surviving dinosaurs but have brains which occupy a much greater relative volume in the endocranium.\nSensory organs.\nEyes.\nThe eyes can focus independently, and are specialised with three types of photoreceptive cells, all with fine structural characteristics of retinal cone cells used for both day and night vision, and a \"tapetum lucidum\" which reflects onto the retina to enhance vision in the dark. There is also a third eyelid on each eye, the nictitating membrane. Five visual opsin genes are present, suggesting good colour vision, possibly even at low light levels.\nParietal eye (third eye).\nLike some other living vertebrates, including some lizards, the tuatara has a third eye on the top of its head called the parietal eye (also called a pineal or third eye) formed by the parapineal organ, with an accompanying opening in the skull roof called the pineal or parietal foramen, enclosed by the parietal bones. It has its own lens, a parietal plug which resembles a cornea, retina with rod-like structures, and degenerated nerve connection to the brain. The parietal eye is visible only in hatchlings, which have a translucent patch at the top centre of the skull. After four to six months, it becomes covered with opaque scales and pigment. While capable of detecting light, it is probably not capable of detecting movement or forming an image. It likely serves to regulate the circadian rhythm and possibly detect seasonal changes, and help with thermoregulation.\nOf all extant tetrapods, the parietal eye is most pronounced in the tuatara. It is part of the pineal complex, another part of which is the pineal gland, which in tuatara secretes melatonin at night. Some salamanders have been shown to use their pineal bodies to perceive polarised light, and thus determine the position of the sun, even under cloud cover, aiding navigation.\nHearing.\nTogether with turtles, the tuatara has the most primitive hearing organs among the amniotes. There is no tympanum (eardrum) and no earhole, and the middle ear cavity is filled with loose tissue, mostly adipose tissue (fat). The stapes comes into contact with the quadrate (which is immovable), as well as the hyoid and squamosal. The hair cells are unspecialised, innervated by both afferent and efferent nerve fibres, and respond only to low frequencies. Though the hearing organs are poorly developed and primitive with no visible external ears, they can still show a frequency response from 100 to 800\u00a0Hz, with peak sensitivity of 40\u00a0dB at 200\u00a0Hz.\nOdorant receptors.\nAnimals that depend on the sense of smell to capture prey, escape from predators or simply interact with the environment they inhabit, usually have many odorant receptors. These receptors are expressed in the dendritic membranes of the neurons for the detection of odours. The tuatara has around 472 receptors, a number more similar to what birds have than to the large number of receptors that turtles and crocodiles may have.\nSpine and ribs.\nThe tuatara spine is made up of hourglass-shaped amphicoelous vertebrae, concave both before and behind. This is the usual condition of fish vertebrae and some amphibians, but is unique to tuatara within the amniotes. The vertebral bodies have a tiny hole through which a constricted remnant of the notochord passes; this was typical in early fossil reptiles, but lost in most other amniotes.\nThe tuatara has gastralia, rib-like bones also called gastric or abdominal ribs, the presumed ancestral trait of diapsids. They are found in some lizards, where they are mostly made of cartilage, as well as crocodiles and the tuatara, and are not attached to the spine or thoracic ribs. The true ribs are small projections, with small, hooked bones, called uncinate processes, found on the rear of each rib. This feature is also present in birds. The tuatara is the only living tetrapod with well-developed gastralia and uncinate processes.\nIn the early tetrapods, the gastralia and ribs with uncinate processes, together with bony elements such as bony plates in the skin (osteoderms) and clavicles (collar bone), would have formed a sort of exoskeleton around the body, protecting the belly and helping to hold in the guts and inner organs. These anatomical details most likely evolved from structures involved in locomotion even before the vertebrates ventured onto land. The gastralia may have been involved in the breathing process in early amphibians and reptiles. The pelvis and shoulder girdles are arranged differently from those of lizards, as is the case with other parts of the internal anatomy and its scales.\nTail and back.\nThe spiny plates on the back and tail of the tuatara resemble those of a crocodile more than a lizard, but the tuatara shares with lizards the ability to break off its tail when caught by a predator, and then regenerate it. The regrowth takes a long time and differs from that of lizards. Well illustrated reports on tail regeneration in tuatara have been published by Alibardi and Meyer-Rochow. The cloacal glands of tuatara have a unique organic compound named tuataric acid.\nAge determination.\nCurrently, there are two means of determining the age of tuatara. Using microscopic inspection, hematoxylinophilic rings can be identified and counted in both the phalanges and the femur. Phalangeal hematoxylinophilic rings can be used for tuatara up to ages 12\u201314\u00a0years, as they cease to form around this age. Femoral rings follow a similar trend, however they are useful for tuatara up to ages 25\u201335\u00a0years. Around that age, femoral rings cease to form. Further research on age determination methods for tuatara is required, as tuatara have lifespans much longer than 35\u00a0years (ages up to 60 are common, and captive tuatara have lived to over 100\u00a0years). One possibility could be via examination of tooth wear, as tuatara have fused sets of teeth.\nPhysiology.\nAdult tuatara are terrestrial and nocturnal reptiles, though they will often bask in the sun to warm their bodies. Hatchlings hide under logs and stones, and are diurnal, likely because adults are cannibalistic. Juveniles are typically active at night, but can be found active during the day. The juveniles' movement pattern is attributed to genetic hardwire of conspecifics for predator avoidance and thermal restrictions. Tuatara thrive in temperatures much lower than those tolerated by most reptiles, and hibernate during winter. They remain active at temperatures as low as , while temperatures over are generally fatal. The optimal body temperature for the tuatara is from , the lowest of any reptile. The body temperature of tuatara is lower than that of other reptiles, ranging from over a day, whereas most reptiles have body temperatures around . The low body temperature results in a slower metabolism.\nEcology.\nBurrowing seabirds such as petrels, prions, and shearwaters share the tuatara's island habitat during the birds' nesting seasons. The tuatara use the birds' burrows for shelter when available, or dig their own. The seabirds' guano helps to maintain invertebrate populations on which tuatara predominantly prey, including beetles, crickets, spiders, w\u0113t\u0101s, earthworms, and snails. Their diets also consist of frogs, lizards, and bird's eggs and chicks. Young tuatara are also occasionally cannibalised. The diet of the tuatara varies seasonally, and they consume mainly fairy prions and their eggs in the summer. In total darkness no feeding attempt was observed, and the lowest light intensity at which an attempt to snatch a beetle was observed occurred under 0.0125\u00a0lux. The eggs and young of seabirds that are seasonally available as food for tuatara may provide beneficial fatty acids. Tuatara of both sexes defend territories, and will threaten and eventually bite intruders. The bite can cause serious injury. Tuatara will bite when approached, and will not let go easily. Female tuatara rarely exhibit parental behaviour by guarding nests on islands with high rodent populations.\nTuataras are parasitised by the tuatara tick (\"Archaeocroton sphenodonti\"), a tick that directly depends on tuataras. These ticks tend to be more prevalent on larger males, as they have larger home ranges than smaller and female tuatara and interact with other tuatara more in territorial displays.\nReproduction.\nTuatara reproduce very slowly, taking 10 to 20\u00a0years to reach sexual maturity. Though their reproduction rate is slow, tuatara have the fastest swimming sperm by two to four times compared to all reptiles studied earlier. Mating occurs in midsummer; females mate and lay eggs once every four years. During courtship, a male makes his skin darker, raises his crests, and parades toward the female. He slowly walks in circles around the female with stiffened legs. The female will either allow the male to mount her, or retreat to her burrow. Adult males do not have a penis or any form of intromittent phallus. They reproduce by the male lifting the tail of the female and placing his vent (cloaca) over hers. This process is sometimes referred to as a \"cloacal kiss\". The sperm is then transferred into the female, much like the mating process in birds. Along with birds, the tuatara is one of the few members of Amniota to have lost the ancestral penis.\nTuatara eggs have a soft, parchment-like 0.2\u00a0mm thick shell that consists of calcite crystals embedded in a matrix of fibrous layers. It takes the females between one and three years to provide eggs with yolk, and up to seven months to form the shell. It then takes between 12 and 15\u00a0months from copulation to hatching. This means reproduction occurs at two- to five-year intervals, the slowest in any reptile. Survival of embryos has also been linked to having more success in moist conditions. Wild tuatara are known to be still reproducing at about 60\u00a0years of age; \"Henry\", a male tuatara at Southland Museum in Invercargill, New Zealand, became a father (possibly for the first time) on 23\u00a0January 2009, at age\u00a0111, with an 80\u00a0year-old female.\nThe sex of a hatchling depends on the temperature of the egg, with warmer eggs tending to produce male tuatara, and cooler eggs producing females. Eggs incubated at have an equal chance of being male or female. However, at , 80% are likely to be males, and at , 80% are likely to be females; at all hatchlings will be females. Some evidence indicates sex determination in tuatara is determined by both genetic and environmental factors.\nTuatara probably have the slowest growth rates of any reptile, continuing to grow larger for the first 35\u00a0years of their lives. The average lifespan is about 60 years, but they can live to be well over 100 years old; tuatara could be the reptile with the second longest lifespan after tortoises. Some experts believe that captive tuatara could live as long as 200 years. This may be related to genes that offer protection against reactive oxygen species. The tuatara genome has 26\u00a0genes that encode selenoproteins and 4\u00a0selenocysteine-specific tRNA genes. In humans, selenoproteins have a function of antioxidation, redox regulation and synthesis of thyroid hormones. It is not fully demonstrated, but these genes may be related to the longevity of this animal or may have emerged as a result of the low levels of selenium and other trace elements in the New Zealand terrestrial systems.\nGenomic characteristics.\nThe most abundant LINE element in the tuatara is L2 (10%). Most of them are interspersed and can remain active. The longest L2 element found is 4 kb long and 83% of the sequences had ORF2p completely intact. The CR1 element is the second most repeated (4%). Phylogenetic analysis shows that these sequences are very different from those found in other nearby species such as lizards. Finally, less than 1% are elements belonging to L1, a low percentage since these elements tend to predominate in placental mammals. Usually, the predominant LINE elements are the CR1, contrary to what has been seen in the tuatara. This suggests that perhaps the genome repeats of sauropsids were very different compared to mammals, birds and lizards.\nThe genes of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) are known to play roles in disease resistance, mate choice, and kin recognition in various vertebrate species. Among known vertebrate genomes, MHCs are considered one of the most polymorphic. In the tuatara, 56 MHC genes have been identified; some of which are similar to MHCs of amphibians and mammals. Most MHCs that were annotated in the tuatara genome are highly conserved, however there is large genomic rearrangement observed in distant lepidosaur lineages.\nMany of the elements that have been analyzed are present in all amniotes, most are mammalian interspersed repeats or MIR, specifically the diversity of MIR subfamilies is the highest that has been studied so far in an amniote. 16\u00a0families of SINEs that were recently active have also been identified.\nThe tuatara has 24\u00a0unique families of DNA transposons, and at least 30 subfamilies were recently active. This diversity is greater than what has been found in other amniotes and in addition, thousands of identical copies of these transposons have been analyzed, suggesting to researchers that there is recent activity.\nThe genome is the second largest known to reptiles. Only the Greek tortoise genome is larger. Around 7,500\u00a0LTRs have been identified, including 450\u00a0endogenous retroviruses (ERVs). Studies in other Sauropsida have recognised a similar number but nevertheless, in the genome of the tuatara it has been found a very old clade of retrovirus known as Spumavirus.\nMore than 8,000\u00a0non-coding RNA-related elements have been identified in the tuatara genome, of which the vast majority, about 6,900, are derived from recently active transposable elements. The rest are related to ribosomal, spliceosomal and signal recognition particle RNA.\nThe mitochondrial genome of the genus \"Sphenodon\" is approximately 18,000\u00a0bp in size and consists of 13\u00a0protein-coding genes, 2\u00a0ribosomal RNA and 22\u00a0transfer RNA genes.\nDNA methylation is a very common modification in animals and the distribution of CpG sites within genomes affects this methylation. Specifically, 81% of these CpG sites have been found to be methylated in the tuatara genome. Recent publications propose that this high level of methylation may be due to the amount of repeating elements that exist in the genome of this animal. This pattern is closer to what occurs in organisms such as zebrafish, about 78%, while in humans it is only 70%.\nConservation.\nTuatara are absolutely protected under New Zealand's Wildlife Act 1953. The species is also listed under Appendix\u00a0I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) meaning commercial international trade in wild sourced specimens is prohibited and all other international trade (including in parts and derivatives) is regulated by the CITES permit system.\nDistribution and threats.\nTuatara were once widespread on New Zealand's main North and South Islands, where subfossil remains have been found in sand dunes, caves, and M\u0101ori middens. Wiped out from the main islands before European settlement, they were long confined to 32\u00a0offshore islands free of mammals. The islands are difficult to get to, and are colonised by few animal species, indicating that some animals absent from these islands may have caused tuatara to disappear from the mainland. However, \"kiore\" (Polynesian rats) had recently become established on several of the islands, and tuatara were persisting, but not breeding, on these islands. Additionally, tuatara were much rarer on the rat-inhabited islands. Prior to conservation work, 25% of the distinct tuatara populations had become extinct in the past century.\nThe recent discovery of a tuatara hatchling on the mainland indicates that attempts to re-establish a breeding population on the New Zealand mainland have had some success. The total population of tuatara is estimated to be between 60,000 and 100,000.\nClimate change.\nTuatara have temperature-dependent sex determination meaning that the temperature of the egg determines the sex of the animal. For tuatara, lower egg incubation temperatures lead to females while higher temperatures lead to males. Since global temperatures are increasing, climate change may be skewing the male to female ratio of tuatara. Current solutions to this potential future threat are the selective removal of adults and the incubation of eggs.\nEradication of rats.\nTuatara were removed from Stanley, Red Mercury and Cuvier Islands in 1990 and 1991, and maintained in captivity to allow Polynesian rats to be eradicated on those islands. All three populations bred in captivity, and after successful eradication of the rats, all individuals, including the new juveniles, were returned to their islands of origin. In the 1991\u201392 season, Little Barrier Island was found to hold only eight tuatara, which were taken into \"in situ\" captivity, where females produced 42 eggs, which were incubated at Victoria University. The resulting offspring were subsequently held in an enclosure on the island, then released into the wild in 2006 after rats were eradicated there.\nIn the Hen and Chicken Islands, Polynesian rats were eradicated on Whatupuke in 1993, Lady Alice Island in 1994, and Coppermine Island in 1997. Following this program, juveniles have once again been seen on the latter three islands. In contrast, rats persist on Hen Island of the same group, and no juvenile tuatara have been seen there as of 2001. In the Alderman Islands, Middle Chain Island holds no tuatara, but it is considered possible for rats to swim between Middle Chain and other islands that do hold tuatara, and the rats were eradicated in 1992 to prevent this. Another rodent eradication was carried out on the Rangitoto Islands east of D'Urville Island, to prepare for the release of 432\u00a0Cook Strait tuatara juveniles in 2004, which were being raised at Victoria University as of 2001.\nBrothers Island tuatara.\n\"Sphenodon punctatus guntheri\" is present naturally on one small island with a population of approximately 400. In 1995, 50\u00a0juvenile and 18\u00a0adult Brothers Island tuatara were moved to Titi Island in Cook Strait, and their establishment monitored. Two years later, more than half of the animals had been seen again and of those all but one had gained weight. In 1998, 34\u00a0juveniles from captive breeding and 20\u00a0wild-caught adults were similarly transferred to Matiu/Somes Island, a more publicly accessible location in Wellington Harbour. The captive juveniles were from induced layings from wild females.\nIn late October\u00a02007, 50\u00a0tuatara collected as eggs from North Brother Island and hatched at Victoria University were being released onto Long Island in the outer Marlborough Sounds. The animals had been cared for at Wellington Zoo for the previous five years and had been kept in secret in a specially built enclosure at the zoo, off display.\nThere is another out of country population of Brothers Island tuatara that was given to the San Diego Zoological Society and is housed off-display at the San Diego Zoo facility in Balboa. No successful reproductive efforts have been reported yet.\nNorthern tuatara.\n\"S.\u00a0punctatus punctatus\" naturally occurs on 29\u00a0islands, and its population is estimated to be over 60,000\u00a0individuals. In 1996, 32\u00a0adult northern tuatara were moved from Moutoki Island to Moutohora. The carrying capacity of Moutohora is estimated at 8,500\u00a0individuals, and the island could allow public viewing of wild tuatara. In 2003, 60\u00a0northern tuatara were introduced to Tiritiri Matangi Island from Middle Island in the Mercury group. They are occasionally seen sunbathing by visitors to the island.\nA mainland release of \"S.p.\u00a0punctatus\" occurred in 2005 in the heavily fenced and monitored Karori Sanctuary. The second mainland release took place in October\u00a02007, when a further 130 were transferred from Stephens Island to the Karori Sanctuary. In early 2009, the first recorded wild-born offspring were observed.\nCaptive breeding.\nThe first successful breeding of tuatara in captivity is believed to have achieved by Sir Algernon Thomas at either his University offices or residence in Symonds Street in the late 1880s or his new home, Trewithiel, in Mount Eden in the early 1890s.\nSeveral tuatara breeding programmes are active in New Zealand. Southland Museum and Art Gallery in Invercargill was the first institution to have a tuatara breeding programme; starting in 1986 they bred \"S.\u00a0punctatus\" and have focused on \"S.\u00a0guntheri\" more recently.\nHamilton Zoo, Auckland Zoo and Wellington Zoo also breed tuatara for release into the wild. At Auckland Zoo in the 1990s it was discovered that tuatara have temperature-dependent sex determination.\nThe Victoria University of Wellington maintains a research programme into the captive breeding of tuatara, and the P\u016bkaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre keeps a pair and a juvenile.\nThe WildNZ Trust has a tuatara breeding enclosure at Ruawai. One notable captive breeding success story took place in January\u00a02009, when all 11 eggs belonging to 110\u00a0year-old tuatara Henry and 80\u00a0year-old tuatara Mildred hatched. This story is especially remarkable as Henry required surgery to remove a cancerous tumour in order to successfully breed.\nIn January 2016, Chester Zoo, England, announced that they succeeded in breeding the tuatara in captivity for the first time outside its homeland.\nCultural significance.\nTuatara feature in a number of indigenous legends, and are held as \"ariki\" (God forms). Tuatara are regarded as the messengers of Whiro, the god of death and disaster, and M\u0101ori women are forbidden to eat them. Tuatara also indicate \"tapu\" (the borders of what is sacred and restricted), beyond which there is \"mana\", meaning there could be serious consequences if that boundary is crossed. M\u0101ori women would sometimes tattoo images of lizards, some of which may represent tuatara, near their genitals. Today, tuatara are regarded as a \"taonga\" (special treasure) along with being viewed as the kaitiaki (guardian) of knowledge.\nThe tuatara was featured on one side of the New Zealand five-cent coin, which was phased out in October 2006. \"Tuatara\" was also the name of the \"Journal of the Biological Society\" of Victoria University College and subsequently Victoria University of Wellington, published from 1947 until 1993. It has now been digitised by the New Zealand Electronic Text Centre, also at Victoria.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30791", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30791", "title": "Polytetrafluoroethylene", "text": "Synthetic polymer\nPolytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) is a synthetic fluoropolymer of tetrafluoroethylene, and has numerous applications because it is chemically inert. The commonly known brand name of PTFE-based composition is Teflon by Chemours, a spin-off from DuPont, which originally invented the compound in 1938. \nPolytetrafluoroethylene is a fluorocarbon solid, as it is a high-molecular-weight polymer consisting wholly of carbon and fluorine. PTFE is hydrophobic: neither water nor water-containing substances wet PTFE, as fluorocarbons exhibit only small London dispersion forces due to the low electric polarizability of fluorine. PTFE has one of the lowest coefficients of friction of any solid.\nPolytetrafluoroethylene is used as a non-stick coating for pans and other cookware. It is non-reactive, partly because of the strength of carbon\u2013fluorine bonds, so it is often used in containers and pipework for reactive and corrosive chemicals. When used as a lubricant, PTFE reduces friction, wear, and energy consumption of machinery. It is used as a graft material in surgery and as a coating on catheters.\nPTFE and chemicals used in its production are some of the best-known and widely applied per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), which are persistent organic pollutants. PTFE occupies more than half of all fluoropolymer production, followed by polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF).\nFor decades, DuPont used perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA, or C8) during production of PTFE, later discontinuing its use due to legal actions over ecotoxicological and health effects of exposure to PFOA. DuPont's spin-off Chemours currently manufactures PTFE using an alternative chemical it calls GenX, another PFAS. Although GenX was designed to be less persistent in the environment compared to PFOA, its effects may be equally harmful or even more detrimental than those of the chemical it has replaced.\nHistory.\nPolytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) was accidentally discovered in 1938 by Roy J. Plunkett while he was working in Chemours Chambers Works plant in New Jersey for DuPont. A team of DuPont chemists attempted to make a new chlorofluorocarbon refrigerant, called tetrafluoroethylene. The gas in its pressure bottle stopped flowing before the bottle's weight had dropped to the point signaling \"empty\". John J. Beall (chemist), noticing a weight differential in his test cylinder, brought it to the attention of Roy Plunkett. The chemists in the lab sawed the bottle apart and found the bottle's interior coated with a waxy white material that was oddly slippery. Analysis showed that it was polymerized perfluoroethylene, with the iron from the inside of the container having acted as a catalyst at high pressure. Kinetic Chemicals patented the new fluorinated plastic (analogous to the already known polyethylene) in 1941, and registered the Teflon trademark in 1945.\nBy 1948, DuPont, which founded Kinetic Chemicals in partnership with General Motors, was producing over of Teflon-brand polytetrafluoroethylene per year in Parkersburg, West Virginia. An early use was in the Manhattan Project as a material to coat valves and seals in the pipes holding highly reactive uranium hexafluoride at the vast K-25 uranium enrichment plant in Oak Ridge, Tennessee.\nIn 1954, Colette Gr\u00e9goire urged her husband, the French engineer Marc Gr\u00e9goire, to try the material he had been using on fishing tackle on her cooking pans. He subsequently created the first PTFE-coated non-stick pans under the brand name Tefal (combining \"Tef\" from \"Teflon\" and \"al\" from aluminium). In the United States, Marion A. Trozzolo, who had been using the substance on scientific utensils, marketed the first US-made PTFE-coated pan, \"The Happy Pan\", in 1961. Non-stick cookware has since become a common household product, now offered by hundreds of manufacturers across the world.\nThe brand name Zepel was used to promote its stain resistance and water resistance when applied to fabrics.\nIn the 1990s, it was found that PTFE could be radiation cross-linked above its melting point in an oxygen-free environment. Electron beam processing is one example of radiation processing. Cross-linked PTFE exhibits enhanced high-temperature mechanical properties and improved radiation stability. That was significant because, for many years, irradiation at ambient conditions has been used to break down PTFE for recycling. This radiation-induced chain scission allows it to be more easily reground and reused.\nCorona discharge treatment of the surface to increase the energy and improve adhesion has been reported.\nProduction.\nPTFE is produced by free-radical polymerization of tetrafluoroethylene. The net equation is as follows:\n \"n\" F2C=CF2 \u2192 \u2212(F2C\u2212CF2)\"n\"\u2212\nBecause tetrafluoroethylene can explosively decompose to tetrafluoromethane () and carbon, a special apparatus is required for the polymerization to prevent hot spots that might initiate this dangerous side reaction. The process is typically initiated with persulfate, which homolyzes to generate sulfate radicals:\n [O3SO\u2212OSO3]2\u2212 \u21cc 2 SO4\u2022\u2212\nThe resulting polymer is terminated with sulfate ester groups, which can be hydrolyzed to give OH end-groups.\nGranular PTFE is produced via suspension polymerization, where PTFE is suspended in an aqueous medium primarily via agitation and sometimes with the use of a surfactant. PTFE is also synthesized via emulsion polymerization, where a surfactant is the primary means of keeping PTFE in an aqueous medium. Surfactants in the past have included perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS). More recently, Perfluoro 3,6 dioxaoctanoic acid (PFO2OA) and FRD-903 (GenX) are being used as alternatives.\nProperties.\nPTFE is a thermoplastic polymer, which is a white solid at room temperature, with a density of about 2200\u00a0kg/m3 and a melting point of . It maintains high strength, toughness and self-lubrication at low temperatures down to , and good flexibility at temperatures above . PTFE gains its properties from the aggregate effect of carbon-fluorine bonds, as do all fluorocarbons. The only chemicals known to affect these carbon-fluorine bonds are highly reactive metals like the alkali metals, at higher temperatures, such metals as aluminium and magnesium, and fluorinating agents such as xenon difluoride and cobalt(III) fluoride. At temperatures above PTFE undergoes depolymerization. However, it begins to decompose at about through , and pyrolysis occurs at temperatures above .\nThe coefficient of friction of plastics is usually measured against polished steel. PTFE's coefficient of friction is 0.05 to 0.10. PTFE's resistance to van der Waals forces means that it is the only known surface to which a gecko cannot stick. In addition, PTFE can be used to prevent insects from climbing up surfaces painted with the material. For example, PTFE is used to prevent ants from climbing out of formicaria. There are surface treatments for PTFE that alter the surface to allow adhesion to other materials.\nBecause of its chemical and thermal properties, PTFE is often used as a gasket material within industries that require resistance to aggressive chemicals such as pharmaceuticals or chemical processing. However, until the 1990s, PTFE was not known to crosslink like an elastomer, due to its chemical inertness. Therefore, it has no \"memory\" and is subject to creep. Because of the propensity to creep, the long-term performance of such seals is worse than for elastomers that exhibit zero, or near-zero, levels of creep. In critical applications, Belleville washers are often used to apply continuous force to PTFE gaskets, thereby ensuring a minimal loss of performance over the lifetime of the gasket.\nPTFE is an ultraviolet (UV) transparent polymer. However, when exposed to an excimer laser beam, it severely degrades due to heterogeneous photothermal effect.\nProcessing.\nProcessing PTFE can be difficult and expensive because its high melting temperature, , is above its decomposition temperature. Even when molten, PTFE does not flow due to its exceedingly high melt viscosity. The viscosity and melting point can be decreased by inclusion of small amount of comonomers such as perfluoro (propylvinyl ether) and hexafluoropropylene (HFP). These cause the otherwise perfectly linear PTFE chain to become branched, reducing its crystallinity.\nSome PTFE parts are made by cold-moulding, a form of compression molding. Here, fine powdered PTFE is forced into a mould under high pressure (10\u2013100 MPa). After a settling period, lasting from minutes to days, the mould is heated at , allowing the fine particles to fuse (sinter) into a single mass.\nApplications and uses.\nWire insulation, electronics.\nThe most common use of PTFE, consuming about 50% of production, is for the insulation of wiring in aerospace and computer applications (e.g. hookup wire, coaxial cables). This application exploits the fact that PTFE has excellent dielectric properties, specifically low group velocity dispersion, especially at high radio frequencies, making it suitable for use as an excellent insulator in connector assemblies and cables, and in printed circuit boards used at microwave frequencies. Combined with its high melting temperature, this makes PTFE the material of choice as a high-performance substitute for the weaker, higher dispersion, and lower-melting-point polyethylene commonly used in low-cost applications.\nBearing seals.\nIn industrial applications, owing to its low friction, PTFE is used for plain bearings, gears, slide plates, seals, gaskets, bushings, and more applications with sliding action of parts, where it outperforms acetal and nylon.\nElectrets.\nIts extremely high bulk resistivity makes it an ideal material for fabricating long-life electrets, the electrostatic analogues of permanent magnets.\nComposites.\nPTFE film is also widely used in the production of carbon fiber composites as well as fiberglass composites, notably in the aerospace industry. PTFE film is used as a barrier between the carbon or fiberglass part being built and, in breather and bagging materials, is used to incapsulate the bondment when debulking (vacuum removal of air from between layers of laid-up plies of material) and when curing the composite, usually in an autoclave. The PTFE, used here as a film, prevents the non-production materials from sticking to the part being built, which is sticky due to the carbon-graphite or fiberglass plies being pre-pregnated with bismaleimide resin. Non-production materials such as Teflon, Airweave Breather, and the bag itself would be considered F.O.D. (foreign object debris/damage) if left in layup.\nGore-Tex is a brand of expanded PTFE (ePTFE), a material incorporating a fluoropolymer membrane with micropores. The roof of the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in Minneapolis, US, was one of the largest applications of PTFE coatings. of the material was used in the creation of the white double-layered PTFE-coated fiberglass dome.\nChemically inert liners.\nBecause of its extreme non-reactivity and high temperature rating, PTFE is often used as the liner in hose assemblies, expansion joints, and in industrial pipe lines, particularly in applications using acids, alkalis, or other chemicals. Its frictionless qualities allow improved flow of highly viscous liquids and for uses in applications such as brake hoses.\nTensioned membrane structures.\nPTFE architectural membranes are created by coating a woven glass-fibre base cloth with PTFE, forming one of the strongest and most durable materials used in tensile structures. Some notable structures featuring PTFE-tensioned membranes include The O2 Arena in London, Moses Mabhida Stadium in South Africa, Metropolitano Stadium in Spain and the Sydney Football Stadium Roof in Australia.\nMusical instruments.\nPTFE is often found in musical instrument lubrication products, most commonly valve oil.\nLubricants.\nPTFE is used in some aerosol lubricant sprays, including in micronized and polarized form. It is notable for its extremely low coefficient of friction, its hydrophobicity (which serves to inhibit rust), and for the dry film it forms after application, which allows it to resist collecting particles that might otherwise form an abrasive paste. Brands include GT85, Tri-Flow and WD-40 Specialist.\nKitchenware.\nPTFE is best known for its use in coating non-stick frying pans and other cookware, as it is hydrophobic and possesses fairly high heat resistance.\nThe sole plates of some clothes irons are coated with PTFE.\nOthers.\nOther niche applications include:\nSafety.\nWhile PTFE is stable at lower temperatures, it begins to deteriorate at temperatures of about , it decomposes above , and pyrolysis occurs at temperatures above . The main decomposition products are fluorocarbon gases and a sublimate, including tetrafluoroethylene (TFE) and difluorocarbene radicals (RCF2).\nAn animal study conducted in 1955 concluded that it is unlikely that these products would be generated in amounts significant to health at temperatures below . Above those temperatures the degradation by-products can be lethal to birds, and can cause flu-like symptoms in humans (polymer fume fever), although in humans those symptoms disappear within a day or two of being moved to fresh air.\nMost cases of polymer fume fever in humans occur due to smoking PTFE-contaminated tobacco, although cases have occurred in people who have welded near PTFE components. PTFE-coated cookware is unlikely to reach dangerous temperatures with normal use, as meat is usually fried between , and most cooking oils (except refined safflower and avocado oils) start to smoke before a temperature of is reached. A 1973 study by DuPont's Haskell Laboratory found that a 4-hour exposure to the fumes emitted by PTFE cookware heated to was lethal for parakeets, although that was a higher temperature than the required for fumes from pyrolyzed butter to be lethal to the birds.\nPerfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), a chemical formerly used in the manufacture of PTFE products, such as non-stick coated cookware, can be carcinogenic for people who are exposed to it (see Ecotoxicity). Concerning levels of PFOA have been found in the blood of people who work in or live near factories where the chemical is used, and in people regularly exposed to PFOA-containing products, such as some ski waxes and stain-resistant fabric coatings. However, non-stick cookware was not found to be a major source of exposure, as the PFOA is burned off during the manufacturing process and not present in the finished product. Non-stick coated cookware has not been manufactured using PFOA since 2013, and PFOA is no longer being made in the United States.\nEcotoxicity.\nLiving Building Challenge.\nPTFE was added to the Living Building Challenge (LBC) Red List in 2016. The Red List bans substances prevalent in the building industry that pose serious risks to human health and the environment from construction that seeks to meet the criteria of the Living Building Challenge (LBC).\nTrifluoroacetate.\nSodium trifluoroacetate and the similar compound sodium chlorodifluoroacetate can both be generated when PTFE undergoes thermolysis, as well as producing longer chain polyfluoro- and/or polychlorofluoro- (C3-C14) carboxylic acids, which may be equally persistent. These products can accumulate in evaporative wetlands and have been found in the roots and seeds of wetland plant species, but have not been observed to harm plant health or germination success.\nPFOA.\nPerfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA, or C8) has been used in the manufacture of PTFE as a surfactant during its emulsion polymerization, although several manufacturers have entirely discontinued its use.\nPFOA persists indefinitely in the environment. PFOA has been detected in the blood of many individuals of the general US population in the low and sub-parts per billion range, and levels are higher in chemical plant employees and surrounding subpopulations. PFOA and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) have been estimated to be in every American person's blood stream in the parts per billion range, though those concentrations have decreased by 70% for PFOA and 84% for PFOS between 1999 and 2014, which coincides with the end of the production and phase out of PFOA and PFOS in the US. The general population has been exposed to PFOA through massive dumping of C8 waste into the ocean and near the Ohio River Valley. PFOA has been detected in industrial waste, stain-resistant carpets, carpet cleaning liquids, house dust, microwave popcorn bags, water, food and PTFE cookware.\nAs a result of a class-action lawsuit and community settlement with DuPont, three epidemiologists conducted studies on the population of Parkersburg, West Virginia, surrounding the (former DuPont) Chemours Washington Works chemical plant that was exposed to PFOA at levels greater than in the general population. The studies concluded that there was an association between PFOA exposure and six health outcomes: kidney cancer, testicular cancer, ulcerative colitis, thyroid disease, hypercholesterolemia (high cholesterol), and gestational hypertension (pregnancy-induced high blood pressure).\nOverall, PTFE cookware is considered a minor exposure pathway to PFOA.\nGenX.\nAs a result of the lawsuits concerning the PFOA class-action lawsuit, DuPont began to use GenX, a similarly fluorinated compound, as a replacement for perfluorooctanoic acid in the manufacture of fluoropolymers, such as Teflon-brand PTFE. However, the EPA has classified GenX as more toxic than PFOA and it has proven to be a \"regrettable substitute\"; its effects may be equally harmful or even more detrimental than those of the chemical it was meant to replace.\nThe chemicals are manufactured by Chemours, a corporate spin-off of DuPont, in Fayetteville, North Carolina. Fayetteville Works was the site where DuPont began manufacture of PFOA after the lawsuit in Parkersburg WV halted their production there. When the EPA asked companies to voluntarily phase out PFOA production, it was replaced by GenX in Fayetteville Works. In June of 2017, The Wilmington Star-News broke the story that GenX was found in the Cape Fear River \u2013 the drinking water supply for 500,000 people. The source of the pollution was determined to be the Fayetteville Works site, which had been run by DuPont since its founding in 1971 and then managed by DuPont spinoff, The Chemours Company, since 2015. The water utility indicated they could not filter these chemicals from the drinking water. \nThe North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality (NC DEQ) records indicate that DuPont started release PFAS into the area beginning in 1976 with the production of Nafion, and that PFAS including GenX had been released as a byproduct of the production of Vinyl Ethers since 1980, exposing the Cape Fear Basin for decades. A small nonprofit called Cape Fear River Watch sued NC DEQ for not taking swifter and stronger action, and sued the polluter, Chemours, for violations of the Clean Water Act and the Toxic Substances Control Act. The result was a Consent Order, signed February 25, 2019, by Cape Fear River Watch, NC DEQ, and Chemours. The order has required Chemours to stop wastewater discharge, air emissions, groundwater discharge, provide sampling and filtration options to well users, and required sampling that proved there were upwards of 300 distinct PFAS compounds being released from Fayetteville Works.\nSimilar polymers.\nThe Teflon trade name is also used for other polymers with similar compositions:\nThese retain the useful PTFE properties of low friction and nonreactivity, but are also more easily formable. For example, FEP is softer than PTFE and melts at ; it is also highly transparent and resistant to sunlight.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30795", "revid": "1320285197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30795", "title": "Thomas Paine", "text": "American philosopher and author (1737\u20131809)\nThomas Paine (born Thomas Pain, February 9, 1737 [O.S. January 29, 1736] \u2013 June 8, 1809; ) was an English-born American Founding Father, French Revolutionary, inventor, political philosopher, and statesman. His pamphlets \"Common Sense\" (1776) and \"The American Crisis\" (1776\u20131783) framed the Patriot argument for independence from Great Britain at the outset of the American Revolution. Paine advanced Enlightenment-era arguments for human rights that shaped revolutionary discourse on both sides of the Atlantic.\nBorn in Thetford, Norfolk, Paine immigrated to the British American colonies in 1774 with the help of Benjamin Franklin, arriving in time to participate in the American Revolution. Virtually every American Patriot read his 47-page pamphlet \"Common Sense\", which catalyzed the call for independence from Great Britain. He followed that breakthrough with the pro-independence \"American Crisis\" pamphlet series. Paine returned to Britain in 1787 and wrote \"Rights of Man\" (1791) to rebut critics of the French Revolution, particularly the Anglo-Irish conservative writer Edmund Burke. His authorship of the tract led to a trial and conviction \"in absentia\" in England in 1792 for the crime of seditious libel.\nThe British government of William Pitt the Younger was worried by the possibility that the French Revolution might spread to Britain and had begun suppressing works that espoused radical philosophies. Paine's work advocated the right of the people to overthrow their government and was therefore targeted with a writ for his arrest issued in early 1792. Paine fled to France in September, despite not being able to speak French, but he was quickly elected to the French National Convention. The Girondins regarded him as an ally; consequently, the Montagnards regarded him as an enemy, especially Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier, the powerful president of the Committee of General Security. In December 1793, Vadier arrested Paine and took him to Luxembourg Prison in Paris. He completed the first part of \"The Age of Reason\" just before he was arrested. Mark Philp notes that \"In prison Paine managed to produce (and to convey to Daniel Isaac Eaton, the radical London publisher) a dedication for \"The Age of Reason\" and a new edition of the \"Rights of Man\" with a new preface.\" James Monroe used his diplomatic connections to get Paine released in November 1794.\nPaine became notorious because of his pamphlets and attacks on his former allies, who he felt had betrayed him. In \"The Age of Reason\" and other writings, he advocated Deism, promoted reason and freethought, and argued against religion in general and Christian doctrine in particular. In 1796, he published a bitter open letter to George Washington, whom he denounced as an incompetent general and a hypocrite. He published the pamphlet \"Agrarian Justice\" (1797), discussing the origins of property and introducing the concept of a guaranteed minimum income through a one-time inheritance tax on landowners. In 1802, he returned to the U.S. He died on June 8, 1809. Only six people attended his funeral, as he had been ostracized for his ridicule of Christianity and his attacks on the nation's leaders.\nEarly life and education.\nPaine was born on January 29, 1736 in Thetford, Norfolk, England, to Joseph Pain (1708\u20131787), a tenant farmer and stay-maker, and Frances (n\u00e9e\u00a0Cocke) Pain. Joseph followed the Quaker faith and Frances was an Anglican. Despite claims that he adopted a new spelling after emigrating to America in 1774, he was already using \"Paine\" in 1769 while living in Lewes, Sussex.\nPaine attended Thetford Grammar School from 1744 to 1749, when schooling in England was not compulsory. At age 13 he began an apprenticeship with his father. After completing his apprenticeship he enlisted as a privateer at 19 and served aboard the King of Prussia. He returned to Britain in 1759, became a master staymaker, and opened a shop in Sandwich, Kent.\nPaine married Mary Lambert on September 27, 1759, but his business soon collapsed. Mary became pregnant, and after the couple moved to Margate she went into early labour, and both she and their child died.\nIn July 1761 he returned to Thetford to work as a supernumerary officer. In December 1762 he became an Excise Officer in Grantham, Lincolnshire, and in August 1764 he transferred to Alford with a salary of \u00a350 per annum. On August 27, 1765, he was dismissed for \"claiming to have inspected goods he did not inspect\". On July 31, 1766, he petitioned the Board of Excise for reinstatement, which it granted the following day when a vacancy arose. While he waited he resumed corsetmaking.\nIn 1767, he was appointed to a position in Grampound, Cornwall. Later he asked to leave this post to await a vacancy, and he became a school teacher in London.\nOn February 19, 1768, he was appointed to Lewes in Sussex, a town with a tradition of opposition to the monarchy and pro-republican sentiments since the revolutionary decades of the 17th century. Here he lived above the 15th-century Bull House, the tobacco shop of Samuel Ollive and Esther Ollive.\nPaine first became involved in civic matters when he was based in Lewes. He appears in the Town Book as a member of the Court Leet, the governing body for the town. He was also a member of the parish vestry, an influential local Anglican church group whose responsibilities for parish business would include collecting taxes and tithes to distribute among the poor. On March 26, 1771, at age 34, Paine married Elizabeth Ollive, the daughter of his recently deceased landlord, whose business as a grocer and tobacconist he then entered into.\nFrom 1772 to 1773, Paine joined excise officers asking Parliament for better pay and working conditions, publishing, in summer of 1772, \"The Case of the Officers of Excise\", a 12-page article, and his first political work, spending the London winter distributing the 4,000 copies printed to the Parliament and others. In spring 1774, he was again dismissed from the excise service for being absent from his post without permission. The tobacco shop failed. On April 14, to avoid debtors' prison, he sold his household possessions to pay debts. He formally separated from his wife Elizabeth on June 4, 1774, and moved to London. In September, mathematician, Fellow of the Royal Society, and Commissioner of the Excise George Lewis Scott introduced him to Benjamin Franklin, who was there as a voice for colonial opposition to British colonial rule, especially as it related to the Stamp Act, and the Townshend Acts. He was publisher and editor of the largest American newspaper, \"The Pennsylvania Gazette\" and suggested emigration to Philadelphia. He gave a letter of recommendation to Paine, who emigrated in October to the American colonies, arriving in Philadelphia on November 30, 1774.\nIn \"Pennsylvania Magazine\".\nPaine barely survived the transatlantic voyage. The ship's water supplies were bad and typhoid fever killed five passengers. On arriving at Philadelphia, he was too sick to disembark. Benjamin Franklin's physician, there to welcome Paine to America, had him carried off ship; Paine took six weeks to recover. He became a citizen of Pennsylvania \"by taking the oath of allegiance at a very early period\". In March 1775, he became editor of the \"Pennsylvania Magazine\", a position he conducted with considerable ability.\nBefore Paine's arrival in America, sixteen magazines had been founded in the colonies and ultimately failed, each featuring substantial content and reprints from England. In late 1774, Philadelphia printer Robert Aitken announced his plan to create what he called an \"American Magazine\" with content derived from the colonies. Paine contributed two pieces to the magazine's inaugural issue dated January 1775, and Aitken hired Paine as the Magazine's editor one month later. Under Paine's leadership, the magazine's readership rapidly expanded, achieving a greater circulation in the colonies than any American magazine up until that point. While Aitken had conceived of the magazine as nonpolitical, Paine brought a strong political perspective to its content, writing in its first issue that \"every heart and hand seem to be engaged in the interesting struggle for \"American Liberty.\"\"\nPaine wrote in the \"Pennsylvania Magazine\" that such a publication should become a \"nursery of genius\" for a nation that had \"now outgrown the state of infancy\", exercising and educating American minds, and shaping American morality. On March 8, 1775, the \"Pennsylvania Magazine\" published an unsigned abolitionist essay titled \"African Slavery in America\". The essay is often attributed to Paine on the basis of a letter by Benjamin Rush, recalling Paine's claim of authorship to the essay. The essay attacked slavery as an \"execrable commerce\" and \"outrage against Humanity and Justice.\"\nConsciously appealing to a broader and more working-class audience, Paine also used the magazine to discuss worker rights to production. This shift in the conceptualization of politics has been described as a part of \"the 'modernization' of political consciousness\", and the mobilization of ever greater sections of society into political life.\nAmerican Revolution.\n\"Common Sense\" (1776).\nPaine has a claim to the title \"The Father of the American Revolution\", which rests on his pamphlets, especially \"Common Sense,\" which crystallized sentiment for independence in 1776. It was published in Philadelphia on January 10, 1776, and signed anonymously \"by an Englishman\". It was an immediate success, with Paine estimating it sold 100,000 copies in three months to the two million residents of the 13 colonies. During the course of the American Revolution, one biographer estimated a total of about 500,000 copies were sold, including unauthorized editions. However, some historians dispute these numbers. Paine's original title for the pamphlet was \"Plain Truth\", but Paine's friend, pro-independence advocate Benjamin Rush, suggested \"Common Sense\" instead. Finding a printer who was daring enough to commit his print shop to the printing of \"Common Sense\" was not easy. At the advice of Rush, Paine commissioned Robert Bell to print his work.\nThe pamphlet came into circulation in January 1776, after the Revolution had started. It was passed around and often read aloud in taverns, contributing significantly to spreading the idea of republicanism, bolstering enthusiasm for separation from Britain, and encouraging recruitment for the Continental Army. Paine provided a new and convincing argument for independence by advocating a complete break with history. \"Common Sense\" is oriented to the future in a way that compels the reader to make an immediate choice. It offers a solution for Americans disgusted with and alarmed at the threat of tyranny.\nPaine's attack on monarchy in \"Common Sense\" was essentially an attack on King George III. Whereas colonial resentments were originally directed primarily against the king's ministers and Parliament, Paine laid the responsibility firmly at the king's door. \"Common Sense\" was the most widely read pamphlet of the American Revolution. It was a clarion call for unity against the corrupt British court, so as to realize America's providential role in providing an asylum for liberty. Written in a direct and lively style, it denounced the decaying despotisms of Europe and pilloried hereditary monarchy as an absurdity. At a time when many still hoped for reconciliation with Britain, \"Common Sense\" demonstrated to many the inevitability of separation.\nPaine was not on the whole expressing original ideas in \"Common Sense\", but rather employing rhetoric as a means to arouse resentment of the Crown. To achieve these ends, he pioneered a style of political writing suited to the democratic society he envisioned, with \"Common Sense\" serving as a primary example. Part of Paine's work was to render complex ideas intelligible to average readers of the day, with clear, concise writing unlike the formal, learned style favored by many of Paine's contemporaries. Scholars have put forward various explanations to account for its success, including the historic moment, Paine's easy-to-understand style, his democratic ethos, and his use of psychology and ideology.\n\"Common Sense\" was immensely popular in disseminating to a very wide audience ideas that were already in common use among the elite who comprised Congress and the leadership cadre of the emerging nation, who rarely cited Paine's arguments in their public calls for independence. The pamphlet probably had little direct influence on the Continental Congress' decision to issue a Declaration of Independence, since that body was more concerned with how declaring independence would affect the war effort. One distinctive idea in \"Common Sense\" is Paine's beliefs regarding the peaceful nature of republics; his views were an early and strong conception of what scholars would come to call the democratic peace theory.\nLoyalists vigorously attacked \"Common Sense\"; one attack, titled \"Plain Truth\" (1776), by Marylander James Chalmers, said Paine was a political quack and warned that without monarchy, the government would \"degenerate into democracy\". Even some American revolutionaries objected to \"Common Sense\"; late in life John Adams called it a \"crapulous mass\". Adams disagreed with the type of radical democracy promoted by Paine (that men who did not own property should still be allowed to vote and hold public office) and published \"Thoughts on Government\" in 1776 to advocate a more conservative approach to republicanism.\nSophia Rosenfeld argues that Paine was highly innovative in his use of the commonplace notion of \"common sense\". He synthesized various philosophical and political uses of the term in a way that permanently impacted American political thought. He used two ideas from Scottish Common Sense Realism: that ordinary people can indeed make sound judgments on major political issues, and that there exists a body of popular wisdom that is readily apparent to anyone. Paine also used a notion of \"common sense\" favored by philosophes in the Continental Enlightenment. They held that common sense could refute the claims of traditional institutions. Thus, Paine used \"common sense\" as a weapon to de-legitimize the monarchy and overturn prevailing conventional wisdom. Rosenfeld concludes that the phenomenal appeal of his pamphlet resulted from his synthesis of popular and elite elements in the independence movement.\nAccording to historian Robert Middlekauff, \"Common Sense\" became immensely popular mainly because Paine appealed to widespread convictions. Monarchy, he said, was preposterous and it had a heathenish origin. It was an institution of the devil. Paine pointed to the Old Testament, where almost all kings had seduced the Israelites to worship idols instead of God. Paine also denounced aristocracy, which together with monarchy were \"two ancient tyrannies\". They violated the laws of nature, human reason, and the \"universal order of things\", which began with God. This was, Middlekauff says, exactly what most Americans wanted to hear. He calls the Revolutionary generation \"the children of the twice-born\" because in their childhood they had experienced the Great Awakening, which, for the first time, had tied Americans together, transcending denominational and ethnic boundaries and giving them a sense of patriotism.\nPossible involvement in drafting the Declaration of Independence.\nWhile there is no historical record of Paine's involvement in drafting the Declaration of Independence, some scholars of Early American History have suspected his involvement. As noted by the Thomas Paine National Historical Association, multiple authors have hypothesized and written on the subject, including Moody (1872), Van der Weyde (1911), Lewis (1947), and more recently, Smith &amp; Rickards (2007).\nIn 2018, the Thomas Paine National Historical Association introduced an early draft of the Declaration that contained evidence of Paine's involvement based on an inscription of \"T.P.\" on the back of the document. During the early deliberations of the Committee of Five members chosen by Congress to draft the Declaration of Independence, John Adams made a hastily written manuscript copy of the original draft of the Declaration of Independence on June 24, 1776, known as the Sherman Copy. Adams made this copy shortly before preparing another neater, fair copy that is held in the Adams Family Papers collection at the Massachusetts Historical Society. The Sherman copy of the Declaration of Independence is one of several working drafts of the Declaration, made for Roger Sherman's review and approval before the Committee of Five submitted a finalized draft to Congress. The Sherman Copy of the Declaration of Independence contains an inscription on the back of the document that states: \"A beginning perhaps\u00a0\u2013 Original with Jefferson\u00a0\u2013 Copied from Original with T.P.'s permission.\" According to the Thomas Paine National Historical Association, the individual referenced as \"T.P.\" in the inscription appears to be Thomas Paine.\nThe degree to which Paine was involved in formulating the text of the Declaration is unclear, as the original draft referenced in the Sherman Copy inscription is presumed lost or destroyed. However, John Adams' request for permission of \"T.P.\" to copy the original draft may suggest that Paine had a role either assisting Jefferson with organizing ideas within the Declaration, or contributing to the text of the original draft itself.\nNaming the United States.\nHistorians connect Paine to the rise of the national title \"United States of America\". Writing as \"Republicus\" in the June 29, 1776 issue of the \"Pennsylvania Evening Post\", he urged Congress to adopt the name so the new polity could present itself as a nation, and the phrase reached a wider audience days later in the Declaration.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPaine contrasted the prevailing habit in which revolutionary leaders used \"united States\" as a descriptive phrase for their coalition with the diplomatic urgency of 1776. He argued that only a capitalized title would show foreign governments that the colonies had formed a single American nation ready to negotiate alliances.\nHistorian James H. Hutson situates the letter within widespread June 1776 anxiety that Britain might broker a partition treaty before Congress acted. He notes newspaper warnings that European powers would not remain neutral unless American envoys carried an explicit declaration of nationhood abroad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe \"Republicus\" appeal echoed Paine's broader call for shared sacrifice and collective identity by urging readers to embrace a national name that implied reciprocal obligations among the colonies. Within weeks he carried the same urgency into \"The American Crisis\".\n\"The American Crisis\" (1776).\nIn late 1776, Paine published \"The American Crisis\" pamphlet series to inspire the Americans in their battles against the British army. He juxtaposed the conflict between the good American devoted to civic virtue and the selfish provincial man. To inspire his soldiers, General George Washington had \"The American Crisis\", first \"Crisis\" pamphlet, read aloud to them. It begins:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These are the times that try men's souls: The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of their country; but he that stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman. Tyranny, like Hell, is not easily conquered; yet we have this consolation with us, that the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph. What we obtain too cheap, we esteem too lightly: it is dearness only that gives every thing its value. Heaven knows how to put a proper price upon its goods; and it would be strange indeed if so celestial an article as freedom should not be highly rated.\nForeign affairs.\nIn 1777, Paine became secretary of the Congressional Committee on Foreign Affairs. The following year, he alluded to secret negotiation underway with France in his pamphlets. His enemies denounced his indiscretions. There was scandal; together with Paine's conflict with Robert Morris and Silas Deane, it led to Paine's expulsion from the Committee in 1779.\nHowever, in 1781, he accompanied John Laurens on his mission to France. Eventually, after much pleading from Paine, New York State recognized his political services by presenting him with an estate at New Rochelle, New York and Paine received money from Pennsylvania and from Congress at Washington's suggestion. During the Revolutionary War, Paine served as an aide-de-camp to the important general, Nathanael Greene.\nSilas Deane Affair.\nIn what may have been an error, and perhaps even contributed to his resignation as the secretary to the Committee of Foreign Affairs, Paine was openly critical of Silas Deane, an American diplomat who had been appointed in March 1776 by the Congress to travel to France in secret. Deane's goal was to influence the French government to finance the colonists in their fight for independence. Paine largely saw Deane as a war profiteer who had little respect for principle, having been under the employ of Robert Morris, one of the primary financiers of the American Revolution and working with Pierre Beaumarchais, a French royal agent sent to the colonies by King Louis to investigate the Anglo-American conflict. Paine uncovered the financial connection between Morris, who was Superintendent for Finance of the Continental Congress, and Deane.\nWealthy men, such as Robert Morris, John Jay and powerful merchant bankers, were leaders of the Continental Congress and defended holding public positions while at the same time profiting off their own personal financial dealings with governments. Amongst Paine's criticisms, he had written in the \"Pennsylvania Packet\" that France had \"prefaced [their] alliance by an early and generous friendship\", referring to aid that had been provided to American colonies prior to the recognition of the Franco-American treaties. This was alleged to be effectively an embarrassment to France, which potentially could have jeopardized the alliance. John Jay, the President of the Congress, who had been a fervent supporter of Deane, immediately spoke out against Paine's comments. The controversy eventually became public, and Paine was then denounced as unpatriotic for criticizing an American revolutionary. He was even physically assaulted twice in the street by Deane supporters. This much-added stress took a large toll on Paine, who was generally of a sensitive character and he resigned as secretary to the Committee of Foreign Affairs in 1779. Paine left the Committee without even having enough money to buy food for himself.\nMuch later, when Paine returned from his mission to France, Deane's corruption had become more widely acknowledged. Many, including Robert Morris, apologized to Paine, and Paine's reputation in Philadelphia was restored.\n\"Public Good\".\nIn 1780, Paine published a pamphlet entitled \"Public Good\", in which he made the case that territories west of the 13 colonies that had been part of the British Empire belonged after the Declaration of Independence to the American government, and did not belong to any of the 13 states or to any individual speculators. A royal charter of 1609 had granted to the Virginia Company land stretching to the Pacific Ocean. A small group of wealthy Virginia land speculators, including the Washington, Lee, and Randolph families, had taken advantage of this royal charter to survey and to claim title to huge swaths of land, including much land west of the 13 colonies. In \"Public Good\", Paine argued that these lands belonged to the American government as represented by the Continental Congress. This angered many of Paine's wealthy Virginia friends, including Richard Henry Lee of the powerful Lee family, who had been Paine's closest ally in Congress, George Washington, Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, all of whom had claims to huge wild tracts that Paine was advocating should be government owned. The view that Paine had advocated eventually prevailed when the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 was passed.\nThe animosity Paine felt as a result of the publication of \"Public Good\" fueled his decision to embark with Lieutenant Colonel John Laurens on a mission to travel to Paris to obtain funding for the American war effort.\nFunding the Revolution.\nPaine accompanied Col. John Laurens to France and is credited with initiating the mission. It landed in France in March 1781 and returned to America in August with 2.5 million livres in silver, as part of a \"present\" of 6 million and a loan of 10\u00a0million. The meetings with the French king were most likely conducted in the company and under the influence of Benjamin Franklin. Upon returning to the United States with this highly welcomed cargo, Paine and probably Col. Laurens, \"positively objected\" that General Washington should propose that Congress remunerate him for his services, for fear of setting \"a bad precedent and an improper mode\". Paine made influential acquaintances in Paris and helped organize the Bank of North America to raise money to supply the army. In 1785, he was given $3,000 by the U.S. Congress in recognition of his service to the nation.\nHenry Laurens (father of Col. John Laurens) had been the ambassador to the Netherlands, but he was captured by the British on his return trip there. When he was later exchanged for the prisoner Lord Cornwallis in late 1781, Paine proceeded to the Netherlands to continue the loan negotiations. There remains some question as to the relationship of Henry Laurens and Paine to Robert Morris as the Superintendent of Finance and his business associate, Thomas Willing, who became the first president of the Bank of North America in January 1782. They had accused Morris of profiteering in 1779 and Willing had voted against the Declaration of Independence. Although Morris did much to restore his reputation in 1780 and 1781, the credit for obtaining these critical loans to \"organize\" the Bank of North America for approval by Congress in December 1781 should go to Henry or John Laurens and Paine more than to Morris.\nPaine bought his only house in 1783 on the corner of Farnsworth Avenue and Church Streets in Bordentown City, New Jersey and he lived in it periodically until his death in 1809. This is the only place in the world where Paine purchased real estate. In 1785, Paine was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society.\nIn 1787, Paine proposed an iron bridge design for crossing the Schuylkill River at Philadelphia. Having little success in acquiring funding, Paine returned to Paris, France seeking investors or other opportunities to implement his, at the time, novel iron bridge design. Because Paine had few friends when arriving in France aside from Lafayette and Jefferson, he continued to correspond heavily with Benjamin Franklin, a long time friend and mentor. Franklin provided letters of introduction for Paine to use to gain associates and contacts in France.\nLater that year, Paine returned to London from Paris. He then released a pamphlet on August 20 called \"Prospects on the Rubicon: or, an investigation into the Causes and Consequences of the Politics to be Agitated at the Meeting of Parliament\". Tensions between England and France were increasing, and this pamphlet urged the British Ministry to reconsider the consequences of war with France. Paine sought to turn the public opinion against the war to create better relations between the countries, avoid the taxes of war upon the citizens, and not engage in a war he believed would ruin both nations.\nFrance and \"Rights of Man\".\nBack in London by 1787, Paine would become engrossed in the French Revolution that began two years later and decided to travel to France in 1790. Meanwhile, conservative intellectual Edmund Burke launched a counterrevolutionary blast against the French Revolution, entitled \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\" (1790), which strongly appealed to the landed class, and sold 30,000 copies. Paine set out to refute it in his \"Rights of Man\" (1791). He wrote it not as a quick pamphlet, but as a long, abstract political tract of 90,000 words which tore apart monarchies and traditional social institutions. On January 31, 1791, he gave the manuscript to publisher Joseph Johnson. A visit by government agents dissuaded Johnson, so Paine gave the book to publisher J. S. Jordan, then went to Paris, on William Blake's advice. He charged three good friends, William Godwin, Thomas Brand Hollis, and Thomas Holcroft, with handling publication details. The book appeared on March 13, 1791, and sold nearly a million copies. It was \"eagerly read by reformers, Protestant dissenters, democrats, London craftsmen, and the skilled factory-hands of the new industrial north\".\nUndeterred by the government campaign to discredit him, Paine issued his \"Rights of Man, Part the Second, Combining Principle and Practice\" in February 1792. Detailing a representative government with enumerated social programs to remedy the numbing poverty of commoners through progressive tax measures, Paine went much farther than such contemporaries as James Burgh, Robert Potter, John Scott, John Sinclair or Adam Smith. Radically reduced in price to ensure unprecedented circulation, it was sensational in its impact and gave birth to reform societies. An indictment for seditious libel followed, for both publisher and author, while government agents followed Paine and instigated mobs, hate meetings, and burnings in effigy. A fierce pamphlet war also resulted, in which Paine was defended and assailed in dozens of works. The authorities aimed, with ultimate success, to force Paine out of Great Britain. He was then tried \"in absentia\" and found guilty, but he was beyond the reach of British law. The French translation of \"Rights of Man, Part II\" was published in April 1792. The translator, Fran\u00e7ois Lanthenas, eliminated the dedication to Lafayette, as he believed Paine thought too highly of Lafayette, who was seen as a royalist sympathizer at the time.\nIn summer of 1792, he answered the sedition and libel charges thus: \"If, to expose the fraud and imposition of monarchy ... to promote universal peace, civilization, and commerce, and to break the chains of political superstition, and raise degraded man to his proper rank; if these things be libellous ... let the name of libeller be engraved on my tomb.\"\nPaine was an enthusiastic supporter of the French Revolution and was granted honorary French citizenship alongside prominent contemporaries such as Alexander Hamilton, George Washington, Benjamin Franklin and others. Paine's honorary citizenship was in recognition of the publishing of his \"Rights of Man, Part II\" and the sensation it created within France. Despite his inability to speak French, he was elected to the National Convention, representing the district of Pas-de-Calais.\nSeveral weeks after his election to the National Convention, Paine was selected as one of nine deputies to be part of the convention's Constitutional Committee, charged to draft a suitable constitution for the French Republic. He subsequently participated in the Constitutional Committee in drafting the Girondin constitutional project. He voted for the French Republic, but argued against the execution of Louis XVI, referred to as Louis Capet following his deposition, saying the monarch should instead be exiled to the United States: firstly, because of the way royalist France had come to the aid of the American Revolution; and secondly, because of a moral objection to capital punishment in general and to revenge killings in particular. Paine's speech in defense of Louis XVI was interrupted by Jean-Paul Marat, who claimed that, as a Quaker, Paine's religious beliefs ran counter to inflicting capital punishment and thus he should be ineligible to vote. Marat interrupted a second time, stating that the interpreter was deceiving the convention by distorting the meanings of Paine's words, prompting Paine to provide a copy of the speech as proof that he was being correctly interpreted.\nPaine wrote the second part of \"Rights of Man\" on a desk in Thomas 'Clio' Rickman's house, with whom he was staying in 1792 before he fled to France. This desk is currently on display in the People's History Museum in Manchester.\nRegarded as an ally of the Girondins, he was seen with increasing disfavor by the Montagnards, who were now in power after the Insurrection of 31 May \u2013 2 June 1793. Paine was under scrutiny by the authorities also because he was a personal adversary of Gouverneur Morris, who was the American ambassador in France and a friend of George Washington. The revolutionary government, both the Committee of Public Safety and the Committee of General Security, sought to gain the favor of the American ambassador, not wanting to risk the alliance with the United States; therefore, they were more inclined to focus on Paine.\n\"The Age of Reason\".\nPaine was arrested in France on December 28, 1793, following the orders of Vadier. Joel Barlow was unsuccessful in securing Paine's release by circulating a petition among American residents in Paris. He was treated as a political prisoner by the Committee of General Security. Sixteen American citizens were allowed to plead for Paine's release to the convention, yet President Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier of the Committee of General Security refused to acknowledge Paine's American citizenship, stating he was an Englishman and therefore a citizen of a country at war with France. Paine protested and claimed that he was a citizen of the U.S. However, Ambassador Morris did not press his claim, and Paine later wrote that Morris had connived at his imprisonment.\nPaine narrowly escaped execution. A chalk mark was supposed to be left by the jailer on the door of a cell to denote that the prisoner inside was due to be removed for execution. In Paine's case, the mark had accidentally been made on the inside of his door rather than the outside because the door had been left open when the jailer was making his rounds that day, since Paine had been receiving official visitors. But for this quirk of fate, Paine would have been executed the following morning. He thus survived the few vital days needed to be spared by the fall of Robespierre on 9 Thermidor (July 27, 1794).\nPaine was released in November 1794 largely because of the work of the new American ambassador to France, James Monroe, who successfully argued the case for Paine's U.S. citizenship. In July 1795, he was re-admitted into the convention, as were other surviving Girondins. Paine, depressed and ill as a result of his imprisonment, had stayed silent in the period immediately following his release but on 8 July, with the encouragement of Lanthenas, he spoke in the convention. Paine was one of only three \"d\u00e9put\u00e9s\" to oppose the adoption of the new 1795 constitution, because it eliminated universal suffrage, which had been proclaimed, at least for men, by the Montagnard Constitution of 1793.\nIn addition to receiving a British patent for a single-span iron bridge, Paine developed a smokeless candle and worked with inventor John Fitch in developing steam engines.\nIn 1797, Paine lived in Paris with Nicholas Bonneville and his wife, Marguerite Brazier. As well as Bonneville's other controversial guests, Paine aroused the suspicions of authorities. Bonneville hid the Royalist Antoine Joseph Barruel-Beauvert at his home. Beauvert had been outlawed following the coup of 18 Fructidor on September 4, 1797. Paine believed that the United States under President John Adams had betrayed revolutionary France.\nIn 1800, still under police surveillance, Bonneville took refuge with his father in Evreux. Paine stayed on with him, helping Bonneville with the burden of translating the \"Covenant Sea\". The same year, Paine purportedly had a meeting with Napoleon Bonaparte. Napoleon claimed he slept with a copy of \"Rights of Man\" () under his pillow and went so far as to say to Paine that \"a statue of gold should be erected to you in every city in the universe\". Paine discussed with Napoleon how best to invade England. In December 1797, he had written two essays, one of which was pointedly named \"Observations on the Construction and Operation of Navies with a Plan for an Invasion of England and the Final Overthrow of the English Government\", in which he promoted the idea to finance 1,000 gunboats to carry a French invading army across the English Channel. In 1804, Paine returned to the subject, writing \"To the People of England on the Invasion of England\" advocating the idea. However, upon noting Napoleon's progress towards dictatorship, he condemned him as \"the completest charlatan that ever existed\".\nCriticism of George Washington.\nUpset that President Washington, a friend since the Revolutionary War, did nothing during Paine's imprisonment in France, Paine believed Washington had betrayed him and conspired with Robespierre. While staying with Monroe, Paine planned to send Washington a letter of grievance on the president's birthday. Monroe stopped the letter from being sent, and after Paine's criticism of the Jay Treaty, which was supported by Washington, Monroe suggested that Paine live elsewhere.\nPaine then sent a stinging letter to Washington, in which he described him as an incompetent commander and a vain and ungrateful person. Having received no response, Paine contacted his longtime publisher Benjamin Bache, the Jeffersonian democrat, to publish his \"Letter to George Washington\" of 1796 in which he derided Washington's reputation by describing him as a treacherous man who was unworthy of his fame as a military and political hero. Paine wrote that \"the world will be puzzled to decide whether you are an apostate or an impostor; whether you have abandoned good principles or whether you ever had any\". He declared that without France's aid Washington could not have succeeded in the American Revolution and had \"but little share in the glory of the final event\". He also commented on Washington's character, saying that Washington had no sympathetic feelings and was a hypocrite.\nLater years.\nPaine remained in France until 1802, returning to the United States only at President Jefferson's invitation. Paine also paid for the passage for Bonneville's wife Marguerite Brazier and the couple's three sons, Benjamin, Louis, and Thomas Bonneville, to whom Paine was godfather. Paine returned to the U.S. in the early stages of the Second Great Awakening and a time of great political partisanship. The \"Age of Reason\" gave ample excuse for the religiously devout to dislike him, while the Federalists attacked him for his ideas of government stated in \"Common Sense,\" for his association with the French Revolution, and for his friendship with President Jefferson. Also, still fresh in the minds of the public was his \"Letter to Washington,\" published six years before his return. This was compounded when his right to vote was denied in New Rochelle on the grounds that Gouverneur Morris did not recognize him as an American and Washington had not aided him.\nBrazier took care of Paine at the end of his life and buried him after his death. In his will, Paine left the bulk of his estate to her, including 100 acres (40.5 ha) of his farm so she could maintain and educate Benjamin and his brother Thomas.\nDeath.\nOn the morning of June 8, 1809, Paine died, aged 72, at 59 Grove Street in Greenwich Village, New York City. Although the original building no longer exists, the present building has a plaque noting that Paine died at this location.\nAfter his death, Paine's body was brought to New Rochelle, but the Quakers would not allow it to be buried in their graveyard as per his last will, so his remains were buried under a walnut tree on his farm. In 1819, English agrarian radical journalist William Cobbett, who in 1793 had published a hostile continuation of Francis Oldys (George Chalmer)'s \"The Life of Thomas Paine\", dug up his bones and transported them back to England with the intention to give Paine a heroic reburial on his native soil, but this never came to pass. The bones were still among Cobbett's effects when he died over fifteen years later but were later lost. There is no confirmed story about what happened to them after that, although various people have claimed throughout the years to own parts of Paine's remains, such as his skull and right hand.\nAt the time of his death, most American newspapers reprinted Paine's obituary notice from the \"New York Evening Post\" that was in turn quoting from \"The American Citizen\", which read in part: \"He had lived long, did some good, and much harm\". Only six mourners came to his funeral, two of whom were black, most likely freedmen. Months later appeared a hostile biography by James Cheetham, who had admired him since the latter's days as a young radical in Manchester, and who had been friends with Paine for a short time before the two fell out. Many years later the writer and orator Robert G. Ingersoll wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thomas Paine had passed the legendary limit of life. One by one most of his old friends and acquaintances had deserted him. Maligned on every side, execrated, shunned and abhorred \u2013 his virtues denounced as vices \u2013 his services forgotten \u2013 his character blackened, he preserved the poise and balance of his soul. He was a victim of the people, but his convictions remained unshaken. He was still a soldier in the army of freedom, and still tried to enlighten and civilize those who were impatiently waiting for his death. Even those who loved their enemies hated him, their friend \u2013 the friend of the whole world \u2013 with all their hearts. On the 8th of June 1809, death came \u2013 Death, almost his only friend. At his funeral no pomp, no pageantry, no civic procession, no military display. In a carriage, a woman and her son who had lived on the bounty of the dead \u2013 on horseback, a Quaker, the humanity of whose heart dominated the creed of his head \u2013 and, following on foot, two negroes filled with gratitude \u2013 constituted the funeral cortege of Thomas Paine.\nIdeas and views.\nBiographer Eric Foner identifies a utopian thread in Paine's thought, writing: \"Through this new language he communicated a new vision\u00a0\u2013 a utopian image of an egalitarian, republican society\".\nPaine's utopianism combined civic republicanism, belief in the inevitability of scientific and social progress and commitment to free markets and liberty generally. The multiple sources of Paine's political theory all pointed to a society based on the common good and individualism. Paine expressed a redemptive futurism or political messianism. Writing that his generation \"would appear to the future as the Adam of a new world\", Paine exemplified British utopianism.\nLater, his encounters with the Indigenous peoples of the Americas made a deep impression. The ability of the Iroquois to live in harmony with nature while achieving a democratic decision-making process helped him refine his thinking on how to organize society.\nSlavery.\nPaine was critical of slavery and declared himself to be an abolitionist. As secretary to the Pennsylvania legislature, he helped draft legislation to outlaw Patriot involvement in the international slave trade. Paine's statement, \"Man has no property in man\", although used by him in \"Rights of Man\" to deny the right of any generation to bind future ones, has also been interpreted as an argument against slavery. In the book, Paine also describes his mission, among other things, as to \"break the chains of slavery and oppression\".\nOn March 8, 1775, one month after Paine became the editor of \"The Pennsylvania Magazine\", the magazine published an anonymous article titled \"African Slavery in America\", the first prominent piece in the colonies proposing the emancipation of African-American slaves and the abolition of slavery. Paine is often credited with writing the piece, on the basis of later testimony by Benjamin Rush, cosigner of the Declaration of Independence.\nDuring the American Revolutionary War, the British implemented several policies that allowed fugitive slaves fleeing from American enslavers to find refuge within British lines. Writing in response to these policies, Paine wrote in \"Common Sense\" that Britain \"hath stirred up the Indians and the Negroes to destroy us\". Paine, together with Joel Barlow, unsuccessfully tried to convince President Jefferson not to import the institution of slavery to the territory acquired in the Louisiana Purchase, suggesting he rather settle it with free Black families and German immigrants.\nState funded social programs.\nIn his \"Rights of Man, Part Second\", Paine advocated a comprehensive program of state support for the population to ensure the welfare of society, including state subsidy for poor people, state-financed universal public education, and state-sponsored prenatal care and postnatal care, including state subsidies to families at childbirth. Recognizing that a person's \"labor ought to be over\" before old age, Paine also called for a state pension to all workers starting at age 50, which would be doubled at age 60.\n\"Agrarian Justice\".\nHis last pamphlet, \"Agrarian Justice\", published in the winter of 1795, opposed agrarian law and agrarian monopoly and further developed his ideas in the \"Rights of Man\" about how land ownership separated the majority of people from their rightful, natural inheritance and means of independent survival. The U.S. Social Security Administration recognizes \"Agrarian Justice\" as the first American proposal for an old-age pension and basic income or citizen's dividend. Per \"Agrarian Justice\":\nIn advocating the case of the persons thus dispossessed, it is a right, and not a charity ... [Government must] create a national fund, out of which there shall be paid to every person, when arrived at the age of twenty-one years, the sum of fifteen pounds sterling, as a compensation in part, for the loss of his or her natural inheritance, by the introduction of the system of landed property. And also, the sum of ten pounds per annum, during life, to every person now living, of the age of fifty years, and to all others as they shall arrive at that age.\nIn this pamphlet he argued \"All accumulation of personal property, beyond what a man's own hands produce, is derived to him by living in society; and he owes on every principle of justice, of gratitude, and of civilization, a part of that accumulation back again to society from whence the whole came\".\nLamb argues that Paine's analysis of property rights marks a distinct contribution to political theory. His theory of property defends a libertarian concern with private ownership that shows an egalitarian commitment. Paine's new justification of property sets him apart from previous theorists such as Hugo Grotius, Samuel von Pufendorf and John Locke. Lamb says it demonstrates Paine's commitment to foundational liberal values of individual freedom and moral equality. In response to Paine's \"Agrarian Justice\", Thomas Spence wrote \"The Rights of Infants\" wherein he argued that Paine's plan was not beneficial to impoverished people because landlords would just keep raising land prices, further enriching themselves rather than giving the commonwealth an equal chance.\nFiat currency.\nPaine was strongly opposed to fiat money, which he viewed as counterfeiting by the state. He said \"The punishment of a member [of a legislature] who should move for such a law ought to be death\". As part of his essay \"Dissertations on Government, etc.\", published in February, 1786, Paine included a scathing condemnation of paper money emphasizing \"The pretense for paper money has been, that there was not a sufficiency of gold and silver. This, so far from being a reason for paper emissions, is a reason against them.\"\nReligious views.\nBefore his arrest and imprisonment in France, knowing that he would probably be arrested and executed, following in the tradition of early 18th-century English Deism Paine wrote the first part of \"The Age of Reason\" (1793\u20131794). Paine's religious views as expressed in \"The Age of Reason\" caused quite a stir in religious society, effectively splitting the religious groups into two major factions: those who wanted church disestablishment, and the Christians who wanted Christianity to continue having a strong social influence.\nAbout his own religious beliefs, Paine wrote in \"The Age of Reason\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I believe in one God, and no more; and I hope for happiness beyond this life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do not believe in the creed professed by the Jewish church, by the Roman church, by the Greek church, by the Turkish church, by the Protestant church, nor by any church that I know of. My own mind is my own church. All national institutions of churches, whether Jewish, Christian or Turkish, appear to me no other than human inventions, set up to terrify and enslave mankind, and monopolize power and profit.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whenever we read the obscene stories, the voluptuous debaucheries, the cruel and tortuous executions, the unrelenting vindictiveness with which more than half the Bible is filled, it would be more consistent that we call it the word of a demon than the word of God. It is a history of wickedness that has served to corrupt and brutalize mankind; and, for my part, I sincerely detest it, as I detest everything that is cruel.\nThough there is no definitive evidence Paine himself was a Freemason, upon his return to America from France he penned \"An Essay on the Origin of Free-Masonry\" (1803\u20131805) about Freemasonry being derived from the religion of the ancient Druids. Marguerite de Bonneville published the essay in 1810 after Paine's death, but she chose to omit certain passages from it that were critical of Christianity, most of which were restored in an 1818 printing. In the essay, Paine stated that \"the Christian religion is a parody on the worship of the Sun, in which they put a man whom they call Christ, in the place of the Sun, and pay him the same adoration which was originally paid to the Sun.\" Paine also had a negative attitude toward Judaism. While never describing himself as a Deist, he openly advocated Deism in his writings, and called Deism \"the only true religion\":The opinions I have advanced ... are the effect of the most clear and long-established conviction that the Bible and the Testament are impositions upon the world, that the fall of man, the account of Jesus Christ being the Son of God, and of his dying to appease the wrath of God, and of salvation, by that strange means, are all fabulous inventions, dishonorable to the wisdom and power of the Almighty; that the only true religion is Deism, by which I then meant, and mean now, the belief of one God, and an imitation of his moral character, or the practice of what are called moral virtues\u00a0\u2013 and that it was upon this only (so far as religion is concerned) that I rested all my hopes of happiness hereafter. So say I now\u00a0\u2013 and so help me God.\nLegacy.\nHistorian Jack P. Greene stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In a fundamental sense, we are today all Paine's children. It was not the British defeat at Yorktown, but Paine and the new American conception of political society he did so much to popularize in Europe that turned the world upside down.\nHarvey J. Kaye wrote that through Paine, through his pamphlets and catchphrases such as \"The sun never shined on a cause of greater worth\", \"We have it in our power to begin the world over again\", and \"These are the times that try men's souls\" did more than move Americans to declare their independence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[H]e also imbued the nation they were founding with democratic impulse and aspiration and exceptional \u2013 indeed, world-historic \u2013 purpose and promise. For 230 years Americans have drawn ideas, inspiration, and encouragement from Paine and his work.\nJohn Stevenson argues that in the early 1790s, numerous radical political societies were formed throughout England and Wales in which Paine's writings provided \"a boost to the self-confidence of those seeking to participate in politics for the first time.\" In its immediate effects, Gary Kates argues, \"Paine's vision unified Philadelphia merchants, British artisans, French peasants, Dutch reformers, and radical intellectuals from Boston to Berlin in one great movement.\"\nHis writings in the long term inspired philosophic and working-class radicals in Britain and United States. Liberals, libertarians, left-libertarians, feminists, democratic socialists, social democrats, anarchists, free thinkers and progressives often claim him as an intellectual ancestor. Paine's critique of institutionalized religion and advocacy of rational thinking influenced many British freethinkers in the 19th and 20th centuries, such as William Cobbett, George Holyoake, Charles Bradlaugh, Christopher Hitchens and Bertrand Russell.\nThe quote \"Lead, follow, or get out of the way\" is widely but incorrectly attributed to Paine. It can be found nowhere in his published works.\nAbraham Lincoln.\nIn 1835, when he was 26 years old, Abraham Lincoln wrote a defense of Paine's deism. A political associate, Samuel Hill, burned the manuscript to save Lincoln's political career. Historian Roy Basler, the editor of Lincoln's papers, said Paine had a strong influence on Lincoln's style:\nNo other writer of the eighteenth century, with the exception of Jefferson, parallels more closely the temper or gist of Lincoln's later thought. In style, Paine above all others affords the variety of eloquence which, chastened and adapted to Lincoln's own mood, is revealed in Lincoln's formal writings.\nThomas Edison.\nThe inventor Thomas Edison said:\nI have always regarded Paine as one of the greatest of all Americans. Never have we had a sounder intelligence in this republic... It was my good fortune to encounter Thomas Paine's works in my boyhood... it was, indeed, a revelation to me to read that great thinker's views on political and theological subjects. Paine educated me, then, about many matters of which I had never before thought. I remember, very vividly, the flash of enlightenment that shone from Paine's writings, and I recall thinking, at that time, 'What a pity these works are not today the schoolbooks for all children!' My interest in Paine was not satisfied by my first reading of his works. I went back to them time and again, just as I have done since my boyhood days.\nSouth America.\nIn 1811, Venezuelan translator Manuel Garcia de Sena published a book in Philadelphia that consisted mostly of Spanish translations of several of Paine's most important works. The book also included translations of the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation, the U.S. Constitution and the constitutions of five U.S. states.\nIt subsequently circulated widely in South America and through it Uruguayan national hero Jos\u00e9 Gervasio Artigas became familiar with and embraced Paine's ideas. In turn, many of Artigas's writings drew directly from Paine's, including the \"Instructions of 1813\", which Uruguayans consider to be one of their country's most important constitutional documents, and was one of the earliest writings to articulate a principled basis for an identity independent of Buenos Aires.\nMemorials.\nThe first and longest-standing memorial to Paine is the carved and inscribed 12-foot marble column in New Rochelle, New York, organized and funded by publisher, educator and reformer Gilbert Vale (1791\u20131866) and raised in 1839 by the American sculptor and architect John Frazee, the Thomas Paine Monument (see image below).\nNew Rochelle is also the original site of Thomas Paine's Cottage, which along with a 320-acre (130 ha) farm were presented to Paine in 1784 by act of the New York State Legislature for his services in the American Revolution. The same site is the home of the Thomas Paine Memorial Museum.\nIn the 20th century, Joseph Lewis, longtime president of the Freethinkers of America and an ardent Paine admirer, was instrumental in having larger-than-life-sized statues of Paine erected in each of the three countries with which the revolutionary writer was associated. The first, created by Mount Rushmore sculptor Gutzon Borglum, was erected in the Parc Montsouris, Paris, just before World War II began but not formally dedicated until 1948. It depicts Paine standing before the French National Convention to plead for the life of King Louis XVI. The second, sculpted in 1950 by Georg J. Lober, was erected near Paine's one-time home in Morristown, New Jersey. It shows a seated Paine using a drumhead as a makeshift table. The third, sculpted by Sir Charles Wheeler, President of the Royal Academy, was erected in 1964 in Paine's birthplace, Thetford, England. With a quill pen in his right hand and an inverted copy of \"The Rights of Man\" in his left, it occupies a prominent location on King Street. Thomas Paine was ranked No. 34 in the \"100 Greatest Britons\" 2002 extensive Nationwide poll conducted by the BBC.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30796", "revid": "42964511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30796", "title": "Tyre, Lebanon", "text": "Tyre is a city in Lebanon, and one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world. It was one of the earliest Phoenician metropolises and the legendary birthplace of Europa, her brothers Cadmus and Phoenix, and Carthage's founder Dido (Elissa). The city has many ancient sites, including the Tyre Hippodrome, and was added as a whole to the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in 1984. The historian Ernest Renan described it as \"a city of ruins, built out of ruins\".\nTyre is the fifth-largest city in Lebanon after Beirut, Tripoli, Sidon, and Baalbek. It is the capital of the Tyre District in the South Governorate. There were approximately 200,000 inhabitants in the Tyre urban area in 2016, including many refugees, as the city hosts three of the twelve Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon: Burj El Shimali, El Buss, and Rashidieh.\nTerritory.\n&lt;mapframe latitude=\"33.28\" longitude=\"35.239\" zoom=\"11\" width=\"220\" height=\"200\" align=\"right\" /&gt;\nTyre juts out from the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, and is located about south of Beirut. It originally consisted of two distinct urban centres: Tyre itself, which was on an island just 500 to 700 metres (yards) offshore, and the associated settlement of Ushu on the adjacent mainland, later called \"Palaetyrus\", meaning \"Old Tyre\" in Ancient Greek. The fortified city was on top of a rock from which its name was inherited as \"S'r\" is the Phoenician word for \"rock\". It had two ports, the \"Sidonian port\" to the north, still partly existing today, and the \"Egyptian port\" to the south which has perhaps been discovered very recently.\nThroughout history from prehistoric times onwards, all settlements in the Tyre area profited from the abundance of fresh water supplies, especially from the nearby springs of Rashidieh and Ras Al Ain in the South. In addition, there are the springs of Al Bagbog and Ain Ebreen in the North as well as the Litani River, also known as Alqasymieh. The present city of Tyre covers a large part of the original island and has expanded onto and covers most of the causeway built by Alexander the Great in 332 BCE. This isthmus increased greatly in width over the centuries because of extensive silt depositions on either side. The part of the original island not covered by the modern city of Tyre is mostly of an archaeological site showcasing remains of the city from ancient times.\nFour municipalities contribute to Tyre city's built-up area, though none are included in their entirety: Sour municipality contains the heart of the city, excluding the Natural and Coastal Reserve; Burj El Shimali to the East without unpopulated agricultural lands; Abbasiyet Sour to the North without agricultural lands and a dislocated village; and Ain Baal to the South-East, also without agricultural lands and dislocated villages. Tyre's urban area lies on a fertile coastal plain, which explains the fact that as of 2017 about 44% of its territory was used for intra-urban agriculture, while built-up land constituted over 40%.\nIn terms of geomorphology and seismicity, Tyre is close to the Roum Fault and the Yammouneh Fault. Though it has suffered a number of devastating earthquakes over the millennia, the threat level is considered to be low in most places and moderate in a few others. However, a tsunami following an earthquake and subsequent landslides and floods pose major natural risks to the Tyrian population.\nVast reserves of natural gas are estimated to lie beneath Lebanese waters, much of it off Tyre's coast, but exploitation has been delayed by border disputes with Israel.\nEtymology.\nEarly names of Tyre include Akkadian , Phoenician (), and Hebrew (). In Semitic languages, the name of the city possibly means 'rock' after the rocky formation on which the town was originally built.\nThe predominant form in Classical Greek was (), which was first seen in the works of Herodotus but may have been adopted considerably earlier. It gave rise to Latin , which entered English during the Middle English period as \"Tyre\". The demonym for Tyre is \"Tyrian\", and the inhabitants are \"Tyrians\".\nClimate.\nTyre has a Hot-summer mediterranean climate (classified as \"Csa\" under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification), characterized by six months of drought from May to October. On average, it has 300 days of sun a year and a yearly temperature of 20.8\u00b0C (69.5\u00a0\u00b0F). The average maximum temperature reaches its highest at 30.8\u00a0\u00b0C (87.5\u00a0\u00b0F) in August and the average minimum temperature its lowest at 10\u00a0\u00b0C (50\u00a0\u00b0F) in January. On average, the mean annual precipitation reaches up to 645\u00a0mm (25\u00bd\"). The temperature of the sea water reaches a minimum of 17\u00a0\u00b0C (63\u00b0F) in February and a maximum of 32\u00a0\u00b0C (90\u00b0F) in August. At a depth of 70 metres (200') it is constantly at 17\u201318\u00a0\u00b0C (63 to 64\u00b0F).\nMeanwhile, rising sea levels due to global warming threaten coastal erosion to Tyre's peninsula and bay areas.\nHistory.\nThe ancient city of Tyre is located along the coast of Phoenicia in modern Lebanon. The site has been occupied since the Bronze Age. The city became a prominent Phoenician city-state between the 9th and 6th centuries BC, settling prestigious colonies around the Mediterranean Sea, such as Carthage and Leptis Magna. It went under Persian rule in 572 BC, before being conquered by Alexander the Great in 332 BC. Monumental archaeological remains dated from the subsequent Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine, and Medieval periods led to its inscription on its archaeological remains on the UNESCO World's Heritage list in 1984.\nThe Roman historian Justin wrote that the original founders arrived from the nearby city of Sidon in the quest to establish a new harbour. The famous Greek historian Herodotus (c. 484\u2013425 BC), born in the city of Halicarnassus, visited Tyre around 450 BC at the end of the Greco-Persian Wars (499\u2013449 BC), and wrote in his \"Histories\" that according to the priests there, the city was founded 2300 years earlier (around 2750 BC), as a walled place upon the mainland, now known as \"Paleotyre\" (Old Tyre). \nThe Phoenician Tyrians' international trade network was based on its two harbours which are mentioned by ancient writers (Arrian, Anabasis, 2, 24; Strabo, Geography, 16,2,23). The northern harbour opened toward the Phoenician city of Sidon and has been therefore referred to as the \"Sidonian Harbour\" by 19th and 20th century scholars, but it was referred to as the \"Port of Astronoe\" during Late Antiquity. The southern harbour opened toward Egypt and was referred to as the \"Egyptian Harbour\". The location of the two harbours has been the subject of speculations since the 17th Century. The submarine excavation of a large, 4-6th Century BC breakwater north of the city, and the discovery of 250 BC to 500 AD harbour sediments behind this breakwater demonstrated the existence of a northern harbour repeatedly, if not permanently, throughout Antiquity under the modern harbour of Tyre. \nThe location of the southern harbour is more elusive. Renan (1864\u20131874) envisioned it as an extensive structure now located offshore, south of the former island. Subsequent diving surveys identified submerged man-made structures on the seafloor within 150 m of the former island. Antoine Poidebard, who was the first to have them explored by divers in 1939, saw in these structures former breakwaters enclosing a harbour with two entrances. The geographic area enclosed within these structures is therefore often referred to as the \"Southern Harbour\". These structures have also been interpreted as a polder-like area protecting an urban district (El-Amouri et al., 2005; Frost, 1971; Renan, 1864\u20131874). A Phoenician-style breakwater was recently found within this area, but excavation is needed to confirm its age ascription. Harbour sediments found behind the structure suggest that the breakwater was part of the Egyptian harbour. Harbour sediments found near Hiram's Tower, further north, mark an early location of the Sidonian Harbour. \nThe development of Tyre was profoundly affected by the construction of a causeway built by Alexander the Great in 332 BC to seize the city. This reportedly 750 metre (820 yard) long and 60 metre (200\u00a0ft.) wide causeway was laid over a submarine shoal less than 5.4 metres (18\u00a0ft.) deep. This shoal was interpreted as a sandbank (also called a 'salient'), formed by the accretion of sand in the lee of the island, under the effects of the refraction and diffraction of waves around the island. The causeway interrupted longshore sand transport, forcing sand to accumulate along the causeway, rapidly creating an emerged sandy isthmus (or tombolo), linking the island to the mainland.\nThis sandy isthmus rapidly inflated during the centuries following the construction of the causeway. By early Imperial Roman times, monumental buildings had been built over most of its surface. Their layout implies that the isthmus was by then nearly as wide as today. Therefore, the isthmus had completely reshaped the eastern coast of Tyre Island within 6\u201310 centuries after the construction of the causeway, spurring a radical transformation of the city.\nCoast Nature Reserve.\nTyre enjoys a reputation of having some of the cleanest beaches and waters of Lebanon. However, a UN HABITAT profile found that \"seawater is also polluted due to wastewater discharge especially in the port area\". There is still also considerable pollution by solid waste.\nThe Tyre Coast Nature Reserve (TCNR) was decreed in 1998 by the Ministry of Public Works. It is long and covers over . The TCNR is within the best preserved stretch of sandy coastline in southern Lebanon and divided into two section zones: a 1.8\u00a0km (1 mile) sand lined beach, 500 meters (yards) wide-ranging from the Tyre Rest House in the north to the Rashidieh Refugee Camp in the South, and a stretch of 2\u00a0km (1\u00bc miles) with agriculture lands of small family farms and the springs of Ras El Ain with three constantly flowing artesian wells, ranging from Rashidieh to the village of Chaetiyeh in the South.\nThe former is divided into two zones: one for tourism that features a public beach of some 900 metres (yards) and restaurant tents during the summer season hosting up to 20,000 visitors on a busy day, and another 900 metres (yards) of conservation zone as a sanctuary for sea turtles and migrating birds.\nDue to its diverse flora and fauna, the reserve was designated a Ramsar Site in 1999 according to the international treaty for the conservation and sustainable use of Wetlands, since it is considered \"the last bio-geographic ecosystem in Lebanon\". It is an important nesting site for migratory birds, the endangered Loggerhead and green sea turtle, the Arabian spiny mouse and many other creatures (including wall lizards, common pipistrelle, and European badger). Also, there are frequent sighting of dolphins in the waters off Tyre. Altogether, the TCNR includes:\n275 species distributed over 50 families. In addition, the reserve is home to seven regionally and nationally threatened species, 4 endemic and 10 rare species, whilst 59 species are restricted to the Eastern Mediterranean area. It is also worthy to indicate that, several bio-indicator species as well as 25 medicinal species were recognized. TCNR encloses flora species belonging to the various habitats: the sandy shore, rocky shore, littoral and Freshwater ecosystems. A wide number of Gramineae, Fabaceae, Asteraceae and Umbellifereae families dominate the floristic resources.\nHowever, the biodiversity of the TCNR is threatened as shown by a strong decrease in the numbers of the caspian terrapin \"Mauremys caspica\", the green toad \"Bufo viridis\" and the tree frog \"Hyla savigny\". Also, since the 2000s, the North American camphorweed \"Heterotheca subaxillaris\" has invaded the TCNR as a neophyte from Haifa across the Blue Line.\nDuring the 2006 war, turtle breeding areas were affected when the IDF bombed the conservation site.\nThe oil spill which devastated the coast north of Ashkelon in February 2021 also contaminated Tyre's beaches.\nHistorical and cultural heritage.\nArguably the most lasting Phoenician legacy for the Tyrian population has been the linguistic mark that the Syriac and Akkadian languages have left on the Arabic spoken in the region of Tyre. Most notably, the widely used term \"Ba'ali\" \u2013 which is used especially to describe vegetables and fruits from rain-fed, untreated agricultural production \u2013 originates from the Baal religion. The Tyrian municipality of Ain Baal is apparently also named after the Phoenician deity. The most visible part of ancient and medieval history on the other side have been the archaeological sites though:\nThe first archaeological excavations were by Ernest Renan in 1860 and 1861. He was followed in the 1870s by Johann Nepomuk Sepp. His most notable work was excavating at the Cathedral of the Holy Cross in an attempt to find the bones of Frederick Barbarossa. More work was undertaken in 1903 by the Greek archaeologist Theodore Makridi, curator of the Imperial Museum at Constantinople. Important findings like fragments of marble sarcophagi were sent to the Ottoman capital.\nAn archaeological survey of Tyre was done by a French team under the leadership of Denyse Le Lasseur in 1921. It was followed by another mission between 1934 and 1936 that included aerial surveys and diving expeditions. It was led by the Jesuit missionary Antoine Poidebard, a pioneer of aerial archaeology.\nLarge-scale excavations started in 1946 under the leadership of Emir Maurice Ch\u00e9hab (1904\u20131994), \"the father of modern Lebanese archaeology\" who for decades headed the Antiquities Service in Lebanon and was the curator of the National Museum of Beirut. His teams uncovered most remains in the Al Bass/Hippodrome and the City Site/Roman baths.\nDuring the 1960s, Honor Frost (1917\u20132010) \u2013 the Cyprus-born pioneer of underwater archaeology initiated several investigations \"aimed at identifying and documenting the significant archaeological potential for harbour facilities within coastal Tyre\". Based on the results, she suggested that the Al Mobarakee Tower may actually date back to Hellenistic times.\nAll those works stopped though soon after the 1975 beginning of the Civil War and many records were lost.\nIn 1984, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) declared Tyre a World Heritage Site in an attempt to halt the damage being done to the archaeological sites by the armed conflict and by anarchic urban development.\nIn the late 1980s, \"clandestine excavations\" took place in the Al-Bass cemetery, which \"flooded the antiquities market\".\nRegular excavation activities only started again in 1995 under the supervision of Ali Khalil Badawi. Shortly afterwards, an Israeli bomb destroyed an apartment block in the city and evidence for an early church was revealed underneath the rubble. Its unusual design suggests that this was the site of the Cathedral of Paulinus which had been inaugurated in 315 CE.\nIn 1997, the first Phoenician cremation cemetery was uncovered in the al-Bass site, near the Roman necropolis. Meanwhile, Honor Frost mentored local Lebanese archaeologists to conduct further underwater investigations, which in 2001 confirmed the existence of a human-made structure within the northern harbour area of Tyre.\nIn 2003, Randa Berri, president of the National Association for the Preservation of South Lebanon's Archaeology and Heritage and wife of Nabih Berri, veteran leader of the Amal Movement and longtime Speaker of the Parliament of Lebanon, patronized a plan to renovate Khan Sour / Khan Al Askaar, the former Ma'ani palace, and convert it into a museum. As of 2019, nothing was done in that regard and the ruins have kept on crumbling.\nThe hostilities of the 2006 Lebanon War put the ancient structures of Tyre at risk. This prompted UNESCO's Director-General to launch a \"Heritage Alert\" for the site. Following the cessation of hostilities in September 2006, a visit by conservation experts to Lebanon observed no direct damage to the ancient city of Tyre. However, the bombardment had damaged frescoes in a Roman funerary cave at the Tyre Necropolis. Additional site degradation was also noted, including \"the lack of maintenance, the decay of exposed structures due to lack of rainwater regulation and the decay of porous and soft stones\".\nSince 2008, a Lebanese French team under the direction by Pierre-Louis Gatier of the University of Lyon has been conducting archaeological and topographical work. When international archeological missions in Syria came to a halt after 2012 due to the war there, some of them instead started excavations in Tyre, amongst them a team headed by Leila Badre, director of the Archeological Museum of the American University of Beirut (AUB), and Belgian archaeologists.\nThreats to Tyre's ancient cultural heritage include development pressures and the illegal antiquities trade. A highway, planned for 2011, was expected to be built in areas that are deemed archaeologically sensitive. A small-scale geophysical survey indicated the presence of archaeological remains at proposed construction sites. The sites have not been investigated. Despite the relocation of a proposed traffic interchange, the lack of precise site boundaries confuses the issue of site preservation.\nA 2018 study of Mediterranean world heritage sites found that Tyre's City site has \"the highest risk of coastal erosion under current climatic conditions, in addition to 'moderate' risk from extreme sea levels.\" Further coastal inspection was conducted in 2019, leading to a new hypothesis about the local relative sea level rise and to discovery of yet unreported submerged coastal structures.\nLike many of the cities in the Levant and in Lebanon, the architecture since the Lebanese Civil War in the 1970s has been of poor quality, which tend to threaten the cultural heritage in the built environment before the war. Meanwhile, historical buildings from the Ottoman period like Khan Rabu and Khan Sour / Khan Ashkar have partly collapsed after decades of total neglect and lack of any maintenance whatsoever.\nIn 2013, the International Association to Save Tyre (IAST) made headlines when it launched an online raffle in association with Sotheby's to fund the artisans' village Les Ateliers de Tyr at the outskirts of the city. Participants could purchase tickets for 100 euros to win the 1914 \"Man in the Opera Hat\" painting by Pablo Picasso. The proceeds totaled US$5.26 million. The painting was won by a 25-year-old fire-safety official from Pennsylvania. IAST president Maha al-Khalil Chalabi is a daughter of feudal lord and politician Kazem el-Khalil. In September 2017, she opened \"Les Atelier\", which is located in the middle of an orange grove covering an area of 7.300 m2 at the northeastern outskirts of Tyre.\nDuring the 2024 Israeli invasion of Lebanon, UNESCO gave enhanced protection to 34 cultural sites in Lebanon including the Tyre archaeological sites to safeguard them from damage.\nBiblical description.\nThe city of Tyre appears in many biblical traditions:\nAstronomical objects.\nA multi-ring structured region on Europa, the smallest of the four Galilean moons orbiting Jupiter, is named after Tyre, the legendary birthplace of princess Europa. Originally called \"Tyre Macula\", it is some 140 kilometers (90 miles) in diameter (about the size of the island of Hawaii) and thought to be the site where an asteroid or comet impacted Europa's ice crust.\nThe asteroid 209 Dido is named after the legendary Tyrian-Carthaginian princess. It is a very large main-belt asteroid, classified as a C-type asteroid which is probably composed of carbonaceous materials. 209 Dido was discovered in 1879 by C. H. F. Peters.\nCultural life.\nThe first cinema in Tyre opened in the late 1930s when a caf\u00e9 owner established makeshift film screenings. Hamid Istanbouli \u2013 a fisherman by profession, who was also a traditional storyteller (\"hakawati\") and thus interested in cinema \u2013 projected films on the wall of a Turkish hammam. In 1939 the Roxy opened, followed in 1942 by the \"Empire\":\nBy the mid-1950s there were four cinemas in Tyre, and four more soon opened in nearby Nabatieh. Many also hosted live performances by famous actors and musicians, serving as community spaces where people from different backgrounds came together.\nIn 1959, the \"Cinema Rivoli of Tyre\" opened and quickly became one of the prime movie theatres of the country. According to UNIFIL, it was visited \"by celebrity who's whos of the time, including Jean Marais, Brigitte Bardot, Rushdi Abaza and Omar Hariri.\" In 1964, the \"Dunia\" opened, two years later followed by the \"Al Hamra Cinema\", which became a venue for some of the Arab world's most famous performers, like Mahmoud Darwish, Sheikh Imam, Ahmed Fouad Negm, Wadih el-Safi, and Marcel Khalife.\nMeanwhile, two Tyrian artists had a major impact on the development of Lebanese music: Halim el-Roumi (1919\u20131983) and Ghazi Kahwaji (1945\u20132017). Some sources claim that the famous musician, composer, singer and actor el-Roumi was born in Tyre to Lebanese parents. However, others suggest that he was born in Nazareth and moved to Tyre from Palestine. For some time, he worked as a teacher at the Jafariya High School there. In 1950 he became director of Radio Lebanon's music department, where he discovered the singer Fairuz and introduced her to the Rahbani brothers. Roumi composed music for and with them in close collaborations.\nKahwaji was Lebanon's first scenographer and for three decades the artistic general director for the Rahbani brothers and Fairuz. He used this prominent position to promote \"against confessionalism and fundamentalism\". Kahwaji, who was also a professor at the Lebanese University (LU) and the Saint Joseph University in Beirut, published between 2008 and 2010 the sarcastic three-volume book series \"Kahwajiyat\" about social injustice in the Arab world.\nBy then, cultural life in Tyre had been severely affected by armed conflict as well. In 1975, the commercial \"Festivals de Tyr\" \u2013 organised by Maha al-Khalil Chalabi, the daughter of feudal landlord and politician Kazem al-Khalil \u2013 were supposed to debut but stopped at the outbreak of the Civil War.\nSome cinemas were damaged by Israeli bombardment in 1982 and all of them eventually closed down, the last ones in 1989: the Hamra and the AK2000.\nIn the mid-nineties though, first the idea of a commercial Tyre International Festival was revived. It has been organised since then annually in the ancient site of the Roman hippodrome, featuring international artists like Elton John and Sarah Brightman, as well as Lebanese stars Wadih El Safi, Demis Roussos, Kadim Al-Saher, Melhem Barakat, Julia Boutros, and Majida El Roumi, the daughter of Halim el-Roumi.\nIn 2006, the \"Centre de Lecture et d'Animation Culturelle\" (C.L.A.C.) was opened by Tyre's municipality as the first public library of the city, with support from the Lebanese Ministry of Culture and the French Embassy in Beirut. It is located in the historical building of the \"Beit Daoud\" next to the \"Beit El Medina\", the former Mamluk House, in the old town.\nIn 2014, the NGO Tiro Association for Arts rehabilitated the defunct cinema Al Hamra under the leadership of \"Palestinian-Lebanese street theater performer, actor, comedian, and theater director\" (*1986). His grandfather was one of the founders of cinema in Tyre and his father used to repair cinema projectors.\nIn 2018, the Istanbouli Theatre troupe rehabilitated and moved to the Rivoli Cinema, which had been closed since 1988, to establish the non-commercial Lebanese National Theater as a free cultural space with free entrance and a special focus on training children and youth in arts. It also runs the \"Mobile Peace Bus\", which is decorated with graffiti of Lebanese cultural icons, to promote arts in the villages of the neighbouring countryside. Istanbouli has argued:\nIn Tyre, we have 400 shops for shisha, one library, and one theatre. But if there are places, people will come.\nIn 2019, the film \"Manara\" (Arabic for \"lighthouse\") by Lebanese director Zayn Alexander, who shot the movie at the Al Fanar resort in Tyre, won the Laguna Sud Award for Best Short Film at the Venice Days Strand festival.\nEducation.\nThere are many universities in Lebanon.\nThe Jafariya School was founded in 1938 by Imam Abdul Hussein Sharafeddin. It soon expanded thanks mainly to donations from rich \u00e9migr\u00e9s and thus was upgraded in 1946 to be a Secondary School, the first in Southern Lebanon (see above). It has remained one of the main schools in Tyre ever since.\nAn important role in the Tyrian education landscape is played by the charity organisation of the vanished Imam Musa al-Sadr, which has been headed since his disappearance in 1978 by his sister Rabab al-Sadr. While the foundation operates in various parts of the country, its main base is a compound on the southern entry of the Tyre peninsula close to the sea. A major focus is its Orphanages, but it also runs adult educational and vocational training programmes, especially for young women, in addition to health and development projects.\nMusa Sadr also laid the groundwork for establishing the Islamic University of Lebanon (IUL) which was finally licensed in 1996 and opened a branch on the seafront, in Tyre. Its board of trustees is dominated by representatives of the Supreme Shiite Council, founded by Sadr in 1967.\nThe Lebanese Evangelical School in Tyre with a history of more than 150 years is arguably the largest school in town. Coll\u00e8ge \u00c9lite, a French international school opened in 1996, is another one of a host of private schools in Tyre. The Cadmous College - a pre-kindergarten to grade 12 school, run by the Maronite missionaries - has about 10% Christian and 90% Muslim pupils.\nIn August 2019, the 17-year-old Ismail Ajjawi \u2013 a Palestinian resident of Tyre and graduate of the UNRWA 'Deir Yassin' High School in the El-Buss refugee camp \u2013 made global headlines when he scored top-results to earn a scholarship to study at Harvard, but was deported upon arrival in Boston despite valid visa. He was readmitted ten days later to start his studies in time.\nDemographics.\nIn 2014, Muslims made up 78.64% and Christians made up 21.02% of registered voters in Tyre. 66.29% of the voters were Shiite Muslims, 12.33% were Sunni Muslims and 12.03% were Greek Catholics.\nAn accurate statistical accounting is not possible, since the government of Lebanon has released only rough estimates of population numbers since 1932.\nThe Lebanese nationality population of Tyre is predominantly Shia Muslim with a small but noticeable Christian community. In 2010, it was estimated that Christians accounted for 15% of Tyre's population. In 2017, the Maronite Catholic Archeparchy of Tyre counted about 42,500 members. Most of them live in the mountains of Southern Lebanon, while there are just some 500 Maronites in Tyre itself. The Melkite Greek Catholic Archeparchy of Tyre \u2013 which not only covers the District of Tyre in the South Governorate but also neighbouring areas in the Nabatieh Governorate \u2013 registered 2,857 members in that year.\nRefugees.\nThe city of Tyre has become home to more than 60,000 Palestinian refugees who are mainly Sunni Muslims with some Christian families. Tyre hosted Shias from the seven villages that were depopulated in 1948, they settled in suburbs like Shabriha. As of June 2018, there were 12,281 registered persons in the Al Buss camp, 24,929 in Burj El Shimali and 34,584 in Rashidieh. In the ramshackle \"gathering\" of Jal Al Bahar next to the coastal highway, the number of residents was estimated to be around 2,500 in 2015.\nIn all camps, the number of refugees from Syria and Palestinian refugees from Syria increased in recent years. Tensions developed since these new arrivals would often accept work in the citrus and banana groves \"for half the daily wage\" that local Palestinian refugees used to earn.\nIn early 2019, some 1,500 Syrian refugees were evicted from their informal settlements around the Litani river for allegedly polluting the waters which are already heavily contaminated.\nForeign workers.\nTyre is known as \"Little West Africa\". Many families in Tyre have relatives in the Western Africa diaspora, especially in Senegal, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Ivory Coast and Nigeria. In Senegal, most immigrants originated from Tyre. Member of the Tyrian communities there are \"primarily second, third and fourth generation migrants, many of whom have never been to Lebanon.\" One of Tyre's main promenades is called \"Avenue du Senegal\".\nAs there were an estimated 250,000 foreign workers \u2013 mostly Ethiopian women \u2013 under the discriminatory Kafala system of sponsorship in Lebanon by 2019, there is also a large community of African migrants in Tyre. They are mainly Ethiopian women who work as domestic servants. Some of them celebrate church service at the Greek-Catholic Cathedral of Saint Thomas, which has devoted a chapel on its compound to Tyre-born Saint Frumentius, the first bishop of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church. In April 2014 one Ethiopian made headlines in an apparent suicide in Tyre:\nMedia reports said the woman had fled last week from her employer's home. Security forces later detained the Ethiopian and returned her to her employer\nPoverty.\nThe 2016 UN HABITAT profile found that:\nApproximate calculations suggest that 43% of Lebanese in Tyre urban area are living in poverty.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of urban Tyre mostly depends on tourism, contracting services, the construction sector, and remittances from Tyrians in the diaspora, especially in West Africa.\nUNIFIL contributes greatly to the purchasing power in the Tyrian economy as well, both through spending by its individual members as well as through \"quick-impact projects\" like gravelling road, rehabilitating public places etc.\nAs of 2016, Olive trees were reported to comprise 38% of Tyre's agricultural land, but producers lacked a collective marketing strategy. While Citrus reportedly comprised 25% of the agricultural land, 20% of its harvest ended up wasted.\nTyre houses one of the nation's major ports, though much smaller than the ports of Beirut, Tripoli, and also Sidon/Saida. Its cargo traffic has been limited to the periodical import of used cars. One day after the 2020 Beirut explosion which devastated the Port of Beirut and much of the national capital on 4 August the national government reportedly decided to use the Port of Tyre as a back-up for the Port of Tripoli.\nIn the harbour area, the Barbour family of shipbuilders continues to build wooden boats. Tyre is thus one of only a few cities in the Mediterranean that has kept this ancient tradition, although the Barbour business has been struggling to survive as well. By 2004, there were \"over 600 fishermen [..] striving to make ends meet in Tyre alone\".\nLebanon's General Directorate of Land Registry and Cadastre (GDLRC) recorded for Tyre a 4.4 percent growth rate for land transactions between 2014 and 2018, the highest rate in the country during that period. This increase in real estate prices has been largely attributed to the inflow of remittances from diaspora Tyrians.\nOff the Tyrian coast, block 9 has been awarded for deepwater drilling of natural gas to a consortium of French company TotalEnergies, Italy-based Eni, and Russian Novatek.\nSports.\nTadamon Sour Sporting Club, or simply Tadamon (meaning \"Solidarity\"), nicknamed \"The Ambassador of the South\", was founded in 1946 and is thus the historically most established football club of Tyre. They play their home matches at the Tyre Municipal Stadium and have won one Lebanese FA Cup (2000\u201301) and two Lebanese Challenge Cups (2013 and 2018). Tadamon's traditional rivals, Salam Sour Sports Club, are also based in Tyre.\nAccording to BBC reports, Tadamon SC was stripped of its Lebanese Premier League championship title in 2001 following match-fixing allegations.\nIn the same year the club scored arguably one of its biggest transfers when Roda Antar from its own youth teams was loaned to Germany's Hamburger SV for two seasons. After eight years in Germany with Hamburg, SC Freiburg and 1. FC K\u00f6ln he played another six years in the Chinese Super League and then returned to Tadamon for one final season before retirement.\nA number of Lebanese Premier League professional footballers, who have also played for the Lebanon national team, originate from Tyre, namely Rabih Ataya, and Nassar Nassar.\nTwin towns\u00a0\u2013 sister cities.\nTyre is twinned with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "30797", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30797", "title": "Tarja Halonen", "text": "Finnish politician, President of Finland (born 1943)\nTarja Kaarina Halonen (, born 24 December 1943) is a Finnish politician who served as the president of Finland, and the first and to date only woman to hold the position, from 2000 to 2012. She first rose to prominence as a lawyer with the Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions (SAK), and as the prime minister's parliamentary secretary (1974\u20131975) and a member of the City Council of Helsinki (1977\u20131996). Halonen was a Social Democratic Party member of parliament from 1979 until her election to the presidency in 2000. She also served as a minister at the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health from 1987 to 1990, as Minister of Justice from 1990 to 1991, and as Minister for Foreign Affairs from 1995 to 2000.\nHalonen was an extremely popular president, with her approval ratings reaching a peak of 88 percent in December 2003. She was re-elected in 2006, defeating National Coalition Party candidate Sauli Niinist\u00f6 in the second round by 51% to 48%. Ineligible to run in the 2012 presidential elections because of term limits, Halonen left office on 1 March 2012 and was succeeded by Niinist\u00f6.\nWidely known for her interest in human rights issues, Halonen served as the chairperson of the Finnish LGBT rights organization Seta in the 1980s, and she actively participated in the discussion of issues such as women's rights and the problems of globalization during her presidency. In 2006, she was mentioned by various commentators as a potential candidate for the United Nations Secretary-General selection, but she denied an interest at that time, stating that she wanted to finish her term as president before thinking about other career options. In 2009, \"Forbes\" named her among the 100 most powerful women in the world.\nHalonen is a member of the Council of Women World Leaders, an international network of current and former women presidents and prime ministers whose mission is to mobilize the highest-level women leaders globally for collective action on issues of critical importance to women and equitable development.\nSince the death of Martti Ahtisaari in 2023, Halonen is currently the oldest living former president of Finland.\nEarly life and career.\nTarja Halonen was born on 24 December 1943 in the district of Kallio, which at the time was a traditional working-class area in central Helsinki. Her mother Lyyli Elina Loimola was a set-dresser and her father Vieno Olavi Halonen worked as a welder. Halonen's parents married at the beginning of World War II and Tarja was born a few years later. Vieno Halonen was at the frontline during the Continuation War and Lyyli Halonen was working in a shoe factory when their daughter was born. When Halonen was two years old, her father Vieno Halonen went to the kiosk to buy a magazine and no longer returned home to his family. Halonen has not commented much on the incident since, but Halonen's parents officially divorced in 1948. Vieno Halonen was an award-winning soldier who fought in the 26th Infantry Regiment, so-called \"Ace Regiment\". Vieno Halonen was wounded three times during the war and after the war he was awarded first, second and fourth class Order of the Cross of Liberty medals. In later interviews, Tarja Halonen has said that she has met her father only a few times.\nAfter the divorce, in 1950, Lyyli Halonen married her new husband Thure Forss, who worked as an electrician and was very active in the working-class community. Both Halonen's mother and her stepfather influenced her world view extensively. Halonen later said that her mother was a true survivor, always an extremely active and resilient person who valued good, honest and modest hardworking people. When she entered politics, Halonen stated that these are also the qualities and attributes she respects in people.\nIn 1950 she began her studies in Kallio Elementary school from where she later moved to Kallio Gymnasium and finally finished her matriculation examination in 1962. She began to study Art History in the University of Helsinki in 1962 but in autumn 1963 she changed her studies to law, and obtained her Master of Laws degree in 1968 specializing in criminal law.\nShe began to work as a lawyer, already before obtaining her degree, in a credit surveillance company \"Luotonvalvonta oy\" in 1967. After working there for a few years, she was hired by the National Union of University Students in Finland to work as a Social Affairs and General Secretary from 1969 to 1970. Her work in the Union spurred her interest in politics, and in 1970 she obtained a post as a lawyer in the Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions, being the first female ever to work as a lawyer in the Union.\nPolitical career: 1970\u20132000.\nTrade unionist.\nIn 1971, Halonen joined the Social Democratic Party which had close ties with the trade unions in which she worked as a lawyer from 1970 to 1974.\nIn early 1970, she was elected to represent Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions in a committee that called for the recognition of East Germany. Later she became the Vice-President of the committee, which lobbied then-President Urho Kekkonen. During the presidential elections of 2006 she was criticized by rivals for this. She responded that the committee was formed by members from many different political parties including conservative parties. In 1973, Finland recognized both East Germany and West Germany as sovereign states.\nFirst elections.\nIn 1974, Prime Minister Kalevi Sorsa appointed Halonen as his parliamentary secretary. Sorsa later said that he wanted his parliamentary secretary to have good ties with the trade unions of Finland and have skills in jurisprudence.\nWorking in Parliament made Halonen more interested in politics and she decided to take part in the municipal elections of 1976. She was elected to the City Council of Helsinki, a position she held continuously for five terms from 1977 to 1996. Additionally in 1979, she was elected into Parliament as a representative of the Helsinki constituency. She served five full terms and less than a year of her sixth term in Parliament until her inauguration as president in 2000. In Parliament, her first formal post was as the chairman of the Social Committee, which she held from 1984 to 1987.\nMinisterial career.\nIn 1987, Halonen was appointed Minister of Social Affairs and Health by Prime Minister Harri Holkeri. Halonen held the position until 1990. In addition to this, she served as Minister for Nordic Cooperation from 1989 to 1991, the same year in which she was also appointed the chairman of the International Solidarity Foundation, a post she relinquished in 2000.\nFrom 1990 to 1991, she served as Minister of Justice, and from 1995 until her election to the presidency, she served as the Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Lipponen I Cabinet.\nPresidential campaign.\n2000 presidential campaign.\nHalonen announced in 1999 that she wished to stand as a candidate for president in the 2000 presidential elections. In the preliminary elections of the Social Democrats, Halonen ran against Pertti Paasio, a member of the European Parliament and former party chairman, and Jacob S\u00f6derman, the European Ombudsman. The incumbent, Martti Ahtisaari, refused to run in party preliminaries and thus announced that he would not run for a second term. Halonen won the preliminaries by a landslide, getting 7,800 out of 12,800 votes.\nHalonen was a surprising candidate as she did not represent many traditional values: she was known as a left-wing social democratic party member, who lived in a domestic partnership, was a single parent and had resigned from the national church. Despite starting from fourth place in the presidential election polls, in the first round of the elections, Halonen received the most votes, 40.0%. Her nearest opponent, former prime minister Esko Aho of the Centre Party, received 34.4% of votes.\nSince neither of the two candidates got over 50% of the votes, a second round was held. In the second round, Halonen narrowly defeated her opponent with 51.6% against 48.4%, thus becoming Finland's first female head of state. Her first term began on 1 March 2000.\n2006 presidential campaign.\nOn 20 May 2005, Halonen held a press conference in M\u00e4ntyniemi where she announced her willingness to run for a second term. Officially, this was the desired answer for the SDP delegation that had visited her two days earlier. In addition to her own party's support, the leader of the Left Alliance, Suvi-Anne Siimes, gave her support for Halonen's future campaign.\nSAK openly lobbied for her re-election. It used its members' money on mudslinging campaigns on behalf of Halonen. In those flyers, \"Niinist\u00f6 is presented as the horror of worker, whereas SAK-supported Halonen is like a worker's dream\". Halonen said she approved of the flyers.\nA study analyzed newspaper articles and concluded that the main newspaper \"Helsingin Sanomat\" produced almost exclusively positive tone stories about Halonen and much more negative tone articles about candidates Niinist\u00f6, Vanhanen and Hautala.\nAmerican talk show host Conan O'Brien made recurring jokes about Halonen on his show, \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\", because of his own resemblance to her. He endorsed Halonen and produced humorous mock campaign ads and attack ads against her opponents. He went as far as visiting Finland and meeting Halonen.\nOn 19 November, the SDP's party council meeting was held; praised as \"the president of the whole nation\", she was unanimously chosen as the presidential candidate. Shortly thereafter, the party council of the Left Alliance gave the party's official support to Halonen.\nHalonen's received 46% of the first round vote in the election. Sauli Niinist\u00f6 (of the National Coalition Party) was second with 24%. They faced each other in a runoff on 29 January 2006, where Halonen was re-elected with 51.8% of the vote against Mr. Niinist\u00f6's 48.2%. The re-election was a close call. She led in the advance voting, but she eventually received fewer votes on the actual voting day than Mr. Niinist\u00f6 did.\nPresidency.\nFirst term: 2000\u20132006.\nAfter her narrow election victory in the first election, Halonen's approval ratings rose and reached a peak of 88% in December 2003.\nIn a 2001 interview Halonen said that she was worried about the Russian response if NATO approved membership bids by Baltic countries. Latvian president Vaira Vike-Freiberga asked what she meant and whether Halonen is actively opposing NATO membership of Baltic countries.\nIn the \"Iraqgate\" scandal, Halonen's advisor Martti Manninen leaked confidential documents to the Centre Party leader Anneli J\u00e4\u00e4tteenm\u00e4ki, who had become prime minister. The revelations led to the resignation of J\u00e4\u00e4tteenm\u00e4ki.\nHalonen has opposed the use of landmines in Finnish military doctrine.\nHalonen has defended cluster bombs and did not sign a treaty which would have banned Finland from using these kinds of weapons.\nSecond term: 2006\u20132012.\np\nIn 2008, Halonen nominated SDP-affiliated Ritva Viljanen for a second term in the Ministry of the Interior. The government had nominated Ilkka Laitinen. Over the course of the previous 50 years, the president had only once chosen to not obey the government's consensus, leading to Halonen thusly being accused of cronyism.\nIn September 2008, Halonen was perceived as insulting Estonia by saying that the Estonians suffer from a \"post-Soviet stress condition\". President of Estonia Toomas Hendrik Ilves commented on the issue, saying that \"Estonia has never condemned, and will not condemn the foreign affairs decisions of another EU country. It will also not assess the psychiatric state of other EU countries\". In 2009, Halonen rejected calls to apologize for Finland's attitude towards Estonian independence from the Soviet Union in 1991.\nAt the end of her second term Halonen's presidency and economic views received harsh criticism from Bj\u00f6rn Wahlroos, the chairman of the two largest banks in Finland.\nPolitical views.\nEarly in her political career Halonen represented the far-left wing of the SDP. She publicly opposed the proposed free trade agreement of the European Economic Community in 1973, by signing a petition along with 500 other prominent social democrats and socialists. Otherwise she was loyal to President Kekkonen's foreign policy, which was founded on Finnish neutrality and good relations with the Soviet Union. Markku Salomaa's 2021 book \"Tarza \u2013 Pasifistin odysseia voimapolitiikan maailmassa\" states that Chancellor Angela Merkel had a very negative attitude towards Halonen, precisely because of her pro-Soviet and far-left wing world of ideas. Since 2004, rumors have been circulating on Internet that Halonen gave a May Day speech at Hakaniemi Market Square in 1976 and hoped that Finland would join the Soviet Union, saying: \"Finland would be blessed to join the Soviet Union by peaceful means. At the same time, we would get rid of the yoke of capitalism, because capitalism will die in 20 years. Finland, together with the Soviet Union, could be a pioneer towards a communist society.\" In an interview with \"STT\", Halonen herself has completely rejected the gossip, saying: \"I have not given any May Day speech in Hakaniemi in 1976, nor can the text be found in the Informant. And if a Social Democrat SAK lawyer had given such a May Day speech in the 1970s, the employment relationship would have been rather short.\"\nThroughout her political career, Halonen has described herself as a supporter of \"international solidarity\". She describes herself as a \"relative pacifist\", meaning that she does not support unilateral disarmament. She has strongly defended the President's role as the commander in chief of the military. She opposed NATO membership during her tenure. Following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, when Finnish public opinion had turned, and the Parliament had debated the issue and decided, in favor of submitting an application for NATO membership, Halonen also voiced her support on Twitter, calling the move \"a necessary measure in the changed security situation in Europe\". Her strong stands on these issues have characterised her presidential term and shaped Finnish foreign policy, in part in cooperation with the like-minded former Minister of Foreign Affairs, Erkki Tuomioja.\nHalonen has publicly supported the involvement of the Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions (SAK) in politics.\nThe Constitution of Finland and Halonen's decision to take part in some European Union meetings with the prime minister has created the so-called \"problem of two dinner plates\" in Finland. Since most other countries only have their prime ministers representing them, it was also decided in Finland that the task is reserved for the Prime Minister in most cases.\nOn 20 March 2013, Halonen publicly voiced her support for same-sex marriage.\nPersonal life.\nHalonen says her interests include art history, the theatre and swimming. She says she speaks Finnish, Swedish, and English, and is studying Estonian. Halonen had two cats during her presidential term. After they died, she was given a \"Neva Masquerade\" cat in 2013 by Russian prime minister Dmitry Medvedev.\nOn 26 August 2000, Halonen married her longtime partner, Dr. Pentti Araj\u00e4rvi, in a civil ceremony at her official residence, M\u00e4ntyniemi, after a relationship of more than fifteen years. Halonen's adult daughter Anna, and Araj\u00e4rvi's adult son Esko, acted as witnesses. Both children are from previous relationships.\nShe promotes Finland in her personal accoutrements, such as wearing a Moomin watch.\nIn the 1960s, she left the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland, to which the majority of Finns belong, to protest against its policy of taxing church members and its stance against female priests. The church has since accepted women as priests, and Halonen has stated that she has no personal reason not to return to the church but refrains from doing so in order not to give a signal that might be misinterpreted. In the 1990s, Halonen acted as the chairman of \"Suomen setlementtiliitto\", a Christian social work organization. After her presidential term, Halonen rejoined the Evangelical-Lutheran Church. According to her statements, she had previously refrained from it as it might have been considered an attempt to garner political support. Since then, Halonen has even preached publicly in a divine service of her home parish of Kallio. This is a privilege that the parish priest may grant only in exceptional cases to persons known for their Christian conviction.\nIn 1980\u20131981 Halonen served as the chairman of Seta, the main LGBT rights organization in Finland.\nCriticism.\nHalonen was criticized for her view that the COVID-19 pandemic was handled better in countries with female leaders.\nFormer Estonian president Toomas Hendrik Ilves and Finnish author Sofi Oksanen have strongly criticized Halonen for perceived unwillingness to publicly condemn Russia\u2019s hostilities in the past. Notably, after the 2008 Russian invasion of Georgia, Halonen referred to Ilves' concerns as \"post-Soviet stress\".\nIn popular culture.\nA long-running joke, which stems from the recurring segment \"Conan O'Brien Hates My Homeland\", is that American talk show host Conan O'Brien resembles Tarja Halonen. After joking about this for several months (which led to his endorsement of her campaign), O'Brien travelled to Finland, appeared on several television shows and met President Halonen. The trip was filmed and aired as a special.\nHalonen also appears as an animated character in the political satire TV series \"The Autocrats\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30801", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30801", "title": "Truso", "text": "Early Medieval trading center at the southern Baltic Sea coast\nTruso was a Viking Age port of trade (emporium) set up by the Scandinavians at the banks of the Nogat delta branch of the Vistula River, close to a bay (the modern Dru\u017cno lake), where it emptied into the shallow and brackish Vistula Lagoon. This sizeable lagoon is separated from the Gda\u0144sk Bay by the Vistula Spit at the southern Baltic Sea coast. In the 9th century, the merchant Wulfstan of Hedeby travelled to Truso in the service of the English King Alfred the Great and wrote his account of the place at a prominent location of the Amber Road, which attracted merchants from central and southern Europe, who supplied the markets in the Mediterranean and the Middle East with the highly valued commodity.\nThe account of the voyage to the town of Truso in the land of the \"Pruzzens\" around the year 890 by Wulfstan of Hedeby has been included in Alfred the Great's translation of Orosius' \"Histories\". Moreover, Wulfstan named Truso as being near \"Estmere\" (which is his rendition of the Old Prussian \"A\u012bstinmari\" and Lithuanian \"Aistmar\u0117s\" for Vistula Lagoon). In the words of Marija Gimbutas, \"the name of the town is the earliest known historically in the Baltic Sea area\".\nHistory.\nTruso was situated in a central location upon the Eastern European trade routes, which led from Birka in Sweden via Visby on the island of Gotland towards the southern Baltic Sea shore, where in the 13th century the Hanseatic city of Elbing was established. From there, trade continued further south along the Amber Road to Carnuntum in the Alps. These ancient roads led further south-west and south-east to the Black Sea and eventually to North Africa and the Middle East. Gimbutas has observed thatFor Old Prussia, Truso played the same central role as Haithabu for north-western Germany or the Slavic Vineta for Pomerania.East\u2013western trade routes lead from Truso and Wiskiauten (a rival trading centre in Old Prussia, at the south-western corner of the Courish Lagoon), along the Baltic Sea to Jutland and from there up the Slien inlet to Haithabu (Hedeby), the large trading center in Jutland. This town, located close to the modern city of Schleswig in Schleswig-Holstein, was centrally located and could be reached from all four directions over land as well as from the North Sea and the Baltic Sea.\nAround the year 890, Wulfstan of Hedeby embarked on his seven-day journey from Hedeby to Truso at the behest of king Alfred the Great. He named the lands and the coasts he had passed as the ship was travelling under sail all the way. Weonodland was on his right and Langland, Laeland, Falster and Sconey on his left, all land that is subject to Denmark.\nWulfstan resumes: Then on our left we had the land of the Burgundians, who have a king to themselves. Then, after the land of the Burgundians, we had on our left the lands that have been called from the earliest times Blekingey, and Meore, and Eowland, and Gotland, all which territory is subject to the Sweons; and Weonodland (the land of the Wends) was all the way on our right, as far as the Vistula estuary.The most sought after commodities of Truso were amber, animal furs and (pagan) slaves, while the industries of blacksmithing and amber working provided processed trading goods. The beginnings of the town has been dated back to approximately the end of the 7th century, while in the second half of the 10th century siltation in the Nogat had begun to cut off the town from the Vistula lagoon and the Baltic Sea. The town's importance as trading port began to decline and was eventually eclipsed by the ascent of Gda\u0144sk as the local trading center, that was situated right by the sea.\nHistorians still debate the motive for this expedition. King Alfred obviously needed allies in his defense against the Danish and Norwegian Vikings, who had already taken over most of England. However, that reason for the journey is rather unlikely, since Truso was at the time little more than a trading center and Alfred the Great, the West Saxon ruler, already kept in close contact with the continental Saxons and the Franks. \nArchaeology.\nFirst attempts at finding the exact location of the town date back to the early sixteenth century. Based on Prussian archaeological finds from 1897 and excavations which began in the 1920s, archaeologists located Truso near Elbing (since 1945 Jan\u00f3w Pomorski near Elbl\u0105g). Found artifacts, dating from the 7th to 12th century, were stored in the Elbing Museum, now the Elbl\u0105g Museum. In the 1980s, the Polish archaeologist Marek Jagodzi\u0144ski had resumed excavations and cleared a site of circa 20 hectare, in which a series of structures had burnt down around the year 1,000.\nTrade must have been of great importance at the settlements, as the numerous merchant graves along the river testify. Artefacts unearthed at the site include scales, weights, silver horseshoe brooches, belt buckles, swords, coins, elaborate jewelry imported from Scandinavia, garment accessories and armament components. Scandinavian traders and craftmen lived and worked in central and port area, while peripheral area might be inhabited also by Balts and Slavs. The Scandinavian influence on these settlements and artefacts is particularly obvious and confirms Viking expansion of settlement activity to Courland and Livland. As early as the 8th century, the first incursions of North Germanic groups took place, which lead to the founding of the Grobin/Seeburg settlement near Liep\u00e1ja. Archbishop Rimbert of Bremen recorded the immigration of a group under the Svea king Olaf during the 9th century. \nAuthor Gwyn Jones noted that at the circa 20 ha sized area \"no true town has been found and excavated\" and that the identification of the site in Elbl\u0105g with Truso is based on \"finds of Norse weapons\" and the presence of \"a large Viking Age cemetery\" nearby, According to Mateusz Bogucki \"by now, there is no doubt that the settlement really is Wulfstan's Truso\" The Elbl\u0105g Museum brochure: \"Truso- A Discovered Legend\", by Marek F. Jagodzi\u0144ski, describes a large number of buildings found during the recent excavations, with burnt remains of posts suggesting buildings of around and long houses of about . A thick layer of ash, debris and numerous arrowheads suggest that the city was destroyed by pirates or invaders.\nMateusz Bogucki of the Polish Academy of Sciences at the Institute of Archaeology and Ethnology, states in his book \"Coin finds in the viking Age emporium at Jan\u00f3w Pomorski (Truso) and the Prussian phenomenon\" about \"...the end of Truso as a port of trade...a strong political power, probably of Piast origin...sent warriors to try to take control...and destroyed the town.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30802", "revid": "40826289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30802", "title": "Tragedy of the commons", "text": "Self-interests causing depletion of a shared resource\nThe tragedy of the commons is the concept that, if many people enjoy unfettered access to a finite, valuable resource, such as a pasture, they will tend to overuse it and may end up destroying its value altogether. Even if some users exercised voluntary restraint, the other users would merely replace them, the predictable result being a \"tragedy\" for all. The concept has been widely discussed, and criticised, in economics, ecology and other sciences.\nThe metaphorical term is the title of a 1968 essay by ecologist Garrett Hardin. The concept itself did not originate with Hardin but rather extends back to classical antiquity, being discussed by Aristotle. The principal concern of Hardin's essay was overpopulation of the planet. To prevent the inevitable tragedy (he argued) it was necessary to reject the principle (supposedly enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights) according to which every family has a right to choose the number of its offspring, and to replace it by \"mutual coercion, mutually agreed upon\".\nSome scholars have argued that over-exploitation of the common resource is by no means inevitable, since the individuals concerned may be able to achieve mutual restraint by consensus. Others have contended that the metaphor is inapposite or inaccurate because its exemplar\u00a0\u2013 unfettered access to common land\u00a0\u2013 did not exist historically, the right to exploit common land being controlled by law. The work of Elinor Ostrom, who received the Nobel Prize in Economics, is seen by some economists as having refuted Hardin's claims. Hardin's views on over-population have been criticised as simplistic and racist.\nExpositions.\nClassical.\nThe concept of unrestricted-access resources becoming spent, where personal use does not incur personal expense, was discussed by the philosopher Aristotle, who observed in his \"Politics\" that&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLloyd's pamphlet.\nIn 1833, the English economist William Forster Lloyd published \"Two Lectures on the Checks to Population\", a pamphlet that included a hypothetical example of over-use of a common resource. This was the situation of cattle herders sharing a common parcel of land on which they were each entitled to let their cows graze.\nHe postulated that if a herder put more than his allotted number of cattle on the common, overgrazing could result. For each additional animal, a herder could receive additional benefits, while the whole group shared the resulting damage to the commons. If all herders made this individually rational economic decision, the common could be depleted or even destroyed, to the detriment of all.\nLloyd's pamphlet was written after the enclosure movement had eliminated the open field system of common property as the standard model for land exploitation in England (though there remained, and still remain, millions of acres of \"common land\": see \n). Carl Dahlman and others have asserted that his description was historically inaccurate, pointing to the fact that the system endured for hundreds of years without producing the disastrous effects claimed by Lloyd.\nGarrett Hardin's article.\nIn 1968, ecologist Garrett Hardin explored this social dilemma in his article \"The Tragedy of the Commons\", published in the journal \"Science\". The essay derived its title from the pamphlet by Lloyd, which he cites, on the over-grazing of common land.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Therein is the tragedy. Each man is locked into a system that compels him to increase his herd without limit\u00a0\u2013 in a world that is limited. Ruin is the destination toward which all men rush, each pursuing his own best interest in a society that believes in the freedom of the commons. Freedom in a commons brings ruin to all.\u2014\u200a\nHardin discussed problems that cannot be solved by technical means, as distinct from those with solutions that require \"a change only in the techniques of the natural sciences, demanding little or nothing in the way of change in human values or ideas of morality\". Hardin focused on human population growth, the use of the Earth's natural resources, and the welfare state.\nHardin argued that if individuals relied on themselves alone, and not on the relationship between society and man, then people will treat other people as resources, which would lead to the world population growing and for the process to continue. Parents breeding excessively would leave fewer descendants because they would be unable to provide for each child adequately. Such negative feedback is found in the animal kingdom. Hardin said that if the children of improvident parents starved to death, if overbreeding was its own punishment, then there would be no public interest in controlling the breeding of families.\nPolitical inferences.\nHardin blamed the welfare state for allowing the tragedy of the commons; where the state provides for children and supports over breeding as a fundamental human right, a Malthusian catastrophe is inevitable. Consequently, in his article, Hardin lamented the following proposal from the United Nations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; The Universal Declaration of Human Rights describes the family as the natural and fundamental unit of society. [Article 16] It follows that any choice and decision with regard to the size of the family must irrevocably rest with the family itself, and cannot be made by anyone else. \u2014\u200a\nIn addition, Hardin also pointed out the problem of individuals acting in rational self-interest by claiming that if all members in a group used common resources for their own gain and with no regard for others, all resources would still eventually be depleted. Overall, Hardin argued against relying on conscience as a means of policing commons, suggesting that this favors selfish individuals\u00a0\u2013 often known as free riders\u00a0\u2013 over those who are more altruistic.\nIn the context of avoiding over-exploitation of common-pool resources, Hardin concluded by restating Hegel's maxim (which was quoted by Engels), \"freedom is the recognition of necessity\". He suggested that \"freedom\" completes the tragedy of the commons. By recognizing resources as commons in the first place, and by recognizing that, as such, they require management, Hardin believed that humans \"can preserve and nurture other and more precious freedoms\".\nThe \"Commons\" as a modern resource concept.\nHardin's article marked the mainstream acceptance of the term \"commons\" as used to connote a shared resource. As Frank van Laerhoven and Elinor Ostrom have stated: \"Prior to the publication of Hardin's article on the tragedy of the commons (1968), titles containing the words 'the commons', 'common pool resources', or 'common property' were very rare in the academic literature.\" They go on to say: \"In 2002, Barrett and Mabry conducted a major survey of biologists to determine which publications in the twentieth century had become classic books or benchmark publications in biology. They report that Hardin's 1968 article was the one having the greatest career impact on biologists and is the most frequently cited\". However, the Ostroms point out that Hardin's analysis was based on crucial misconceptions about the nature of common property systems.\nSystem archetype.\nIn systems theory, the commons problem is one of the ten most common system archetypes. The Tragedy of the Commons archetype can be illustrated using a causal loop diagram.\nApplication.\nMetaphoric meaning.\nLike Lloyd and Thomas Malthus before him, Hardin was primarily interested in the problem of human population growth. But in his essay, he also focused on the use of larger (though finite) resources such as the Earth's atmosphere and oceans, as well as pointing out the \"negative commons\" of pollution (i.e., instead of dealing with the deliberate privatization of a positive resource, a \"negative commons\" deals with the deliberate commonization of a negative cost, pollution).\nAs a metaphor, the tragedy of the commons should not be taken too literally. The \"tragedy\" is not in the word's conventional or theatric sense, nor a condemnation of the processes that lead to it. Similarly, Hardin's use of \"commons\" has frequently been misunderstood, leading him to later remark that he should have titled his work \"The Tragedy of the Unregulated Commons\".\nThe metaphor illustrates the argument that free access and unrestricted demand for a finite resource ultimately reduces the resource through over-exploitation, temporarily or permanently. This occurs because the benefits of exploitation accrue to individuals or groups, each of whom is motivated to maximize the use of the resource to the point in which they become reliant on it, while the costs of the exploitation are borne by all those to whom the resource is available (which may be a wider class of individuals than those who are exploiting it). This, in turn, causes demand for the resource to increase, which causes the problem to snowball until the resource collapses (even if it retains a capacity to recover). The rate at which depletion of the resource is realized depends primarily on three factors: the number of users wanting to consume the common in question, the consumptive nature of their uses, and the relative robustness of the common.\nThe same concept is sometimes called the \"tragedy of the fishers\", because fishing too many fish before or during breeding could cause stocks to plummet.\nModern commons.\nThe \"tragedy of the commons\" can be considered in relation to environmental issues such as sustainability. The commons dilemma stands as a model for a great variety of resource problems in society today, such as water, forests, fish, and non-renewable energy sources such as oil, gas, and coal.\nHardin's model posits that the tragedy of the commons may emerge if individuals prioritize self-interest.\nAnother case study involves beavers in Canada, historically crucial for natives who, as stewards, organized to hunt them for food and commerce. Non-native trappers, motivated by fur prices, contributed to resource degradation, wresting control from the indigenous population. Conservation laws enacted in the 1930s in response to declining beaver populations led to the expulsion of trappers, legal acknowledgment of natives, and enforcement of customary laws. This intervention resulted in productive harvests by the 1950s.\nSituations exemplifying the \"tragedy of the commons\" include the overfishing and destruction of the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, the destruction of salmon runs on rivers that have been dammed (most prominently in modern times on the Columbia River in the Northwest United States and historically in North Atlantic rivers), and the devastation of the sturgeon fishery (in modern Russia, but historically in the United States as well). In terms of water supply, another example is the limited water available in arid regions (e.g., the area of the Aral Sea and the Los Angeles water system supply, especially at Mono Lake and Owens Lake).\nIn economics, an externality is a cost or benefit that affects a party who did not choose to incur that cost or benefit. Negative externalities are a well-known feature of the \"tragedy of the commons\". For example, driving cars has many negative externalities; these include pollution, carbon emissions, and traffic accidents. Every time Person A gets in a car, it becomes more likely that Person Z will suffer in each of those areas. Economists often urge the government to adopt policies that \"internalize\" an externality.\nThe \"tragedy of the commons\" can also refer to the idea of open data. Anonymised data are crucial for useful social research and represent therefore a public resource\u00a0\u2013 better said, a common good\u00a0\u2013 which is liable to exhaustion. Some feel that the law should provide a safe haven for the dissemination of research data, since it can be argued that current data protection policies overburden valuable research without mitigating realistic risks.\nAn expansive application of the concept can also be seen in Vyse's analysis of differences between countries in their responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. Vyse argues that those who defy public health recommendations can be thought of as spoiling a set of common goods, \"the economy, the healthcare system, and the very air we breathe, for all of us. In a similar vein, it has been argued that higher sickness and mortality rates from COVID-19 in individualistic cultures with less obligatory collectivism, is another instance of the \"tragedy of the commons\".\nExamples.\nGeneral examples (some alluded to by Hardin) of potential and actual tragedies include:\nClimate.\nThe effects of climate change have been given as a mass example of the tragedy of the commons. This perspective proposes that the earth, being the commons, has suffered a depletion of natural resources without regard to the externalities, the impact on neighboring and future populations. The collective actions of individuals, organisations, and governments continue to contribute to environmental degradation. Mitigation of the long-term impacts and tipping points require strict controls or other solution, but this may come as a loss to different industries. The sustainability of population and industry growth is the subject of climate change discussion. The global commons of environmental resource consumption or selfishness, as in the fossil fuel industry has been theorised as not realistically manageable. This is due to the crossing of irreversible thresholds of impact before the costs are entirely realised.\nDigital commons.\nIn the past two decades, scholars have been attempting to apply the concept of the tragedy of the commons to the digital environment. However, between scholars there are differences on some very basic notions inherent to the tragedy of the commons: the idea of finite resources and the extent of pollution. On the other hand, there seems to be some agreement on the role of the digital divide and how to solve a potential tragedy of the digital commons.\nMany digital resources have properties that make them vulnerable to the tragedy of the commons, including data, virtual artifacts and even limited user attention. Closely related are the physical computational resources, such as CPU, RAM, and network bandwidth, that digital communities on shared servers rely upon and govern. Some scholars argue that digital resources are infinite, and therefore immune to the tragedy of the commons, because downloading a file does not constitute the destruction of the file in the digital environment, and because it can be replicated and disseminated throughout the digital environment. However, it can still be considered a finite resource within the context of privacy laws and regulations that limit access to it.\nFinite digital resources can thus be digital commons. An example is a database that requires persistent maintenance, such as Wikipedia. As a non-profit, it survives on a network of people contributing to maintain a knowledge base without expectation of direct compensation. This digital resource will deplete as Wikipedia may only survive if it is contributed to and used as a commons. The motivation for individuals to contribute is reflective of the theory because, if humans act in their own immediate interest and no longer participate, then the resource becomes misinformed or depleted. Arguments surrounding the regulation and mitigation requirements for digital resources may become reflective of natural resources.\nThis raises the question whether one can view access itself as a finite resource in the context of a digital environment. Some scholars argue this point, often pointing to a proxy for access that is more concrete and measurable. One such proxy is bandwidth, which can become congested when too many people try to access the digital environment. Alternatively, one can think of the network itself as a common resource which can be exhausted through overuse. Therefore, when talking about resources running out in a digital environment, it could be more useful to think in terms of the access to the digital environment being restricted in some way; this is called information entropy.\nThere are some scholars who look only at the pollution that occurs in the digital environment itself. They argue that unrestricted use of digital resources can cause an overproduction of redundant data which causes noise and corrupts communication channels within the digital environment. Others argue that the pollution caused by the overuse of digital resources also causes pollution in the physical environment. They argue that unrestricted use of digital resources causes misinformation, fake news, crime, and terrorism, as well as problems of a different nature such as confusion, manipulation, insecurity, and loss of confidence.\nElapsed patents.\nPatents are effectively a limited-time exploitation monopoly given to inventors. Once the period has elapsed, the invention is in principle free to all, and many companies do indeed commercialize such products, now market-proven. However, around 50% of all patent applications do not reach successful commercialization at all, often due to immature levels of components or marketing failures by the innovators. Scholars have suggested that since investment is often connected to patentability, such inactive patents form a rapidly \"growing\" category of underprivileged technologies and ideas that, under current market conditions, are effectively unavailable for use. \nThus, \"Under the current system, people are encouraged to register new patents, and are discouraged from using publicly available patents.\"765 The case might be particularly relevant to technologies that are relatively more environmentally/human damaging but also somewhat costlier than other alternatives developed contemporaneously.766\nCommons dilemma.\nThe \"commons dilemma\" is a specific class of social dilemma in which people's short-term selfish interests are at odds with long-term group interests and the common good. In academia, a range of related terminology has also been used as shorthand for the theory or aspects of it, including \"resource dilemma\", \"take-some dilemma\", and \"common pool resource\".\nCommons dilemma researchers have studied conditions under which groups and communities are likely to under- or over-harvest common resources in both the laboratory and field. Research programs have concentrated on a number of motivational, strategic, and structural factors that might be conducive to management of commons.\nIn game theory, which constructs mathematical models for individuals' behavior in strategic situations, the corresponding \"game\", developed by Hardin, is known as the Commonize Costs\u00a0\u2013 Privatize Profits Game (CC\u2013PP game).\nPsychological factors.\nKopelman, Weber, &amp; Messick (2002), in a review of the experimental research on cooperation in commons dilemmas, identify nine classes of independent variables that influence cooperation in commons dilemmas: social motives, gender, payoff structure, uncertainty, power and status, group size, communication, causes, and frames. They organize these classes and distinguish between psychological individual differences (stable personality traits) and situational factors (the environment). Situational factors include both the task (social and decision structure) and the perception of the task.\nEmpirical findings support the theoretical argument that the cultural group is a critical factor that needs to be studied in the context of situational variables. Rather than behaving in line with economic incentives, people are likely to approach the decision to cooperate with an appropriateness framework. An expanded, four factor model of the Logic of Appropriateness, suggests that the cooperation is better explained by the question: \"What does a person like me (identity) do (rules) in a situation like this (recognition) given this culture (group)?\"\nStrategic factors.\nStrategic factors also matter in commons dilemmas. One often-studied strategic factor is the order in which people take harvests from the resource. In simultaneous play, all people harvest at the same time, whereas in sequential play people harvest from the pool according to a predetermined sequence\u00a0\u2013 first, second, third, etc. There is a clear order effect in the latter games: the harvests of those who come first\u00a0\u2013 the leaders\u00a0\u2013 are higher than the harvest of those coming later\u00a0\u2013 the followers. The interpretation of this effect is that the first players feel entitled to take more. With sequential play, individuals adopt a first come-first served rule, whereas with simultaneous play people may adopt an equality rule. Another strategic factor is the ability to build up reputations. Research found that people take less from the common pool in public situations than in anonymous private situations. Moreover, those who harvest less gain greater prestige and influence within their group.\nStructural factors.\nHardin stated in his analysis of the tragedy of the commons that \"Freedom in a commons brings ruin to all.\" One of the proposed solutions is to appoint a leader to regulate access to the common. Groups are more likely to endorse a leader when a common resource is being depleted and when managing a common resource is perceived as a difficult task. Groups prefer leaders who are elected, democratic, and prototypical of the group, and these leader types are more successful in enforcing cooperation. A general aversion to autocratic leadership exists, although it may be an effective solution, possibly because of the fear of power abuse and corruption.\nThe provision of rewards and punishments may also be effective in preserving common resources. Selective punishments for overuse can be effective in promoting domestic water and energy conservation\u00a0\u2013 for example, through installing water and electricity meters in houses. Selective rewards work, provided that they are open to everyone. An experimental carpool lane in the Netherlands failed because car commuters did not feel they were able to organize a carpool. The rewards do not have to be tangible. In Canada, utilities considered putting \"smiley faces\" on electricity bills of customers below the average consumption of that customer's neighborhood.\nEvolutionary biology.\nA parallel was drawn in 2006 between the tragedy of the commons and the competing behaviour of parasites that, through acting selfishly, eventually diminish or destroy their common host. The idea has also been applied to areas such as the evolution of virulence or sexual conflict, where males may fatally harm females when competing for matings.\nThe idea of evolutionary suicide, where adaptation at the level of the individual causes the whole species or population to be driven extinct, can be seen as an extreme form of an evolutionary tragedy of the commons. From an evolutionary point of view, the creation of the tragedy of the commons in pathogenic microbes may provide us with advanced therapeutic methods.\nMicrobial ecology studies have also addressed if resource availability modulates the cooperative or competitive behaviour in bacteria populations. When resources availability is high, bacterial populations become competitive and aggressive with each other, but when environmental resources are low, they tend to be cooperative and mutualistic.\nEcological studies have hypothesised that competitive forces between animals are major in high carrying capacity zones (i.e., near the Equator), where biodiversity is higher, because of natural resources abundance. This abundance or excess of resources, causes animal populations to have \"r\" reproduction strategies (many offspring, short gestation, less parental care, and a short time until sexual maturity), so competition is affordable for populations. Also, competition could select populations to have \"r\" behaviour in a positive feedback regulation.\nContrarily, in low carrying capacity zones (i.e., far from the equator), where environmental conditions are harsh, \"K\" strategies are common (longer life expectancy, produce relatively fewer offspring and tend to be altricial, requiring extensive care by parents when young) and populations tend to have cooperative or mutualistic behaviours. If populations have a competitive behaviour in hostile environmental conditions, they mostly are filtered out (die) by environmental selection; hence, populations in hostile conditions are selected to be cooperative.\nSolutions.\nArticulating solutions to the tragedy of the commons is one of the main problems of political philosophy. In some situations, locals implement (often complex) social schemes that work well. When these fail, there are many possible governmental solutions such as privatization, internalizing the externalities, and regulation.\nNon-governmental solution.\nRobert Axelrod contends that even self-interested individuals will often find ways to cooperate, because collective restraint serves both the collective and individual interests. Anthropologist G. N. Appell criticised those who cited Hardin to \"impos[e] their own economic and environmental rationality on other social systems of which they have incomplete understanding and knowledge.\"\nPolitical scientist Elinor Ostrom, who was awarded 2009's Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for her work on the issue, and others revisited Hardin's work in 1999. They found the tragedy of the commons not as prevalent or as difficult to solve as Hardin maintained, since locals have often come up with solutions to the commons problem themselves. For example, another group found that a commons in the Swiss Alps has been run by a collective of farmers there to their mutual and individual benefit since 1517, in spite of the farmers also having access to their own farmland. In general, it is in the interest of the users of a commons to keep them functioning and so complex social schemes are often invented by the users for maintaining them at optimum efficiency. Another prominent example of this is the deliberative process of granting legal personhood to a part of nature, for example rivers, with the aim of preserving their water resources and prevent environmental degradation. This process entails that a river is regarded as its own legal entity that can sue against environmental damage done to it while being represented by an independently appointed guardian advisory group. This has happened as a bottom-up process in New Zealand: Here debates initiated by the Whanganui Iwi tribe have resulted in legal personhood for the river. The river is considered as a living whole, stretching from mountain to sea and even includes not only the physical but also its metaphysical elements.\nSimilarly, geographer Douglas L. Johnson remarks that many nomadic pastoralist societies of Africa and the Middle East in fact \"balanced local stocking ratios against seasonal rangeland conditions in ways that were ecologically sound\", reflecting a desire for lower risk rather than higher profit; in spite of this, it was often the case that \"the nomad was blamed for problems that were not of his own making and were a product of alien forces.\" Independently finding precedent in the opinions of previous scholars such as Ibn Khaldun as well as common currency in antagonistic cultural attitudes towards non-sedentary peoples, governments and international organizations have made use of Hardin's work to help justify restrictions on land access and the eventual sedentarization of pastoral nomads despite its weak empirical basis. Examining relations between historically nomadic Bedouin Arabs and the Syrian state in the 20th century, Dawn Chatty notes that \"Hardin's argument was curiously accepted as the fundamental explanation for the degradation of the steppe land\" in development schemes for the arid interior of the country, downplaying the larger role of agricultural overexploitation in desertification as it melded with prevailing nationalist ideology which viewed nomads as socially backward and economically harmful.\nElinor Ostrom and her colleagues looked at how real-world communities manage communal resources, such as fisheries, land irrigation systems, and farmlands, and they identified a number of factors conducive to successful resource management. One factor is the resource itself; resources with definable boundaries (e.g. land) can be preserved much more easily. A second factor is resource dependence; there must be a perceptible threat of resource depletion, and it must be difficult to find substitutes. The third is the presence of a community; small and stable populations with a thick social network and social norms promoting conservation do better. A final condition is that there be appropriate community-based rules and procedures in place with built-in incentives for responsible use and punishments for overuse. When the commons is taken over by non-locals, those solutions can no longer be used.\nMany of the economic and social structures recommended by Ostrom coincide with the structures recommended by anarchists, particularly green anarchism. The largest contemporary societies that use these organizational strategies are the Rebel Zapatista Autonomous Municipalities and the Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria which have heavily been influenced by anarchism and other versions of libertarian and ecological socialism.\nIndividuals may act in a deliberate way to avoid consumption habits that deplete natural resources. This consciousness promotes the boycotting of products or brands and seeking alternative, more sustainable options.\nAltruistic punishment.\nVarious well-established theories, such as theory of kin selection and direct reciprocity, have limitations in explaining patterns of cooperation emerging between unrelated individuals and in non-repeatable short-term interactions. Studies have shown that punishment is an efficacious motivator for cooperation among humans.\nAltruistic punishment entails the presence of individuals that punish defectors from a cooperative agreement, although doing so is costly and provides no material gain. These punishments effectively resolve tragedy of the commons scenarios by addressing both first-order free rider problems (i.e. defectors free riding on cooperators) and second-order free rider problems (i.e. cooperators free riding on work of punishers). Such results can only be witnessed when the punishment levels are high enough.\nWhile defectors are motivated by self-interest and cooperators feel morally obliged to practice self-restraint, punishers pursue this path when their emotions are clouded by annoyance and anger at free riders.\nGovernmental solutions.\nGovernmental solutions are used when the above conditions are not met (such as a community being larger than the cohesion of its social network). Examples of government regulation include population control, privatization, regulation, and internalizing the externalities.\nHardin on population control.\nIn Hardin's essay, he proposed that the solution to the problem of overpopulation must be based on \"mutual coercion, mutually agreed upon\" and result in \"relinquishing the freedom to breed\". Hardin discussed this topic further in a 1979 book, \"Managing the Commons,\" co-written with John A. Baden. He framed this prescription in terms of needing to restrict the \"reproductive right\", to safeguard all other rights. Several countries have a variety of population control laws in place.\nIn the context of United States policy debates, Hardin advocated restrictions on migration, particularly of non-whites. In a 1991 article, he stated\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Popular anthropology came along with its dogma that all cultures are equally good, equally valuable. To say otherwise was to be narrow-minded and prejudiced, to be guilty of the sin of ethnocentrism. In time, a sort of Marxist-Hegelian dialectic took charge of our thinking: ethnocentrism was replaced by what we can only call ethnofugalism\u2014a romantic flight away from our own culture. That which was foreign and strange, particularly if persecuted, became the ideal. Black became beautiful, and prolonged bilingual education replaced naturalization. Immigration lawyers grew rich serving their clients by finding ways around the law of the land to which they (the lawyers) owe their allegiance. Idealistic religious groups, claiming loyalty to a higher power than the nation, openly shielded and transported illegal immigrants.\nPrivatization.\nOne solution for some resources is to convert common good into private property (Coase 1960), giving the new owner an incentive to enforce its sustainability. Libertarians and classical liberals cite the tragedy of the commons as an example of what happens when Lockean property rights to homestead resources are prohibited by a government. They argue that the solution to the tragedy of the commons is to allow individuals to take over the property rights of a resource, that is, to privatize it.\nIn England, this solution was attempted in the inclosure acts. According to Karl Marx in , this solution leads to increasing numbers of people being pushed into smaller and smaller pockets of common land which has yet to be privatised, thereby merely displacing and exacerbating the problem while putting an increasing number of people in precarious situations. Economic historian Bob Allen coined the term \"Engels' pause\" to describe the period from 1790 to 1840, when British working-class wages stagnated and per-capita gross domestic product expanded rapidly during a technological upheaval.\nRegulation.\nIn a typical example, governmental regulations can limit the amount of a common good that is available for use by any individual. Permit systems for extractive economic activities including mining, fishing, hunting, livestock raising, and timber extraction are examples of this approach. Similarly, limits to pollution are examples of governmental intervention on behalf of the commons. This idea is used by the United Nations Moon Treaty, Outer Space Treaty and Law of the Sea Treaty as well as the UNESCO World Heritage Convention (treaty) which involves the international law principle that designates some areas or resources the Common Heritage of Mankind.\nGerman historian Joachim Radkau thought Hardin advocates strict management of common goods via increased government involvement or international regulation bodies. An asserted impending \"tragedy of the commons\" is frequently warned of as a consequence of the adoption of policies which restrict private property and espouse expansion of public property.\nGiving legal rights of personhood to objects in nature is another proposed solution. The idea of giving land a legal personality is intended to enable the democratic system of the rule of law to allow for prosecution, sanction, and reparation for damage to the earth. For example, this has been put into practice in Ecuador in the form of a constitutional principle known as \"Pacha Mama\" (Mother Earth).\nInternalizing externalities.\nPrivatization works when the person who owns the property (or rights of access to that property) pays the full price of its exploitation. As discussed above negative externalities (negative results, such as air or water pollution, that do not proportionately affect the user of the resource) is often a feature driving the tragedy of the commons. \"Internalizing the externalities\", in other words ensuring that the users of resource pay for all of the consequences of its use, can provide an alternate solution between privatization and regulation. One example is gasoline taxes which are intended to include both the cost of road maintenance and of air pollution. This solution can provide the flexibility of privatization while minimizing the amount of government oversight and overhead that is needed.\nThe mid-way solution.\nOne of the significant actions areas which can dwell as potential solution is to have co-shared communities that have partial ownership from governmental side and partial ownership from the community. Ownership here refers to common use of the resource, allowing all players to plan and supervise use and mutually benefit, which ensure that power is not held in one or two hands only. Since involvement of multiple stakeholders is necessary, responsibilities can be shared across them based on their abilities and capacities.\nTragedy of digital commons solutions.\nScholars disagree on the particularities underlying the tragedy of the digital commons; however, there does seem to be some agreement on the cause and the solution. The cause of the tragedy of the commons occurring in the digital environment is attributed by some scholars to the digital divide. They argue that there is too large a focus on bridging this divide and providing unrestricted access to everyone. Such a focus on increasing access without the necessary restrictions causes the exploitation of digital resources for individual self-interest that is underlying any tragedy of the commons.\nIn terms of the solution, scholars agree that cooperation rather than regulation is the best way to mitigate a tragedy of the digital commons. The digital world is not a closed system in which a central authority can regulate the users, as such some scholars argue that voluntary cooperation must be fostered. This could perhaps be done through digital governance structure that motivates multiple stakeholders to engage and collaborate in the decision-making process. Other scholars argue more in favor of formal or informal sets of rules, like a code of conduct, to promote ethical behaviour in the digital environment and foster trust. Alternative to managing relations between people, some scholars argue that it is access itself that needs to be properly managed, which includes expansion of network capacity.\nCriticism.\nCommons in historical reality.\nThe status of common land in England as mentioned in Lloyd's pamphlet has been widely misunderstood.\nMillions of acres were \"common land\", but this did not mean public land open to everybody, a popular fallacy. There was no such thing as ownerless land. Every parcel of \"common\" land had a legal owner, who was a private person or corporation. The owner was called the \"lord of the manor\" (which, like \"landlord\", was a legal term denoting ownership, not aristocratic status).\nIt was true that there were local people, called \"commoners\", defined as those who had a legal right to use his land for some purpose of their own, typically grazing their animals. Certainly their rights were strong, because the lord was not entitled to build on his own land, or fence off any part of it, unless he could prove he had left enough pasture for the commoners. But these individuals were not the general public at large: not everyone in the vicinity was a commoner.\nFurthermore the commoners' right to graze the lord's land with their animals was restricted by law \u2013 precisely in order to prevent overgrazing. If overgrazing did nevertheless occur, which it sometimes did, it was because of incompetent or weak land management, and not because of the pressure of an unlimited right to graze, which did not exist.\nHence Christopher Rodgers said that \"Hardin's influential thesis on the 'tragedy of the commons' ... has no application to common land in England and Wales. It is based on a false premise\". Rodgers, professor of law at Newcastle University, added:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Far from suffering a tragedy of the commons in Hardin's sense, common land\u00a0... was subject to common law principles of customary origin that promoted 'sustainable management'. These were expressed through property rights, in the form of qualifications on the resource use conferred by property entitlements, and were administered by local manor courts\u00a0... Moreover, the administration of customary rules by the manor courts represented a wholly different means for organising the management of common resources than the model posited by Hardin, which stresses the need for exclusive ownership by either individuals or government in order to promote the effective management of the resource.\nEvery productive unit (\"manor\") had a manorial court; without it, the manor ceased to exist. Manorial courts could fine commoners, and the lord of the manor for that matter, for breaches of customary law, e.g. grazing too many cattle on the land. Customary law varied locally. It could not be altered without the consent of the whole body of the commoners, except by getting an Act of Parliament.\nBy the time of Lloyd's pamphlet (1833) the majority of land in England had been enclosed and had ceased to be common land. That which remained may not have been good agricultural land anyway, or the best managed. Lloyd takes for granted that common lands were inferior and argues his over-grazing theory to explain it. He does not examine other possible causes e.g. common land was difficult to drain, to keep disease-free, and to use for improved cattle breeding.\nLikewise, Susan Jane Buck Cox argues that the common land example used to argue this economic concept is on very weak historical ground, and misrepresents what she terms was actually the \"triumph of the commons\": the successful common usage of land for many centuries. She argues that social changes and agricultural innovation, and not the behaviour of the commoners, led to the demise of the commons. In a similar vein, Carl Dahlman argues that commons were effectively managed to prevent overgrazing.\nOthers.\nHardin's work is criticised as historically inaccurate in failing to account for the demographic transition, and for failing to distinguish between common-pool resources and open access resources. Radical environmentalist Derrick Jensen claims the tragedy of the commons is used as propaganda for private ownership. He says it has been used by the political right wing to hasten the final enclosure of the \"common resources\" of third world and indigenous people worldwide, as a part of the Washington Consensus. He argues that in true situations, those who abuse the commons would have been warned to desist and if they failed would have punitive sanctions against them. He says that rather than being called \"The Tragedy of the Commons\", it should be called \"the Tragedy of the Failure of the Commons\".\nMarxist geographer David Harvey has a similar criticism: \"The dispossession of indigenous populations in North America by 'productive' colonists, for instance, was justified because indigenous populations did not produce value\", asking: \"Why, for instance, do we not focus in Hardin's metaphor on the individual ownership of the cattle rather than on the pasture as a common?\"\nSome authors, like Yochai Benkler, say that with the rise of the Internet and digitalisation, an economics system based on commons becomes possible again. He wrote in his book \"The Wealth of Networks\" in 2006 that cheap computing power plus networks enable people to produce valuable products through non-commercial processes of interaction: \"as human beings and as social beings, rather than as market actors through the price system\". He uses the term \"networked information economy\" to refer to a \"system of production, distribution, and consumption of information goods characterized by decentralized individual action carried out through widely distributed, nonmarket means that do not depend on market strategies\". He also coined the term \"commons-based peer production\" for collaborative efforts based on sharing information. Examples of commons-based peer production are Wikipedia, free and open source software and open-source hardware.\nThe tragedy of the commons has served as a pretext for powerful private companies and/or governments to introduce regulatory agents or outsourcing on less powerful entities or governments, for the exploitation of their natural resources. Powerful companies and governments can easily corrupt and bribe less powerful institutions or governments, to allow them exploit or privatize their resources, which causes more concentration of power and wealth in powerful entities. This phenomenon is known as the resource curse.\nOther criticisms have focused on Hardin's racist and eugenicist views, claiming that his arguments are directed towards forcible population control, particularly for people of color.\nComedy of the commons.\nIn certain cases, exploiting a resource more may be a good thing. Carol M. Rose, in a 1986 article, discussed the concept of the \"comedy of the commons\", where the public property in question exhibits \"increasing returns to scale\" in usage (hence the phrase, \"the more the merrier\"), in that the more people use the resource, the higher the benefit to each one. Rose cites as examples commerce and group recreational activities. According to Rose, public resources with the \"comedic\" characteristic may suffer from under-investment rather than over usage.\nA modern example presented by Garrett Richards in environmental studies is that the issue of excessive carbon emissions can be tackled effectively only when the efforts are directly addressing the issues along with the collective efforts from the world economies. Additionally, the more that nations are willing to collaborate and contribute resources, the higher the chances are for successful technological developments.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30804", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30804", "title": "The Boston Herald", "text": ""}
{"id": "30805", "revid": "49500661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30805", "title": "Tape bias", "text": "Technique that improves the fidelity of analogue tape recorders\nTape bias is the term for two techniques, AC bias and DC bias, that improve the fidelity of analogue tape recorders. DC bias is the addition of direct current to the audio signal that is being recorded. AC bias is the addition of an inaudible high-frequency signal (generally from 40 to 150\u00a0kHz) to the audio signal. Most contemporary tape recorders use AC bias.\nWhen recording, magnetic tape has a nonlinear response as determined by its coercivity. Without bias, this response results in poor performance, especially at low signal levels. A recording signal that generates a magnetic field strength less than the tape's coercivity cannot magnetise the tape and produces little playback signal. Bias increases the signal quality of most audio recordings significantly by pushing the signal into more linear zones of the tape's magnetic transfer function.\nHistory.\nMagnetic recording was proposed as early as 1878 by Oberlin Smith, who on 4 October 1878 filed, with the U.S. patent office, a caveat regarding the magnetic recording of sound and who published his ideas on the subject in the 8 September 1888 issue of \"The Electrical World\" as \"Some possible forms of phonograph\". By 1898, Valdemar Poulsen had demonstrated a magnetic recorder and proposed magnetic tape. Fritz Pfleumer was granted a German patent for a non-magnetic \"Sound recording carrier\" with a magnetic coating, on 1 January 1928. Years earlier, Joseph O'Neil had created a similar recording medium, yet had not made a working machine that could record sound.\nDC bias.\nThe earliest magnetic recording systems simply applied the unadulterated (baseband) input signal to a recording head, resulting in recordings with poor low-frequency response and high distortion. Within short order, the addition of a suitable direct current to the signal, a DC bias, was found to reduce distortion by operating the tape substantially within its linear-response region. The principal disadvantage of DC bias was that it left the tape with a net magnetization, which generated significant noise on replay because of the grain of the tape particles. However: the earlier wire recorders were largely immune to the problem due to their high running speed and relatively large wire size. Some early DC-bias systems used a permanent magnet that was placed near the record head. It had to be swung out of the way for replay. DC bias was replaced by AC bias but was later re-adopted by some very low-cost cassette recorders.\nAC bias.\nThe original patent for AC bias was filed by Wendell L. Carlson and Glenn L. Carpenter in 1921, eventually resulting in a patent in 1927. The value of AC bias was somewhat masked by the fact that wire recording gained little benefit from the technique and Carlson and Carpenter's achievement was largely ignored. The first rediscovery seems to have been by Dean Wooldridge at Bell Telephone Laboratories, around 1937, but their lawyers found the original patent, and Bell simply kept silent about their rediscovery of AC bias.\nTeiji Igarashi, Makoto Ishikawa, and Kenzo Nagai of Japan published a paper on AC biasing in 1938 and received a Japanese patent in 1940. Marvin Camras (USA) also rediscovered high-frequency (AC) bias independently in 1941 and received a patent in 1944.\nThe reduction in distortion and noise provided by AC bias was accidentally rediscovered in 1940 by Walter Weber while working at the Reichs-Rundfunk-Gesellschaft (RRG) when a DC-biased Magnetophon that he had been working on developed an 'unwanted' oscillation in its record circuitry. \nThe last production DC biased Magnetophon machines had harmonic distortion in excess of 10 percent; a dynamic range of 40\u00a0dB and a frequency response of just 50\u00a0Hz to 6\u00a0kHz at a tape speed slightly in excess of 30 inches per second (76.8\u00a0cm/sec). The AC biased Magnetophon machines reduced the harmonic distortion to well under 3 percent; extended the dynamic range to 65\u00a0dB and the frequency response was now from 40\u00a0Hz to 15\u00a0kHz at the same tape speed. These AC biased magnetophons provided a fidelity of recording that outperformed any other recording system of the time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30806", "revid": "3736169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30806", "title": "Tree (abstract data type)", "text": "Linked node hierarchical data structure\nIn computer science, a tree is a widely used abstract data type that represents a hierarchical tree structure with a set of connected nodes. Each node in the tree can be connected to many children (depending on the type of tree), but must be connected to exactly one parent, except for the \"root\" node, which has no parent (i.e., the root node as the top-most node in the tree hierarchy). These constraints mean there are no cycles or \"loops\" (no node can be its own ancestor), and also that each child can be treated like the root node of its own subtree, making recursion a useful technique for tree traversal. In contrast to linear data structures, many trees cannot be represented by relationships between neighboring nodes (parent and children nodes of a node under consideration, if they exist) in a single straight line (called edge or link between two adjacent nodes).\nBinary trees are a commonly used type, which constrain the number of children for each parent to at most two. When the order of the children is specified, this data structure corresponds to an ordered tree in graph theory. A value or pointer to other data may be associated with every node in the tree, or sometimes only with the \"leaf nodes\", which have no children nodes.\nThe abstract data type (ADT) can be represented in a number of ways, including a list of parents with pointers to children, a list of children with pointers to parents, or a list of nodes and a separate list of parent-child relations (a specific type of adjacency list). Representations might also be more complicated, for example using indexes or ancestor lists for performance.\nTrees as used in computing are similar to but can be different from mathematical constructs of trees in graph theory, trees in set theory, and trees in descriptive set theory.\nTerminology.\nA node is a structure which may contain data and connections to other nodes, sometimes called edges or links. Each node in a tree has zero or more child nodes, which are below it in the tree (by convention, trees are drawn with \"descendants\" going downwards). A node that has a child is called the child's parent node (or superior). All nodes have exactly one parent, except the topmost root node, which has none. A node might have many ancestor nodes, such as the parent's parent. Child nodes with the same parent are sibling nodes. Typically siblings have an order, with the first one conventionally drawn on the left. Some definitions allow a tree to have no nodes at all, in which case it is called \"empty\".\nAn internal node (also known as an inner node, inode for short, or branch node) is any node of a tree that has child nodes. Similarly, an external node (also known as an outer node, leaf node, or terminal node) is any node that does not have child nodes.\nThe height of a node is the length of the longest downward path to a leaf from that node. The height of the root is the height of the tree. The depth of a node is the length of the path to its root (i.e., its \"root path\"). Thus the root node has depth zero, leaf nodes have height zero, and a tree with only a single node (hence both a root and leaf) has depth and height zero. Conventionally, an empty tree (tree with no nodes, if such are allowed) has height \u22121.\nEach non-root node can be treated as the root node of its own subtree, which includes that node and all its descendants.\nOther terms used with trees:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Glossary/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCommon operations.\nTraversal and search methods.\nStepping through the items of a tree, by means of the connections between parents and children, is called walking the tree, and the action is a \"walk\" of the tree. Often, an operation might be performed when a pointer arrives at a particular node. A walk in which each parent node is traversed before its children is called a pre-order walk; a walk in which the children are traversed before their respective parents are traversed is called a post-order walk; a walk in which a node's left subtree, then the node itself, and finally its right subtree are traversed is called an in-order traversal. (This last scenario, referring to exactly two subtrees, a left subtree and a right subtree, assumes specifically a binary tree.) A level-order walk effectively performs a breadth-first search over the entirety of a tree; nodes are traversed level by level, where the root node is visited first, followed by its direct child nodes and their siblings, followed by its grandchild nodes and their siblings, etc., until all nodes in the tree have been traversed.\nRepresentations.\nThere are many different ways to represent trees. In working memory, nodes are typically dynamically allocated records with pointers to their children, their parents, or both, as well as any associated data. If of a fixed size, the nodes might be stored in a list. Nodes and relationships between nodes might be stored in a separate special type of adjacency list. In relational databases, nodes are typically represented as table rows, with indexed row IDs facilitating pointers between parents and children.\nNodes can also be stored as items in an array, with relationships between them determined by their positions in the array (as in a binary heap).\nA binary tree can be implemented as a list of lists: the head of a list (the value of the first term) is the left child (subtree), while the tail (the list of second and subsequent terms) is the right child (subtree). This can be modified to allow values as well, as in Lisp S-expressions, where the head (value of first term) is the value of the node, the head of the tail (value of second term) is the left child, and the tail of the tail (list of third and subsequent terms) is the right child.\nOrdered trees can be naturally encoded by finite sequences, for example with natural numbers.\nType theory.\nAs an abstract data type, the abstract tree type T with values of some type E is defined, using the abstract forest type F (list of trees), by the functions:\n value: T \u2192 E\n children: T \u2192 F\n nil: () \u2192 F\n node: E \u00d7 F \u2192 T\nwith the axioms:\n value(node(e, f)) = e\n children(node(e, f)) = f\nIn terms of type theory, a tree is an inductive type defined by the constructors nil (empty forest) and node (tree with root node with given value and children).\nMathematical terminology.\nViewed as a whole, a tree data structure is an ordered tree, generally with values attached to each node. Concretely, it is (if required to be non-empty):\nOften trees have a fixed (more properly, bounded) branching factor (outdegree), particularly always having two child nodes (possibly empty, hence \"at most\" two \"non-empty\" child nodes), hence a \"binary tree\".\nAllowing empty trees makes some definitions simpler, some more complicated: a rooted tree must be non-empty, hence if empty trees are allowed the above definition instead becomes \"an empty tree or a rooted tree such that ...\". On the other hand, empty trees simplify defining fixed branching factor: with empty trees allowed, a binary tree is a tree such that every node has exactly two children, each of which is a tree (possibly empty).\nApplications.\nTrees are commonly used to represent or manipulate hierarchical data in applications such as:\nTrees can be used to represent and manipulate various mathematical structures, such as:\nTree structures are often used for mapping the relationships between things, such as:\nJSON and YAML documents can be thought of as trees, but are typically represented by nested lists and dictionaries.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30807", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30807", "title": "Tangent space", "text": "Assignment of vector fields to manifolds\nIn mathematics, the tangent space of a manifold is a generalization of tangent lines to curves in two-dimensional space and tangent planes to surfaces in three-dimensional space in higher dimensions. In the context of physics, the tangent space to a manifold at a point can be viewed as the space of possible velocities for a particle moving on the manifold.\nInformal description.\nIn differential geometry, one can attach to every point formula_1 of a differentiable manifold a \"tangent space\"\u2014a real vector space that intuitively contains the possible directions in which one can tangentially pass through formula_1. The elements of the tangent space at formula_1 are called the \"tangent vectors\" at formula_1. This is a generalization of the notion of a vector, based at a given initial point, in a Euclidean space. The dimension of the tangent space at every point of a connected manifold is the same as that of the manifold itself.\nFor example, if the given manifold is a formula_5-sphere, then one can picture the tangent space at a point as the plane that touches the sphere at that point and is perpendicular to the sphere's radius through the point. More generally, if a given manifold is thought of as an embedded submanifold of Euclidean space, then one can picture a tangent space in this literal fashion. This was the traditional approach toward defining parallel transport. Many authors in differential geometry and general relativity use it. More strictly, this defines an affine tangent space, which is distinct from the space of tangent vectors described by modern terminology.\nIn algebraic geometry, in contrast, there is an intrinsic definition of the \"tangent space at a point\" of an algebraic variety formula_6 that gives a vector space with dimension at least that of formula_6 itself. The points formula_8 at which the dimension of the tangent space is exactly that of formula_6 are called \"non-singular\" points; the others are called \"singular\" points. For example, a curve that crosses itself does not have a unique tangent line at that point. The singular points of formula_6 are those where the \"test to be a manifold\" fails. See Zariski tangent space.\nOnce the tangent spaces of a manifold have been introduced, one can define vector fields, which are abstractions of the velocity field of particles moving in space. A vector field attaches to every point of the manifold a vector from the tangent space at that point, in a smooth manner. Such a vector field serves to define a generalized ordinary differential equation on a manifold: A solution to such a differential equation is a differentiable curve on the manifold whose derivative at any point is equal to the tangent vector attached to that point by the vector field.\nAll the tangent spaces of a manifold may be \"glued together\" to form a new differentiable manifold with twice the dimension of the original manifold, called the \"tangent bundle\" of the manifold.\nFormal definitions.\nThe informal description above relies on a manifold's ability to be embedded into an ambient vector space formula_11 so that the tangent vectors can \"stick out\" of the manifold into the ambient space. However, it is more convenient to define the notion of a tangent space based solely on the manifold itself.\nThere are various equivalent ways of defining the tangent spaces of a manifold. While the definition via the velocity of curves is intuitively the simplest, it is also the most cumbersome to work with. More elegant and abstract approaches are described below.\nDefinition via tangent curves.\nIn the embedded-manifold picture, a tangent vector at a point formula_1 is thought of as the \"velocity\" of a curve passing through the point formula_1. We can therefore define a tangent vector as an equivalence class of curves passing through formula_1 while being tangent to each other at formula_1.\nSuppose that formula_16 is a formula_17 differentiable manifold (with smoothness formula_18) and that formula_19. Pick a coordinate chart formula_20, where formula_21 is an open subset of formula_16 containing formula_1. Suppose further that two curves formula_24 with formula_25 are given such that both formula_26 are differentiable in the ordinary sense (we call these \"differentiable curves initialized at formula_1\"). Then formula_28 and formula_29 are said to be \"equivalent\" at formula_30 if and only if the derivatives of formula_31 and formula_32 at formula_30 coincide. This defines an equivalence relation on the set of all differentiable curves initialized at formula_1, and equivalence classes of such curves are known as \"tangent vectors\" of formula_16 at formula_1. The equivalence class of any such curve formula_37 is denoted by formula_38. The \"tangent space\" of formula_16 at formula_1, denoted by formula_41, is then defined as the set of all tangent vectors at formula_1; it does not depend on the choice of coordinate chart formula_20.\nTo define vector-space operations on formula_41, we use a chart formula_20 and define a map formula_46 by formula_47 where formula_48. The map formula_49 turns out to be bijective and may be used to transfer the vector-space operations on formula_50 over to formula_41, thus turning the latter set into an formula_52-dimensional real vector space. Again, one needs to check that this construction does not depend on the particular chart formula_20 and the curve formula_37 being used, and in fact it does not.\nDefinition via derivations.\nSuppose now that formula_16 is a formula_56 manifold. A real-valued function formula_57 is said to belong to formula_58 if and only if for every coordinate chart formula_20, the map formula_60 is infinitely differentiable. Note that formula_58 is a real associative algebra with respect to the pointwise product and sum of functions and scalar multiplication.\nA \"derivation\" at formula_19 is defined as a linear map formula_63 that satisfies the Leibniz identity\nformula_64\nwhich is modeled on the product rule of calculus.\n(For every identically constant function formula_65 it follows that formula_66).\nDenote formula_41 the set of all derivations at formula_68 Setting\nturns formula_41 into a vector space.\nGeneralizations.\nGeneralizations of this definition are possible, for instance, to complex manifolds and algebraic varieties. However, instead of examining derivations formula_72 from the full algebra of functions, one must instead work at the level of germs of functions. The reason for this is that the structure sheaf may not be fine for such structures. For example, let formula_73 be an algebraic variety with structure sheaf formula_74. Then the Zariski tangent space at a point formula_75 is the collection of all formula_76-derivations formula_77, where formula_76 is the ground field and formula_79 is the stalk of formula_74 at formula_8.\nEquivalence of the definitions.\nFor formula_82 and a differentiable curve formula_83 such that formula_84 define formula_85 (where the derivative is taken in the ordinary sense because formula_86 is a function from formula_87 to formula_88). One can ascertain that formula_89 is a derivation at the point formula_90 and that equivalent curves yield the same derivation. Thus, for an equivalence class formula_91 we can define formula_92 where the curve formula_48 has been chosen arbitrarily. The map formula_94 is a vector space isomorphism between the space of the equivalence classes formula_38 and the space of derivations at the point formula_96\nDefinition via cotangent spaces.\nAgain, we start with a formula_97 manifold formula_16 and a point formula_19. Consider the ideal formula_100 of formula_101 that consists of all smooth functions formula_102 vanishing at formula_1, i.e., formula_104. Then formula_100 and formula_106 are both real vector spaces, and the quotient space formula_107 can be shown to be isomorphic to the cotangent space formula_108 through the use of Taylor's theorem. The tangent space formula_109 may then be defined as the dual space of formula_107.\nWhile this definition is the most abstract, it is also the one that is most easily transferable to other settings, for instance, to the varieties considered in algebraic geometry.\nIf formula_72 is a derivation at formula_1, then formula_113 for every formula_114, which means that formula_72 gives rise to a linear map formula_116. Conversely, if formula_117 is a linear map, then formula_118 defines a derivation at formula_1. This yields an equivalence between tangent spaces defined via derivations and tangent spaces defined via cotangent spaces.\nProperties.\nIf formula_16 is an open subset of formula_50, then formula_16 is a formula_56 manifold in a natural manner (take coordinate charts to be identity maps on open subsets of formula_50), and the tangent spaces are all naturally identified with formula_50.\nTangent vectors as directional derivatives.\nAnother way to think about tangent vectors is as directional derivatives. Given a vector formula_126 in formula_50, one defines the corresponding directional derivative at a point formula_128 by\nformula_129\nThis map is naturally a derivation at formula_1. Furthermore, every derivation at a point in formula_50 is of this form. Hence, there is a one-to-one correspondence between vectors (thought of as tangent vectors at a point) and derivations at a point.\nAs tangent vectors to a general manifold at a point can be defined as derivations at that point, it is natural to think of them as directional derivatives. Specifically, if formula_126 is a tangent vector to formula_16 at a point formula_1 (thought of as a derivation), then define the directional derivative formula_135 in the direction formula_126 by\nformula_137\nIf we think of formula_126 as the initial velocity of a differentiable curve formula_37 initialized at formula_1, i.e., formula_141, then instead, define formula_135 by\nformula_143\nBasis of the tangent space at a point.\nFor a formula_56 manifold formula_16, if a chart formula_146 is given with formula_147, then one can define an ordered basis formula_148 of formula_149 by\nformula_150\nThen for every tangent vector formula_151, one has\nformula_152\nThis formula therefore expresses formula_126 as a linear combination of the basis tangent vectors formula_154 defined by the coordinate chart formula_20.\nThe derivative of a map.\nEvery smooth (or differentiable) map formula_156 between smooth (or differentiable) manifolds induces natural linear maps between their corresponding tangent spaces:\nformula_157\nIf the tangent space is defined via differentiable curves, then this map is defined by\nformula_158\nIf, instead, the tangent space is defined via derivations, then this map is defined by\nformula_159\nThe linear map formula_49 is called variously the \"derivative\", \"total derivative\", \"differential\", or \"pushforward\" of formula_161 at formula_1. It is frequently expressed using a variety of other notations:\nformula_163\nIn a sense, the derivative is the best linear approximation to formula_161 near formula_1. Note that when formula_166, then the map formula_167 coincides with the usual notion of the differential of the function formula_161. In local coordinates the derivative of formula_161 is given by the Jacobian.\nAn important result regarding the derivative map is the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014If formula_156 is a local diffeomorphism at formula_1 in formula_16, then formula_173 is a linear isomorphism. Conversely, if formula_174 is continuously differentiable and formula_175 is an isomorphism, then there is an open neighborhood formula_21 of formula_1 such that formula_161 maps formula_21 diffeomorphically onto its image.\nThis is a generalization of the inverse function theorem to maps between manifolds."}
{"id": "30808", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30808", "title": "Tao", "text": "Philosophical concept native to China\nThe Tao or Dao (Chinese: \u9053; pinyin: \"d\u00e0o\"; Jyutping: \"dou6\") is the source and fundamental principle of the universe, primarily as conceived in East Asian philosophy and religions. The concept is represented by the Chinese character , which has meanings including 'way', 'path', 'road', and sometimes 'doctrine' or 'principle'.\nAccording to \"Tao Te Ching\", Tao is self-existent, formless, eternal, omnipresent, and is the source of all existence. While all phenomena in the universe change continuously, Tao, as the source of all, remains motionless and changeless intrinsically :\nThere is something undifferentiated and yet complete.&lt;br&gt;\nWhich existed before heaven and earth.&lt;br&gt;\nSoundless and formless.&lt;br&gt;\nIt depends on nothing and does not change.&lt;br&gt;\nIt operates everywhere and is free from danger.&lt;br&gt;\nIt may be considered the Mother of the universe.&lt;br&gt;\nI do not know its name; I call it Tao.&lt;br&gt;\n \u2501\u2501\u2501 from Chapter 25 of Tao Teh Ching \nTao is also described as invisible, intangible, and beyond intellectual understanding, as it is written in \"Tao Te Ching\" :\nWe look at it, and we do not see it, and we name it 'the Equable.'&lt;br&gt;\nWe listen to it, and we do not hear it, and we name it 'the Inaudible.'&lt;br&gt;\nWe try to grasp it, and do not get hold of it, and we name it 'the Subtle.'&lt;br&gt;\nWith these three qualities, it cannot be made the subject of description;&lt;br&gt;\nand hence we blend them together and obtain The One.\n \u2501\u2501\u2501 from Chapter 14 of Tao Teh Ching \nOther chapters of \"Tao Te Ching\", as well as other Taoist scriptures such as \"Ultra Supreme Elder Lord's Ultra Plainness Scripture\", and \"The Wonderful Scripture on the Constant Purity and Tranquility Spoken by the Ultra Supreme Elder Lord\", etc., reiterate that Tao is formless, invisible, omnipresent, and is the source of all.\nBased on these descriptions, Tao is considered to be the Absolute Truth independent of any conditions, and the Ultimate Reality behind all phenomena. It is the underlying natural order of the universe whose ultimate essence is difficult to circumscribe because it is non-conceptual yet evident in one's being of aliveness.\nPersonification of Tao.\nIn \"Tao Te Ching\", Tao is often described as a feminine concept or figure. For example, in some chapters, Tao is described as the Mother of the universe who gives birth to all existence and sustains them, while in some other chapters, the practice of adhering to Tao is called \"keeping to the Mother\", \"keeping to the Feminine\" or \"being fed by the Mother\".\nAdditionally, some ancient Chinese classics describe a supreme goddess considered an embodiment of Tao, known as Holy Mother the Original Lord (\u8056\u6bcd\u5143\u541b), Ultimate One Original Lord (\u592a\u4e00\u5143\u541b), Uncreated Original Empress (\u5148\u5929\u5143\u540e), Supreme Original Lord (\u7121\u4e0a\u5143\u541b), etc. According to the ancient classics, She is the teacher of Yellow Emperor, Lao Tzu and Ninth Heaven Mysterious Goddess (\u4e5d\u5929\u7384\u5973).\nAccording to Taoist Scriptures, Ultra Supreme Elder Lord (\u592a\u4e0a\u8001\u541b) is also an embodiment of Tao, and the historical Lao Tzu is considered an incarnation of him.\nDescription and uses of the concept.\nThe word \"Tao\" has a variety of meanings in both the ancient and modern Chinese language. Aside from its purely prosaic use meaning road, channel, path, principle, or similar, the word has acquired a variety of differing and often confusing metaphorical, philosophical, and religious uses. In most belief systems, the word is used symbolically in its sense of \"way\" as the right or proper way of existence, or in the context of ongoing practices of attainment or of the full coming into being, or the state of enlightenment or spiritual perfection that is the outcome of such practices.\nSome scholars make sharp distinctions between the moral or ethical usage of the word \"Tao\" that is prominent in Confucianism and religious Taoism and the more metaphysical usage of the term used in philosophical Taoism and most forms of Mahayana Buddhism; others maintain that these are not separate usages or meanings, seeing them as mutually inclusive and compatible approaches to defining the principle. \nConventionally used to refer to something that cannot otherwise be discussed in words, the term was originally used as a form of praxis rather than theory. Early writings such as the \"Tao Te Ching\" and \"I Ching\" are careful to distinguish between \"conceptions of\" the Tao (sometimes referred to as \"named Tao\") and the Tao itself (the \"unnamed Tao\"), which cannot be expressed or understood in language. Liu Da asserts that the Tao is properly understood as an experiential and evolving concept and that there are not only cultural and religious differences in the interpretation of the Tao but personal differences that reflect the character of individual practitioners.\nThe Tao can be roughly thought of as the \"flow of the universe\", or as some essence or pattern behind the natural world that keeps the Universe balanced and ordered. It is related to qi, the essential energy of action and existence. The Tao is a non-dualistic principle\u2014it is the greater whole from which all the individual elements of the Universe derive. Catherine Keller considers it similar to the negative theology of Western scholars, but the Tao is rarely an object of direct worship, being treated more like the Hindu concepts of karma, dharma, or \"\u1e5ata\" than as a divine object. The Tao is more commonly expressed in the relationship between \"wu\" (void or emptiness, in the sense of \"wuji\") and the natural, dynamic balance between opposites, leading to its central principle of \"wu wei\" (inaction or inexertion).\nThe Tao is usually described in terms of elements of nature, and in particular, as similar to water. Like water it is undifferentiated, endlessly self-replenishing, soft and quiet but immensely powerful, and impassively generous. The Song dynasty painter Chen Rong popularized the analogy with his painting \"Nine Dragons\".\nMuch of Taoist philosophy centers on the cyclical continuity of the natural world and its contrast to the linear, goal-oriented actions of human beings, as well as the perception that the Tao is \"the source of all being, in which life and death are the same.\"\nIn all its uses, the Tao is considered to have ineffable qualities that prevent it from being defined or expressed in words. It can, however, be \"known\" or \"experienced\", and its principles (which can be discerned by observing nature) can be followed or practiced. Much of East Asian philosophical writing focuses on the value of adhering to the principles of the Tao and the various consequences of failing to do so.\nThe Tao was shared with Confucianism, Chan Buddhism and Zen, and more broadly throughout East Asian philosophy and religion in general. In Taoism, Chinese Buddhism, and Confucianism, the object of spiritual practice is to \"become one with the Tao\" (\"Tao Te Ching\") or to harmonize one's will with nature to achieve 'effortless action'. This involves meditative and moral practices. Important in this respect is the Taoist concept of \"de\" ('virtue'). In Confucianism and religious forms of Taoism, these are often explicitly moral/ethical arguments about proper behavior, while Buddhism and more philosophical forms of Taoism usually refer to the natural and mercurial outcomes of action (comparable to karma). The Tao is intrinsically related to the concepts of yin and yang, where every action creates counter-actions as unavoidable movements within manifestations of the Tao, and proper practice variously involves accepting, conforming to, or working with these natural developments.\nIn Taoism and Confucianism, the Tao was sometimes traditionally seen as a \"transcendent power that blesses\" that can \"express itself directly\" through various ways, but most often shows itself through the speech, movement, or traditional ritual of a \"prophet, priest, or king.\" Tao can serve as a life energy instead of qi in some Taoist belief systems.\n\"De\".\n\"De\" () is the term generally used to refer to proper adherence to the Tao. \"De\" is the active living or cultivation of the way. Particular things (things with names) that manifest from the Tao have their own inner nature that they follow in accordance with the Tao, and the following of this inner nature is \"De\". \"Wu wei\", or 'naturalness', is contingent on understanding and conforming to this inner nature, which is interpreted variously from a personal, individual nature to a more generalized notion of human nature within the greater Universe.\nHistorically, the concept of De differed significantly between Taoists and Confucianists. Confucianism was largely a moral system emphasizing the values of humaneness, righteousness, and filial duty, and so conceived De in terms of obedience to rigorously defined and codified social rules. Taoists took a broader, more naturalistic, more metaphysical view on the relationship between humankind and the Universe and considered social rules to be at best a derivative reflection of the natural and spontaneous interactions between people and at worst calcified structure that inhibited naturalness and created conflict. This led to some philosophical and political conflicts between Taoists and Confucians. Several sections of the works attributed to Zhuang Zhou are dedicated to critiques of the failures of Confucianism.\nInterpretations.\nTaoism.\nThe translator Arthur Waley observed that\n[Tao] means a road, path, way; and hence, the way in which one does something; method, doctrine, principle. The Way of Heaven, for example, is ruthless; when autumn comes 'no leaf is spared because of its beauty, no flower because of its fragrance'. The Way of Man means, among other things, procreation; and eunuchs are said to be 'far from the Way of Man'. \"Chu Tao\" is 'the way to be a monarch', i.e. the art of ruling. Each school of philosophy has its \"tao\", its doctrine of the way in which life should be ordered. Finally in a particular school of philosophy whose followers came to be called Taoists, \"tao\" meant 'the way the universe works'; and ultimately something very like God, in the more abstract and philosophical sense of that term.\n\"Tao\" gives Taoism its name in English, in both its philosophical and religious forms. The Tao is the fundamental and central concept of these schools of thought. Taoism perceives the Tao as a natural order underlying the substance and activity of the Universe. Language and the \"naming\" of the Tao is regarded negatively in Taoism; the Tao fundamentally exists and operates outside the realm of differentiation and linguistic constraints.\nThere is no single orthodox Taoist view of the Tao. All forms of Taoism center around Tao and De, but there is a broad variety of distinct interpretations among sects and even individuals in the same sect. Despite this diversity, there are some clear, common patterns and trends in Taoism and its branches.\nThe diversity of Taoist interpretations of the Tao can be seen across four texts representative of major streams of thought in Taoism. All four texts are used in modern Taoism with varying acceptance and emphasis among sects. The \"Tao Te Ching\" is the oldest text and representative of a speculative and philosophical approach to the Tao. The \"Daotilun\" is an eighth century exegesis of the \"Tao Te Ching\", written from a well-educated and religious viewpoint that represents the traditional, scholarly perspective. The devotional perspective of the Tao is expressed in the \"Qingjing Jing\", a liturgical text that was originally composed during the Han dynasty and is used as a hymnal in religious Taoism, especially among eremites. The \"Zhuangzi\" uses literary devices such as tales, allegories, and narratives to relate the Tao to the reader, illustrating a metaphorical method of viewing and expressing the Tao.\nThe forms and variations of religious Taoism are incredibly diverse. They integrate a broad spectrum of academic, ritualistic, supernatural, devotional, literary, and folk practices with a multitude of results. Buddhism and Confucianism particularly affected the way many sects of Taoism framed, approached, and perceived the Tao. The multitudinous branches of religious Taoism accordingly regard the Tao, and interpret writings about it, in innumerable ways. Thus, outside of a few broad similarities, it is difficult to provide an accurate yet clear summary of their interpretation of the Tao.\nA central tenet in most varieties of religious Taoism is that the Tao is ever-present, but must be manifested, cultivated, and/or perfected to be realized. It is the source of the Universe, and the seed of its primordial purity resides in all things. Breathing exercises, according to some Taoists, allowed one to absorb \"parts of the universe.\" Incense and certain minerals were seen as representing the greater universe as well, and breathing them in could create similar effects. The manifestation of the Tao is \"de\", which rectifies and invigorates the world with the Tao's radiance.\nAlternatively, philosophical Taoism regards the Tao as a non-religious concept; it is not a deity to be worshiped, nor is it a mystical Absolute in the religious sense of the Hindu brahman. Joseph Wu remarked of this conception of the Tao, \"Dao is not religiously available; nor is it even religiously relevant.\" The writings of Laozi and Zhuangzi are tinged with esoteric tones and approach humanism and naturalism as paradoxes. In contrast to the esotericism typically found in religious systems, the Tao is not transcendent to the self, nor is mystical attainment an escape from the world in philosophical Taoism. The self steeped in the Tao is the self grounded in its place within the natural Universe. A person dwelling within the Tao excels in themselves and their activities.\nHowever, this distinction is complicated by hermeneutic difficulties in the categorization of Taoist schools, sects, and movements.\nSome Taoists believe the Tao is an entity that can \"take on human form\" to perform its goals.\nThe Tao represents human harmony with the universe and even more phenomena in the world and nature.\nConfucianism.\nThe Tao of Confucius can be translated as 'truth'. Confucianism regards the Way, or Truth, as concordant with a particular approach to life, politics, and tradition. It is held as equally necessary and well regarded as \"de\" and \"ren\" ('compassion', 'humanity'). Confucius presents a humanistic Tao. He only rarely speaks of the 'Way of Heaven'. The early Confucian philosopher Xunzi explicitly noted this contrast. Though he acknowledged the existence and celestial importance of the Way of Heaven, he insisted that the Tao principally concerns human affairs.\nAs a formal religious concept in Confucianism, Tao is the Absolute toward which the faithful move. In \"Zhongyong\" (The Doctrine of the Mean), harmony with the Absolute is the equivalent to integrity and sincerity. The \"Great Learning\" expands on this concept explaining that the Way illuminates virtue, improves the people, and resides within the purest morality. During the Tang dynasty, Han Yu further formalized and defined Confucian beliefs as an apologetic response to Buddhism. He emphasized the ethics of the Way. He explicitly paired \"Tao\" and \"De\", focusing on humane nature and righteousness. He also framed and elaborated on a \"tradition of the Tao\" in order to reject the traditions of Buddhism.\nAncestors and the Mandate of Heaven were thought to emanate from the Tao, especially during the Song dynasty.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhism first started to spread in China during the first century AD and was experiencing a golden age of growth and maturation by the fourth century AD. Hundreds of collections of Pali and Sanskrit texts were translated into Chinese by Buddhist monks within a short period of time. \"Dhyana\" was translated as , and later as \"zen\", giving Zen Buddhism its name. The use of Chinese concepts, such as the Tao, that were close to Buddhist ideas and terms helped spread the religion and make it more amenable to the Chinese people. However, the differences between the Sanskrit and Chinese terminology led to some initial misunderstandings and the eventual development of Buddhism in East Asia as a distinct entity. As part of this process, many Chinese words introduced their rich semantic and philosophical associations into Buddhism, including the use of \"Tao\" for central concepts and tenets of Buddhism.\nPai-chang Huai-hai told a student who was grappling with difficult portions of \"suttas\", \"Take up words in order to manifest meaning and you'll obtain 'meaning'. Cut off words and meaning is emptiness. Emptiness is the Tao. The Tao is cutting off words and speech.\" Zen Buddhists regard the Tao as synonymous with both the Buddhist Path and the results of it, the Noble Eightfold Path and Buddhist enlightenment. Pai-chang's statement plays upon this usage in the context of the fluid and varied Chinese usage of \"Tao\". Words and meanings are used to refer to rituals and practices. The \"emptiness\" refers to the Buddhist concept of \"sunyata\". Finding the Tao and Buddha-nature is not simply a matter of formulations, but an active response to the Four Noble Truths that cannot be fully expressed or conveyed in words and concrete associations. The use of \"Tao\" in this context refers to the literal \"way\" of Buddhism, the return to the universal source, dharma, proper meditation, and nirvana, among other associations. \"Tao\" is commonly used in this fashion by Chinese Buddhists, heavy with associations and nuanced meanings.\nNeo-Confucianism.\nDuring the Song dynasty, neo-Confucians regarded the Tao as the purest thing-in-itself. Shao Yong regarded the Tao as the origin of heaven, earth, and everything within them. In contrast, Zhang Zai presented a vitalistic Tao that was the fundamental component or effect of qi, the motive energy behind life and the world. A number of later scholars adopted this interpretation, such as Tai Chen during the Qing dynasty.\nZhu Xi, Cheng Ho, and Cheng Yi perceived the Tao in the context of \"li\" ('principle') and \"t'ien li\" ('principle of Heaven'). Cheng Hao regarded the fundamental matter of \"li\", and thus the Tao, to be humaneness. Developing compassion, altruism, and other humane virtues is following of the Way. Cheng Yi followed this interpretation, elaborating on this perspective of the Tao through teachings about interactions between yin and yang, the cultivation and preservation of life, and the axiom of a morally just universe.\nOn the whole, the Tao is equated with totality. Wang Fuzhi expressed the Tao as the \"taiji\", or 'great ultimate', as well as the road leading to it. Nothing exists apart from the Principle of Heaven in Neo-Confucianism. The Way is contained within all things. Thus, the religious life is not an elite or special journey for Neo-Confucians. The normal, mundane life is the path that leads to the Absolute, because the Absolute is contained within the mundane objects and events of daily life.\nChinese folklore.\nYayu, the son of Zhulong who was reincarnated on Earth as a violent hybrid between a bull, a tiger, and a dragon, was allowed to go to an afterlife that was known as \"the place beyond the Tao\". This shows that some Chinese folk storytelling and mythological traditions had very differing interpretations of the Tao between each other and orthodox religious practices.\nChristianity.\nNoted Christian author C.S. Lewis used the word Tao to describe \"the doctrine of objective value, the belief that certain attitudes are really true, and others really false, the kind of thing the Universe is and the kind of things we are.\" He asserted that every religion and philosophy contains foundations of universal ethics as an attempt to line up with the Tao\u2014the way mankind was designed to be. In Lewis's thinking, God created the Tao and fully displayed it through the person of Jesus Christ.\nSimilarly, Eastern Orthodox hegumen Damascene (Christensen), a pupil of noted monastic and scholar of East Asian religions Seraphim Rose, identified \"logos\" with the Tao. Damascene published a full commented translation of the \"Tao Te Ching\" under the title \"Christ the Eternal Tao\".\nIn some Chinese translations of the New Testament, the word (\"logos\") is translated as , in passages such as John 1:1, indicating that the translators considered the concept of Tao to be somewhat equivalent to the Hellenic concept of \"logos\" in Platonism and Christianity.\nLinguistic aspects.\nThe Chinese character is highly polysemous: its historical alternate pronunciation as possessed an additional connotation of 'guide'. The history of the character includes details of orthography and semantics, as well as a possible Proto-Indo-European etymology, in addition to more recent loaning into English and other world languages.\nOrthography.\n\"Tao\" is written with the Chinese character using both traditional and simplified characters. The traditional graphical interpretation of dates back to the \"Shuowen Jiezi\" dictionary published in 121 CE, which describes it as a rare \"compound ideogram\" or \"ideographic compound\". According to the \"Shuowen Jiezi\", combines the 'go' radical (a variant of ) with . This construction signified a \"head going\" or \"leading the way\".\n\"Tao\" is graphically distinguished between its earliest nominal meaning of 'way', 'road', 'path', and the later verbal sense of 'say'. It should also be contrasted with . The simplified character for has in place of .\nThe earliest written forms of \"Tao\" are bronzeware script and seal script characters from the Zhou dynasty (1045\u2013256 BCE) bronzes and writings. These ancient forms more clearly depict the element as hair above a face. Some variants interchange the 'go' radical with , with the original bronze \"crossroads\" depiction written in the seal character with two and .\nBronze scripts for occasionally include an element of or , which occurs in . The linguist Peter A. Boodberg explained,\nThis \"\"tao\" with the hand element\" is usually identified with the modern character \"tao\" &lt; \"d'\u00f4g\", 'to lead,', 'guide', 'conduct', and considered to be a \"derivative\" or verbal cognate of the noun \"tao\", \"way,\" \"path.\" The evidence just summarized would indicate rather that \"\"tao\" with the hand\" is but a \"variant\" of the basic \"tao\" and that the word itself combined both nominal and verbal aspects of the etymon. This is supported by textual examples of the use of the primary \"tao\" in the verbal sense \"to lead\" (e. g., \"Analects\" 1.5; 2.8) and seriously undermines the unspoken assumption implied in the common translation of Tao as \"way\" that the concept is essentially a nominal one. Tao would seem, then, to be etymologically a more dynamic concept than we have made it translation-wise. It would be more appropriately rendered by \"lead way\" and \"lode\" (\"way,\" \"course,\" \"journey,\" \"leading,\" \"guidance\"; cf. \"lodestone\" and \"lodestar\"), the somewhat obsolescent deverbal noun from \"to lead.\"\nThese Confucian \"Analects\" citations of \"dao\" verbally meaning 'to guide', 'to lead' are: \"The Master said, 'In guiding a state of a thousand chariots, approach your duties with reverence and be trustworthy in what you say\" and \"The Master said, 'Guide them by edicts, keep them in line with punishments, and the common people will stay out of trouble but will have no sense of shame.\"\nPhonology.\nIn modern Standard Chinese, 's two primary pronunciations are tonally differentiated between falling tone and dipping tone (usually written as ).\nBesides the common specifications and (with variant ), has a rare additional pronunciation with the level tone, , seen in the regional \"chengyu\" , a reduplication of and from northeast China.\nIn Middle Chinese (c.\u20096th\u201310th centuries CE) tone name categories, and were and . Historical linguists have reconstructed MC and as and (Bernhard Karlgren), and and , and (William H. Baxter), and and .\nIn Old Chinese (c.\u20097th\u20133rd centuries BCE) pronunciations, reconstructions for and are (Karlgren), (Zhou), and , , and and .\nSemantics.\nThe word has many meanings. For example, the \"Hanyu Da Zidian\" dictionary defines 39 meanings for and 6 for .\nJohn DeFrancis's Chinese-English dictionary gives twelve meanings for , three for , and one for . Note that brackets clarify abbreviations and ellipsis marks omitted usage examples.\n2d\u00e0o N. [noun] road; path \u25c6M. [nominal measure word] \u2460 (for rivers/topics/etc.) \u2461 (for a course (of food); a streak (of light); etc.) \u25c6V. [verb] \u2460 say; speak; talk (introducing direct quote, novel style) ... \u2461 think; suppose \u25c6B.F. [bound form, bound morpheme] \u2460 channel \u2461 way; reason; principle \u2462 doctrine \u2463 Daoism \u2464 line \u2465\u3008hist.\u3009 [history] \u2466 district; circuit canal; passage; tube \u2467 say (polite words) ... See also \"4d\u01ceo\", \"4d\u0101o\"\n4d\u01ceo B.F. [bound form] \u2460 guide; lead ... \u2461 transmit; conduct ... \u2462 instruct; direct ...\n4d\u0101o in \"sh\u00e9nshend\u0101od\u0101o\" ... R.F. [reduplicated form] \u3008topo.\u3009[non-Mandarin form] odd; fantastic; bizarre\"Dao\", starting from the Song dynasty, also referred to an ideal in Chinese landscape paintings that artists sought to live up to by portraying \"nature scenes\" that reflected \"the harmony of man with his surroundings.\"\nEtymology.\nThe etymological linguistic origins of \"dao\" \"way; path\" depend upon its Old Chinese pronunciation, which scholars have tentatively reconstructed as *\"d'\u00f4g\", *\"d\u0259gwx\", *\"d\u0259w\", *\"lu\u0294\", and *\"l\u00fb\u0294\".\nBoodberg noted that the \"shou\" \"head\" phonetic in the \"dao\" character was not merely phonetic but \"etymonic\", analogous with English \"to head\" meaning \"to lead\" and \"to tend in a certain direction,\" \"ahead,\" \"headway\".\nParonomastically, \"tao\" is equated with its homonym \u8e48 \"tao\" &lt; \"d'\u00f4g\", \"to trample,\" \"tread,\" and from that point of view it is nothing more than a \"treadway,\" \"headtread,\" or \"foretread \"; it is also occasionally associated with a near synonym (and possible cognate) \u8fea \"ti\" &lt; \"d'i\u00f4k\", \"follow a road,\" \"go along,\" \"lead,\" \"direct\"; \"pursue the right path\"; a term with definite ethical overtones and a graph with an exceedingly interesting phonetic, \u7531 \"yu\" &lt; \"dj\u00f4g\",\" \"to proceed from.\" The reappearance of C162 [] \"walk\" in \"ti\" with the support of C157 [] \"foot\" in \"tao\", \"to trample,\" \"tread,\" should perhaps serve us as a warning not to overemphasize the headworking functions implied in \"tao\" in preference to those of the lower extremities.\nVictor H. Mair proposes a connection with Proto-Indo-European \"drogh\", supported by numerous cognates in Indo-European languages, as well as semantically similar Semitic Arabic and Hebrew words.\nThe archaic pronunciation of Tao sounded approximately like \"drog\" or \"dorg\". This links it to the Proto-Indo-European root \"drogh\" (to run along) and Indo-European \"dhorg\" (way, movement). Related words in a few modern Indo-European languages are Russian \"doroga\" (way, road), Polish \"droga\" (way, road), Czech \"dr\u00e1ha\" (way, track), Serbo-Croatian \"draga\" (path through a valley), and Norwegian dialect \"drog\" (trail of animals; valley). ... The nearest Sanskrit (Old Indian) cognates to Tao (\"drog\") are \"dhrajas\" (course, motion) and \"dhraj\" (course). The most closely related English words are \"track\" and \"trek\", while \"trail\" and \"tract\" are derived from other cognate Indo-European roots. Following the Way, then, is like going on a cosmic trek. Even more unexpected than the panoply of Indo-European cognates for Tao (\"drog\") is the Hebrew root \"d-r-g\" for the same word and Arabic \"t-r-q\", which yields words meaning \"track, path, way, way of doing things\" and is important in Islamic philosophical discourse.\nAxel Schuessler's etymological dictionary presents two possibilities for the tonal morphology of \"d\u00e0o\" \"road; way; method\" &lt; Middle Chinese \"d\u00e2u\"B &lt; Old Chinese *\"l\u00fb\u0294\" and \"d\u00e0o\" or \"to go along; bring along; conduct; explain; talk about\" &lt; Middle \"d\u00e2u\"C &lt; Old *\"l\u00fbh\". Either \"d\u00e0o\" \"the thing which is doing the conducting\" is a Tone B (\"shangsheng\" \"rising tone\") \"endoactive noun\" derivation from \"d\u00e0o\" \"conduct\", or \"d\u00e0o\" is a Later Old Chinese (Warring States period) \"general tone C\" (\"qusheng\" \"departing tone\") derivation from \"d\u00e0o\" \"way\". For a possible etymological connection, Schuessler notes the ancient \"Fangyan\" dictionary defines \"yu\" &lt; *\"lokh\" and \"lu\" &lt; *\"lu\" as Eastern Qi State dialectal words meaning \"d\u00e0o\" &lt; *\"l\u00fb\u0294\" \"road\".\nOther languages.\nMany languages have borrowed and adapted \"Tao\" as a loanword.\nIn Chinese, this character is pronounced as Cantonese \"dou6\" and Hokkian \"to7\". In Sino-Xenic languages, is pronounced as Japanese \"d\u014d\", \"t\u014d\", or \"michi\"; Korean \"do\" or \"to\"; and Vietnamese \"\u0111\u1ea1o\".\nSince 1982, when the International Organization for Standardization adopted Pinyin as the standard romanization of Chinese, many Western languages have changed from spelling this loanword \"tao\" in national systems (e.g., French EFEO Chinese transcription and English Wade\u2013Giles) to \"dao\" in Pinyin.\nThe \"tao\"/\"dao\" \"the way\" English word of Chinese origin has three meanings, according to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\n1. a. In Taoism, an absolute entity which is the source of the universe; the way in which this absolute entity functions.\n1. b. = \"Taoism\", \"taoist\"\n2. In Confucianism and in extended uses, the way to be followed, the right conduct; doctrine or method.\nThe earliest recorded usages were \"Tao\" (1736), \"Tau\" (1747), \"Taou\" (1831), and \"Dao\" (1971).\nThe term \"Taoist priest\" (), was used already by the Jesuits Matteo Ricci and Nicolas Trigault in their \"De Christiana expeditione apud Sinas\", rendered as \"Tausu\" in the original Latin edition (1615), and \"Tausa\" in an early English translation published by Samuel Purchas (1625).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30809", "revid": "8561672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30809", "title": "The Thing (1982 film)", "text": "1982 sci-fi horror film directed by John Carpenter\nThe Thing is a 1982 American science fiction horror film directed by John Carpenter from a screenplay by Bill Lancaster. Based on the 1938 John W. Campbell Jr. novella \"Who Goes There?\", it tells the story of a group of American researchers in Antarctica who encounter the eponymous \"Thing\", an extraterrestrial life-form that assimilates, then imitates, other organisms. The group is overcome by paranoia and conflict as they learn that they can no longer trust each other and that any of them could be the Thing. The film stars Kurt Russell as the team's helicopter pilot R. J. MacReady, with A. Wilford Brimley, T. K. Carter, David Clennon, Keith David, Richard Dysart, Charles Hallahan, Peter Maloney, Richard Masur, Donald Moffat, Joel Polis, and Thomas G. Waites in supporting roles.\nProduction began in the mid-1970s as a faithful adaptation of the novella, following 1951's \"The Thing from Another World\". \"The Thing\" went through several directors and writers, each with different ideas on how to approach the story. Filming lasted roughly twelve weeks, beginning in August 1981 and took place on refrigerated sets in Los Angeles as well as in Juneau, Alaska, and Stewart, British Columbia. Of the film's $15million budget, $1.5million was spent on Rob Bottin's creature effects, a mixture of chemicals, food products, rubber, and mechanical parts turned by his large team into an alien capable of taking on any form.\n\"The Thing\" was released in 1982 to negative reviews. Critics praised the special effects achievements but criticized their visual repulsiveness, while others found the characters poorly realized. The film grossed $19.6million during its theatrical run. Many reasons have been cited for its failure to impress audiences: competition from films such as \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\", which offered an optimistic view of alien visitation; a summer that had been filled with successful science fiction and fantasy films and an audience living through a recession, diametrically opposed to \"The Thing\"'s nihilistic and bleak tone.\nThe film found a cult following when it was released on home video and television and it has since been reappraised as one of the best science fiction and horror films ever made. Numerous film makers have noted its influence on their work, and it has been referred to in other media such as television and video games. \"The Thing\" has spawned merchandise\u00a0\u2013 including a 1982 novelization, comic book sequels, haunted house attractions, and board games\u00a0\u2013 as well as a video game of the same title and a 2011 prequel film of the same title.\nPlot.\nIn Antarctica, a Norwegian helicopter pursues a sled dog to an American research station. The Americans witness the passenger accidentally blow up the helicopter in addition to himself. The pilot fires a rifle and shouts at the Americans, but they cannot understand him and he is shot dead in self-defense by station commander Garry. The American helicopter pilot, R. J. MacReady, and Dr. Copper leave to investigate the Norwegian base. Among the charred ruins and frozen corpses, they find the burnt corpse of a malformed humanoid, which they transfer to the American station. Their biologist, Blair, autopsies the remains and finds a normal set of human organs.\nClark kennels the sled dog, and it soon metamorphoses and absorbs several of the station dogs. This disturbance alerts the team, and Childs uses a flame thrower to incinerate the creature. Blair autopsies the Dog-Thing and surmises it is an organism that can perfectly imitate other life forms. Data recovered from the Norwegian base leads the Americans to a large excavation site containing a partially buried alien spacecraft, which Norris estimates has been buried for over a hundred thousand years and a smaller, human-sized dig site. Blair grows paranoid after running a computer simulation that indicates the creature could assimilate all life on Earth in a matter of years. The group implements controls to reduce the risk of assimilation.\nThe remains of the malformed humanoid assimilate an isolated Bennings, but Windows interrupts the process and MacReady burns the Bennings-Thing. The team also imprisons Blair in a tool shed after he sabotages all the vehicles, kills the remaining sled dogs, and destroys the radio to prevent escape. Copper suggests testing for infection by comparing the crew's blood against uncontaminated blood held in storage, but after learning the blood stores have been destroyed, the men lose faith in Garry's leadership, and MacReady takes command. He, Windows, and Nauls find Fuchs' burnt corpse and surmise he committed suicide to avoid assimilation. Windows returns to base while MacReady and Nauls investigate MacReady's shack. During their return, Nauls abandons MacReady in a snowstorm, believing he has been assimilated after finding his torn clothes in the shack.\nThe team debates whether to allow MacReady inside, but he breaks in and holds the group at bay with dynamite. During the encounter, Norris appears to suffer a heart attack. As Copper attempts to defibrillate Norris, his chest transforms into a large mouth and bites off Copper's arms, killing him. MacReady incinerates the Norris-Thing, but its head detaches and attempts to escape before also being burnt. MacReady thinks that the Norris-Thing demonstrated that every part of the Thing is an individual life-form with its own survival instinct. He proposes testing blood samples from each survivor with a heated piece of wire and has each man restrained, but is forced to kill Clark after he lunges at MacReady with a scalpel. Everyone passes the test except Palmer, whose blood recoils from the heat. Exposed, the Palmer-Thing transforms, breaks free of its bonds, and infects Windows, forcing MacReady to incinerate them both.\nChilds is left on guard in the main building while MacReady, Garry and Nauls go to test Blair. They find that he has escaped and has been using vehicle components to assemble a small flying saucer, which they destroy. Upon their return, Childs is missing, and the power generator has been destroyed, leaving the men without heat. MacReady speculates that, with no escape left, the Thing intends to return to hibernation until a rescue team arrives. The three men agree that the Thing cannot be allowed to escape and set explosives to destroy the station but the Blair-Thing kills Garry, and Nauls disappears. The Blair-Thing transforms into an enormous creature and breaks the detonator but MacReady triggers the explosives with a stick of dynamite, destroying the station and the Blair-Thing.\nWhile MacReady sits by the burning remnants, Childs returns, claiming he got lost in the storm while pursuing Blair. Exhausted and slowly freezing to death, they acknowledge the futility of their distrust and share a bottle of J&amp;B Scotch whisky.\nCast.\n\"The Thing\" also features Norbert Weisser as one of the Norwegians, and an uncredited dog, Jed, as the Dog-Thing. The only female presence in the film is the voice of MacReady's chess computer, voiced by Carpenter's wife, Adrienne Barbeau. The producer, David Foster, associate producer, Larry Franco and writer, Bill Lancaster, along with other members of the crew, make a cameo appearance in a recovered photograph of the Norwegian team. Camera operator Ray Stella stood in for the shots where needles were used to take blood, telling Carpenter that he could do it all day. Franco also played the Norwegian wielding a rifle and hanging out of the helicopter during the opening sequence. Stunt coordinator, Dick Warlock, also made cameos in the film, including an off-screen appearance as the shadow on the wall during the scene where the Dog-Thing enters one of the researcher's living quarters. Clennon was originally intended to be in the scene but due to his shadow being easily identifiable Carpenter decided to use Warlock instead. Warlock also played Palmer-Thing and stood in for Brimley in a few scenes that involved Blair.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nDevelopment of the film began in the mid-1970s when David Foster and fellow producer Lawrence Turman suggested to Universal Pictures an adaptation of the 1938 John W. Campbell novella \"Who Goes There?\" It had been loosely adapted once before in Howard Hawks' and Christian Nyby's 1951 film \"The Thing from Another World\", but Foster and Turman wanted to develop a project that stuck more closely to the source material. Screenwriters Hal Barwood and Matthew Robbins held the rights to make an adaptation, but passed on the opportunity to make a new film, so Universal obtained the rights from them. In 1976, Wilbur Stark had purchased the remake rights to 23 RKO Pictures films, including \"The Thing from Another World\", from three Wall Street financiers who did not know what to do with them, in exchange for a return when the films were produced. Universal in turn acquired the rights to remake the film from Stark, resulting in him being given an executive producer credit on all print advertisements, posters, television commercials, and studio press material.\nJohn Carpenter was first approached about the project in 1976 by co-producer and friend Stuart Cohen but Carpenter was mainly an independent film director, so Universal chose \"The Texas Chain Saw Massacre\" (1974) director Tobe Hooper as they had him under contract. The producers were ultimately unhappy with Hooper and his writing partner Kim Henkel's concept. After several more failed pitches by other writers and attempts to bring on other directors, such as John Landis, the project was put on hold. Even so, the success of Ridley Scott's 1979 science fiction horror film \"Alien\" helped revitalize the project, at which point Carpenter became loosely attached following his success with his influential slasher film \"Halloween\" (1978).\nCarpenter was reluctant to join the project, as he thought Hawks' adaptation would be difficult to surpass, although he was unimpressed with the film's monster. Cohen suggested that he read the original novella. Carpenter found the \"creepiness\" of the imitations conducted by the creature, and the questions it raised, interesting. He drew parallels between the novella and Agatha Christie's mystery novel \"And Then There Were None\" (1939), and noted that the story of \"Who Goes There?\" was \"timely\" for him, meaning he could make it \"true to [his] day\" as Hawks had in his time. Carpenter, a fan of Hawks' adaptation, paid homage to it in \"Halloween\", and he watched \"The Thing from Another World\" several times for inspiration before filming began. Carpenter and cinematographer Dean Cundey first worked together on \"Halloween\", and \"The Thing\" was their first big-budget project for a major film studio.\nAfter securing the writer and crew, the film was stalled again when Carpenter nearly quit, believing that a passion project of his, \"El Diablo\" (1990), was on the verge of being made by EMI Films. The producers discussed various replacements including Walter Hill, Sam Peckinpah and Michael Ritchie, but the development of \"El Diablo\" was not as imminent as Carpenter believed, and he remained with \"The Thing\".\nUniversal initially set a budget of $10million, with $200,000 for \"creature effects\", which at the time was more than the studio had ever allocated to a monster film. Filming was scheduled to be completed within 98 days. Universal's production studios estimated that it would require at least $17million before marketing and other costs, as the plan involved more set construction, including external sets and a large set piece for the original scripted death of Bennings, which was estimated to cost $1.5million alone. As storyboarding and designs were finalized, the crew estimated they would need at least $750,000 for creature effects, a figure Universal executives agreed to after seeing the number of workers employed under Rob Bottin, the special make-up effects designer. Larry Franco was responsible for making the budget work for the film; he cut the filming schedule by a third, eliminated the exterior sets for on-site shooting, and removed Bennings' more extravagant death scene. Cohen suggested reusing the destroyed American camp as the ruined Norwegian camp, saving a further $250,000. When filming began in August, \"The Thing\" had a budget of $11.4million, and indirect costs brought it to $14million. The effects budget ran over, totaling $1.5million, forcing the elimination of some scenes, including Nauls' confrontation of a creature dubbed the \"box Thing\". By the end of production, Carpenter had to make a personal appeal to executive Ned Tanen for $100,000 to complete a simplified version of the Blair-Thing. The final cost was $12.4million, and overhead costs brought it to $15million.\nWriting.\nSeveral writers developed drafts for \"The Thing\" before Carpenter became involved, including \"Logan's Run\" (1967) writer William F. Nolan, novelist David Wiltse, and Hooper and Henkel, whose draft was set at least partially underwater, and which Cohen described as a \"Moby-Dick\"-like story in which \"The Captain\" did battle with a large, non-shapeshifting creature. As Carpenter said in a 2014 interview, \"they were just trying to make it work\". The writers left before Carpenter joined the project. He said the scripts were \"awful\", as they changed the story into something it was not, and ignored the chameleon-like aspect of the Thing. Carpenter did not want to write the project, after recently completing work on \"Escape from New York\" (1981) and having struggled to complete a screenplay for \"The Philadelphia Experiment\" (1984). He was wary of taking on writing duties, preferring to let someone else do it. Once Carpenter was confirmed as the director, several writers were asked to script \"The Thing\", including Richard Matheson, Nigel Kneale, and Deric Washburn.\nBill Lancaster initially met with Turman, Foster and Cohen in 1977, but he was given the impression that they wanted to closely replicate \"The Thing from Another World\", and he did not want to remake the film. In August 1979, Lancaster was contacted again. By this time he had read the original \"Who Goes There?\" novella, and Carpenter had become involved in the project. Lancaster was hired to write the script after describing his vision for the film, and his intention to stick closely to the original story, to Carpenter, who was a fan of Lancaster's work on \"The Bad News Bears\" (1976). Lancaster conceived several key scenes in the film, including the Norris-Thing biting Dr. Copper, and the use of blood tests to identify the Thing, which Carpenter cited as the reason he wanted to work on the film. Lancaster said he found some difficulty in translating \"Who Goes There?\" to film, as it features very little action. He also made some significant changes to the story, such as reducing the number of characters from 37 to 12. Lancaster said that 37 was excessive and would be difficult for audiences to follow, leaving little screen time for characterization. He also opted to alter the story's structure, choosing to open his in the middle of the action, instead of using a flashback as in the novella. Several characters were modernized for contemporary audiences; MacReady, originally a meteorologist, became a tough loner described in the script as \"35. Helicopter pilot. Likes chess. Hates the cold. The pay is good.\" Lancaster aimed to create an ensemble piece where one person emerged as the hero, instead of having a Doc Savage-type hero from the start.\nLancaster wrote thirty to forty pages but struggled with the film's second act, and it took him several months to complete the script. After it was finished, Lancaster and Carpenter spent a weekend in northern California refining the script, each having different takes on how a character should sound, and comparing their ideas for scenes. Lancaster's script opted to keep the creature largely concealed throughout the film, and it was Bottin who convinced Carpenter to make it more visible to have a greater impact on the audience. Lancaster's original ending had MacReady and Childs turn into the Thing. In the spring, the characters are rescued by helicopter, greeting their saviors with \"Hey, which way to a hot meal?\". Carpenter thought this ending was too shallow. In total, Lancaster completed four drafts of the screenplay. The novella concludes with the humans clearly victorious, but concerned that birds they see flying toward the mainland may have been infected by the Thing. Carpenter opted to end the film with the survivors slowly freezing to death to save humanity from infection, believing this to be the ultimate heroic act. Lancaster wrote this ending, which eschews a \"The Twilight Zone\"-style twist or the destruction of the monster, as he wanted to instead have an ambiguous moment between the pair, of trust and mistrust, fear and relief.\nCasting.\nAnita Dann served as casting director. Kurt Russell had worked with Carpenter twice before and was involved in the production before being cast, helping Carpenter develop his ideas. Russell was the last actor to be cast, in June 1981, by which point second unit filming was starting in Juneau, Alaska. Carpenter wanted to keep his options open for the lead R. J. MacReady, and discussions with the studio considered Christopher Walken, Jeff Bridges, and Nick Nolte, who were either unavailable or declined, and Sam Shepard, who showed interest but was never pursued. Tom Atkins and Jack Thompson were strong early and late contenders for the role of MacReady but Russell got the part. In part, Carpenter cited the practicality of choosing someone he had found reliable before, and who would not baulk at the difficult filming conditions. It took Russell about a year to grow his hair and beard for the role. At various points, the producers also met with Brian Dennehy, Kris Kristofferson, John Heard, Ed Harris, Tom Berenger, Jack Thompson, Scott Glenn, Fred Ward, Peter Coyote, Tom Atkins, and Tim McIntire. Some passed on the idea of starring in a monster film, while Dennehy became the choice to play Copper. Each actor was to be paid $50,000, but after the more-established Russell was cast, his salary increased to $400,000.\nGeoffrey Holder, Carl Weathers, and Bernie Casey were considered for the role of mechanic Childs, and Carpenter also looked at Isaac Hayes, having worked with him on \"Escape from New York\". Ernie Hudson was the front-runner and was almost cast until they met with Keith David. \"The Thing\" was David's first significant film role, and coming from a theater background, he had to learn on set how to hold himself back and not show every emotion his character was feeling, with guidance from Richard Masur and Donald Moffat in particular. Masur (dog handler Clark) and David discussed their characters in rehearsals and decided that they would not like each other. For senior biologist Blair, the team chose the unknown Wilford Brimley, as they wanted an everyman whose absence would not be questioned by the audience too soon. The intent with the character was to have him become infected early in the film but offscreen, so that the audience would not know, concealing his intentions. Carpenter wanted to cast Donald Pleasence, but it was decided that he was too recognizable to accommodate the role. T. K. Carter was cast as the station's cook Nauls but the comedian, Franklyn Ajaye, also came in to read for the role. Instead, he delivered a lengthy speech about the character being a stereotype, after which the meeting ended.\nBottin lobbied hard to play assistant mechanic Palmer, but it was deemed impossible for him to do so alongside his existing duties. As the character has some comedic moments, Universal brought in comedians Jay Leno, Garry Shandling, and Charles Fleischer, among others, but opted to go with actor David Clennon, who was better suited to play the dramatic elements. Clennon had read for the Bennings character, but he preferred Palmer's \"blue-collar stoner\" role to a \"white collar science man\". Powers Boothe, Lee Van Cleef, Jerry Orbach, and Kevin Conway were considered for the role of station commander Garry, and Richard Mulligan was also considered when the production experimented with the idea of making the character closer to MacReady in age. Masur also read for Garry, but he asked to play the dog handler Clark instead, as he liked the character's dialogue and was also a fan of dogs. Masur worked daily with the wolfdog Jed and his handler, Clint Rowe, during rehearsals, as Rowe was familiarizing Jed with the sounds and smells of people. This helped Masur's and Jed's performance, as the dog would stand next to him without looking for his handler. Masur described his character as one uninterested in people, but who loves working with dogs. He went to a survivalist store and bought a flip knife for his character, and used it in a confrontation with David's character. Masur turned down a role in \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" to play Clark. William Daniels and Dennehy were both interested in playing Dr. Copper, and it was a last-second decision by Carpenter to go with Richard Dysart.\nIn early drafts, Windows was called Sanchez, and later Sanders. The name Windows came when the actor for the role, Thomas Waites, was in a costume fitting and tried on a large pair of dark glasses, which the character wears in the film. Russell described the all-male story as interesting since the men had no one to posture for without women.\nFilming.\n\"The Thing\" was storyboarded extensively by Mike Ploog and Mentor Huebner before filming began. Their work was so detailed that many of the film's shots replicate the image layout. Cundey pushed for the use of anamorphic format aspect ratio, believing that it allowed for placing several actors in an environment, and making use of the scenic vistas available, while still creating a sense of confinement within the image. It also enabled the use of negative space around the actors to imply something may be lurking just offscreen.\nPrincipal photography began on August 24, 1981, in Juneau, Alaska. Filming lasted about twelve weeks. Carpenter insisted on two weeks of rehearsals before filming as he wanted to see how scenes would play out. This was unusual at the time because of the expense involved. Filming then moved to the Universal lot, where the outside heat was over . The internal sets were climate-controlled to to facilitate their work. The team considered building the sets inside an existing refrigerated structure but were unable to find one large enough. Instead, they collected as many portable air conditioners as they could, closed off the stage, and used humidifiers and misters to add moisture to the air. After watching a roughly assembled cut of filming to date, Carpenter was unhappy that the film seemed to feature too many scenes of men standing around talking. He rewrote some completed scenes to take place outdoors to be shot on location when principal photography moved to Stewart, British Columbia.\nCarpenter was determined to use authentic locations instead of studio sets, and his successes on \"Halloween\" and \"The Fog\" (1980) gave him the credibility to take on the much bigger-budget production of \"The Thing\". A film scout located an area just outside Stewart, along the Canadian coast, which offered the project both ease of access and scenic value during the day. On December 2, 1981, roughly 100 American and Canadian crew members moved to the area to begin filming. During the journey there, the crew bus slid in the snow toward the unprotected edge of the road, nearly sending it down a embankment. Some of the crew stayed in the small mining town during filming, while others lived on residential barges on the Portland Canal. They would make the drive up a small, winding road to the filming location in Alaska where the exterior outpost sets were built.\nThe sets had been built in Alaska during the summer, atop a rocky area overlooking a glacier, in preparation for snow to fall and cover them. They were used for interior and exterior filming, meaning they could not be heated above freezing inside to ensure there was always snow on the roof. Outside, the temperature was so low that the camera lenses would freeze and break. The crew had to leave the cameras in the freezing temperatures, as keeping them inside in the warmth resulted in foggy lenses that took hours to clear. Filming, greatly dependent on the weather, took three weeks to complete, with heavy snow making it impossible to film on some days. Rigging the explosives necessary to destroy the set in the film's finale required 8 hours.\nKeith David broke his hand in a car accident the day before he was to begin shooting. David attended filming the next day, but when Carpenter and Franco saw his swollen hand, they sent him to the hospital where it was punctured with two pins. He returned wearing a surgical glove beneath a black glove that was painted to resemble his complexion. His left hand is not seen for the first half of the film. Carpenter filmed the Norwegian camp scenes after the end scenes, using the damaged American base as a stand-in for the charred Norwegian camp. The explosive destruction of the base required the camera assistants to stand inside the set with the explosives, which were activated remotely. The assistants then had to run to a safe distance while seven cameras captured the base's destruction. Filmed when the use of special effects was rare, the actors had to adapt to having Carpenter describe to them what their characters were looking at, as the effects would not be added until post-production. There were some puppets used to create the impression of what was happening in the scene, but in other cases, the cast would be looking at a wall or an object marked with an \"X\".\nArt director John J. Lloyd oversaw the design and construction of all the sets, as there were no existing locations used in the film. Cundey suggested that the sets should have ceilings and pipes seen on camera to make the spaces seem more claustrophobic.\nPost-production.\nSeveral scenes in the script were omitted from the film, sometimes because there was too much dialogue that slowed the pace and undermined the suspense. Carpenter blamed some of the issues on his directorial method, noting that several scenes appeared to be repeating events or information. Another scene featuring a snowmobile chase pursuing dogs was removed from the shooting script as it would have been too expensive to film. One scene present in the film, but not the script, features a monologue by MacReady. Carpenter added this partly to establish what was happening in the story and because he wanted to highlight Russell's heroic character after taking over the camp. Carpenter said that Lancaster's experience writing ensemble pieces did not emphasize single characters. Since \"Halloween\", several horror films had replicated many of the scare elements of that film, something Carpenter wanted to move away from for \"The Thing\". He removed scenes from Lancaster's script that had been filmed, such as a body suddenly falling into view at the Norwegian camp, which he felt were too clich\u00e9d. About three minutes of scenes were filmed from Lancaster's script that elaborated on the characters' backgrounds.\nA scene with MacReady absentmindedly inflating a blow-up doll while watching the Norwegian tapes was filmed but was not used in the finished film. The doll would later appear as a jump scare with Nauls. Other scenes featured expanded or alternate deaths for various characters. In the finished film, Fuchs' charred bones are discovered, revealing he has died off-screen, but another take sees his corpse impaled on a wall with a shovel. Nauls was scripted to appear in the finale as a partly assimilated mass of tentacles but in the film he disappears. Carpenter struggled with a method of conveying to the audience what assimilation by the creature meant. Lancaster's original set piece of Bennings' death had him pulled beneath a sheet of ice by the Thing, before resurfacing in different areas in various stages of assimilation. The scene called for a set to be built on one of Universal's largest stages, with sophisticated hydraulics, dogs, and flamethrowers, but it was deemed too costly to produce. A scene was filmed with Bennings being murdered by an unknown assailant but it was felt that assimilation, leading to his death, was not explained enough. Short on time, and with no interior sets remaining, a small set was built, Maloney was covered with K-Y Jelly, orange dye, and rubber tentacles. Monster gloves for a different creature were repurposed to demonstrate partial assimilation.\nCarpenter filmed multiple endings for \"The Thing\", including a \"happier\" ending because editor Todd Ramsay thought that the bleak, nihilistic conclusion would not test well with audiences. In the alternate take, MacReady is rescued and given a blood test that proves he is not infected. Carpenter said that stylistically this ending would have been \"cheesy\". Editor Verna Fields was tasked with reworking the ending to add clarity and resolution. It was finally decided to create an entirely new scene, which omitted the suspicion of Childs being infected by removing him completely, leaving MacReady alone. This new ending tested only slightly better with audiences than the original, and the production team agreed to the studio's request to use it. It was set to go to print for theaters when the producers, Carpenter, and executive Helena Hacker decided that the film was better left with ambiguity instead of nothing at all. Carpenter gave his approval to restore the ambiguous ending, but a scream was inserted over the outpost explosion to posit the monster's death. Universal executive Sidney Sheinberg disliked the ending's nihilism and, according to Carpenter, said, \"Think about how the audience will react if we see the [Thing] die with a giant orchestra playing\". Carpenter later noted that the original ending and the ending without Childs tested poorly with audiences, which he interpreted as the film simply not being heroic enough.\nMusic.\nEnnio Morricone composed the film's score, as Carpenter wanted \"The Thing\" to have a European musical approach. Carpenter flew to Rome to speak with Morricone to convince him to take the job. By the time Morricone flew to Los Angeles to record the score, he had already developed a tape filled with an array of synthesizer music because he was unsure what type of score Carpenter wanted. Morricone wrote complete separate orchestral and synthesizer scores and a combined score, which he knew was Carpenter's preference. Carpenter picked a piece, closely resembling his own scores, that became the main theme used throughout the film. He also played the score from \"Escape from New York\" for Morricone as an example. Morricone made several more attempts, bringing the score closer to Carpenter's own style of music. In total, Morricone produced a score of approximately one hour that remained largely unused but was later released as part of the film's soundtrack. Carpenter and his longtime collaborator Alan Howarth separately developed some synth-styled pieces used in the film. In 2012, Morricone recalled,\nI've asked [Carpenter], as he was preparing some electronic music with an assistant to edit on the film, \"Why did you call me, if you want to do it on your own?\" He surprised me, he said\u00a0\u2013 \"I got married to your music. This is why I've called you.\"... Then when he showed me the film, later when I wrote the music, we didn't exchange ideas. He ran away, nearly ashamed of showing it to me. I wrote the music on my own without his advice. Naturally, as I had become quite clever since 1982, I've written several scores relating to my life. And I had written one, which was electronic music. And [Carpenter] took the electronic score.\nCarpenter said,\n[Morricone] did all the orchestrations and recorded for me 20 minutes of music I could use wherever I wished but without seeing any footage. I cut his music into the film and realized that there were places, mostly scenes of tension, in which his music would not work... I secretly ran off and recorded in a couple of days a few pieces to use. My pieces were very simple electronic pieces\u00a0\u2013 it was almost tones. It was not really music at all but just background sounds, something today you might even consider as sound effects.\nDesign.\nCreature effects.\n\"The Thing\"'s special effects were largely designed by Bottin, who had worked with Carpenter on \"The Fog\" (1980). When Bottin joined the project in mid-1981, pre-production was in progress, but no design had been settled on for the alien. Artist Dale Kuipers had created some preliminary paintings of the creature's look, but he left the project after being hospitalized following a traffic accident before he could develop them further with Bottin. Carpenter conceived the Thing as a single creature, but Bottin suggested that it should be constantly changing and able to look like anything. Carpenter initially considered Bottin's description of his ideas as \"too weird\", and had him work with Ploog to sketch them instead. As part of the Thing's design, it was agreed anyone assimilated by it would be a perfect imitation and would not know they were the Thing. The actors spent hours during rehearsals discussing whether they would know they were the Thing when taken over. Clennon said that it did not matter, because everyone acted, looked and smelled exactly the same before (or after) being taken over. At its peak, Bottin had a 35-person crew of artists and technicians, and he found it difficult to work with so many people. To help manage the team, he hired Erik Jensen, a special effects line producer who he had worked with on \"The Howling\" (1981), to be in charge of the special make-up effects unit. Bottin's crew also included mechanical aspect supervisor Dave Kelsey, make-up aspect coordinator Ken Diaz, moldmaker Gunnar Ferdinansen, and Bottin's longtime friend Margaret Beserra, who managed painting and hair work.\nIn designing the Thing's different forms, Bottin explained that the creature had been all over the galaxy. This allowed it to call on different attributes as necessary, such as stomachs that transform into giant mouths and spider legs sprouting from heads. Bottin said the pressure he experienced caused him to dream about working on designs, some of which he would take note of after waking. One abandoned idea included a series of dead baby monsters, which was deemed \"too gross\". Bottin admitted he had no idea how his designs would be implemented practically, but Carpenter did not reject them. Carpenter said, \"What I didn't want to end up with in this movie was a guy in a suit... I grew up as a kid watching science-fiction monster movies, and it was always a guy in a suit.\" According to Cundey, Bottin was very sensitive about his designs, and worried about the film showing too many of them. At one point, as a preemptive move against any censorship, Bottin suggested making the creature's violent transformations and the appearance of the internal organs more fantastical using colors. The decision was made to tone down the color of the blood and viscera, although much of the filming had been completed by that point. The creature effects used a variety of materials including mayonnaise, creamed corn, microwaved bubble gum, and K-Y Jelly.\nDuring filming, then-21-year-old Bottin was hospitalized for exhaustion, double pneumonia, and a bleeding ulcer, caused by his extensive workload. Bottin himself explained he would \"hoard the work\", opting to be directly involved in many of the complicated tasks. His dedication to the project saw him spend over a year living on the Universal lot. Bottin said he did not take a day off during that time and slept on the sets or in locker rooms. To take some pressure off his crew, Bottin enlisted the aid of special effects creator Stan Winston to complete some of the designs, primarily the Dog-Thing. With insufficient time to create a sophisticated mechanical creature, Winston opted to create a hand puppet. A cast was made of makeup artist Lance Anderson's arm and head, around which the Dog-Thing was sculpted in oil-based clay. The final foam-latex puppet, worn by Anderson, featured radio-controlled eyes and cable-controlled legs, and was operated from below a raised set on which the kennel was built. Slime from the puppet would leak onto Anderson during the two days it took to film the scene, and he had to wear a helmet to protect himself from the explosive squibs simulating gunfire. Anderson pulled the tentacles into the Dog-Thing and reverse motion was used to create the effect of them slithering from its body. Winston refused to be credited for his work, insisting that Bottin deserved sole credit; Winston was given a \"thank you\" in the credits instead.\nIn the \"chest chomp\" scene, Dr. Copper attempts to revive Norris with a defibrillator. Revealing himself as the Thing, Norris-Thing's chest transforms into a large mouth that severs Copper's arms. Bottin accomplished this scene by recruiting a double amputee and fitting him with prosthetic arms filled with wax bones, rubber veins and Jell-O. The arms were then placed into the practical \"stomach mouth\" where the mechanical jaws clamped down on them, at which point the actor pulled away, severing the false arms. The effect of the Norris-Thing's head detaching from the body to save itself took many months of testing before Bottin was satisfied enough to film it. The scene involved a fire effect, but the crew were unaware that fumes from the rubber foam chemicals inside the puppet were flammable. The fire ignited the fumes, creating a large fireball that engulfed the puppet. It suffered only minimal damage after the fire had been put out, and the crew successfully filmed the scene. Stop-motion expert Randall William Cook developed a sequence for the end of the film where MacReady is confronted by the gigantic Blair-Thing. Cook created a miniature model of the set and filmed wide-angle shots of the monster in stop motion, but Carpenter was not convinced by the effect and used only a few seconds of it. It took fifty people to operate the Blair-Thing puppet.\nThe production intended to use a camera centrifuge\u00a0\u2013 a rotating drum with a fixed camera platform\u00a0\u2013 for the Palmer-Thing scene, allowing him to seem to run straight up the wall and across the ceiling. Again, the cost was too high and the idea abandoned for a stuntman falling into frame onto a floor made to look like the outpost's ceiling. Stuntman Anthony Cecere stood in for the Palmer-Thing after MacReady sets it on fire and it crashes through the outpost wall.\nVisuals and lighting.\nCundey worked with Bottin to determine the appropriate lighting for each creature. He wanted to show off Bottin's work because of its details, but he was conscious that showing too much would reveal its artificial nature, breaking the illusion. Each encounter with the creature was planned for areas where they could justify using a series of small lights to highlight the particular creature-model's surface and textures. Cundey would illuminate the area behind the creature to detail its overall shape. He worked with Panavision and a few other companies to develop a camera capable of automatically adjusting light exposure at different film speeds. He wanted to try filming the creature at fast and slow speeds thinking this would create a more interesting visual effect, but they were unable to accomplish this at the time. For the rest of the set, Cundey created a contrast by lighting the interiors with warmer lights hung overhead in conical shades so that they could still control the lighting and have darkened areas on set. The outside was constantly bathed in a cold, blue light that Cundey had discovered being used on airport runways. The reflective surface of the snow and the blue light helped create the impression of coldness. The team also made use of the flamethrowers and magenta-hued flares used by the actors to create dynamic lighting.\nThe team originally wanted to shoot the film in black-and-white, but Universal was reluctant as it could affect their ability to sell the television rights for the film. Instead, Cundey suggested muting the colors as much as possible. The inside of the sets were painted in neutral colors such as gray, and many of the props were also painted gray, while the costumes were a mix of somber browns, blues, and grays. They relied on the lighting to add color. Albert Whitlock provided matte-painted backdrops, including the scene in which the Americans discover the giant alien spaceship buried in the ice. A scene where MacReady walks up to a hole in the ice where the alien had been buried was filmed at Universal, while the surrounding area, including the alien spaceship, helicopter, and snow, were all painted.\nCarpenter's friend John Wash, who developed the opening computer simulation for \"Escape from New York\", used a Cromemco Z-2 to design the computer program showing how the Thing assimilates other organisms. Colors were added by placing filters in front of an animation camera used to shoot the computer frames. Model maker Susan Turner built the alien ship approaching Earth in the pre-credits sequence, which featured 144 strobing lights. Drew Struzan designed the film's poster. He completed it in 24 hours, based only on a briefing, knowing little about the film.\nRelease.\nMarketing.\nThe lack of information about the film's special effects drew the attention of film exhibitors in early 1982. They wanted reassurance that \"The Thing\" was a first-rate production capable of attracting audiences. Cohen and Foster, with a specially employed editor and Universal's archive of music, put together a 20-minute showreel emphasizing action and suspense. They used available footage, including alternate and extended scenes not in the finished film, but avoided revealing the special effects as much as possible. The reaction from the exclusively male exhibitors was generally positive, and Universal executive Robert Rehme told Cohen that the studio was counting on \"The Thing\"'s success, as they expected \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" to appeal only to children. While finalizing the film, Universal sent Carpenter a demographic study showing that the audience appeal of horror films had declined by seventy percent over the previous six months. Carpenter considered this a suggestion that he lower his expectations of the film's performance. After one market research screening, Carpenter queried the audience on their thoughts, and one audience member asked, \"Well what happened in the very end? Which one was the Thing...?\" When Carpenter responded that it was up to their imagination, the audience member responded, \"Oh, God. I hate that.\"\nAfter returning from a screening of \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\", the audience's silence at a trailer of \"The Thing\" caused Foster to remark, \"We're dead\". The response to public pre-screenings of \"The Thing\" resulted in the studio changing the somber, black-and-white advertising approved by the producers to a color image of a person with a glowing face. The tagline was also changed from \"Man is the warmest place to hide\"\u00a0\u2013 written by Stephen Frankfort, who wrote the \"Alien\" tagline, \"In space, no one can hear you scream\"\u00a0\u2013 to \"The ultimate in alien terror\", trying to capitalize on \"Alien\"'s audience. Carpenter attempted to make a last-minute change of the film's title to \"Who Goes There?\", to no avail. The week before its release, Carpenter promoted the film with clips on \"Late Night with David Letterman\". In 1981, horror magazine \"Fangoria\" held a contest encouraging readers to submit drawings of what the Thing would look like. Winners were rewarded with a trip to Universal Studios. On its opening day, a special screening was held at the Hollywood Pacific Theatre, presided over by Elvira, Mistress of the Dark, with free admission for those in costume as monsters.\nBox office.\n\"The Thing\" was released in the United States on June 25, 1982. During its opening weekend, the film earned $3.1million from 840 theaters\u00a0\u2013 an average of $3,699 per theater\u00a0\u2013 finishing as the number eight film of the weekend behind supernatural horror \"Poltergeist\" ($4.1million), which was in its fourth weekend of release, and ahead of action film \"Megaforce\" ($2.3million). It dropped out of the top10 grossing films after three weeks, and ended its run earning a total of $19.6million against its $15million budget, making it only the 42nd highest-grossing film of 1982. It was not a box office failure, nor was it a hit. Subsequent theatrical releases have raised the box office gross to $19.9million as of 2023[ [update]].\nReception.\nCritical reception.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI take every failure hard. The one I took the hardest was \"The Thing\". My career would have been different if that had been a big hit... The movie was hated. Even by science-fiction fans. They thought that I had betrayed some kind of trust, and the piling on was insane. Even the original movie's director, Christian Nyby, was dissing me.\n\u2014 John Carpenter in 2008 on the contemporary reception of \"The Thing\"\nThe film received negative reviews on its release, and hostility for its cynical, anti-authoritarian tone and graphic special effects. Some reviewers were dismissive of the film, calling it the \"quintessential moron movie of the 80's\", \"instant junk\", and a \"wretched excess\". \"Starlog\"'s Alan Spencer called it a \"cold and sterile\" horror movie attempting to cash in on the genre audience, against the \"optimism of \"E.T.\", the reassuring return of \"Star Trek II\", the technical perfection of \"Tron\", and the sheer integrity of \"Blade Runner\"\".\nThe plot was criticized as \"boring\", and undermined by the special effects. The \"Los Angeles Times\"' Linda Gross said that \"The Thing\" was \"bereft, despairing, and nihilistic\", and lacking in feeling, meaning the characters' deaths did not matter. Spencer said it featured sloppy continuity, lacked pacing, and was devoid of warmth or humanity. David Ansen of \"Newsweek\" felt the film confused the use of effects with creating suspense, and that it lacked drama by \"sacrificing everything at the altar of gore\". The \"Chicago Reader\"'s Dave Kehr considered the dialogue to be banal and interchangeable, making the characters seem and sound alike. \"The Washington Post\"'s Gary Arnold said it was a witty touch to open with the Thing having already overcome the Norwegian base, defeating the type of traps seen in the 1951 version, while \"New York\"'s David Denby lamented that the Thing's threat is shown only externally, without focusing on what it is like for someone who thinks they have been taken over. Roger Ebert considered the film to be scary, but offering nothing original beyond the special effects, while \"The New York Times\"' Vincent Canby said it was entertaining only if the viewer needed to see spider-legged heads and dog autopsies.\nReviews of the actors' performances were generally positive, while criticizing the depictions of the characters they portrayed. Ebert said they lacked characterization, offering basic stereotypes that existed just to be killed, and Spencer called the characters bland even though the actors do the best they can with the material. \"Time\"'s Richard Schickel singled Russell out as the \"stalwart\" hero, where other characters were not as strongly or wittily characterized, and \"Variety\" said that Russell's heroic status was undercut by the \"suicidal\" attitude adopted toward the film's finale. Other reviews criticized implausibilities such as characters wandering off alone. Kehr did not like that the men did not band together against the Thing, and several reviews noted a lack of camaraderie and romance, which Arnold said reduced any interest beyond the special effects.\nThe film's special effects were simultaneously lauded and lambasted for being technically brilliant but visually repulsive and excessive. \"Cinefantastique\" wrote that the Thing \"may be the most unloved monster in movie history... but it's also the most incredible display of special effects makeup in at least a decade.\" Reviews called Bottin's work \"genius\", noting the designs were novel, unforgettable, \"colorfully horrific\", and called him a \"master of the macabre\". Arnold said that the \"chest chomp\" scene demonstrated \"appalling creativity\" and the subsequent severed head scene was \"madly macabre\", comparing them to \"Alien\"'s chest burster and severed head scenes. \"Variety\" called it \"the most vividly gruesome horror film to ever stalk the screens\". Conversely, Denby called them more disgusting than frightening and lamented that the trend of horror films to open the human body more and more bordered on obscenity. Spencer said that Bottin's care and pride in his craft were shown in the effects, but both they and Schickel found them to be overwhelming and \"squandered\" without strong characters and story. Even so, Canby said that the effects were too \"phony looking to be disgusting\". Canby and Arnold said the creature's lack of a single, discernible shape was to its detriment, and hiding it inside humans made it hard to follow. Arnold said that the 1951 version was less versatile but easier to keep in focus.\nGross and Spencer praised the film's technical achievements, particularly Cundey's \"frostbitten\" cinematography, the sound, editing, and Morricone's score. Spencer was critical of Carpenter's direction, saying it was his \"futile\" attempt to give the audience what he thinks they want and that Carpenter was not meant to direct science fiction, but was instead suited to direct \"traffic accidents, train wrecks, and public floggings\". Ansen said that \"atrocity for atrocity's sake\" was ill-becoming of Carpenter.\n\"The Thing\" was often compared to similar films, particularly \"Alien\", \"Invasion of the Body Snatchers\" (1978), and \"The Thing from Another World\". Ebert and Denby said that \"The Thing\" seemed derivative compared to those films, which had portrayed the story in a better way. \"Variety\" called it inferior to the 1951 version. Arnold considered \"The Thing\" as the result of \"Alien\" raising the requirement for horrific spectacle.\n\"The Thing from Another World\" actor Kenneth Tobey and director Christian Nyby also criticized the film. Nyby said, \"If you want blood, go to the slaughterhouse... All in all, it's a terrific commercial for J&amp;B Scotch\". Tobey singled out the visual effects, saying they \"were so explicit that they actually destroyed how you were supposed to feel about the characters... They became almost a movie in themselves, and were a little too horrifying.\" In Phil Hardy's 1984 book \"Science Fiction\", a reviewer described the film as a \"surprising failure\" and called it \"Carpenter's most unsatisfying film to date\". The review noted that the narrative \"seems little more than an excuse for the various set-pieces of special effects and Russell's hero is no more than a cypher compared to Tobey's rounded character in Howard Hawks' \"The Thing\"\". Clennon said that introductory scenes for the characters, omitted from the film, made it hard for audiences to connect with them, robbing it of some of the broader appeal of \"Alien\".\nJohn Nubbin reviewed \"The Thing\" for \"Different Worlds\" magazine and stated that \"At its best, this film is scary. At its worst it lacks the power to involve us within its confines, making it just another horror film in the end.\"\nAccolades.\n\"The Thing\" received nominations from the Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Films for Best Horror Film and Best Special Effects, but lost to \"Poltergeist\" and \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\", respectively. The film was nominated at the Razzie Awards for Worst Musical Score.\nPost-release.\nPerformance analysis and aftermath.\nIn a 1999 interview, Carpenter said audiences rejected \"The Thing\" for its nihilistic, depressing viewpoint at a time when the United States was in the midst of a recession. When it opened, it was competing against the critically and commercially successful \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" ($619million), a family-friendly film released two weeks earlier that offered a more optimistic view of alien visitation. Carpenter described it as the complete opposite of his film. \"The Thing\" opened on the same day as the science fiction film \"Blade Runner\", which debuted as the number two film that weekend with a take of $6.1million and went on to earn $33.8million. It was also regarded as a critical and commercial failure at the time. Others blamed an oversaturation of science fiction and fantasy films released that year, including \"Conan the Barbarian\" ($130million), \"Poltergeist\" ($121.7million), \"\" ($97million), \"Mad Max 2\" ($34.5million), and \"Tron\" ($33million). Some analysts blamed Universal's poor marketing, which did not compete with the deluge of promotion for prominent films released that summer. Another factor was the R rating it was given, restricting the audience to those over the age of 17 unless accompanied by an adult. In contrast, \"Poltergeist\", another horror film, received a PG rating, allowing families and younger children to view it.\nThe impact on Carpenter was immediate\u00a0\u2013 he lost the job of directing the 1984 science fiction horror film \"Firestarter\" because of \"The Thing\"'s poor performance. His previous success had gained him a multiple-film contract at Universal, but the studio opted to buy him out of it instead. He continued making films afterward but lost confidence, and did not openly talk about \"The Thing\"'s failure until a 1985 interview with \"Starlog\", where he said, \"I was called 'a pornographer of violence'... I had no idea it would be received that way... \"The Thing\" was just too strong for that time. I knew it was going to be strong, but I didn't think it would be too strong... I didn't take the public's taste into consideration.\" Shortly after its release, Wilbur Stark sued Universal for $43million for \"slander, breach of contract, fraud and deceit\", alleging he incurred a financial loss by Universal failing to credit him properly in its marketing and by showing his name during the end credits, a less prestigious position. Stark also said that he \"contributed greatly to the [screenplay]\". David Foster responded that Stark was not involved with the film's production in any way, and received proper credit in all materials. Stark later sued for a further $15million over Foster's comments. The outcome of the lawsuits is unknown.\nHome media.\nWhile \"The Thing\" was not initially successful, it was able to find new audiences and appreciation on home video, and later on television. Sidney Sheinberg edited a version of the film for network television broadcast, which added narration and a different ending, where the Thing imitates a dog and escapes the ruined camp. Carpenter disowned this version, and theorized that Sheinberg had been mad at him for not taking his creative ideas on board for the theatrical cut.\n\"The Thing\" was released on DVD in 1998 and featured additional content, such as \"The Thing: Terror Takes Shape\"\u00a0\u2013 a detailed documentary on the production, deleted and alternate scenes, and commentary by Carpenter and Russell. An HD DVD version followed in 2006 containing the same features, and a Blu-ray version in 2008 featuring just the Carpenter and Russell commentary, and some behind-the-scenes videos available via picture-in-picture during the film. A 2016 Blu-ray release featured a 2K resolution restoration of the film, overseen by Dean Cundey. As well as including previous features such as the commentary and \"Terror Takes Shape\", it added interviews with the cast and crew, and segments that focus on the music, writing, editing, Ploog's artwork, an interview with Alan Dean Foster, who wrote the film's novelization, and the television broadcast version of \"The Thing\" that runs fifteen minutes shorter than the theatrical cut. A 4K resolution restoration was released in 2017 on Blu-ray, initially as a United Kingdom exclusive with a limited run of eight thousand units. The restoration was created using the original film negative, and was overseen by Carpenter and Cundey. A 4KUltra HD Blu-ray was released in September 2021.\nMCA released the soundtrack for \"The Thing\" in 1982. Var\u00e8se Sarabande re-released it in 1991 on compact disc and Compact Cassette. In 2011, Howarth and Larry Hopkins restored Morricone's score using updated digital techniques and arranged each track in the order it appears in the film. The album also includes tracks composed by Carpenter and Howarth for the film. A remastered version of the score was released on vinyl on February 23, 2017; a deluxe edition included an exclusive interview with Carpenter. In May 2020, an extended play (EP), \"Lost Cues: The Thing\", was released. The EP contains Carpenter's contributions to \"The Thing\"'s score; he re-recorded the music because the original masterings were lost.\nOther media.\nA novelization of the film was published by Alan Dean Foster in 1982. It is based on an earlier draft of the script and features some differences from the finished film. A scene in which MacReady, Bennings, and Childs chase infected dogs out into the snow is included, and Nauls' disappearance is explained: Cornered by the Blair-Thing, he chooses suicide over assimilation.\nIn 2000, McFarlane Toys released two \"Movie Maniacs\" figures: the Blair-Thing and the Norris-Thing, including its spider-legged, disembodied head. SOTA Toys released a set featuring a MacReady figure and the Dog-Thing based on the film's kennel scene, as well as a bust of the Norris-Thing's spider-head. In 2017, Mondo and the Project Raygun division of USAopoly released \"The Thing: Infection at Outpost 31\", a board game. Players take on the role of characters from the film or the Thing, each aiming to defeat the other through subterfuge and sabotage. \"The Thing: The Boardgame\" was released by Pendragon Game Studio in 2024.\nA pinball table based on \"The Thing\" is featured in \"Pinball M\" (2023), including R. J. MacReady and various other elements from the film. Characters from, and an area based on \"The Thing\" appear in the 2024 video game \"Funko Fusion\".\nThematic analysis.\nThe central theme of \"The Thing\" concerns paranoia and mistrust. Fundamentally, the film is about the erosion of trust in a small community, instigated by different forms of paranoia caused by the possibility of someone not being who they say they are, or that your best friend may be your enemy. It represents the distrust that humans always have for somebody else and the fear of betrayal by those we know and, ultimately, our bodies. The theme remains timely because the subject of paranoia adapts to the age. The immediate concern of \"The Thing\" is the inability to trust one's peers, but this feeling can be widened to represent distrust of entire institutions.\nDeveloped in an era of Cold War tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union, the film evokes the threat of nuclear annihilation by mutually assured destruction. \"Diabolique\"'s Daniel Clarkson Fisher notes that preferring annihilation to defeat is a recurring motif, both in MacReady's destruction of the chess computer after being checkmated and his vow to destroy the Thing even at the expense of the team. Clarkson Fisher and \"Screen Rant\"'s Michael Edward Taylor see the team's accusatory distrust and fear of assimilation as an expression of the American Red Scare of the 1950s and 1960s, while Taylor also sees a commentary on the isolationism of the me generation in the 1970s. \"Slant Magazine\"'s John Lingsan said the men display a level of post-Vietnam War (1955\u20131975) \"fatigued counterculturalism\"\u00a0\u2013 the rejection of conventional social norms, each defined by their own eccentricities.\n\"The Atlantic\"'s Noah Berlatsky said that unlike typical horror genre films, women are excluded, allowing the Thing to be identified as a fear of not being a man, or being homosexual. \"Vice\"'s Patrick Marlborough considered \"The Thing\" to be a \"scathing examination\" of manliness, noting that identifying the Thing requires intimacy, confession, and empathy to out the creature, but \"male frailty\" prevents this as an option. Trapped by pride and stunted emotional growth, the men are unable to confront the truth out of fear of embarrassment or exposure. Berlatsky noted that MacReady avoids emotional attachments and is the most paranoid, allowing him to be the hero. This detachment works against him in the finale, which leaves MacReady locked in a futile mistrust with Childs, each not really knowing the other.\nNerdist's Kyle Anderson and \"Strange Horizons\"'s Orrin Grey analyzed \"The Thing\" as an example of author H. P. Lovecraft's cosmic horror. Anderson's analysis includes the idea of cosmic horror in large part coming \"from the fear of being overtaken\", connecting it to Lovecraft's xenophobia and Blair's character arc of becoming what he most fears. In contrast, Anderson compares Blair to MacReady, who represents a more traditional Hollywood film protagonist. Grey describes the creature as fear of the loss of self, using Blair's character as an example. Discussing The Thing in the context of the first of three films in Carpenter's \"\", Grey states the threat the monster poses to the world \"is less disconcerting than the threat posed to the individual concept of self.\"\nThe Thing never speaks or gives a motive for its actions, and ruthlessly pursues its goal. \"Den of Geek\"'s Mark Harrison and Ryan Lambie said that the essence of humanity is free will, which is stripped away by the Thing, possibly without the individual being aware that they have been taken over. In a 1982 interview, when given the option to describe \"The Thing\" as \"pro-science\" like \"Who Goes There?\" or \"anti-science\" like \"The Thing from Another World\", Carpenter chose \"pro-human\", stating, \"It's better to be a human being than an imitation, or let ourselves be taken over by this creature who's not necessarily evil, but whose nature it is to simply imitate, like a chameleon.\" Further allusions have been drawn between the blood-test scene and the epidemic of HIV at the time, which could be identified only by a blood test.\nSince its release, many theories have been developed to attempt to answer the film's ambiguous ending shared by MacReady and Childs. Several suggest that Childs was infected, citing Dean Cundey's statement that he deliberately provided a subtle illumination to the eyes of uninfected characters, something absent from Childs. Similarly, others have noted a lack of visible breath from the character in the frigid air. While both aspects are present in MacReady, their absence in Childs has been explained as a technical issue with the filming. During production, Carpenter considered having MacReady be infected, and an alternate ending showed MacReady having been rescued and definitively tested as uninfected. Russell has said that analyzing the scene for clues is \"missing the point\". He continued, \"[Carpenter] and I worked on the ending of that movie together a long time. We were both bringing the audience right back to square one. At the end of the day, that was the position these people were in. They just didn't know anything... They didn't know if they knew who they were... I love that, over the years, that movie has gotten its due because people were able to get past the horrificness of the monster... to see what the movie was about, which was paranoia.\" However, Carpenter has teased, \"Now, I do know, in the end, who the Thing is, but I cannot tell you.\"\nLegacy.\nRetrospective reassessment.\nIn the years following its release, critics and fans have reevaluated \"The Thing\" as a milestone of the horror genre. A prescient review by Peter Nicholls in 1992 called \"The Thing\" \"a bleak, memorable film [that] may yet be seen as a classic\". It has been called one of the best films directed by Carpenter. John Kenneth Muir called it \"Carpenter's most accomplished and underrated directorial effort\", and critic Matt Zoller Seitz said it \"is one of the greatest and most elegantly constructed B-movies ever made\".\nTrace Thurman described it as one of the best films ever, and in 2008, \"Empire\" magazine selected it as one of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time, at number 289, calling it \"a peerless masterpiece of relentless suspense, retina-wrecking visual excess and outright, nihilistic terror\". It is now considered to be one of the greatest horror films ever made, and a classic of the genre. Several publications have called it one of the best films of 1982, including Filmsite.org, Film.com, and \"Entertainment Weekly\". Muir called it \"the best science fiction-horror film of 1982, an incredibly competitive year, and perhaps even the best genre motion picture of the decade\". \"Complex\" named it the ninth-best of the decade, calling it the \"greatest genre remake of all time\". Numerous publications have ranked it as one of the best science fiction films, including number four by \"IGN\" (2016); number 11 by Rotten Tomatoes (2024); number12 by \"Thrillist\" (2018); number17 by \"GamesRadar+\" (2018); number 31 by \"Paste\" (2018); number 32 by \"Esquire\" (2015) and \"Popular Mechanics\" (2017).\nSimilarly, \"The Thing\" has appeared on several lists of the top horror films, including number one by \"The Boston Globe\"; number two by Bloody Disgusting (2018); number four by \"Empire\" (2016); and number six by \"Time Out\" (2016). \"Empire\" listed its poster as the 43rd best film poster ever. In 2016, the British Film Institute named it one of ten great films about aliens visiting Earth. It was voted the ninth best horror film of all time in a \"Rolling Stone\" readers poll, and is considered one of the best examples of body horror. \"GamesRadar+\" listed its ending as one of the 25 best of all time. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, which has compiled old and contemporary reviews, reports that 85% of 85 critics provided positive reviews for the film, with an average rating of 7.4/10. The site's critics consensus reads: \"Grimmer and more terrifying than the 1950s take, John Carpenter's \"The Thing\" is a tense sci-fi thriller rife with compelling tension and some remarkable make-up effects.\" On Metacritic, a similar website that aggregates both past and present reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 57 out of 100 based on 13 critics, indicating \"mixed or average reviews\".\nIn a 2011 interview, Carpenter remarked that it was perhaps his favorite film from his own filmography. He lamented that it took a long time for \"The Thing\" to find a wider audience, saying, \"If \"The Thing\" had been a hit, my career would have been different. I wouldn't have had to make the choices that I made. But I needed a job. I'm not saying I hate the movies I did. I loved making \"Christine\" (1983) and \"Starman\" (1984) and \"Big Trouble in Little China\" (1986), all those films. But my career would have been different.\"\nCultural influence.\nThe film has had a significant effect on popular culture, and by 1998, \"The Thing\" was already considered a cult classic. It is listed in the film reference book \"1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die\", which says \"one of the most influential horror movies of the 1980s, much imitated but rarely bettered... It is one of the first films to unflinchingly show the rupture and warp of flesh and bone into grotesque tableaus of surreal beauty, forever raising the bar of cinematic horror.\" It has been referred to in a variety of media, from television (including \"The X-Files\", \"Futurama\", and \"Stranger Things\") to games (\"Resident Evil 4\", \"Tomb Raider III\", \"\", and \"Among Us\"), and films (\"The Faculty\", \"Slither\", and \"The Mist\").\nSeveral filmmakers have spoken of their appreciation for \"The Thing\" or cited its influence on their own work, including Guillermo del Toro, James DeMonaco, J. J. Abrams, Neill Blomkamp, David Robert Mitchell, Rob Hardy, Steven S. DeKnight, Quentin Tarantino, and Brian Patrick Butler. In 2011, \"The New York Times\" asked prominent horror filmmakers what film they had found the scariest. Two, John Sayles and Edgar Wright, cited \"The Thing\". The 2015 Tarantino film \"The Hateful Eight\" takes numerous cues from \"The Thing\", from featuring Russell in a starring role, to replicating themes of paranoia and mistrust between characters restricted to a single location, and even duplicating certain angles and layouts used by Carpenter and Cundey. Pieces of Morricone's unused score for \"The Thing\" were repurposed for \"The Hateful Eight\". Tarantino also cited \"The Thing\" as an inspiration for his 1992 film \"Reservoir Dogs\".\nThe film is screened annually in February to mark the beginning of winter at the Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station. In January 2010, \"Clarkesworld Magazine\" published \"The Things\", a short story by Peter Watts told from the Thing's point of view; it is unable to understand why humans are hostile toward it and horrified to learn that they do not shapeshift. The story received a 2011 Hugo Award nomination. In 2017, a 400-page art book was released featuring art inspired by \"The Thing\", with contributions from 350 artists, a foreword by director Eli Roth, and an afterword by Carpenter.\nThe 2007 Halloween Horror Nights event at Universal Studios in Orlando, Florida, featured \"The Thing: Assimilation\", a haunted attraction based on the film. The attraction included MacReady and Childs, both held in stasis, the Blair-Thing and the outpost kennel.\nSequels.\nDark Horse Comics published four comic book sequels starring MacReady, beginning in December 1991 with the two-part \"The Thing from Another World\" by Chuck Pfarrer, which is set 24 hours after the film. Pfarrer was reported to have pitched his comic tale to Universal as a sequel in the early 1990s. This was followed by the four-part \"The Thing from Another World: Climate of Fear\" in July 1992, the four-part \"The Thing from Another World: Eternal Vows\" in December 1993, and \"The Thing from Another World: Questionable Research\". In 1999, Carpenter said that no serious discussions had taken place for a sequel, but he would be interested in basing one on Pfarrer's adaptation, calling the story a worthy sequel. A 2002 video game of the same name was released for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 2, and Xbox to generally favorable reviews. The game's plot follows a team of U.S. soldiers investigating the aftermath of the film's events.\nIn 2005, the Syfy channel planned a four-hour miniseries sequel produced by Frank Darabont and written by David Leslie Johnson-McGoldrick. The story followed a Russian team who recover the corpses of MacReady and Childs, as well as remnants of the Thing. The story moves forward 23 years, where the Thing escapes in New Mexico, and follows the attempts at containment. The project never proceeded, and Universal opted to continue with a feature film sequel. A prequel film, also titled \"The Thing\", was released in October 2011 to a $31million worldwide box office gross and mixed reviews. The story follows the events after the Norwegian team discovers the Thing. In 2020, Universal Studios and Blumhouse Productions announced the development of a remake of Carpenter's \"The Thing\". The remake was described as incorporating elements of \"The Thing from Another World\" and \"The Thing\", as well as the novella \"Who Goes There?\" and its expanded version \"Frozen Hell\", which features several additional chapters.\nAlthough released years apart, and unrelated in terms of plot, characters, crew, or even production studios, Carpenter considers \"The Thing\" to be the first installment in his \"Apocalypse Trilogy\", a series of films based around cosmic horror, entities unknown to man, that are threats to both human life and the sense of self. \"The Thing\" was followed by \"Prince of Darkness\" in 1987, and \"In the Mouth of Madness\" in 1994. All three films are heavily influenced by Carpenter's appreciation for the works of Lovecraft.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30810", "revid": "146242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30810", "title": "The Thing -- 1982", "text": ""}
{"id": "30811", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30811", "title": "Troff", "text": "Typesetting language\n \ntroff (), short for \"typesetter roff\", is the major component of a document processing system developed by Bell Labs for the Unix operating system. troff and the related nroff were both developed from the original roff.\nWhile nroff was intended to produce output on terminals and line printers, troff was intended to produce output on typesetting systems, specifically the Graphic Systems CAT, which had been introduced in 1972. Both used the same underlying markup language, and a single source file could normally be used by nroff or troff without change.\n\"troff\" features commands to designate fonts, spacing, paragraphs, margins, footnotes and more. Unlike many other text formatters, \"troff\" can position characters arbitrarily on a page, even overlapping them, and has a fully programmable input language. Separate preprocessors are used for more convenient production of tables, diagrams, and mathematics. Inputs to troff are plain text files and can be created by any text editor.\nExtensive macro packages have been created for various document styles. A typical distribution of troff includes the me macros for formatting research papers, man and mdoc macros for creating Unix man pages, mv macros for creating mountable transparencies, and the ms and mm macros for letters, books, technical memoranda, and reports.\nHistory.\n\"troff\"'s origins can be traced to a text-formatting program called RUNOFF, which was written by Jerome H. Saltzer for MIT's CTSS operating system in the mid-1960s. (The name allegedly came from the phrase \"I'll run off a document\".)\nBob Morris ported it to the GE 635 architecture and called the program roff (an abbreviation of \"runoff\"). It was rewritten as rf for the PDP-7, and at the same time (1969), Doug McIlroy rewrote an extended and simplified version of \"roff\" in the BCPL programming language.\nThe first version of Unix was developed on a PDP-7 which was sitting around Bell Labs. In 1971 the developers wanted to get a PDP-11 for further work on the operating system. In order to justify the cost for this system, they proposed that they would implement a document-formatting system for the Bell Labs patents department. This first formatting program was a reimplementation of McIllroy's \"roff\", written by Joe F. Ossanna.\nWhen they needed a more flexible language, a new version of \"roff\" called nroff (\"newer \"roff\"\") was written, which provided the basis for all future versions. When they got a Graphic Systems CAT phototypesetter, Ossanna modified \"nroff\" to support multiple fonts and proportional spacing. Dubbed \"troff\", for \"typesetter roff\", its sophisticated output amazed the typesetter manufacturer and confused peer reviewers, who thought that manuscripts using \"troff\" had been published before. As such, the name \"troff\" is pronounced rather than *.\nWith \"troff\" came \"nroff\" (they were actually almost the same program), which was for producing output for line printers and character terminals. It understood everything \"troff\" did, and ignored the commands which were not applicable, e.g., font changes.\nOssanna's \"troff\" was written in PDP-11 assembly language and produced output specifically for the CAT phototypesetter. He rewrote it in C, although it was now 7000 lines of uncommented code and still dependent on the CAT. As the CAT became less common, and was no longer supported by the manufacturer, the need to make it support other devices became a priority. Ossanna died before this task was completed, so Brian Kernighan took on the task of rewriting \"troff\". The newly rewritten version produced a device-independent code which was very easy for post-processors to read and translate to the appropriate printer codes. Also, this new version of \"troff\" (often called ditroff for \"device independent troff\") had several extensions, which included drawing functions. The program's documentation defines the output format of \"ditroff\", which is used by many modern \"troff\" clones like GNU groff.\nIn 1983, \"troff\" was one of several UNIX tools available for Charles River Data Systems' UNOS operating system under Bell Laboratories license.\nThe \"troff\" collection of tools (including pre- and post-processors) was eventually called Documenter's WorkBench (DWB), and was under continuous development in Bell Labs and later at the spin-off Unix System Laboratories (USL) through 1994. At that time, SoftQuad took over the maintenance, although Brian Kernighan continued to improve \"troff\" on his own. Thus, there are at least the following variants of the original Bell Labs \"troff\" in use:\nWhile \"troff\" has been supplanted by other programs such as Interleaf, FrameMaker, and LaTeX, it is still being used quite extensively. It remains the default formatter for the UNIX documentation.\nThe software was reimplemented as groff for the GNU system beginning in 1990. In addition, due to the open sourcing of Ancient UNIX systems, as well as modern successors such as the ditroff-based open-sourced versions found on OpenSolaris and Plan 9 from Bell Labs, there are several versions of AT&amp;T troff (CAT and ditroff-based) available under various open-source licenses.\nMacros.\nIn general, one was not encouraged to use troff directly, but rather go through some easier-to-use interface.\nTroff includes macros that are run before starting to process the document. These macros include setting up page headers and footers, defining new commands, and influencing how the output will be formatted. The command-line argument for including a macro set is codice_1, which has led to many macro sets being known as the base filename with a leading m.\nThe standard macro sets, with leading m are:\nThe ms macros were the first of these, developed at AT&amp;T, before they were supplanted by the mm macros. One goal of the mm macros was that they be usable by the typing pool at Bell Labs and, over time, this happened and the mm macros became a standard at Bell Labs. AT&amp;T made the mm macros commercially available for System V Unix. In contrast, the me macros were developed at Berkeley.\nAn example of a simple business letter prepared with the mm macros would be:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pre/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA comprehensive list of macros available is usually listed in a codice_3 manual page.\nPreprocessors.\nAs \"troff\" evolved, since there are several things which cannot be done easily in \"troff\", several preprocessors were developed. These programs transform certain parts of a document into \"troff\" input, fitting naturally into the use of \"pipelines\" in Unix \u2014 sending the output of one program as the input to another (see pipes and filters). Typically, each preprocessor translates only sections of the input file that are specially marked, passing the rest of the file through unchanged. The embedded preprocessing instructions are written in a simple application-specific programming language, which provides a high degree of power and flexibility.\nThree preprocessors provide \"troff\" with drawing capabilities by defining a domain-specific language for describing the picture.\nIn addition, there is a command soelim that removes codice_4 inclusion directives from the input text.\nA typical structure of the pipeline might be:\ncodice_5\nYet more preprocessors allow the drawing of more complex pictures by generating output for \"pic\".\nOther front-ends.\nSeveral other front-ends have been developed that are intended to be friendlier interfaces to troff. \nOne of them is Sanscribe, originally developed at Berkeley and then enhanced during the 1980s by several users including Intel and InterACT. Used for writing memos, reports, documents, Sanscribe is built upon basic troff commands as well as the me macros and various pre- and post-processors such as soelim, eqn, tbl, grap, and pic. However it is a main program binary, not a preprocessor. The conditional inclusion capability renders it especially useful for maintaining multi-platform reference manuals. However, Sanscribe is fragile and prone to giving cryptic errors or producing weirdly formatted results.\nA special-purpose front-end is vgrind, which generates nicely formatted source program listings, with such features as putting comments in italics, keywords in bold, and function names highlighted in margins. It can run either as a filter or as a main program with its output being passed to troff. It has support for the languages in use at Bell Labs facilities, including not just Fortran, C, and C++ but also domain-specific tools such as Bourne shell and yacc as well as those further afield such as Emacs Lisp and Icon.\nA different approach is employed by the CADiZ suite of tools for the Z notation. Rather than the codice_6 program being a preprocessor in the front of the pipeline, it interacts multiple times with codice_7 as both input and output, using saved files rather than a pipe. CADiZ also contains its own set of macros, called codice_8 to codice_9.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30813", "revid": "45445004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30813", "title": "The Onion", "text": "American satire news organization\nThe Onion is an American digital media company and newspaper organization that publishes satirical articles on international, national, and local news. The company is currently based in Chicago, but originated as a weekly print publication on August 29, 1988, in Madison, Wisconsin. \"The Onion\" began publishing online in early 1996. In 2007, they began publishing satirical news audio and video online as the \"Onion News Network\". In 2013, \"The Onion\" stopped publishing its print edition and launched Onion Labs, an advertising agency. \"The Onion\" was then acquired three times, first by Univision in 2016, which later merged \"The Onion\" and its several other publications into those of Gizmodo Media Group. This unit was sold in 2019 to Great Hill Partners, forming a new company named G/O Media. Then, in April 2024, G/O Media sold \"The Onion\" to Global Tetrahedron, a firm newly created by former Twilio CEO Jeff Lawson, which revived the print edition in August that year.\n\"The Onion\"'s articles cover real and fictional current events, parodying the tone and format of traditional news organizations with stories, editorials, and street interviews using a traditional news website layout and an editorial voice modeled after that of the Associated Press. The publication's humor often depends on presenting mundane, everyday events as newsworthy, surreal, or alarming, such as \"Rotation Of Earth Plunges Entire North American Continent Into Darkness\". In 1999, comedian Bob Odenkirk praised the publication as \"the best comedy writing in the country\".\n\"The Onion\" previously ran \"The A.V. Club\", a non-satirical entertainment and pop culture publication founded in 1993 that contains interviews and reviews of newly released media and other weekly features, and \"ClickHole\", a satirical website founded in 2014 which parodies clickbait websites. \"ClickHole\" was acquired by \"Cards Against Humanity\" in February 2020 while \"The A.V. Club\" was acquired by \"Paste\" magazine in March 2024.\nHistory.\nMadison (1988\u20132001).\nIn 1988, \"The Onion\" was founded as a weekly print newspaper for satirical news by University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison students Tim Keck and Christopher Johnson. Keck's parents had both worked on \"The Hammond Times\" newspaper, and he had previously partnered with cartoonist James Sturm to sell monthly calendars featuring characters from Sturm's comics in \"The Daily Cardinal\" student newspaper. The idea for a newspaper of fake stories came from \"The Daily Cardinal\"'s annual April Fools' Day parody issue. Keck claims that Johnson's uncle suggested naming the newspaper \"The Onion\" because of their frequent consumption of onion sandwiches, early comic contributor Scott Dikkers maintains that it referred to \"newspaper slang in the 1930s for a juicy, multi-layered story,\" and editor Cole Bolton insists that it mocked the campus bulletin \"The Union\", alongside which early issues appeared.\nIn 1989, Keck and Johnson sold the paper to Dikkers; Peter Haise, their advertising manager; and Jonnie Wilder, their typesetter, for $16,000 ($19,000 according to some sources). After the sale, Keck and Johnson separately became publishers of similar alternative weeklies: Keck of \"The Stranger\" in Seattle, Washington, and Johnson of the \"Weekly Alibi\" in Albuquerque, New Mexico. In late 1990, Wilder sold her shares for $15,000 to work at the board game publisher Iron Crown Enterprises. Haise left \"The Onion\" after 15 years and eventually opened a custom framing shop in Wauwatosa, Wisconsin. Dikkers claimed he was de facto editor by the third issue and became \"The Onion\"'s longest-serving editor-in-chief (1988\u20131999, 2005\u20132008).\nIn \"The Onion\"'s earlier years, it was successful in a number of university locations (e.g., University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison and University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign). The publication primarily consisted of a mix of Dikkers's cartoons, \"Spy\" magazine-like satire, and short fiction. The bottom three inches were reserved as ad space for coupons that were typically purchased by local, student-centered or inexpensive establishments, such as eateries and video rental stores.\nIn the summer of 1993, Stephen Thompson founded and became editor of the paper's genuine entertainment section, which was dubbed \"The A.V. Club\" in 1995. In a 1994 interview with \"U. Magazine\", Dikkers discussed Onion, Inc.'s plans to create a new sketch comedy show called \"The Comedy Castaways\", which they were in the process of pitching to NBC, Fox, and HBO. With a pilot and the first two episodes in post-production, Dikkers said, \"I think what sets us apart is we've intentionally formed a tightly knit group of funny performers. A lot of these other shows are created by 50-year-olds, written by 40-year-olds and performed by 35-year-olds\".\nIn 1995, Dave and Jeff Haupt sold their shares of Cisco to purchase a $25,000 license to franchise \"The\" \"Onion\" in Denver, Colorado. The publication also licensed \"The Onion\"'s content for between $200 and $500 a week. According to the Haupts, the staff in the paper's Chicago office were known to smoke marijuana while watching Cubs games on television. But the Haupts and their partner, Dave Rogers, assembled a more business-focused staff. While other editions of The Onion ran pages of stories there were not enough ads to support, the Haupts cut content to avoid losses. It was a deal many at \"The Onion\" eventually regretted. There were blowups when the Haupts refused to run especially biting headlines or when they made changes to the paper's layout. \"We might have been selling humor, but the business behind it was always very serious to us. The rest of \"The Onion\" was a complete disaster.\"\nIn the spring of 1996, Ben Karlin and Dikkers collaborated with Robert Smigel and Dana Carvey to create four short \"Onion\" news segments for \"The Dana Carvey Show\". Smigel said that after being introduced to \"The Onion\" by Bob Odenkirk a year earlier, \"it jumped out at me as something completely original and great, and I really wanted to use it on the show\". Although four fake news segments anchored by Stephen Colbert were recorded, only one of the segments actually aired.\nIn response to other websites copying \"Onion\" print articles without attribution, graphic designer Jack Szwergold launched an online version of \"The Onion\" in May 1996. Amid the dot-com boom, high revenue from online advertising allowed the newspaper to professionalize with formal positions and salaries. In a 2002 interview, then-editor in chief Rob Siegel said, \"If you look at the breakdown of people who read \"The Onion\" online, it's like Microsoft, Dell Computers, the Department of Justice and then, like, University of Wisconsin. So it's a combination of students and pretty impressive people. I get the feeling that the print version is read by people hanging out in bars\".\nThe website also increased \"The Onion\"'s global recognition. Soon after its launch, the article \"Dying Boy Gets Wish: To Pork Janet Jackson\" prompted a lawsuit from the singer's legal team, which was settled by issuing a letter of apology in the following issue and providing a complimentary subscription. In March 1999, \"The Onion\"'s website won its first Webby Award in the category of \"Humor\".\nIn the fall of 1996, Ben Karlin, who had been a writer and editor for the publication since graduating from the University of Wisconsin in 1993, moved to Los Angeles and joined other former \"Onion\" staff members to create a pilot for a news parody titled \"Deadline: Now\" for the Fox Network. The 15-minute pilot was completed in 1997, but it was never picked up for production. However, its creation led to steady writing work for Karlin and other former \"Onion\" staffers, such as writing some episodes of \"Space Ghost Coast to Coast\" on the Cartoon Network. In the wake of Karlin's departure, Siegel took over as editor of the publication, for which he was paid $400 per week. In January 1999, when Jon Stewart became the host of \"The Daily Show\", he chose Karlin to be head writer of the newly restructured show.\nOn January 27, 1998, MTV premiered \"Virtual Bill\", a collaboration between writers of \"The Onion\" and 3-D character studio Protozoa. The titular \"Virtual Bill\" character was a quasi-realistic CGI version of Bill Clinton created by studio Protozoa who introduced music videos and told jokes written by the staff of \"The Onion\". The voice of \"Virtual Bill\" was provided by then-editor Dikkers. After the initial premiere, \"Virtual Bill\" returned to MTV on December 17, 1998, with another TV special and an interactive web special produced by Pulse that ported the 3D data into a web compatible format using Pulse's proprietary plug-in.\nFrom March 3 to 7, 1999, \"Onion\" staff attended The Comedy Festival in Aspen, Colorado to promote their \"Our Dumb Century\" book. The newspaper was met with effusive praise from notable comedians like Conan O'Brien, Dave Foley and Dave Thomas, as well as cartoonist Peter Bagge and musician Andy Prieboy. The book released on March 23, 1999, featuring mocked-up newspaper front pages from across the 20th century, presented as if the publication had been continuously in print since before 1900. In the wake of the book's success, networks such as HBO and NBC were in talks to bring \"The Onion\" to TV with a special based on \"Our Dumb Century\". Despite nearly two years of work spent on conceiving and producing \"Our Dumb Century\", the writers received only $1,300 in bonuses, despite the fact that the two-book publishing deal netted \"The Onion\" $450,000.\nIn April 2000, DreamWorks Studios optioned two stories from the satirical newspaper, \"Canadian Girlfriend Unsubstantiated\"\u2014which was to be written by former \"Onion\" editor and writer Rich Dahm\u2014and \"Tenth Circle Added to Rapidly Growing Hell\" with an eye toward producing the latter as a family comedy. \"The story is so dark and hate filled\u2014I was shocked\", said head writer Todd Hanson. \"It's like an Onion joke. I mean, what are they going to do? Add a sickly-but-adorable moppet?\" added editor Robert Siegel. DreamWorks planned for the finished \"Tenth Circle Added to Rapidly Growing Hell\" to involve animation as well as musical singalongs. The following year, Miramax signed a first-look deal with \"The Onion\", but it never agreed to any films.\nIn June 2000, writers and editors of \"The Onion\" participated in a Comedy Central panel discussion moderated by Jeff Greenfield titled \"The State of \"The Onion\"\" during the \"Toyota Comedy Festival 2000\". The following month, editor Robert Siegel was named one of \"People\" magazine's most eligible bachelors.\nNew York City (2001\u20132012).\nIn April 2000, a $12 million deal for Comedy Central to acquire \"The Onion\" fell through amid the dot-com crash. In frustration, Dikkers sold his shares to David Schafer, who managed investments for Strong Capital Management. Writers conditioned their acceptance of the deal on joining the owners in New York City, while writers for \"The A.V. Club\" would remain in Madison, Wisconsin. Agreeing that the move would allow \"The Onion\" to expand into a full production company of books, television, and movies, Haise and Schafer chose a former furniture warehouse in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan. The planned launch of the New York City print edition on September 16, 2001, was postponed due to the September 11 attacks. The rewritten issue debuted on September 27 and was widely praised for bringing humor to a recent tragedy, doubling the website's online traffic in the following weeks.\nIn November 2002, a humorous op-ed piece in \"The Onion\" that was satirically bylined by filmmaker Michael Bay titled \"Those Chechen Rebels Stole My Idea\" was removed from the site without explanation. Entertainment industry trade magazine Variety theorized, \"It's not clear if Bay\u2014a frequent object of \"The Onion\"'s satire\u2014requested the move.\"\nIn 2003, editor Robert Siegel quit his day-to-day role at \"The Onion\" to focus on writing screenplays full-time. \"After the 14,000th headline I felt the itch to use a different part of my brain\", he said. \"You can go mad thinking in headline form.\" In the wake of his departure, long-time staff writer Carol Kolb took over as editor of the publication.\nUnable to support \"The Onion\"'s rising costs, Haise sold his ownership shares to Schafer for $1.7 million in April 2003. Schafer appointed journalist Steve Hannah as \"The Onion\"'s new CEO, who quickly faced criticism for being too old to understand its satire. In 2005, \"The Onion\" moved its New York City offices from its initial Chelsea location to downtown on Broadway in the SoHo neighborhood of Manhattan. That same year, Kolb resigned to work in television writing, leading Hannah to rehire Dikkers as editor-in-chief.\nIn 2006, \"The Onion\" had reached a print circulation of 549,000; it was distributed for free in several cities. The same year, it launched a YouTube channel, which was structured as a parody of modern American television news programs. In June 2006, it was also announced that Siegel had been tapped by Miramax Films to write the screenplay for a comedy titled \"Homeland Insecurity\" which was slated to be about a pair of Arab-Americans who are mistaken for terrorists while traveling to Texas.\nIn July 2006, business media began reporting that Viacom intended to acquire \"The Onion\". After the sale price was rejected by \"Onion\" executives, the company began expanding with unpaid interns to appear larger to potential buyers.\nIn April 2007, \"The Onion\" launched \"Onion News Network\", a parody of \"the visual style and breathless reporting of 24-hour cable news networks like CNN.\" In 2008, Kolb returned as head writer of the Onion News Network, while Dikkers handed off editorial control of \"The Onion\" itself to Joe Randazzo. Randazzo first became a writer for \"The Onion\" in 2006 and became the first \"Onion\" editor with no connection to its initial era in Madison.\nIn November 2009, \"The Onion\" released \"Our Front Pages: 21 Years of Greatness, Virtue, and Moral Rectitude From America's Finest News Source\" which was notable in not only compiling dozens of front pages from the publication's history as a news parody but also showcasing front pages from the publication's early, more casual campus humor focused era during the 1980s when the publication featured headlines such as, \"Depressed? Try Liposuction on that Pesky Head.\"\nIn July 2009, \"The Onion\" satirized media consolidation by leaking false rumors that the newspaper would be sold, which was widely reported by other outlets. Fictional Publisher Emeritus T. Herman Zweibel (portrayed by Dikkers) announced that he had sold the publication to a Chinese company\u2014Yu Wan Mei Corporation\u2014resulting in a week-long series of China-related articles throughout \"The Onion\"'s website and print editions. On July 22, 2009, editor Joe Randazzo clarified on NPR's \"All Things Considered\" that \"we are, in fact, still a solvent independently owned American company.\"\nIn August 2011, \"The Onion\"'s website began testing a paywall model, requiring a $2.95 monthly/$29.95 annual charge from non-U.S. visitors who wish to read more than about five stories within 30 days. \"We are testing a meter internationally as readers in those markets are already used to paying directly for some (other) content, particularly in the UK where we have many readers\", said the company's CTO Michael Greer.\nIn September 2011, \"The Onion\" announced that it would move its editorial operations to Chicago, joining its corporate headquarters. That year, \"Onion News Network\" launched on television, and it was a major source of revenue amid diminished newspaper advertising in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis. Chicago and Illinois offered tax breaks for Internet video production, while New York City unions had bargained high wages for \"Onion\" writers.\nThe move blindsided \"Onion\" writers, and they threatened to collectively resign. Writer Baratunde Thurston organized \"Project Allium\" (named after the \"Allium\" genus of onions) to have business incubator Betaworks acquire \"The Onion\". Hannah responded by rejecting Betaworks' offer and convincing Dikkers to return as General Manager and Vice President of Creative Development to maintain the appearance of continuity. Around 85% of the staff resigned, including Randazzo.\nChicago (2012\u2013present).\nWith the publication's core editorial staff now based in Chicago, in March 2012 Cole Bolton\u2014a Brown University graduate of business economics, former associate economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and research associate at Harvard Business School\u2014was named the new editor-in-chief of \"The Onion\". \"I was never in an improv group, never in a sketch group, never wrote for an \"Onion\" parody in college\", said Bolton in a 2014 interview with comedy publication \"SplitSider\". \"It was just sort of a decision that I decided, two years out of college, that I didn't like where I was going in my life, and I wanted to do something that I cared about more, so I ended up just sending stuff in to \"The Onion\".\"\nAdditionally, in March 2012 more insight into the internal issues surrounding the Chicago move\u2014including an attempt made by the writers to find a new owner\u2014are explored by articles in \"The Atlantic Wire\" and \"New York\" magazine's \"Daily Intelligencer\". According to an article in the \"Chicago Tribune\", founding editor Scott Dikkers returned to the publication in light of the Chicago move stating that he hopes to find a \"younger and hungrier\" pool of talent in Chicago than what was available in New York City. \"\"The Onion\" is obviously always going to draw talent from wherever it is\", Dikkers said. \"In Madison, people used to just come in off the street [...] and we'd give them a shot. \"The Onion\" has always thrived on the youngest, greenest people.\"\nIn August 2012, it was announced that a group of former \"The Onion\" writers had teamed up with Adult Swim to create comedy content on a website called \"Thing X\". According to the comedy website \"SplitSider\", \"\"The Onion\" writers had nothing else going on, and AdultSwim.com wanted to take advantage of that. But only because they smelled a business opportunity. Adult Swim is just looking at it from a business standpoint.\" In June 2013, it was announced that \"Thing X\" would be shutting down with some staff moving over to parent website adultswim.com on June 18, 2013. In February 2013 \"The Onion\" was added to \"Advertising Age\"'s \"Digital A-List 2013\" because the publication \"...has not just survived, it's thrived...\" since the publication's 2012 move to consolidate operations and staff in Chicago.\nIn November 2013, the publication announced in \"Crain's Chicago Business\" that \"The Onion\" would move to an all-digital format by December 2013, citing a 30% year-over-year growth in page views to the publication's website. The final print edition was published on December 13, 2013.\nIn 2013, \"The Onion\" received an email from Michael Cohen claiming that an article published about Donald Trump was defamation. Cohen demanded that it be removed with an apology.\nIn June 2014, \"The Onion\" launched the spinoff website ClickHole, which satirizes and parodies so-called \"clickbait\" websites such as BuzzFeed and Upworthy that capitalize on viral content to drive traffic. On September 21, 2015, \"StarWipe\" launched as a satirical spinoff of \"The A.V. Club\" centered on celebrity culture. It was closed on June 17, 2016.\nIn November 2014, \"Bloomberg News\" reported that \"The Onion\" had hired a financial adviser for a possible sale. In June 2015, Hannah was replaced as CEO by Mike McAvoy, who he had hired a decade earlier as a financial controller. The following year, he oversaw restructuring to reduce non-media roles in response to declining demand.\nUnivision Communications / G/O Media ownership (2016\u20132024).\nIn January 2016, Univision Communications purchased a 40% stake in Onion, Inc. for between $85\u2013100 million. \"The Onion\" and Gizmodo Media Group was merged into Univision's Fusion Media Group with the former undergoing a visual overhaul to match Gizmodo's branding.\nIn January 2017, \"The Onion\" partnered with Lionsgate Films and production company Serious Business to develop multiple film projects. \"We've plotted our takeover of the film industry for some time\", said Kyle Ryan, vice president of Onion Studios. \"With the help of Serious Business and Lionsgate, we'll make room on our award shelf for some Oscars. To the basement you go, Pulitzers.\" Serious Business is a production company run by former UTA Online co-founder Jason U. Nadler, \"@midnight\" co-creator Jon Zimelis and writer/producer Alex Blagg.\nIn September 2017, the site's editor-in-chief Cole Bolton and executive editor Ben Berkley stepped down to join Elon Musk's \"Thud\", which folded after Musk pulled funding the following year over fears that it would satirize his own companies. Chad Nackers was elevated from head writer to editor-in-chief and is now the only remaining member from \"The Onion\"'s Madison era. The departures were partially due to disagreements about the direction the site was taking under the ownership of Univision.\nIn April 2018 the employees of the company unionized with The Writers Guild Of America, East. The union comprises \"all of the creative staffs at Onion Inc.: \"The A.V. Club\", \"The Onion\", \"ClickHole\", \"The Takeout\", Onion Labs, and Onion Inc.'s video and art departments.\" and reached a contract agreement with management on December 20, 2018.\nIn July 2018, Univision laid off 15% of \"Onion\" staff to support a sale of Onion Inc. and Gizmodo Media Group. On April 8, 2019, private equity firm Great Hill Partners acquired Onion Inc. and Gizmodo Media Group from Univision for an undisclosed amount to form G/O Media. In March 2024, G/O Media sold \"The A.V. Club\" to \"Paste\" magazine and was reported to be seeking buyers for \"The Onion\".\nGlobal Tetrahedron ownership, attempted purchase of \"InfoWars\" (2024\u2013present).\nOn April 25, 2024, G/O Media CEO Jim Spanfeller told employees that G/O Media had sold \"The Onion\" to Chicago firm Global Tetrahedron, which is owned by Twilio founder Jeff Lawson, with former NBC News reporter Ben Collins serving as CEO. As a condition of the deal, the new owners said they would retain the website's staff and keep it based in Chicago. \"Global Tetrahedron\" is taken from a \"fictional evil megacorporation\" that has been the subject of a running gag since \"Our Dumb Century\". New leaders at the company also included Danielle Strle as chief product officer and Leila Brillson as chief marketing officer. Global Tetrahedron promised that the buyers would continue to honor \"Onion\" staffers' union contract, and that \"Onion\" employees would be part of a revenue sharing plan. Under Global Tetrahedron ownership, \"The Onion\" redesigned its website, dropping Kinja and carrying significantly less advertising, and launched a subscription that included a new monthly print edition in August 2024. \"Onion News Network\", which had not released new content since 2015, returned in September 2024, with former MSNBC host Joshua Johnson portraying anchor Dwight Richmond.\nOn November 14, 2024, through a bankruptcy auction, Global Tetrahedron attempted to purchase \"InfoWars\", a conspiratorial far-right website founded by Alex Jones. Collins stated that Global Tetrahedron's intent was to turn \"InfoWars\" into a parody of Jones's conspiracy theories, adding genuine gun violence prevention information to the site as well. The purchase was supported by families of the victims of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, who had successfully sued Jones for defamation. The purchase was initially halted the following day, and on December 10, the federal bankruptcy judge overseeing Jones's case, Christopher Lopez, rejected the sale, concluding that the bidding process was flawed. Lopez ordered an evidentiary hearing regarding the auction, saying \"I'm going to figure out exactly what happened\" and that \"no one should feel comfortable with the results of this auction.\" No date was immediately set for a new auction, and in early 2025 the bankruptcy court rejected the purchase attempt, as \"InfoWars's\" parent company was no longer in bankruptcy and thus the website was no longer an asset eligible for auction through the court.\nPrint edition.\nDuring \"The Onion\" print edition's initial 25-year run\u2014from the publication's creation in 1988 to the end of the print edition in 2013\u2014it was distributed for free in various cities across the United States and Canada as well as via paid mail order subscription to subscribers around the world. By the time the print edition of \"The Onion\" ceased publication in December 2013, it was only available in Chicago, Milwaukee and Providence. At its peak, \"The Onion\" had a print circulation of about 500,000 while the publication's websites brought in more than 10 million unique monthly visitors. Below is a list of all of the cities in which \"The Onion\" was distributed freely at different points from 1988 to 2013.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"The Onion\" revived its print edition in August 2024, as a paid subscription with monthly issues. To promote the relaunch, \"The Onion\" printed a special 40,000-copy run for the Democratic National Convention that month. As of August 2025, \"The Onion\" has 53,000 subscribers.\nRegular features.\nRegular features of \"The Onion\" include:\nEditors and writers.\nAs of 2025, the current editor of \"The Onion\" is Chad Nackers.&lt;ref name=\"reuters/nackers-2025\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Past editors and writers have included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBooks, video, film and audio.\nBooks.\nSince the first publication of \"Our Dumb Century\" in 1999, \"The Onion\" has produced various books that often compile already produced material into collected volumes. Its other fully original book content includes \"Our Dumb World\" (2007) and \"The Onion Book of Known Knowledge\" (2012).\n\"Onion News Network\".\nIn April 2007, \"The Onion\" launched \"Onion News Network\"\u2014a daily web video broadcast\u2014with a story about an illegal immigrant taking an executive's $800,000-a-year job for $600,000 a year, directed by Dikkers. The publication reportedly initially invested $1 million in the production and hired 15 new staffers. On February 3, 2009, \"The Onion\" launched a spin-off of the \"Onion News Network\" called the \"Onion Sports Network.\" In April 2009, the program was awarded a Peabody Award noting that the publication provides \"ersatz news that has a worrisome ring of truth.\"\nIn a \"Wikinews\" interview in November 2007, former \"Onion\" President Mills said the \"Onion News Network\" had been a huge hit. \"We get over a million downloads a week, which makes it one of the more successful produced-for-the-Internet videos\", said Mills. \"If we're not the most successful, we're one of the most.' In January 2011, \"The Onion\" launched two TV shows on cable networks: \"Onion SportsDome\" which premiered January 11 on Comedy Central, and the \"Onion News Network\" which premiered January 21 on Independent Film Channel (IFC). Later in the year IFC officially announced the renewal of the \"Onion News Network\" for a second season in March 2011 while Comedy Central officially announced the cancellation of \"Onion SportsDome\" in June 2011.\nIn August 2011, the Writers Guild of America, East, AFL\u2013CIO, announced the unionization of the \"Onion News Network\" writing staff, averting a potential strike which hinged on pay and benefits. It is also not the first time Onion, Inc. has been criticized for the way it treats its employees: In June 2011 \"A.V. Club\" Philadelphia city editor Emily Guendelsberger was the victim of an attack and\u2014according to the \"Philadelphia Daily News\"\u2014her job did not provide health insurance to cover hospital bills. According to the WGA, \"Onion News Network\" was the only scripted, live-action program that had employed non-union writers. \"The ONN writers stood together and won real improvements\", said WGAE Executive Director Lowell Peterson. \"We welcome them into the WGAE and we look forward to a productive relationship with the company.\" Peterson noted that more than 70 Guild members from all of the New York-based comedy shows signed a letter supporting the \"Onion News Network\" writers, and hundreds of Guild members sent emails to the producers.\nIn March 2012, IFC officially announced the cancellation of the \"Onion News Network\". After the show's cancellation, a pilot for a new comedy series titled \"Onion News Empire\" premiered on Amazon.com in April 2013, which presented as a behind-the-scenes look of \"The Onion\"'s newsroom. The pilot was one of several candidates for production on Amazon, but was not ultimately selected. In September 2024, \"The Onion\" relaunched the \"Onion News Network\" on its YouTube page, starring former MSNBC host Joshua Johnson as ONN anchor Dwight Richmond.\nVideo series.\nOnion Digital Studios\nIn 2008, \"The Onion\" launched a series of YouTube videos produced by its 'Onion Digital Studios' division, funded in part by a grant from YouTube and exclusive to the site. \nSeries produced were:\nlimited release on October 2, 2025 in independent theaters, after a theater chain withdrew&lt;ref name=\"thebeacon/bad-pedophile\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"indiewire/1235154168\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\navailable online as \"The Onion Investigates: Jeffrey Epstein\"&lt;ref name=\"youtube/XjhSoGcQhWU\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\n\"The Onion Movie\".\n\"The Onion Movie\" is a direct-to-video film written by then-\"Onion\" editor Robert Siegel and writer Todd Hanson and directed by Tom Kuntz and Mike Maguire. Created in 2003, Fox Searchlight Pictures was on board to release the movie, originally called \"The Untitled Onion Movie\", but at some point in the process, directors Kuntz and Maguire\u2014as well as writer Siegel\u2014walked away from the project. In 2006, New Regency Productions took over the production of the troubled project. After two years of being in limbo, the film was released directly on DVD on June 3, 2008. Upon release, it was credited as being directed by James Kleiner, a pseudonym for Kuntz and Maguire.\nIn Spring 2014, early employee and former shareholder, Peter K. Haise, sued majority shareholder,&lt;ref name=\"captimes/3397c5ab0cd1\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; David K. Schafer, in Palm Beach County over not being listed as an \"Executive Producer\" in the film's credits, despite that being a condition of his 2003 transfer of ownership. The lawsuit was ultimately settled with Haise claiming an undisclosed financial victory.\n\"Onion Radio News\".\nThe \"Onion Radio News\" was an audio podcast/radio show produced by \"The Onion\" from 1999 and 2009. The core voice of the podcast was that of a fictional newsreader named \"Doyle Redland\" who was voiced by Pete S. Mueller. At its peak \"Onion Radio News\" was picked up by the Westwood One radio network as well as Audible.com.\nOnion Public Radio podcasts.\nOn February 5, 2018, \"The Onion\" published its first podcast, titled \"A Very Fatal Murder\". It was released in six parts and parodies other true crime podcasts such as \"Serial\" and \"My Favorite Murder\". The story follows Onion Public Radio reporter David Pascall (voiced by David Sidorov) as he tries to investigate the murder of a 17-year-old girl named Hayley Price in the fictional town of Bluff Springs, Nebraska.\nOn January 16, 2020, \"The Onion\" expanded its podcast formula to include \"The Topical\", in a partnership with Sony Music. \"The Topical\" was a satirical news podcast which parodies the style and format of NPR drive-time news broadcasts and \"The Daily\" by the \"New York Times\". It was hosted by a fictional Leslie Price, with its final episode on May 20, 2021.\nInfluence and controversies.\nTaken seriously.\nOccasionally, the straight-faced manner in which \"The Onion\" reports non-existent events, happenings and ideas has resulted in third parties mistakenly citing \"The Onion\" stories as real news.\nAs a political actor.\nSeveral commentators have characterized \"The Onion\" as overtly political. In 2013, Noreen Malone, editor of \"The New York Times\" Sunday Business section, characterized the publication as producing biting, leftist op-ed pieces through its presentation of satire news. Conversely, journalist David Weigel criticized the outlet for advocating US intervention in the Syrian civil war and same-sex marriage in the United States, which he framed as already popular views adopted for the faster Internet news cycle. Farhad Manjoo of \"Slate\" similarly attributed the publication's \"faster, bigger, more strident, and, to me, a little inconsistent\" tone to the exigencies of the Internet.\nPolitical commentator Emmett Rensin has described \"The Onion\" as \"the paper most dedicated to the overthrowing capitalism in the United States\" and that it \"represents some latent Marxism in our culture\", citing its criticism of false consciousness, commodity fetishization, and the invisible hand. Rensin attributes this slant to the need to work from \"obvious, intuitive truth\u2014the kind necessary for any kind of broadly appealing humor\", while Christine Wenc's book \"Funny Because It's True\" highlights that many early writers came from \"The Daily Cardinal\", the left-leaning student newspaper of the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison.\nSome of the publication's political impact is unintentional. For example, \"The Onion\"'s long-running caricature of Joe Biden as a blue-collar \"creepy but harmless uncle\" character is believed to have benefited the real Joe Biden's public image. In May 2019, the former \"Onion\" editor Joe Garden published an op-ed in \"Vice\" to express regret over the character, which he felt had distracted from serious concerns about Biden's political record and personal behavior.\nU.S. Presidential Seal dispute.\nIn September 2005, the assistant counsel to President George W. Bush, Grant M. Dixton, wrote a cease-and-desist letter to \"The Onion\", asking the publication to stop using the presidential seal, which it used in an online parody of Bush.\n\"The Onion\" responded with a formal request to use the seal in accordance with the executive order, while maintaining that its use was legitimate. The letter stated, \"It is inconceivable that anyone would think that, by using the seal, \"The Onion\" intends to 'convey\u00a0... sponsorship or approval' by the president\", but then went on to ask that the letter be considered a formal application requesting permission to use the seal.\n85th Academy Awards controversy.\nDuring the 85th Academy Awards, a post on \"The Onion\"'s Twitter account called 9-year-old Best Actress nominee Quvenzhan\u00e9 Wallis \"a cunt\". The post was deleted within an hour, but not before hundreds of angry responses. CEO Steve Hannah issued an apology to Wallis and the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, calling the remarks \"crude and offensive\" and \"No person should be subjected to such a senseless, humorless comment masquerading as satire.\" Scott Dikkers\u2014who was Vice President Creative Development for the publication at the time\u2014said in an interview with NBC 5 Chicago that the publication had sent an apology note to Quvenzhan\u00e9 and her family but also stated, \"She's a big star now. I think she can take it.\" The publication's public apology was denounced by some former \"Onion\" writers, with one stating, \"It wasn't a great joke, but big deal.\"\nSubway September 11 Promotion.\nIn 2013, \"The Onion\" published an article detailing the introduction of a recent promotion at Subway themed around the September 11 attacks, where customers could supposedly get two footlong subs for $9.11. This article was accompanied by an ad that depicted a man flying towards two sub sandwiches (arranged to depict the twin towers) along with further offensive jokes around the attacks. The ad quickly circulated around the internet and gathered much criticism as it led customers to believe it was official.\nSubway responded on Twitter with a statement reading: \"Like everyone, we are deeply offended by the fake story and ad created by \"The Onion\".\" However, the hoax again came under some scrutiny when YouTuber Travis Northrup posted a video where he printed out the ad and presented it as a coupon when ordering at his local Subway in San Francisco. To his surprise, the coupon was accepted. This video caused some backlash due to some believing that Subway was honoring the hoax, but many still saw it as a humorous situation.\nMurder of Big Show.\nOn June 16, 2017, \"The Onion\" featured an article describing professional wrestler Big Show being killed by WWE after a seven-year-old boy wandered into a steel cage during a live event in Indianapolis. The article, meant to lampoon the real-life killing of Harambe, a gorilla in a Cincinnati zoo, received criticism for satirizing the murder of an actual person as well as leading some fans to believe Big Show was dead.\nAmicus brief in \"Novak v. City of Parma\".\nOn October 3, 2022, \"The Onion\" filed its first \"amicus curiae\" brief with the Supreme Court of the United States in the case of \"Novak v. City of Parma\". \"The Onion\" supported the \"certiorari\" petition of Anthony Novak, who was seeking civil damages after having been arrested and unsuccessfully prosecuted over a Facebook page parodying the page of the Parma Police Department. \"The Onion\"'s brief contained numerous jokes, including a claimed readership of 4.3 trillion, a remark that \"the federal judiciary is staffed entirely by total Latin dorks\", and a boast regarding Jonathan Swift that \"its writers are far more talented, and their output will be read long after that hack Swift's has been lost to the sands of time\". The brief noted the paper's Latin motto as (\"You are stupid\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30814", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30814", "title": "Taoiseach", "text": "Head of government of Ireland\nThe Taoiseach is the head of government, or prime minister, of Ireland. The office is appointed by the president of Ireland upon nomination by D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann (the lower house of the Oireachtas, Ireland's national legislature) and the office-holder must retain the support of a majority in the D\u00e1il to remain in office.\nThe Irish word means \"chief\" or \"leader\", and was adopted in the 1937 Constitution of Ireland as the title of the \"head of the Government or Prime Minister\". It is the official title of the head of government in both English and Irish, and is not used for the prime ministers of other countries, who are instead referred to in Irish by the generic term . The phrase \"an Taoiseach\" is sometimes used in an otherwise English-language context, and means the same as \"the Taoiseach\".\nThe incumbent Taoiseach is Miche\u00e1l Martin, TD, leader of Fianna F\u00e1il, who took office on 23 January 2025, following the 2024 general election and an agreement between Fianna F\u00e1il, Fine Gael and independent TDs.\nOverview.\nUnder the Constitution of Ireland, the Taoiseach is nominated by a simple majority of the voting members of D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. The Taoiseach is then formally appointed to office by the President, who is required to appoint whomever the D\u00e1il designates, without the option of declining to make the appointment. For this reason, the Taoiseach may informally be said to have been \"elected\" by D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann.\nIf the Taoiseach loses the support of a majority in D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, they are not automatically removed from office. Instead, they are compelled either to resign or to persuade the President to dissolve the D\u00e1il and call new elections. If the President \"in his absolute discretion\" refuses to grant a dissolution, this effectively forces the Taoiseach to resign. To date, no President has ever refused a dissolution, although the option to exercise this prerogative arose in 1944 and 1994, and twice in 1982. The Taoiseach may lose the support of D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann by the passage of a vote of no confidence, or implicitly, through the failure of a vote of confidence. Alternatively, the D\u00e1il may refuse supply. In the event of the Taoiseach's resignation, they continue to exercise the duties and functions of office until the appointment of a successor.\nThe Taoiseach nominates the remaining members of the Government, who are then, with the consent of the D\u00e1il, appointed by the President. The Taoiseach may advise the President to dismiss cabinet ministers from office; the President does not have discretion on accepting such advice. The Taoiseach is also responsible for appointing eleven members of the sixty members of the upper house of parliament, the Seanad.\nThe Department of the Taoiseach is the government department which supports and advises the Taoiseach in carrying out his or her various duties. The Taoiseach is assisted by one or more Ministers of State at the Department of the Taoiseach, one of whom is the Government Chief Whip.\nSalary.\nThe Taoiseach's salary is \u20ac248,773, as of 1 March 2025.\nThe Taoiseach's salary was cut from \u20ac214,187 to \u20ac200,000 when Enda Kenny took office in 2011 before being cut further to \u20ac185,350 under the Haddington Road Agreement in 2013.\nA proposed increase of \u20ac38,000 in 2007 was deferred when Brian Cowen became Taoiseach and in October 2008, the government announced a 10% salary cut for all ministers, including the Taoiseach. However this was a voluntary cut and the salaries remained nominally the same with both ministers and Taoiseach essentially refusing 10% of their salary. This caused controversy in December 2009 when a salary cut of 20% was based on the higher figure before the refused amount was deducted. The Taoiseach is also allowed an additional \u20ac118,981 in annual expenses.\nResidence.\nThere is no official residence of the Taoiseach. In 2008 it was reported speculatively that the former Steward's Lodge at Farmleigh adjoining the Phoenix Park would become the official residence of the Taoiseach. However, no official statements were made nor any action taken. The house, which forms part of the Farmleigh estate acquired by the State in 1999 for \u20ac29.2 million, was renovated at a cost of nearly \u20ac600,000 in 2005 by the Office of Public Works. Former Taoiseach Bertie Ahern did not use it as a residence, but his successor Brian Cowen used it occasionally, as did later Taoisigh Enda Kenny and Leo Varadkar, who each paid \u20ac50 per night for the use of the house to avoid benefit-in-kind tax being levied on them for use of the house as a grace and favour mansion.\nSalute.\n\"\" (\"More of Cloyne\") is a traditional air collected by Patrick Weston Joyce in 1873. \"Amhr\u00e1n D\u00f3chais\" (\"Song of Hope\") is a poem written by Osborn Bergin in 1913. John A. Costello chose the air as his musical salute. The salute is played by army bands on the arrival of the Taoiseach at state ceremonies. Though the salute is often called \", Brian \u00d3 Cu\u00edv argued \" is the correct title.\nHistory.\nOrigins and etymology.\nThe words and (deputy prime minister) are both from the Irish language and of ancient origin. The Taoiseach is described in the Constitution of Ireland as \"the head of the Government or Prime Minister\", its literal translation is 'chieftain' or 'leader'. Although \u00c9amon de Valera, who introduced the title in 1937, was a democratic politician who had in the past associated with paramilitaries, some have remarked that the meaning 'leader' in 1937 made the title similar to the titles of fascist dictators of the time, such as (for Adolf Hitler), (for Benito Mussolini) and (for Francisco Franco). , in turn, refers to the system of tanistry, the Gaelic system of succession whereby a leader would appoint an heir apparent while still living.\nIn Scottish Gaelic, translates as 'clan chief' and both words originally had similar meanings in the Gaelic languages of Scotland and Ireland. The related Welsh language word (current meaning: 'prince') has a similar origin and meaning. It is hypothesised that both derive ultimately from the proto-Celtic 'chieftain, leader'.\nThe plural of is ( , ).\nAlthough the Irish form is sometimes used in English instead of 'the Taoiseach', the English version of the Constitution states that they \"shall be called \u2026 the Taoiseach\".\nDebate on the title.\nIn 1937 when the draft Constitution of Ireland was being debated in the D\u00e1il, Frank MacDermot, an opposition politician, moved an amendment to substitute \"Prime Minister\" for the proposed \"Taoiseach\" title in the English text of the Constitution. It was proposed to keep the \"Taoiseach\" title in the Irish language text. The proponent remarked:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It seems to me to be mere make-believe to try to incorporate a word like \"Taoiseach\" in the English language. It would be pronounced wrongly by 99 percent of the people. I have already ascertained it is a very difficult word to pronounce correctly. That being so, even for the sake of the dignity of the Irish language, it would be more sensible that when speaking English we should be allowed to refer to the gentleman in question as the Prime Minister... It is just one more example of the sort of things that are being done here as if for the purpose of putting off the people in the North. No useful purpose of any kind can be served by compelling us, when speaking English, to refer to An Taoiseach rather than to the Prime Minister.\nThe President of the Executive Council, \u00c9amon de Valera, gave the term's meaning as \"chieftain\" or \"Captain\". He said he was \"not disposed\" to support the proposed amendment and felt the word \"Taoiseach\" did not need to be changed. The proposed amendment was defeated on a vote and \"Taoiseach\" was included as the title ultimately adopted by plebiscite of the people.\nModern office.\nThe modern position of Taoiseach was established by the 1937 Constitution of Ireland and is the most powerful role in Irish politics. The office replaced the position of President of the Executive Council of the 1922\u20131937 Irish Free State.\nThe positions of Taoiseach and President of the Executive Council differed in certain fundamental respects. Under the Constitution of the Irish Free State, the latter was vested with considerably less power and was largely just the chairman of the cabinet, the Executive Council. For example, the President of the Executive Council could not dismiss a fellow minister on his own authority. Instead, the Executive Council had to be disbanded and reformed entirely to remove a member. The President of the Executive Council also did not have the right to advise the Governor-General to dissolve D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann on his own authority, that power belonging collectively to the Executive Council.\nIn contrast, the office of Taoiseach as created in 1937 possesses a much more powerful role. The holder of the position can both advise the President to dismiss ministers and dissolve Parliament on his own authority\u2014advice that the President is almost always required to follow by convention. \nThe Taoiseach's role is significantly enhanced on paper compared to its counterparts in other parliamentary systems because it is vested with both \"de jure\" and \"de facto\" executive authority. In other parliamentary systems, the head of state is at least nominal chief executive, but is either bound by convention to act on the advice of the cabinet, or must have their acts countersigned by a minister. In Ireland, the Constitution explicitly vests executive authority in the Government, of which the Taoiseach is the leader.\nGenerally, where there have been multi-party or coalition governments, the Taoiseach has been the leader of the largest party in the coalition. One exception to this was John A. Costello, who was not the leader of his party, but an agreed choice to head the government, because the other parties refused to accept then Fine Gael leader Richard Mulcahy as Taoiseach. In 2011 Taoiseach Brian Cowen, resigned as party leader and was succeeded by Miche\u00e1l Martin, but continued as Taoiseach until the formation of a new government following a general election.\nFollowing the 2020 election, Fianna F\u00e1il and Fine Gael entered coalition together for the first time. The two agreed to rotate the role of Taoiseach, with Miche\u00e1l Martin going first before becoming T\u00e1naiste under Leo Varadkar, and later Simon Harris, of the smaller Fine Gael party. The two parties opted to continue this rotation after the 2024 election.\nList of office holders.\nBefore the enactment of the 1937 Constitution, the head of government was the President of the Executive Council. This office was held by W.\u00a0T. Cosgrave of Cumann na nGaedheal from 1922 to 1932, and by \u00c9amon de Valera of Fianna F\u00e1il from 1932 to 1937. By convention, Taoisigh are numbered to include Cosgrave; therefore, Miche\u00e1l Martin is considered the 15th Taoiseach, not the 14th.\nFurther reading.\nBiographies.\nBiographies are also available of de Valera, Lemass, Lynch, Cosgrave, FitzGerald, Haughey, Reynolds and Ahern. FitzGerald wrote an autobiography, while an authorised biography was produced of de Valera.\nSome biographies and memoirs of former Taoisigh and presidents of the Executive Council:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30816", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30816", "title": "Tree rotation", "text": "Local change in a binary tree that preserves leaf order\nIn discrete mathematics, tree rotation is an operation on a binary tree that changes the structure without interfering with the order of the elements. A tree rotation moves one node up in the tree and one node down. It is used to change the shape of the tree, and in particular to decrease its height by moving smaller subtrees down and larger subtrees up, resulting in improved performance of many tree operations.\nThere exists an inconsistency in different descriptions as to the definition of the direction of rotations. Some say that the direction of rotation reflects the direction that a node is moving upon rotation (a left child rotating into its parent's location is a right rotation) while others say that the direction of rotation reflects which subtree is rotating (a left subtree rotating into its parent's location is a left rotation, the opposite of the former). This article takes the approach of the directional movement of the rotating node.\nIllustration.\nThe right rotation operation as shown in the adjacent image is performed with \"Q\" as the root and hence is a right rotation on, or rooted at, \"Q\". This operation results in a rotation of the tree in the clockwise direction. The inverse operation is the left rotation, which results in a movement in a counter-clockwise direction (the left rotation shown above is rooted at \"P\"). The key to understanding how a rotation functions is to understand its constraints. In particular the order of the leaves of the tree (when read left to right for example) cannot change (another way to think of it is that the order that the leaves would be visited in an in-order traversal must be the same after the operation as before). Another constraint is the main property of a binary search tree, namely that all nodes in the right subtree are greater than the parent and all nodes in the left subtree are less than the parent. Notice that the right child of a left child of the root of a sub-tree (for example node B in the diagram for the tree rooted at Q) can become the left child of the root, that itself becomes the right child of the \"new\" root in the rotated sub-tree, without violating either of those constraints. As seen in the diagram, the order of the leaves doesn't change. The opposite operation also preserves the order and is the second kind of rotation.\nAssuming this is a binary search tree, as stated above, the elements must be interpreted as variables that can be compared to each other. The alphabetic characters to the left are used as placeholders for these variables. In the animation to the right, capital alphabetic characters are used as variable placeholders while lowercase Greek letters are placeholders for an entire set of variables. The circles represent individual nodes and the triangles represent subtrees. Each subtree could be empty, consist of a single node, or consist of any number of nodes.\nDetailed illustration.\nWhen a subtree is rotated, the subtree side upon which it is rotated increases its height by one node while the other subtree decreases its height. This makes tree rotations useful for rebalancing a tree.\nConsider the terminology of Root for the parent node of the subtrees to rotate, Pivot for the node which will become the new parent node, RS for the side of rotation and OS for the opposite side of rotation. For the root Q in the diagram above, RS is C and OS is P. Using these terms, the pseudo code for the rotation is:\n let Pivot = Root.OS\n Root.OS = Pivot.RS\n Pivot.RS = Root\n Root = Pivot\nThis is a constant time operation.\nThe programmer must also make sure that the root's parent points to the pivot after the rotation. Also, the programmer should note that this operation may result in a new root for the entire tree and take care to update pointers accordingly.\nInorder invariance.\nThe tree rotation renders the inorder traversal of the binary tree invariant. This implies the order of the elements is not affected when a rotation is performed in any part of the tree. Here are the inorder traversals of the trees shown above:\nComputing one from the other is very simple. The following is example Python code that performs that computation:\ndef right_rotation(treenode):\n \"\"\"Rotate the specified tree to the right.\"\"\"\n left, Q, C = treenode\n A, P, B = left\n return (A, P, (B, Q, C))\nAnother way of looking at it is:\nRight rotation of node Q:\nLeft rotation of node P:\nAll other connections are left as-is.\nThere are also \"double rotations\", which are combinations of left and right rotations. A \"double left\" rotation at X can be defined to be a right rotation at the right child of X followed by a left rotation at X; similarly, a \"double right\" rotation at X can be defined to be a left rotation at the left child of X followed by a right rotation at X.\nTree rotations are used in a number of tree data structures such as AVL trees, red\u2013black trees, WAVL trees, splay trees, and treaps. They require only constant time because they are \"local\" transformations: they only operate on 5 nodes, and need not examine the rest of the tree.\nRotations for rebalancing.\nA tree can be rebalanced using rotations. After a rotation, the side of the rotation increases its height by 1 whilst the side opposite the rotation decreases its height similarly. Therefore, one can strategically apply rotations to nodes whose left child and right child differ in height by more than 1. Self-balancing binary search trees apply this operation automatically. A type of tree which uses this rebalancing technique is the AVL tree.\nRotation distance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in computer science\nCan the rotation distance between two binary trees be computed in polynomial time?\nMore unsolved problems in computer science\nThe rotation distance between any two binary trees with the same number of nodes is the minimum number of rotations needed to transform one into the other. With this distance, the set of \"n\"-node binary trees becomes a metric space: the distance is symmetric, positive when given two different trees, and satisfies the triangle inequality.\nIt is an open problem whether there exists a polynomial time algorithm for calculating rotation distance, though several variants of the rotation distance problem admit polynomial time algorithms.\nDaniel Sleator, Robert Tarjan and William Thurston showed that the rotation distance between any two \"n\"-node trees (for \"n\" \u2265 11) is at most 2\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a06, and that some pairs of trees are this far apart as soon as \"n\" is sufficiently large. Lionel Pournin showed that, in fact, such pairs exist whenever \"n\" \u2265 11.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30818", "revid": "6289403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30818", "title": "Terms", "text": ""}
{"id": "30829", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30829", "title": "TaiJiQuan", "text": ""}
{"id": "30830", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30830", "title": "The New York Times Company", "text": "American mass media company\nThe New York Times Company is an American mass media corporation that publishes \"The New York Times\" and its associated publications such as \"The New York Times International Edition\" and other media properties. The New York Times Company's headquarters are in The New York Times Building, a skyscraper in Manhattan, New York City.\nHistory.\nThe company was founded by Henry Jarvis Raymond and George Jones in New York City. The first edition of the newspaper \"The New York Times\", published on September 18, 1851, stated: \"We publish today the first issue of the New-York Daily Times, and we intend to issue it every morning (Sundays excepted) for an indefinite number of years to come.\"\nThe company moved into the cable channel industry, purchasing a 40% interest in the Popcorn Channel, a theatrical movie preview and local movie times, in November 1994. In 1996, it expanded upon its broadcasting by purchasing Palmer Communications, owners of WHO-DT in Des Moines and KFOR in Oklahoma City.\nIn April 2002, The New York Times Company and Discovery Communications announced a joint venture television network called Discovery Times, although this was just a rename of the Discovery Civilization Network. The company completed its purchase of \"The Washington Post\"'s 50 percent interest in the \"International Herald Tribune\" (\"IHT\") for US$65 million on January 1, 2003, becoming the sole owner.\nOn March 18, 2005, the company acquired About.com, an online provider of consumer information, for US$410 million. In 2005, the company reported revenues of US$3.4 billion to its investors. The Times, on August 25, 2006, acquired Baseline StudioSystems, an online database and research service on the film and television industries for US$35 million.\nIn 2006, The Times sold their stake in Discovery Times to Discovery. The channel was relaunched as Investigation Discovery two years later. The company announced on September 12, 2006, its decision to sell its Broadcast Media Group, consisting of \"nine network-affiliated television stations, their related Web sites and the digital operating center\". \"The New York Times\" reported on January 4, 2007, that the company had reached an agreement to sell all nine local television stations to the private equity firm Oak Hill Capital Partners, which then created a holding company for the stations, Local TV LLC. The company announced that it had finalized the sale of its Broadcast Media Group on May 7, 2007, for \"approximately $575 million\".\nOn May 7, 2007, the company announced that its About.com web information service was acquiring Consumersearch.com, a Web site that compiles reviews of consumer products, for $33 million in cash. In 2007, the company moved from 229 West 43rd Street to the New York Times Building at 620 Eighth Avenue, on the west side of Times Square, between 40th and 41st streets across from the Port Authority of New York &amp; New Jersey Bus Terminal.\nOn July 14, 2009, the company announced that WQXR was to be sold to WNYC, which moved the station to 105.9 FM and began to operate the station noncommercially on October 8, 2009. This US$45 million transaction, which involved Univision Radio's WCAA moving to the 96.3 FM frequency from 105.9 FM, ended the Times' 65-year-long ownership of the station.\nIn December 2011, the company sold its Regional Media Group to Halifax Media Group, owners of \"The Daytona Beach News-Journal\", for $143 million. \"The Boston Globe\" and \"The Telegram &amp; Gazette\" of Worcester were not part of the sale. In 2011, the Times sold Baseline StudioSystems back to its original owners, Laurie S. Silvers and Mitchell Rubenstein, majority shareholders of Project Hollywood LLC.\nFacing falling revenue from print advertising in its flagship publication in 2011, \"The New York Times\", the company introduced a paywall to its website. As of 2012, it had been modestly successful, garnering several hundred thousand subscriptions and about $100 million in annual revenue.\nIn 2013, the New York Times Company sold \"The Boston Globe\" and other New England media properties to John W. Henry, the principal owner of the Boston Red Sox. According to the Times Company, the move was made in order to focus more on its core brands.\nAfter forming an editorial partnership with the New York Times in 2015, The Wirecutter, a product review website, was acquired by the Times in October 2016 for a reported $30 million. In March 2020, the New York Times Company acquired subscription-based audio app, Audm. In July 2020, the New York Times Company acquired podcast production company Serial Productions. The same month, the company appointed chief operating officer Meredith Kopit Levien to the position of CEO. In February 2022, the New York Times Company bought \"The Athletic\", a subscription-based sports news website, for $550\u00a0million. Its founders, Alex Mather and Adam Hansmann, stayed with the publication, which is run separately from the \"Times\".\nIn January 2022, the Times acquired Wordle, an Internet word puzzle game that grew from 90 players in October 2021 to millions at the time of purchase. The Times paid a price \"in the low seven figures,\" according to its creator, Josh Wardle. ValueAct Capital took a stake in the company in August 2022. ValueAct aims to encourage the company to more actively pursue the sale of \"bundled\" subscriptions to its various offerings.\nRadio stations.\nThe paper bought AM radio station WQXR (1560kHz) in 1944. Its \"sister\" FM station, WQXQ, became WQXR-FM (96.3MHz). Branded as \"The Stereo Stations of \"The New York Times\"\", its classical music radio format was simulcast on both the AM &amp; FM frequencies until December 1992, when the big-band and pop standards music format of station WNEW (1130kHz \u2013 now WBBR/\"Bloomberg Radio\") was transferred to and adopted by WQXR; in recognition of the format change, WQXR changed its call letters to WQEW (a \"hybrid\" combination of \"WQXR\" and \"WNEW\"). By 1999, \"The New York Times\" was leasing WQEW to ABC Radio for its \"Radio Disney\" format. In 2007, WQEW was finally purchased by Disney; in late 2014, it was sold to Family Radio (a religious radio network) and became WFME. In 2009, WQXR-FM was sold to the WNYC radio group and, on October 8, moved from 96.3 to 105.9MHz (swapping frequencies with Spanish-language station WXNY-FM, which wanted the more powerful transmitter to increase its coverage) and began operating it as a noncommercial, public radio station.\nHoldings.\nAlongside its namesake newspaper, the company owns \"The New York Times International Edition\" and related digital properties including NYTimes.com, as well as various brand-related properties.\nBusiness trends.\nThe company experienced a sharp decline in sales at the beginning of the 21st century. From 2011 onwards, sales stabilized and even began to grow again after a few years. In May 2025, the company had a market capitalization of US$8.9 billion.\nOwnership and leadership.\nSince September 25, 1997, the company has been listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol NYT. From April 27, 1967, until January 13, 1969, the company's Class A common stock traded over the counter. From January 14, 1969, until September 24, 1997, the shares were traded on the American Stock Exchange. Of the two categories of stock, Class A and Class B, the former is publicly traded and the latter is held privately\u2014largely (over 90% through The 1997 Trust) by the descendants of Adolph Ochs, who purchased \"The New York Times\" newspaper in 1896.\nCarlos Slim loan and investment.\nOn January 20, 2009, \"The New York Times\" reported that its parent company, the New York Times Company, had reached an agreement to borrow $250million from Mexican billionaire Carlos Slim, \"to help the newspaper company finance its businesses\". The New York Times Company later repaid that loan ahead of schedule. Slim subsequently bought large quantities of the company's Class A shares, which are available for purchase by the public and offer less control over the company than Class B shares, which are privately held. Slim's investments in the company included large purchases of Class A shares in 2011, when he increased his stake in the company to 8.1% of Class A shares, and again in 2015, when he exercised stock options\u2014acquired as part of a repayment plan on the 2009 loan\u2014to purchase 15.9million Class A shares, making him the largest shareholder.\nAs of March 7, 2016, Slim owned 17.4% of the company's Class A shares, according to annual filings submitted by the company. While Slim became the largest shareholder in the company, his investment only allowed him to vote for Class A directors, a third of the company's board. In December 2017, Slim reportedly cut his stake in The New York Times by half, reducing his ownership to approximately 8%. By 2021, Slim was no longer listed among \"principal holders of common stock\" (i.e. greater than 5% ownership) in the company's annual proxy statement.\nBoard of directors.\nAs of \u00a02025:[ [update]]\nCommunity awards.\nThe company sponsors a series of national and local awards designed to highlight the achievements of individuals and organizations in different realms.\nIn 2007, it inaugurated its first Nonprofit Excellence Award, awarded to four organizations \"for the excellence of their management practices\". Only nonprofits in New York City, Long Island, or Westchester were eligible.\nJointly with the Carnegie Corporation of New York and the American Library Association, the New York Times Company sponsors an award to honor librarians \"for service to their communities\". The \"I Love My Librarian!\" award was given to ten recipients in December 2008, and presented by the New York Times Company president and CEO Janet L. Robinson, Carnegie Corporation president Vartan Gregorian, and Jim Rettig, president of the American Library Association. The award has been given to ten exceptional librarians annually since that date.\nIn May 2009, the company launched The New York Times Outstanding Playwright Award to honor an American playwright who had recently had his or her professional debut in New York. The first winner was Tarell Alvin McCraney for his play \"The Brothers Size\". In 2010, Dan LeFranc won for his play \"Sixty Miles to Silver Lake\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30836", "revid": "828300791", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30836", "title": "Turbines", "text": ""}
{"id": "30837", "revid": "50829384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30837", "title": "Tampa Bay Buccaneers", "text": "National Football League franchise in Tampa, Florida\nThe Tampa Bay Buccaneers (colloquially known as the Bucs) are a professional American football team based in Tampa, Florida. The Buccaneers compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) South division. They joined the NFL in 1974 as an expansion team, along with the Seattle Seahawks, and played their first season in 1976 as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) West division.\nBefore the 1977 season, Tampa Bay switched conferences and divisions with Seattle, becoming a member of the NFC Central division. The Seahawks eventually rejoined the NFC in 2002, leaving the Buccaneers as the only NFL team not to play in their original conference. As a result of the league's realignment before the 2002 season, the Buccaneers joined three former NFC West teams to form the NFC South. The team is owned by the Glazer family and plays its home games at Raymond James Stadium in Tampa.\nThe Buccaneers have won two Super Bowl championships and, along with the Baltimore Ravens, are the only two NFL franchises that are undefeated in multiple Super Bowl appearances. They were regarded as a perennial losing franchise for most of their first two decades due to suffering 26 consecutive losses in their first two seasons (including a winless inaugural season) and 14 consecutive losing seasons from 1983 to 1996\u2014the most in NFL history\u2014contributing to their league-worst overall winning percentage of \nDespite these early struggles, Tampa Bay is the first post-merger expansion team to clinch a division title, win a playoff game, and host a conference championship, all of which they accomplished by their fourth season in 1979. The team's image improved by the time of their first championship in 2002, also the first for any of the six organizations built after the merger, but they would not win another playoff game until their second Super Bowl championship season in 2020. In 2024, the team tied the New Orleans Saints for the most NFC South titles with seven. The 2024 season also set franchise and division records with four consecutive division titles as well as five consecutive playoff appearances.\nHistory.\nHugh Culverhouse era (1976\u20131994).\nJohn McKay years (1976\u20131984).\nThe Buccaneers joined the NFL as members of the AFC West in 1976. The next year, they were moved to the NFC Central, while the other 1976 expansion team, the Seattle Seahawks, switched conferences with Tampa Bay and joined the AFC West. This realignment was dictated by the league as part of the 1976 expansion plan, so that both teams could play each other twice and every other NFL franchise once during their first two seasons. Instead of a traditional schedule of playing each division opponent twice, the Buccaneers played every conference team once, plus the Seahawks.\nTampa Bay went 0\u201314 in their first season. They were outscored by an average of almost 21 points per game. Only three games ended with the Buccaneers within one possession. Until the Detroit Lions in 2008, the 1976 Buccaneers were the only Super Bowl-era team to go winless in a whole season. Their losing streak caused them to become the butt of late-night television comedians' jokes. Tampa Bay did not win their first game until the 13th week of their second season, starting with a record of 0\u201326 (though the Buccaneers had beaten the Atlanta Falcons, 17\u20133, in a 1976 pre-season game before their first regular season). The Saints' head coach, Hank Stram, was fired after losing to the Buccaneers. Their first win came on December 11, 1977, on the road against the New Orleans Saints in Week 13. Tampa Bay needed one more week to get their second victory, a home win over the St. Louis Cardinals in the 1977 season finale. The Cardinals also fired their coach, Don Coryell, shortly afterward.\nThe Buccaneers improved to a 5\u201311 mark in 1978. The team boasted a strong defensive unit that finished seventh in points allowed. The team was competitive in numerous close games. The Buccaneers' situation improved rapidly in the 1979 season. With the maturation of quarterback Doug Williams and future four-time Pro Bowl tight end Jimmie Giles, the first 1,000-yard rushing season from running back Ricky Bell, and a smothering, league-leading, Star Studded defense led by future NFL Hall of Famer Lee Roy Selmon, the Buccaneers kicked off the season with five consecutive victories, a performance that landed them on the cover of \"Sports Illustrated.\"\nWith four games left in the season, the Buccaneers needed to win only one of them to make the playoffs. In the first, STP was put all over the goal posts in Tampa to prevent the goalposts from being ripped down in the event of a celebration. Four blocked kicks later, the Buccaneers wasted the oily substance, falling to the Minnesota Vikings 23\u201322. STP was wasted again the following week as the Buccaneers were shut out 14\u20130 by the Chicago Bears; and in O. J. Simpson's final home game in San Francisco, Tampa Bay lost its third straight attempt to clinch a division title against a 49ers team which came in with a 1\u201313 record. However, in the season finale at home against the Kansas City Chiefs, which was played in the worst downpour in Buccaneers history, Tampa Bay pulled out a 3\u20130 victory. Finishing with a 10\u20136 record, the Buccaneers had their first winning season in franchise history, and won the Central Division in a tiebreaker over the Bears. In an upset, the Buccaneers defeated the Philadelphia Eagles 24\u201317 in the divisional round of the playoffs. Because the Los Angeles Rams defeated the Dallas Cowboys in the other NFC playoff game, the Buccaneers hosted the NFC Championship Game the following week in Tampa. The Buccaneers lost to the Rams 9\u20130. In their fourth season, the Bucs seemed on the verge of fulfilling McKay's five-year plan. The Buccaneers regressed in 1980 and finished with a 5\u201310\u20131 mark.\nThe Buccaneers made the playoffs again by winning their division in the 1981 season. It came down to a thrilling final game at Detroit; the winner would take the Central Division crown and the loser would miss the playoffs. The Detroit Lions had not lost at home all season. Although the Buccaneers trailed early, an 84-yard touchdown bomb from quarterback Williams to wide receiver Kevin House and a fumble recovery for a touchdown by defensive tackle David Logan sealed the win for the Buccaneers. In the playoffs, the Cowboys defeated the Buccaneers, 38\u20130, in the divisional round. The loss remains the largest postseason shutout loss in franchise history.\nThe 1982 season started 0\u20133 for the Buccaneers, before a player's strike shut down the NFL for seven weeks. When the league resumed play, the Buccaneers were nicknamed the \"Cardiac Kids\" for winning five of their next six games, all in the final moments, to go 5\u20134 and qualify for the expanded playoff slate. In the first round, the Buccaneers once again faced the Cowboys at Dallas, losing 30\u201317. As it turned out, this would be the last winning regular season under Culverhouse's ownership.\nBefore the 1983 season, Williams bolted to the United States Football League in a salary dispute. The Buccaneers lost their first nine games of the 1983 season en route to finishing 2\u201314, the first of 12 consecutive seasons with at least ten losses\u2014an NFL record. Included was the drafting of Heisman Trophy winner Bo Jackson with the first pick in the 1986 draft. Jackson had let it be known that he would never play a down for Hugh Culverhouse at Tampa Bay. Making good on his threat, he opted instead to play baseball for the Kansas City Royals and would later return for parts of football seasons with the Los Angeles Raiders. Along with Williams, who later was a Super Bowl champion quarterback for Washington, two other Buccaneers quarterbacks during this era led other teams to Super Bowl wins. Steve Young won with the 49ers and Trent Dilfer won with the Baltimore Ravens. In the 1984 season, the team went 6\u201310 in John McKay's final season.\nFormer Atlanta Falcons' coach Leeman Bennett was named head coach before the 1985 season. He led the team to consecutive 2\u201314 finishes in 1985 and 1986. Bennett was fired after the 1986 season. Ray Perkins was hired to be the head coach of the Buccaneers before the 1987 season. Perkins coached for the team for almost four seasons, getting fired during 1990 season. Under Perkins's tenure, the team won no more than five games in a single season.\nUnder Culverhouse, the Buccaneers were one of the NFL's more profitable teams during the 1980s; however, this was largely because he kept the payroll among the lowest in the league, hampering their ability to sign quality players. Attendance also sagged; at one point the Buccaneers went parts of three whole seasons without having a home game televised locally, and when they did it was more attributed to a strong visiting team with a large following in the area, such as the Chicago Bears or Green Bay Packers.\nHardy Nickerson, a future five-time Pro Bowl linebacker, signed as a free agent from the Pittsburgh Steelers. John Lynch, a future Pro Bowl, and Hall of Fame strong safety, was drafted in 1993. In the 1995 NFL draft the Buccaneers drafted two future Hall of Famers: Warren Sapp and Derrick Brooks. Pro Bowl Fullback, Mike Alstott, was drafted the next year in the 1996 draft.\nGlazer family era (1995\u2013present).\nDespite the profitability of the Buccaneers in the 1980s, Culverhouse's death in 1994 revealed a man close to bankruptcy despite having a low payroll for his team. His son, Miami attorney Hugh Culverhouse Jr. soon sued his father's associates (Stephen Story, Jack Donlan, and Fred Cone) who had built the trust account that was meant to manage the elder Culverhouse's business (which involved a $350\u00a0million estate) after having his wife sign a post-nuptial agreement. At any rate, a settlement was soon reached that gave control of the trust to Culverhouse Jr., who sold the team for $192\u00a0million. Interested parties included New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner and Baltimore Orioles owner Peter Angelos, the latter of whom publicly declared he would move the team to Baltimore, as the city did not have an NFL franchise at that time.\nHowever, in a last-minute surprise, real estate magnate Malcolm Glazer outbid both of them for $192\u00a0million, the highest sale price for a professional sports franchise up to that point. Glazer immediately placed his sons Bryan, Edward, and Joel in charge of the team's financial affairs. He stated that he had every intention of keeping the team in Tampa, but informed area citizens its current stadium deal would not support the record paid amount and that a new stadium would be required. The Glazers convinced Hillsborough County voters to raise sales taxes to fund the construction of what would become Raymond James Stadium.\nTony Dungy years (1996\u20132001).\nThe Glazers' deep pockets and serious commitment to fielding a winning team\u2013in Tampa Bay\u2013finally allowed the Buccaneers to become competitive. The team's performance dramatically improved when the Glazers hired Minnesota Vikings defensive coordinator Tony Dungy as head coach. Additionally, the team jettisoned the old uniform designs in favor of a modern look.\nDuring Dungy's first season in 1996, the team continued to struggle, starting the season 1\u20138. But in the second half of the season, they finished 5\u20132, primarily due to the performance of a defense ranked seventh in the NFL led by Hardy Nickerson and the maturing of Sam Wyche's draftees Brooks, Lynch, and Sapp. Dungy, with his even-tempered personality, quickly brought balance and morale to the team, and his Cover 2 defensive scheme, sharpened to perfection by defensive coordinator Monte Kiffin and linebackers coach Lovie Smith, became the foundation for Tampa Bay's future success. Their version of Cover 2 was so successful that it became known as the Tampa 2. It has been brought to the Chicago Bears by Smith, Detroit Lions by Rod Marinelli, Kansas City Chiefs by Herman Edwards and to the Indianapolis Colts by Dungy himself, and copied by several other teams.\nThe team started the 1997 season 5\u20130, picking up where they left off the previous year, and this quick start once again landed them on the cover of \"Sports Illustrated\" twice. The Buccaneers went 10\u20136 for their first winning season and playoff appearance since 1982, as a wild-card team. In the Buccaneers' final home game at Houlihan's Stadium (formerly Tampa Stadium), the team defeated the Lions 20\u201310. They lost at Lambeau Field to the eventual NFC champion Packers 21\u20137 in the Divisional Round. Still, there was reason for optimism, and the expectations were high for the following season.\nThe 1998 season, the first to be played in the newly constructed Raymond James Stadium, saw the Buccaneers lose several close games en route to a disappointing 8\u20138 record. The Buccaneers had to play the first six football games of the year (including preseason) on the road, as the new stadium was not quite finished.\nThe 1999 season brought much better fortune. On the strength of the NFL's number 3 overall defense and a performance by rookie quarterback Shaun King, the Buccaneers finished the season with an 11\u20135 record and won their third NFC Central Division Championship. They beat the Washington Redskins 14\u201313 in the Divisional round, before losing to the eventual Super Bowl Champion St. Louis Rams in a low-scoring NFC Championship Game, 11\u20136. The Buccaneers' loss was controversial, highlighted by the reversal of a pass from King to wide receiver Bert Emanuel, which ended the Buccaneers' chances at continuing their last-minute drive. In league meetings after the season, the NFL changed the rules regarding what constituted an incomplete pass.\nWhile the Buccaneers played well in 2000 and 2001 and made the playoffs in each season, they were unable to fulfill their primary goal of a Super Bowl victory. The wild card spots that Tampa Bay earned forced them to go on the road for their postseason opener in each year, and both road games took them into frigid Philadelphia to play the Eagles. The Buccaneers historically have struggled in games played with a temperature of less than (as late as 1999, they had never won a game with a temperature played under 40 degrees) and the latter loss to the Eagles was the sixth time that Tampa Bay had lost a postseason game on the road (out of six played).\nJon Gruden years (2002\u20132008).\nDungy was fired by the Buccaneers after a 31\u20139 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles in the Wildcard Round of 2001 and soon thereafter hired as the head coach of the Indianapolis Colts, while the Buccaneers mounted a search for his replacement that would include numerous names and rejections. Several potential candidates were offered the job, including University of Florida head coach (and former Buccaneers quarterback) Steve Spurrier, former New York Giants head coach Bill Parcells, and Baltimore Ravens defensive coordinator Marvin Lewis. Spurrier jumped to the Redskins when he was offered the most lucrative salary package ever offered to an NFL head coach, and Parcells eventually passed on the Buccaneers' offer\u2014the second time he had done so in the history of the franchise. Buccaneers' general manager Rich McKay threw his support behind Lewis. The Glazer brothers were so displeased with the selection of yet another defensive-minded coach that they overruled McKay and took control of the candidate search themselves. They made it clear that their top choice was Jon Gruden; however, he was still under contract with the Oakland Raiders.\nWhile talks with the Raiders were secretly underway, the Glazers publicly pursued another respected offensive mind, San Francisco 49ers head coach Steve Mariucci. Just when initial reports indicated that Mariucci had agreed to become both the Buccaneers' head coach and their general manager, Raiders owner Al Davis agreed to release Gruden to Tampa Bay.\nThe Glazers' shrewd move eventually paid off in acquiring Gruden, but it was costly. The team hired Gruden away from the Raiders on February 20, 2002, but the price was four draft picks, including the Buccaneers' first and second-round picks in 2002, their first-round pick in 2003, and their second-round selection in 2004, along with $8\u00a0million in cash. (The league as a result prohibited any further trading of draft picks for coaches.) Gruden was frustrated by the limitation of his coaching authority by Davis and was more than pleased to return to Tampa Bay. His parents lived in Carrollwood, and he had spent part of his childhood in Tampa in the early 1980s when his father was a running backs coach and later a scout for the Buccaneers.\nUpon his arrival in Tampa, Gruden immediately went to work, retooling a sluggish offense, changing over 50% of the starting offense. With a new Tailback, Wide Receiver, Two Tight Ends, Left Tackle, and Left Guard, Gruden put his stamp on the teams offense to remove the \"Dungy's Team\" label. The league's sweeping realignment sent the Buccaneers to the new NFC South Division, along with the Falcons, Carolina Panthers and New Orleans Saints.\nSuper Bowl XXXVII champions (2002).\nLed by the league's top defense, the 2002 season was the Buccaneers' most successful to date. Linebacker Derrick Brooks was named the NFL Defensive Player of the Year with a tendency to make big plays. They won the NFC South title with the team's best ever record, 12\u20134, and scored more points in two playoff wins over the 49ers and Eagles than in Buccaneers playoff history combined. The Philadelphia Eagles were a thorn in Tampa Bay's side, having eliminated the Buccaneers in each of the last two seasons' wild card games. Tampa Bay entered the game as heavy underdogs and fell behind early. However, the Buccaneers persevered and took a ten-point lead into the fourth quarter. Ronde Barber sealed the win in dramatic fashion with a late interception return for a touchdown, and a 27\u201310 victory. The Buccaneers then went on to rout Gruden's former team, the Raiders, who had the league's number one offense, by a score of 48\u201321 in Super Bowl XXXVII, nicknamed 'The Pirate Bowl'.\nSoon after the Super Bowl victory, a growing number of press reports indicated Gruden's lack of patience with general manager McKay, a major architect of the Buccaneers' rebuilding effort over the previous ten years. McKay, like Gruden, had long-established ties to the Tampa Bay area. However, during the 2003 season, the Gruden-McKay relationship deteriorated as the Buccaneers struggled on the field. In November, Keyshawn Johnson was deactivated by the team ten games into the season for his conduct, which included sideline arguments with Buccaneers coaches and players. Johnson was eventually traded to the Dallas Cowboys for wide receiver Joey Galloway, who later in his career played for the New England Patriots, Pittsburgh Steelers, and Washington Redskins.\nIn December, the Glazers allowed McKay to leave the Bucs before the end of the regular season, and he promptly joined the Falcons as president and general manager. Thus, McKay watched his first game as a Falcons executive sitting next to owner Arthur Blank in a Raymond James Stadium skybox. The Falcons defeated the Buccaneers 30\u201328. The Buccaneers suffered a sluggish start and finished the season 7\u20139. With the Raiders' dismal 4\u201312 performance, neither Super Bowl team reached the playoffs that year.\nFor 2004, Bruce Allen was hired as general manager. After Allen's arrival, both John Lynch and Warren Sapp were released, stunning many Buccaneers fans. The distracted Buccaneers began the 2004 season with a 1\u20135 record, their worst start under Gruden. The fading accuracy of kicker Mart\u00edn Gram\u00e1tica did not help matters, as the team lost many close games en route to a 5\u201311 record.\nIn the 2005 season, the Buccaneers celebrated their 30th season in the league, and returned to their winning ways. The Buccaneers selected Carnell \"Cadillac\" Williams in the first round of the 2005 draft, and the rookie would provide a running game the Buccaneers had not possessed since the days of James Wilder Sr. in the 1980s. Williams would later go on to receive the NFL Offensive Rookie of the Year Award. After starting 5\u20131, the team entered a midseason slump hampered by a season-ending injury to starting quarterback Brian Griese. Replacement starter Chris Simms struggled early, but came into his own, leading the team to a last-minute win over the Redskins. The Buccaneers won the NFC South Division finishing 11\u20135. The season ended abruptly, however, with a 17\u201310 loss in the Wild Card round, in a rematch with Washington that saw receiver Edell Shepherd drop the potential game-winning catch in the endzone.\nAfter winning the division in 2005, the Buccaneers suffered through an abysmal 2006 season. The season was plagued by injuries, with starters such as guard Dan Buenning, wide receiver Michael Clayton, running back Cadillac Williams, defensive end Simeon Rice, cornerback Brian Kelly, and quarterback Chris Simms all being placed on injured reserve at some point in the season. The season also saw a lot of rookies starting for the Buccaneers, such as quarterback Bruce Gradkowski, tackle Jeremy Trueblood, and guard Davin Joseph.\nThe Buccaneers started off the season 0\u20133, with Simms throwing one touchdown to seven interceptions. In the third game of the season, a last-minute loss to the Panthers, Simms's spleen was ruptured, and he was placed on injured reserve for the balance of the season. After their bye week, the Buccaneers elected to start Gradkowski, a sixth-round pick from Toledo. After nearly beating the Saints, Gradkowski led the team to last-minute wins over the Cincinnati Bengals and Philadelphia Eagles. The success was short-lived, however, and the Buccaneers lost five of the next six games. Tim Rattay replaced Gradkowski as quarterback late in the season, and the team finished 4\u201312. The aged defense, with five starters who had played there for a decade or more, was ranked 17th overall, the first time a Tampa Bay defense was not ranked in the top ten since 1996.\nAfter the disappointing 2006 season, the Buccaneers for the first time in several seasons had money to spend in free agency. They brought in quarterback Jeff Garcia, offensive tackle Luke Petitgout, defensive end Kevin Carter, and linebacker Cato June. On April 28, 2007, the Buccaneers drafted Clemson defensive end Gaines Adams with the 4th overall pick in the NFL draft. After the draft the Buccaneers picked up tight end Jerramy Stevens. and defensive tackle Ryan Sims.\nThe off-season changes resulted in the Buccaneers winning the NFC South title in the 2007 season, finishing with a 9\u20137 record, and the 4th seed in the conference. The division crown was the second one in three seasons under Gruden. In the Wild Card round of the playoffs held on January 6, 2008, the Buccaneers lost to the eventual Super Bowl champion Giants by a final score of 24\u201314.\nDuring the 2008 offseason, the Buccaneers re-signed head coach Gruden and general manager Allen through the 2011 season. They also acquired former players Warrick Dunn, who had spent the last 6 seasons with the Falcons, and Brian Griese, who was the starting quarterback for the team in 2005 until a knee injury sidelined him for the remainder of the year. Chris Simms was finally released, having not played in a game since his injury in 2006. The Buccaneers got off to a great start in 2008, with a 9\u20133 record going into the final month of the season, tied for first place in the division, with a chance at the top seed in the conference. On December 2, it was announced that defensive coordinator Monte Kiffin would be leaving the team after the season's end, for the same job at the University of Tennessee, serving under his son Lane Kiffin, who had just been named the new head coach at the school. After the announcement, the Buccaneers would lose their final four games of the season to finish 9\u20137 for the second consecutive season. Unlike 2007, it was not enough to secure the division championship, nor a playoff appearance.\nRaheem Morris was named the replacement for Monte Kiffin as defensive coordinator in December 2008. A month later, after the huge collapse that ended the 2008 season, the Buccaneers fired Jon Gruden and swiftly elevated Morris to the head coach position. Bruce Allen was also let go, with Mark Dominik named his successor as general manager. Several veterans were released including Derrick Brooks, Joey Galloway, and Jeff Garcia. The new staff traded for tight end Kellen Winslow Jr., signed quarterback Byron Leftwich, and drafted Josh Freeman with the 17th overall pick.\nRaheem Morris.\nThe 2009 squad started out 0\u20137, behind Leftwich and later Josh Johnson. After their bye week, the team elevated Freeman to starting quarterback, resulting in the team's first win of the season. The team finished 3\u201313, the worst record since 1991.\nThe Buccaneers' 2010 season surprised many, producing the greatest single-season turnaround in franchise history, going 10\u20136. This was largely behind the stellar performances of Freeman, rookie receiver Mike Williams, and LeGarrette Blount. Despite the effort, the team narrowly missed the playoffs, losing out on the wild card tiebreaker to the eventual Super Bowl XLV champion Green Bay Packers.\nTampa Bay began the 2011 season with high hopes, adding several key defensive players through the draft. After a 4\u20132 start, however, the Buccaneers collapsed, dropping ten consecutive games to finish 4\u201312. The day after a 45\u201324 loss to the Falcons in their final game of the season, the team fired Morris, offensive coordinator Greg Olson and the rest of his corresponding staff. During the Morris era, the lack of on-the-field success, along with several contributing factors, including the recession, saw attendance slip, precipitating local television blackouts for the first time since the mid-1990s. All eight regular-season home games were blacked out in 2010, and five of seven were blacked out in 2011 (one \"home\" game was played in London).\nGreg Schiano.\nAbout three weeks after firing Raheem Morris, the Buccaneers hired Greg Schiano from Rutgers as the new head coach. During his introductory conference he stated \"There will be Buccaneer men, and there will be a Buccaneer Way.\" The phrase \"The Buccaneer Way\" became a slogan among fans and local media, describing the new regime and attitude. The team filled out the coaching staff with new faces, including Mike Sullivan, Bill Sheridan, and Butch Davis. In 2013, Dave Wannstedt was also added as special teams coach. In the first day of free agency, the club signed top prospects Vincent Jackson and Carl Nicks, as well as Eric Wright. The $140\u00a0million committed to the team during that 24-hour period is the largest investment the Glazer family has put into the team going back almost a decade.\nThe team finished the 2012 season at 7\u20139, notably ranking first in rushing defense. Furthermore, the rushing offense was highlighted by the breakout performance of Doug Martin. After two seasons of game-day local television blackouts, the improved team began seeing increased attendance and attention, and some blackouts lifted. 6 games were blacked out in 2012. For the three-year period of 2010\u20132012, the Buccaneers led the NFL in local television blackouts with 19 (Cincinnati was second with 11). Schiano's strict and regimented coaching style, however, drew criticism at the end of a game against the Giants, ordering his defense to continue to aggressively tackle the offense as Giants quarterback Eli Manning was taking a knee to end the game. Afterwards, Schiano was met at midfield by an irate Tom Coughlin, who did not appreciate the Buccaneers' aggressiveness.\nComing into the 2013 season, fans and analysts had better than average expectations for Tampa Bay. They were expected to improve their record, and potentially make a playoffs run. The predictions proved unfounded, as numerous issues on and off the field saw the team collapse. The team dealt with several players, including Lawrence Tynes, Carl Nicks, and Johnthan Banks, contracting antibiotic-resistant MRSA infections, which led to a 2015 lawsuit by Tynes that settled in 2017. During training camp, a reported rift began to divide Schiano and quarterback Josh Freeman. After an 0\u20133 start, Freeman was benched, and ultimately released. This was after Freeman reportedly missed several team meetings, along with the team's annual photograph. Schiano started rookie Mike Glennon, but the team continued to lose. The fans' confidence of Schiano began to decay rapidly, and after a 0\u20138 start, the team got its first win of the season on a Monday night against Miami. A brief win streak saw improvements with Glennon at quarterback, and Bobby Rainey took over at running back with stellar numbers after Doug Martin went down with a shoulder injury. There were no blackouts in 2013, as the Glazers bought up the necessary tickets for two of the games to get to the 85% threshold needed to prevent local blackouts.\nDespite some individual improvements, and some impressive performances by members of the defense, the team dropped the last three games of the season, and finished 4\u201312. The team ranked last or near the bottom in almost every offensive category. On December 30, 2013, Schiano and general manager Mark Dominik were fired.\nLovie Smith.\nOn January 1, 2014, Lovie Smith was hired as the new head coach of the Buccaneers, replacing Greg Schiano. Smith had previously spent 5 seasons with the Buccaneers from 1996 to 2001 coaching the linebackers under Tony Dungy. During his first news conference with the Buccaneers, Smith talked about restoring the quality of the team from the late 1990s and early 2000s: \"There was a certain brand of football you expected from us,\" Smith said. \"You know we would be relentless. There was a brand of football that you got from us each week at Raymond James Stadium. It was hard for opponents to come in and win. We have gotten away from that a little bit, and it's time ... for us to become a relevant team again.\"\nOn January 21, 2014, Jason Licht was hired as the new general manager, replacing Mark Dominik. He was officially introduced at One Buc Place on January 23, 2014. In his first news conference, Licht talked about his philosophy: \"Our philosophy is going to be to build through the draft. That's where we find our stars. That's where we find the next generation. But also in the short term and long term we're going to supplement our roster through free agency but we're going to look for value. We're going to spend wisely.\"\nAfter signing veteran free agent Josh McCown and many more free agents, many analysts predicted that the Buccaneers could be the surprise team of the year and possibly make a playoff run. Those predictions soon went away after the Buccaneers began the season 0\u20133, including a 56\u201314 blowout against the Falcons on \"Thursday Night Football\". McCown was injured in that game, and second-year quarterback Mike Glennon was named the starter. His first start of the 2014 season ended with the Buccaneers earning their first victory of the season in Pittsburgh against the Steelers 27\u201324. The Buccaneers lost the next four games, including two overtime losses against the Saints and the Vikings, one blowout against the Ravens, and a 5-point loss against the Cleveland Browns. Going into week 10 at 1\u20138, McCown returned as the starter. Mathematically, the Buccaneers were still in playoff contention only being 3 games out of first place in the division. McCown's first game back ended with a 27\u201317 loss to the Falcons but won the following week in a 27\u20137 blowout against struggling Washington. The Buccaneers would lose the next three games and were officially knocked out of playoff contention in week 14. The Buccaneers finished 2\u201314, winning two fewer games than the previous season and secured the first-overall draft pick for the 2015 NFL draft.\nDespite the team's record, first-round draft pick wide receiver Mike Evans had more than 1,000 receiving yards, and he became the youngest NFL player to record more than 200 receiving yards in a single game. Vincent Jackson also had more than 1,000 yards receiving, which represented Tampa Bay's first pair of 1,000 yard receivers in a season. Second-year cornerback Johnthan Banks led the team with 4 interceptions and has 50 tackles. Danny Lansanah flourished in the Tampa 2 system with 81 tackles, 1.5 quarterback sacks, and 3 interceptions, with 2 of those interceptions returned for touchdowns for the 2014 season. Jacquies Smith, who was signed from Buffalo after waiving rookie defensive end Scott Solomon a month into the season, had 17 combined tackles, 13 solo tackles, 6.5 sacks, and 1 forced fumble in only 8 starts for 2014.\nIn December 2014, a report surfaced that the Buccaneers used homeless people to sell beer and did not pay them.\nAfter the conclusion of the 2014 season, Tampa Bay hired Ben Steele to become the team's new offensive quality control coach as well as former Falcons offensive coordinator Dirk Koetter to be their new offensive coordinator after parting ways with quarterbacks coach and interim offensive coordinator Marcus Arroyo. Having a 2\u201314 record, tied for the worst record in the NFL in 2014, Tampa Bay gained the first-overall pick in the 2015 NFL draft. They also made some headlines when they released quarterback Josh McCown on February 11, 2015, to save $5.25\u00a0million in cap space. With the first overall pick in the NFL draft, the Buccaneers selected Jameis Winston from Florida State. Throughout the off-season, there was much debate whether the Buccaneers should pick Winston or Oregon quarterback Marcus Mariota.\nOn January 6, 2016, Smith was fired by the Buccaneers after posting a record of 8\u201324 in his two seasons, including a 6\u201310 record in the 2015 season.\nDirk Koetter.\nOn January 15, 2016, Dirk Koetter was promoted from offensive coordinator to become the new head coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. In 2016, Koetter won his first game as head coach, but the team's record slipped to 3\u20135 by week 9 after a 43\u201328 loss to Atlanta on \"Thursday Night Football\". The Buccaneers rattled off five straight victories, their longest winning streak since 2002. They earned upset victories over the heavily favored Chiefs and Seahawks, but snapped the streak with late-season losses to both Dallas and New Orleans. The Buccaneers ended with a 9\u20137 record, but lost the NFC's sixth seed to the Lions due to tiebreakers.\nOn March 9, 2017, the Buccaneers signed former Washington Redskins wide receiver DeSean Jackson, defensive tackle Chris Baker, former Cowboys safety J. J. Wilcox (traded to Pittsburgh Steelers), former New York Jets kicker Nick Folk, and veteran quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick. The season got off to a 2\u20136 start with poor performance, especially in the kicking game. After a loss to the Lions in week 14, they were mathematically eliminated from the playoffs. Tampa Bay finished the season 5\u201311. This was their tenth consecutive season without a playoff appearance. Also, the Buccaneers finished last in the NFC South for the seventh time in nine seasons.\nThe Buccaneers began the 2018 season 2\u20130, their first 2\u20130 start since 2010. Journeyman quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick started the first two games while Jameis Winston was serving a three-game suspension. Fitzpatrick threw for over 400 yards and four touchdowns in both games, against the Saints (the eventual NFC South winner) and the Eagles (the defending Super Bowl champions). On Monday night in Week 3 against the Steelers, Fitzpatrick became the first player in NFL history to throw for 400+ yards in three consecutive games. However, he also threw three interceptions, and Tampa Bay lost the game 30\u201327. Fitzpatrick remained the starter for Week 4 against the Bears. He struggled and was benched after halftime in favor of Winston. Winston was named the starter for Week 6, but was averaging at least two interceptions per game. After week 6's loss to the Falcons, defensive coordinator Mike Smith was fired and linebackers coach Mark Duffner was named interim defensive coordinator. Both Winston and Fitzpatrick took snaps under center as the season wore on, and at 5\u20137 they were still mathematically alive for the postseason. However, they dropped their last four games to finish 5\u201311. After a second consecutive last-place season, Koetter was fired.\nBruce Arians years (2019\u20132021).\nAfter the termination of Dirk Koetter, the Buccaneers named Bruce Arians as the 12th head coach in franchise history on January 8, 2019. Arians had been retired from coaching for a year, having spent the 2018 season in the broadcast booth. Because Arians was still under contract with the Arizona Cardinals through the end of the 2019 season, Tampa Bay agreed to give the Cardinals a sixth-round pick in the 2019 NFL draft for the rights to Arians, as well as receiving Arizona's seventh-round pick in the same draft. On the same day it was reported the Buccaneers would also bring Byron Leftwich, who had served under Arians in Arizona, as offensive coordinator. The next day the Buccaneers announced the hiring of former Jets head coach Todd Bowles as defensive coordinator.\nIn 2019, Tampa Bay finished with a 7\u20139 record. The team finished the season with the best run defense in the league and top 10 in total offense. Jameis Winston, in the final year of his five-year contract, set franchise records with 5,109 passing yards and 33 touchdown passes. He became the eighth quarterback in NFL history to eclipse 5,000 yards in a single season. However he had a league-leading 30 interceptions. He set a mark as the first quarterback in league history to throw 30 touchdown passes and 30 interceptions in the same season. His final pass attempt as a Buccaneers player was a pick-six in overtime to lose against Atlanta in Week 17. Winston was not re-signed by Tampa Bay, and he was subsequently picked up by the Saints during the 2020 offseason.\nSuper Bowl LV champions (2020).\nThe Buccaneers made arguably the biggest acquisition of the 2020 offseason when they acquired veteran quarterback Tom Brady, widely considered the greatest to ever play the position. The offensive engine of the New England Patriots' sports dynasty from 2001 to 2019, Brady announced that he would not be re-signing with the Patriots after 20 seasons and joined the Buccaneers for 2020.\nLater in the offseason, tight end and Brady's New England teammate Rob Gronkowski announced that he was coming out of retirement to return to the NFL. On the same day, the Patriots made an agreement to trade Gronkowski to the Buccaneers, along with a seventh-round pick in exchange for a compensatory fourth-round pick in the 2020 NFL draft. Gronkowski would finish the regular season with 45 receptions, 623 receiving yards, and 7 receiving touchdowns in 16 games.\nOn September 6, 2020, the Buccaneers signed running back Leonard Fournette, who had been waived the previous week by the Jacksonville Jaguars.\nOn October 27, 2020, free agent wide receiver Antonio Brown signed a one-year contract with the Buccaneers. The move reunited Brown with Arians, who was his first offensive coordinator on the Pittsburgh Steelers, and Brady, whom he played one game alongside of for the Patriots. Brown made his first appearance with the Buccaneers in week 9 and would finish the regular season with 45 receptions, 483 receiving yards, and 4 receiving touchdowns in eight games.\nIn Week 15, the Buccaneers overcame a 17\u20130 deficit against the Atlanta Falcons, to win 31\u201327 at Mercedes-Benz Stadium in Atlanta, Georgia.\nIn the 2020 season, Tampa Bay clinched their first playoff berth since 2007 after a 47\u20137 victory against the Lions in Week 16. By the end of the 2020 regular season, Brady had set the Buccaneers record for passing touchdowns with 40. In the same game, receiver Mike Evans set the NFL record for consecutive 1,000-yard seasons to start a career with 7 straight 1,000 yard seasons.\nIn the playoffs, the Buccaneers defeated the Washington Football Team 31\u201323 in the wild card round, their first postseason victory since winning Super Bowl XXXVII in 2002. In the divisional round, they defeated the Saints 30\u201320 to advance to the NFC Championship Game for the fourth time in franchise history, and first since the 2002 season. They then defeated the Packers to advance to Super Bowl LV for the franchise's second appearance in the league championship, facing the defending Super Bowl champions, the Kansas City Chiefs. The Buccaneers defeated the Chiefs to win their second Super Bowl title by a score of 31\u20139. Coincidentally, Raymond James Stadium was named as the host stadium of Super Bowl LV in 2017 when it was determined that SoFi Stadium, which had been awarded the game the year before its construction had begun, would not be completed in time to be eligible under league requirements to host. Thus, the Buccaneers became the first team in NFL history to play in and win a Super Bowl that was held at its home stadium.\nIn the 2021 offseason, the Buccaneers re-signed all 22 of their starters from the 2020 Super Bowl championship season, in addition to re-signing Fournette and former Bengals running back Giovani Bernard. The Buccaneers are the first team in the salary cap era (1994), and fourth team all-time, to re-sign all 22 starters from their Super Bowl team, while every other team's roster changed.\nAfter the 2021 regular season, in which they posted a 13\u20134 record and secured the #2 seed in the NFC playoffs. The team defeated the Philadelphia Eagles 31\u201315 in the Wild Card Round. The Buccaneers' title defense came to an end with a 30\u201327 last-second loss to the eventual Super Bowl LVI champion Los Angeles Rams in the Divisional Round.\nTodd Bowles years (2022\u2013present).\nOn February 1, 2022, quarterback Tom Brady announced his retirement from the league. Brady had one season remaining on his contract with the Buccaneers. However, on March 13, after only forty days, he reversed his decision, and announced he would return for the 2022 season. On March 30, a couple weeks after Brady's announcement, head coach Bruce Arians announced his second retirement from coaching and shifted to Senior Football Consultant. Defensive coordinator and former Jets head coach Todd Bowles was immediately named his replacement.\nDespite signing former All-Pro receiver Julio Jones, former Pro-Bowlers Akiem Hicks and Keanu Neal, and Brady's former teammates Shaq Mason and Logan Ryan, the Buccaneers struggled under Bowles in his first season as head coach. They finished 8\u20139, but still won the NFC South division title, the fifth sub .500 team since the merger to make the playoffs. They lost at home to the Cowboys in the . On February 1, 2023, Brady announced his retirement, this time \"for good\".\nIn 2023, Tampa Bay hired Seahawks quarterbacks coach Dave Canales to be their offensive coordinator and signed Heisman Trophy winner Baker Mayfield to a one-year, $8.5 million contract to be the team's next starting quarterback. The Buccaneers won the NFC South with a 9\u20138 record, their third consecutive division crown. They defeated Philadelphia in the 32\u20139. The Buccaneers saw their season end in the with a 31\u201323 loss to the Detroit Lions.\nDuring the 2024 offseason, Baker Mayfield signed a three-year contract extension with the Buccaneers to remain the starting quarterback. Dave Canales departed to take the head coaching job at Carolina, and was replaced at the offensive coordinator position by Liam Coen. The Buccaneers finished the regular season 10\u20137, and won the NFC South for a franchise-best fourth consecutive season. This also tied the record for most consecutive NFC South titles, with four, and total NFC South titles, with seven; furthermore, this marked the fifth consecutive playoff appearance for the team, both a franchise and division record. Mayfield threw 41 touchdown passes, and the Tampa Bay offense ranked third in the league. Despite missing three games due to a hamstring injury, wide receiver Mike Evans finished the regular season with 1,004 receiving yards. Evans tied the NFL record held by Jerry Rice for the most consecutive seasons with 1,000+ receiving yards (11), as well as extend his own current record for most such seasons consecutively from the start of a career. In the NFL playoffs, they were upset by the Washington Commanders by a field goal, 20\u201323.\nDefense.\nThroughout their history, the Buccaneers have been known for their suffocating defense. It started with the drafting of Hall of Fame defensive end Lee Roy Selmon with their first pick ever in 1976. Three Buccaneer players have been named the AP Defensive Player of the Year, and the team has led the league in total defense on three occasions, including the 2002 championship season. The team's defense was instrumental in their 2020 playoff run which led to their second Super Bowl title. All five of the Buccaneers Hall of Fame inductees are defensive players or coaches.\n1978\u20131982.\nLed by Selmon, Linebackers Dewey Selmon, Richard Wood, Dave Lewis, and Mike Washington, Mark Cotney, and Cedric Brown in the secondary, the early years Buccaneers quickly earned an identity as a defensive team. Their 3\u20134 defense peaked in 1979 when they led the league in total defense, points allowed, and first downs allowed. Lee Roy Selmon was voted NFL Defensive Player of the Year, but they eventually fell 10 points short of the Super Bowl as the offense held them back in the NFC Championship game in a 9\u20130 loss to the Los Angeles Rams. Although 1980 was a down year, the unit made pass defense adjustments and returned in 1981 to finish No. 1 in Touchdowns allowed; giving up only 10 touchdowns all season.\n1997\u20132008: The Tampa 2.\nThe team drafted franchise cornerstones Franchise Player &amp; highest paid on the team Chidi Ahanotu, and John Lynch in 1993, and Warren Sapp and Derrick Brooks in 1995 to go along with All-Pro linebacker Hardy Nickerson. That was followed by the hiring of innovative defensive coordinator Monte Kiffin in 1996. The new-look Buccaneers set the stage for one of the greatest defensive runs in NFL history. From 1997 to 2008, the Buccaneers defense finished in the league's top ten every year but one, including eight top-5 finishes, and two top-ranked efforts. Kiffin along with head coach Tony Dungy created the \"Tampa 2\" defense, a modified version of the established Cover 2 scheme.\nKiffin's defenses were known as gang tacklers with tremendous team speed with a front four that could pressure the quarterback consistently, fast sideline-to-sideline linebackers, and a hard-hitting secondary that caused turnovers. Many teams have copied the Tampa 2, but none have come close to the success the Buccaneers experienced led by numerous Pro Bowlers and Hall of Famers. The Tampa Bay defense featured future Hall of Famers: Derrick Brooks, John Lynch, Warren Sapp, Ronde Barber, and Pro Bowlers, Hardy Nickerson, Simeon Rice, Shelton Quarles, Donnie Abraham, and Super Bowl XXXVII MVP Dexter Jackson. Sapp and Nickerson were named to the 1990s All-Decade 2nd Team while the 2000s All-Decade Team featured Sapp and Brooks as 1st Team players and Ronde Barber on the 2nd Team.\n2002 defense.\nThe 2002 Buccaneers defense is widely regarded as one of the greatest defenses in NFL history, rivaled only by the 1976 Steelers, 1985 Bears, 1986 Giants, 2000 Ravens and 2010's Seattle Seahawks. In the regular season, Tampa Bay led the league in total defense (252.8 ypg), points allowed (196), first downs allowed (14.8 pg), passing (155.6 ypg), interceptions (31), interceptions returned for touchdowns (5), opponent passer rating (48.4), and shutouts (2). They also finished third in opponent rushing average (3.8 ypc), and sixth in sacks (43). Derrick Brooks was awarded AP Defensive Player of the Year as the defense led the way to a 12\u20134 regular season. The team was even better in the postseason allowing only a combined 37 points in three games \u2013 all against top ten offenses. In those three playoff games, they intercepted 9 passes \u2013 returning 4 for touchdowns \u2013 and collected 11 sacks.\nIn Super Bowl XXXVII, the Buccaneers delivered one of the most impressive defensive performances in Super Bowl history. Playing against the #1 offense in the league led by league MVP Rich Gannon, the defense actually outscored the Raiders offense, allowing 2 offensive touchdowns while returning 3 interceptions for touchdowns. The defense set two records in the 48\u201321 blowout, one for most interceptions in a Super Bowl (5), and one for most interceptions returned for touchdowns in a Super Bowl (3). Defensive back Dwight Smith became the only player in Super Bowl history to record multiple interceptions returned for touchdowns in a Super Bowl, while fellow defensive back Dexter Jackson was awarded Super Bowl MVP for his two interceptions in the game. In 19 total games in 2002, the Buccaneers recorded 40 interceptions, 53 sacks, and 9 defensive touchdowns.\n2019\u2013present: Todd Bowles' 3\u20134 defense.\nWhen Arians was hired by the Bucs, he appointed former New York Jets head coach Todd Bowles to be the team's defensive coordinator. That same offseason, the team drafted linebacker Devin White with the fifth overall pick in the 2019 NFL draft, after signing outside linebacker Shaquil Barrett to a one-year, $4\u00a0million contract, and defensive end Ndamukong Suh for one year, $10\u00a0million. With these acquisitions, along with linebackers Lavonte David, Carl Nassib, Jason Pierre-Paul, nose tackles Vita Vea and Beau Allen and defensive end William Gholston, Bowles implemented the 3\u20134 defensive scheme, with a heavy emphasis on blitzing. David and White were the teams' leaders, Barrett led the team, and the league, in sacks with 19.5, and the 2019 Buccaneers finished No. 1 in the league in run defense. The team's defense improved next season after Suh, Barrett, and Pierre-Paul were re-signed and Antoine Winfield Jr. was drafted in the second round of the 2020 NFL draft. The Buccaneers defense was a massive part of the teams' turn-around in 2020, finishing 1st in run defense, 7th in pass defense and 8th in total defense. The Buccaneers pass defense improved 29th to 7th, thanks in part to their young secondary, led by Carlton Davis, Sean Murphy-Bunting, Jordan Whitehead, Winfield Jr., Ross Cockrell, Herb Miller and Mike Edwards. Nicknamed, the \"Grave Diggers\", they forced two interceptions, including a pick-six by Jamel Dean, four sacks and gave up no touchdowns against 2020 NFL MVP Aaron Rodgers in Week 6, forced three interceptions against future Hall of famer Drew Brees, and five sacks and another interception against Rodgers in the NFC Championship Game. In Super Bowl LV, against the league's No. 1 offense led by 2018 NFL MVP Patrick Mahomes, the Buccaneers held Kansas City to season lows in points and red zone attempts, with 9 points, all from field goals, 22 first downs, and 0\u20133 red zone attempts. They forced two interceptions, three sacks, 29 pressures, and five quarterback hits, and a 49.9 passer rating during the game. In 19 total games in 2020, the Buccaneers recorded 18 interceptions, 58 sacks, 19 forced fumbles, and 12 fumble recoveries.\nFacilities.\nThe Buccaneers played their home games at Tampa Stadium until 1998, when they moved to Raymond James Stadium in Tampa.\nIn 1975, the Buccaneers built a small practice complex with offices near Tampa International Airport called One Buccaneer Place\u2014often shorted to \"One Buc Place\". The team used the unspectacular facility through 2005. It sat across the street from International Plaza and Bay Street, and backed up to the runways of the airport. It was located about two miles away from Tampa Stadium. As other NFL clubs began replacing and upgrading their respective facilities, Buccaneers players and coaches stepped up their complaints about the constant aircraft noise, cramped offices, small locker rooms, infestations, and decrepit condition of One Buc Place. Then-head coach Jon Gruden sarcastically referred to the facility as \"The Woodshed\"; some of the coaches' offices were converted broom closets. The frequent summertime rain sent the team to practice in a nearby parking garage. Some players and staff claim to have come down with illnesses from spending too much time in the building. For much of the team's existence, the Buccaneers held training camp on the University of Tampa campus, then at the expansive and better-equipped Disney's Wide World of Sports Complex near Orlando (2002\u20132008).\nIn August 2006, the Buccaneers unveiled a $30\u00a0million training facility located across the street from Raymond James Stadium (on the former site of Tampa Bay Center). The state-of-the-art facility on is one of the largest in the NFL. It includes offices and meeting rooms, three natural grass practice fields, a theater for meetings and press conferences, an expanded weight room, a fully equipped kitchen and dining room, a rehabilitation center with three pools and a locker room twice the size of the former location. The building has a five-story glass and steel football. In 2009, the team began holding training camp at this new complex.\nIn September 2007, statues of important figures from the Buccaneers 2002 championship season were moved into the lobby area in an exhibit called \"Moment of Victory\". The life-size statues included players Mike Alstott, Ronde Barber, Derrick Brooks, Brad Johnson, John Lynch, Shelton Quarles, Simeon Rice, Warren Sapp, and head coach Jon Gruden. The statues are modeled after images from the sideline towards the end of Super Bowl XXXVII.\nAn adjacent climate-controlled indoor practice facility with an artificial turf field was added in 2017. \nInitially, the facility might have been unnamed, but for over a decade, it simply was referred to as \"One Buc Place\", the same name as the old building. In 2018, the facility was named AdventHealth Training Facility, as part of a ten-year naming rights deal with AdventHealth.\nLogos and uniforms.\nLogos.\nSince their inception in 1976, the Buccaneers have gone through two distinct logo/uniform eras. From 1976 to 1996, the team used orange, red, and white uniforms with a \"Bucco Bruce\" logo. Since 1997, the team has used red and pewter uniforms, with a \"skull and swords\" logo.\nThe original \"Bucco Bruce\" logo has seen three distinct versions. The original version was the most distinctive, both in color and design. The logo was refreshed in 1992 with the most obvious differences being the design of the face, specifically the open eye, the design on the dagger, and the usage of white near the neck of the first design. The 2009 throwback uniforms used a cleaned up and crisper version of the 1976\u20131991 logo. From 1997 onwards, the Buccaneers' newer \"skulls and swords\" logo has gone through three iterations. The first was somewhat smaller on the helmet, and featured a more conventionally-shaped skull. The second edition was larger on the helmet, had a different shade of red, and a different design for the shape and face of the skull. The current version is mostly the same as the second, with only minor changes, including a smaller size on the helmet.\n1976.\nShortly after the franchise was awarded, in February 1975 the team name of \"Buccaneers\" was selected, along with proposed team colors of green, orange and white. The name was said to be reminiscent of Jos\u00e9 Gaspar and the Buccaneers of the Caribbean Sea, and the color orange representing the Florida citrus industry. Almost immediately, the nickname \"Bucs\" became popular, but the alternative \"Bay Bucs\" failed to gain traction.\nA few months later, however, green was dropped from the color scheme. The artists' renditions were too similar to the aqua used by the Miami Dolphins, as well as the green shades used by the Miami Hurricanes and Florida A&amp;M. While they desired to keep the primary color orange, which provided a popular visual link to the Gators, Hurricanes, and Florida A&amp;M, they sought to further distinguish themselves. The color red as an accent color was substituted, as a gesture to the former Tampa Spartans and loosely, to the Florida State Seminoles. The orange/red/white combination was now a composite of all major college teams in the state at the time. Officially speaking, the club's colors during this time period were Florida orange, red, and white.\nLong-time \"Tampa Tribune\" cartoonist and Ye Mystic Krewe of Gasparilla member Lamar Sparkman designed the first team logo. Faced with the challenge of designing a logo that did not closely resemble that of the other \"pirates\" in the league, the Raiders, Sparkman came up with a moustached pirate wearing a plumed slouch hat, with a large hoop earring in his left ear and clutching a dagger in his teeth. The pirate appeared to be winking. Sparkman decided to portray the character not as a \"hairy-legged slob\", but more of gallant, swashbuckling, and rakish, \"classy\" type. The eye wink was used rather than an eyepatch, since the Raiders' logo already depicted a patch over one eye. For a very brief time he was referred to as \"Morgan\", and coach John McKay called him \"Errol Flynn\". Local \"St. Petersburg Times\" sportswriter Hubert Mizell coined the somewhat belittling nickname \"Bucco Bruce\" in a February 1976 column, noting almost immediately the mascot's unintimidating and \"cavalier\" appearance. The nickname stuck, while the logo and the name \"Bucco Bruce\" became symbols and reminders of the club's ongoing futility. Sports writer and commentator Nick Bakay once said that Bucco Bruce was a pirate who \"struck fear in the hearts of no one\".\nThe original home uniforms featured orange jerseys with white numerals outlined in red, white trousers, and striped socks. These are the now-infamous \"Creamsicle uniforms\", so named from the perceived similarity of the uniform's appearance to the ice cream snack. Road white jerseys had orange numerals outlined in red. During their first season in 1976, however, the orange jerseys were only used for preseason games. The Buccaneers wore their white jerseys for all 14 regular season games. After the 1976 season, the team would not see striped socks again until they began wearing them as throwback uniforms starting in 2009.\n1977\u20131991.\nAfter only one season, the original orange numerals (with red outline) for the white \"away\" jerseys were reversed. For 1977 and beyond, the white jerseys were revised to have red numerals with an orange outline. The color swap provided better visibility, especially for television coverage purposes. The striped socks were dropped.\nDuring the 1985 season, the team wore a special patch marking their tenth season. In 1989, 1990, and 1991, the Buccaneers elected to wear white at home to accommodate Vinny Testaverde's color blindness. Testaverde had bad performances in the darker (orange) uniforms and persuaded head coach Ray Perkins to change the team's home uniform to white.\nBeloit College, located in Beloit, Wisconsin, received a notice from the Tampa Bay Buccaneers of the college's illegitimate use of their mascot. Beloit College's buccaneer is the mirror image of the Tampa Bay buccaneer, with the creamsicle colors replaced with Beloit's school colors. Athletic Director Ed DeGeorge said Beloit's Buccaneers have used the logo since the early 1980s, when he chose it from a book while ordering decals for the football team's helmets. The NFL's Buccaneers joined the league in 1976. However, the Buccaneers withdrew their claim against Beloit College because of the independent decision to redesign the logo.\n1992\u20131996.\nIn 1992, the Bucco Bruce logo was redrawn, yielding a crisper and larger version that would be used for five seasons. A simultaneous uniform refresh introduced new orange trousers to be paired with the white jerseys, which now featured an orange collar. The Buccaneers utilized the white-on-orange combination for the vast majority of regular season and preseason games (both home and away) during this period. The orange-on-white combination was used sparingly, mainly for primetime games, some late-season games, and away games where the other team chose to white at home. The white-on-white combination was rarely used.\nBefore the team's season finale in 1995 against the Lions, coach Sam Wyche suggested that the Buccaneers wear the orange pants with their orange jerseys. The idea was vetoed by, among others, Pro Bowl linebacker Hardy Nickerson.\nFor the 1993 season, the Buccaneers added a commemorative patch to the right sleeve of their uniforms, which read \"Mr C\" in cursive script. It was in recognition of owner Hugh Culverhouse, who was battling terminal lung cancer. For 1994, the Buccaneers carried the league-wide NFL 75th anniversary patch, and as part of the \"throwback\" theme of the season, wore white jerseys with white pants on two occasions.\nShortly after Malcom Glazer purchased the franchise in January 1995, ownership announced that they were planning to introduce new team colors, logos, and uniforms. Ownership hoped to switch to new uniforms as early as the 1995 season, however the NFL informed them that it was too late to do so at that time. A formal uniform switch request was then submitted to the league and tentatively scheduled to take effect for the 1996 season. Team officials and the NFL Properties department began to research a new design. The local newspaper even held an informal design contest to raise awareness and generate publicity. However, in the meantime, the talks for a new stadium had stalled, leaving open the chance that the franchise might move. As a result, the uniform change was postponed. In March 1996, it was announced that the orange \"Creamsicle\" uniforms would be used for at least another year until the stadium plans were ironed out.\n1997\u20132013.\nA ballot measure to fund the construction of a new stadium passed in September 1996. As a result, the franchise was guaranteed to stay in Tampa, and the plans to design a new uniform were resurrected and reenergized. The Buccaneers worked with the NFL to develop a more marketable and intimidating look in order to improve the team's image. Starting with the 1997 season, the primary team colors were changed to red and pewter, with black and orange as accents. The \"Bucco Bruce\" logo was replaced by a red wind-swept flag displaying a white pirate skull and crossed sabres which is a modified version of the Crossed Swords Jolly Roger. The flagpole was another larger sabre. The \"Buccaneers\" team name was written in a new font, \"Totally Gothic\", and was either red with shadows of pewter or red and white. Orange pinstriping, and an orange football, was used to maintain a visual link to the former colors. Chris Berman nicknamed them \"the pirates in pewter pants,\" a play on the Gilbert and Sullivan opera \"The Pirates of Penzance\". The nickname \"Pewter Pirates\" also became trendy. The Buccaneers staged a ceremony at The Pier on April 7, 1997, in which Bucco Bruce walked the plank of the pirate ship \"Bounty\" docked in Tampa Bay. But not before he was pardoned at the last minute by Governor Lawton Chiles.\nThe new uniforms were adopted while Raymond James Stadium was still under construction, and the new colors would be prominent at the new facility. This new color scheme loosely resembled that of the Tampa Bay Bandits, the USFL team that played in the region during their three-season existence from 1983 to 1985. That team had a color scheme of red, silver, black, and white.\nThe new uniforms provided a combination of either red or white jerseys with either pewter or white trousers. The white-on-white combination has been used numerous times during the preseason and for early regular season games. The red-on-white combination has been used sparingly, for some prime time home games or special occasions. Most games, home and away, have used pewter trousers.\nFor 2005, the uniform featured a patch commemorating the club's 30th season. In 2014, a circular patch was worn with the initials \"MG\", after the death of owner Malcolm Glazer. For 2015, a patch commemorating the club's 40th season was worn.\nLike many other NFL teams located in subtropical climates, the Buccaneers customarily wear their white road jerseys at home during the first half of the season \u2013 forcing opponents to wear their darker colors during the hot summers and autumns in Tampa. Additionally, the visitors' bench of Raymond James Stadium is located on the east side of the stadium, which is in direct sunlight for games that kick off at 1:00\u00a0p.m. Eastern, whereas the west (home) sideline is in the shade. In certain previous years, such as 1989, 1990, 1991, and 1996 \u2013 the last year of the original uniforms, the Buccaneers generally wore white at home for the entire season including preseason. Since the new uniforms were adopted, the Buccaneers typically wear their red jerseys for home games during the second half of the season, and for most nighttime home games. They have also worn red jerseys all four times as the home team in International Series games. During the preseason, the Buccaneers usually wear white for their home games. Since the 1997 season, the Buccaneers have worn both their red jerseys (5 times) and white jerseys (4 times) for home postseason games. At Super Bowl XXXVII, in which Tampa Bay was the designated home team, they elected to wear their red home jerseys. This was despite the kickoff temperature of , one of the hottest Super Bowls on record.\nThe Buccaneers' 1997 uniform change prompted a 2003 lawsuit by the Raiders, who claimed that the NFL and the Buccaneers had infringed upon key trademark elements of the Raiders' brand, including the Raiders' pirate logo. In the same suit, the Raiders challenged the Carolina Panthers' color scheme, which included silver and black. The Raiders wanted the courts to bar the Buccaneers and Panthers from wearing their uniforms while playing in California. However, since the lawsuit was filed in a California state court, the lawsuit was tossed out because only federal courts have jurisdiction on intellectual property issues.\n2014\u20132019.\nThe Buccaneers unveiled a revised logo and helmet on February 20, 2014. This was followed two weeks later on March 3, with the unveiling of new uniforms to be used starting in the 2014 season. The jersey numbers featured a high visibility reflective outline, the helmet logo was revamped and enlarged, the helmet itself was a darker shade of pewter, and the facemask had a chrome-effect coating. The original Creamsicle shade of orange was reintroduced as accent trim. The reaction to the newer uniforms was mixed. Of note, the jersey numbers were derisively compared to digital alarm clock numerals. Different color sock combinations were used with white and colored uniforms, almost always being pewter or red; however, there were two occasions in 2014 when orange socks were used for two different weeks.\nLike the 1997\u20132013 version, the new 2014 uniforms could be worn as combinations of red or white jerseys paired with either pewter or white trousers. As before, the Buccaneers typically wore their white jerseys at home during the first half of the season, and their red jerseys at home during the second half of the season as well as for night games.\nIn 2015, the Buccaneers debuted a Color Rush uniform featuring red jerseys and red trousers, with pewter numerals.\n2020\u2013present.\nThe Buccaneers unveiled three new jersey designs on April 7, 2020. The new uniform designs evoke the club's 1997\u20132013 design, while incorporating modern design elements from the 2014 uniform refresh, including the enlarged flag-and-crossed-swords logo, the newer shade of pewter, as well as the modern ship design logo on the sleeves. While the Buccaneers kept the familiar red and white jerseys with either white or pewter pants, they changed their \"Color Rush\" alternate uniform to an all-pewter combination.\nFor Super Bowl LV held at Raymond James Stadium, Tampa Bay was the designated home team, the first team in NFL history to play in a Super Bowl in their own stadium. They elected to wear their road white jerseys with pewter trousers, instead of their red jerseys, citing the success they had enjoyed during the season in that combination. Tampa Bay routed Kansas City 31\u20139, giving them a Super Bowl win in both their red jerseys (XXXVII) and their white jerseys (LV).\nDuring the 2020 season, the Buccaneers finished with a 6\u20130 record wearing their newer white jersey/pewter pants combination, including three postseason victories over New Orleans, Green Bay, and Kansas City, respectively. They were first introduced in their Week 6 game against Green Bay, a 38\u201310 win at Raymond James Stadium. A renewed interest in wearing white jerseys at home saw Tampa Bay schedule six of eight 2021 home games with white (up from the typical four), plus home playoff games in the Wild Card and Divisional rounds with white/pewter as well.\nDuring the 2025 season, a 50th season patch will be worn across all uniforms. Three versions of the anniversary patch will be used. A red version with the skull &amp; swords logo will be used on the current red/pewter uniforms. A white version with the skull &amp; swords logo will be carried when wearing the white 'away' jerseys. A white and orange version of the patch, with the Bucco Bruce logo, will be worn on the throwback uniforms.\nThrowback uniform.\nAfter their uniform change in 1997, the Buccaneers did not wear the old orange uniforms, even during popular league-sponsored \"throwback\" weekends. The old uniforms were mostly eschewed by the club, and the sale of team merchandise in the old color scheme was embargoed for several years. Fans' opinions of the old uniforms were equally negative. However, after over a decade, there was a renewed interest in the old uniforms, as throwbacks and other alternate uniforms across the league were becoming increasingly popular. In 2008, the team revealed that they would be wearing orange throwback uniforms for one game in the 2009 season. Their use was in conjunction with the creation of a Buccaneers Ring of Honor, celebrating the 30th anniversary of the 1979 division championship team.\nThrowback merchandise went on sale in the summer of 2009, and referred to the orange color not as \"Florida Orange\", but as \"Orange Glaze\". Considerable research was done using photographs and old uniforms to match the original color schemes. The dagger-biting pirate was given a cleaned-up look, and the orange, red, and white uniforms debuted against the Packers (Tampa Bay's former division rival) on November 8, 2009. Raymond James Stadium was also transformed via orange banners and classic field logos and fonts back to the classic Tampa Stadium look of the late 1970s. The Buccaneers won their first throwback game behind rookie quarterback Josh Freeman's first-career NFL start. The throwback game was to become an annual tradition, but went on hiatus after 2012 due to league-wide safety restrictions requiring players wear the same helmet throughout the season. After changes in league policies, the throwback uniforms returned in 2023. \nAhead of the 2025 season, to celebrate the franchise's 50th season, the Buccaneers unveiled a second throwback uniform based on the team's 1976 regular season uniforms. It features white jerseys and white trousers, orange block numerals outlined in red, red-orange-red sleeve stripes, the \"Bucco Bruce\" helmet, and a 50th season patch. This effectively retired the all-pewter uniform, which they last wore in 2023, in order to comply with the NFL's two-alternate/throwback uniform limit. Tampa Bay wore this \u203276 Uniform in Week 3 against the Jets, and at Seattle in Week 5. The \u203276 Uniforms were widely praised, and the Bucs won both games in which they were used.\nThe Buccaneers are 3\u20135 all-time in throwback games.\nPlayers of note.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Buccaneers have retired three jersey numbers, led by Lee Roy Selmon's number 63. Derrick Brooks (55) and Warren Sapp (99) had their numbers formally retired after they were inducted into the Hall of Fame. Despite not being formally retired, the Buccaneers have not reissued 20 (Ronde Barber), 40 (Mike Alstott), or 47 (John Lynch) since those players retired from playing. As of 2024, neither Lynch nor Barber have had their numbers retired, despite also being inducted into the Hall of Fame.\nAnother number that has seen limited usage is 42, worn by the late Ricky Bell. Since Bell's last season in 1981, 42 has only been worn for two seasons, the most recent being in 1990. The number 12 has also not been used since Tom Brady retired in 2022. The number was also notoriously worn by Doug Williams. \nIndividual awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNFL All-Decade and Anniversary Teams.\nSince Tampa Bay's entrance into the NFL, at least one player has been included on each NFL All-Decade Team, excluding the 1970s which Tampa Bay only had existed for four seasons. Tampa Bay has had players elected to the 1980s, 1990s, 2000s, and 2010s teams. Among the three Anniversary Teams, the franchise did not exist for the 50th Anniversary Team, no players were selected to the 75th Anniversary Team, and five players were selected to the 100th Anniversary Team. Players are only included on lists which they played for the team within the years of the decade; members, such as Tom Brady, did not join the Buccaneers until 2020, despite being a member of the 2000s and 2010s All-Decade Teams. Additionally, two players were named to \"\" in 2010, and one was named to the \"Sports Illustrated\" All-Decade Team in 2009.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTampa Stadium Krewe of Honor.\nIn 1991, the organization initiated the \"Krewe of Honor\" to recognize top players, and featured a mural of the first class of three members. The display was painted in 1992 by Pat Donatelli and located on the east side of the stadium. Honorees were presented with a plaque. Quarterback Doug Williams was subsequently inducted September 6, 1992, and owner Hugh Culverhouse on September 5, 1993. No more members were added before Tampa Stadium was closed and demolished; when the stadium was demolished in 1998, so was the Krewe.\nRing of Honor.\nOn November 8, 2009, the team unveiled a new Ring of Honor at Raymond James Stadium. Hall of Fame defensive tackle, as well as the franchise's first ever draft pick, Lee Roy Selmon was the first inductee. On October 19, 2008, one year before the inception of the Ring of Honor, Mike Alstott was honored by the club after his retirement. He would be formally inducted into the ring in 2015. Former head coach Jon Gruden was inducted in 2017, but due to controversy surrounding emails he sent while working for ESPN, his name was removed in 2021. However, he was reinstated in February 2025. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the induction ceremony for 2020 inductee Monte Kiffin was postponed until 2021. Inductees John Lynch and Ronde Barber were both honored a second time for having subsequently been named to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nCriteria for induction is loose, and no formal voting process is conducted. Ownership considers players, coaches, or club executives that have had \"an indelible impact on the franchise\". Maintaining strong ties to the team and the greater Tampa Bay community is an important factor. As of 2024, each of the players that had been named to the defunct \"Krewe of Honor\" have been subsequently inducted into the new Ring of Honor, with the lone exception of Ricky Bell.\nThe ring initially featured the player's number and last name in protruding, illuminated letters, along the frieze of the stadium's east side upper deck. The east side (visitor's side) is utilized so the ring is better visible on television. When the stadium underwent renovations in 2016\u20132017, the ring was refreshed to flat white letters on a red background, expanded to include both first and last names. Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees are additionally denoted by a hall of fame logo next to their names. In 2021, the ring was expanded to a second row of names along the wall below the frieze - starting with the recognition of Tampa Bay's two Super Bowl victories (2002 and 2020). When Gruden's name was re-added in 2025, it was the first name placed on the newer second row. \nSimeon Rice is scheduled to be inducted November 30, 2025.\nAll-Pro Team selections.\nMany current and former members of the Buccaneers have been selected to the Associated Press All-Pro first and second teams. While the AP All-Pro teams are generally considered the highest nomination, Pro Football Writers of America, Newspaper Enterprise Association, Pro Football Weekly, Pro Football Focus, and The Sporting News have also nominated Buccaneers players to their All-Pro teams. \nNotes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTop 50.\nTo mark their 50th season in 2025, the Buccaneers released a list of their franchise's all-time Top 50 players, as ranked through a combination of fan votes, consultation with media experts, and the conclusions of a team committee. The members were selected from a list of players who had started at least 50 games with the Buccaneers, were ranked in the team's top five in a major statistical category, had been voted to a Pro Bowl, named All-Pro, or were part of an iconic moment in Buccaneers history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA Football Life / The Timeline / Hard Knocks.\nFormer Buccaneer players and seasons profiled on \"A Football Life\" and \"The Timeline\":\nTampa Bay draft picks.\nThe Tampa Bay Buccaneers have had the first overall pick in the NFL draft on five occasions.\nCulture.\nTampa Bay Buccaneers Cheerleaders.\nThe Bucs created an official cheerleading squad in their first season, called the \"Swash-Buc-Lers\". In 1999, they were renamed as the \"Tampa Bay Buccaneers Cheerleaders\".\n\"A Triumph of the Heart: The Ricky Bell Story\".\n\"\" is a made-for-television movie that recounts the life of the late Buccaneer running back Ricky Bell. The movie takes place through a dramatic reenactment of the 1981 season, including actual footage of gameplay around the dramatized role by Mario Van Peebles playing Bell himself. Bell finds himself befriending an impaired child who inspire each other to become better in their own ways. It also includes other former Buccaneer players, like Lee Roy Selmon, Charley Hannah, and Doug Williams (only through gameplay footage).\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nAtlanta Falcons.\nThe Buccaneers and Falcons met for the first time in the 1977 season, one year after the Buccaneers joined the NFL as the newest expansion team. The rivalry became fiercer after the 2002 season, when the Buccaneers and Falcons were placed in the same division, leading to constant clashes for the divisional title. The Falcons lead the overall series, 32\u201331. The two teams have not met in the playoffs.\nCarolina Panthers.\nThe Buccaneers and Panthers first meet in 1995, back when the later team joined the NFL as expansion franchise. However, the rivalry would take off during the 2000s with the creation of the NFC South and was described as \"heated\" and \"physical\" due to two main reasons; the first being that both teams fought for dominating control over the NFC South throughout most of the 2000s. The second reason being that players on both franchises suffered season ending injuries during their annual games. Examples include Chris Simms, Dante Wesley, Clifton Smith, and Kavika Pittman. As of the 2024 season, the Panthers lead the rivalry 25\u201324.\nNew Orleans Saints.\nThe Saints and Buccaneers have one noticeable parallel throughout the two franchises history, they were both regarded as unsuccessful franchises until the 21st century, which was both teams were placed in the NFC South in 2002, as well as when their rivalry would truly begin to take off, when both teams improved their fortunes, though the Buccaneers got over the hump first with by winning Super Bowl XXXVII and the Saints winning their first Super Bowl 7 years later in Super Bowl XLIV. The first meeting between these two franchises first occurred in 1977 when the Buccaneers beat the Saints and ended their 26-game straight losing streak. While it is not the most well known rivalry in the NFL, it's grown into one of the league's fiercest and most physical. The rivalry reached new heights in the 2000s, which was when the Buccaneers had a higher advantage over the Saints in the regular season, when both teams started posting winning seasons in that decade. New Orleans Saints leads the rivalry 39\u201324 and the two franchises met once in the playoffs in which the Buccaneers defeated the Saints 30 to 20 and eventually won Super Bowl LV.\nConference.\nFrom 1977 to 2001; the Buccaneers played in the former NFC Central division, culminating in two former divisional rivalries developing with the Detroit Lions and the Green Bay Packers.\nGreen Bay Packers.\nThe Buccaneers and Packers were division rivals from 1977 to 2002 when both were in the NFC Central division. The teams have played several notable games, including a Snow Bowl game in 1985, a and the 2020 NFC Championship Game. As of the 2023 season, the Packers lead the series 34\u201324\u20131.\nPhiladelphia Eagles.\nThe Buccaneers have grown a fairly recent playoff rivalry with the Philadelphia Eagles beginning in the late 1970s, but reached new heights in competition during the new millennium as the two teams have met in the postseason four times since 2000. The rivalry would return in the early 2020s when the Buccaneers beat the Eagles in the 2021 and 2023 NFC Wild Card games. As of Week 4 of the 2025 season, the Buccaneers lead the all-time series 13\u201312. The regular season has the Eagles lead 10\u20139, while the Buccaneers lead 4\u20132 in the postseason.\nLos Angeles Rams.\nThe Buccaneers have also grown a recent rivalry with the Los Angeles Rams as the two teams have faced off numerous times in the postseason; first meeting in the 2021 NFC Divisional round, and in the Conference Championship twice, both in 1979 and 1999 with the Rams winning all 3 matchups. The two teams became the first in league history to win a Super Bowl in their home stadiums as Tampa won Super Bowl LV in 2021, and Los Angeles won Super Bowl LVI a year later. Both teams combine for four Super Bowl championships as they regularly fought for control of the conference in the early 2000s and 2020s respectively. As of the 2023 season, the Rams lead the all-time series 19\u201310.\nInterconference.\nMiami Dolphins.\nThe Buccaneers developed a minor instate rivalry with fellow Floridian team; the Miami Dolphins. The two teams had their first meeting in Week 7 of the 1976 season, with the Dolphins winning 23\u201320. The 1976 meeting was the only one where both teams were members of the AFC, with Tampa leaving later to join the NFC. As a result, the two teams can only meet as interconference rivals, which is not guaranteed to be annual. As of the 2023 season, the Buccaneers leads the all-time regular-season series 7\u20135.\nRadio and television.\nThe Buccaneers' current flagship radio stations are WXTB 97.9 FM and WDAE 620\u00a0AM. The play-by-play announcer since 1989 has been Gene Deckerhoff. Former Bucs tight end Dave Moore joined Deckerhoff as analyst for the 2007 season. T. J. Rives works as the sideline reporter.\nBroadcast legend and former Green Bay Packers' announcer Ray Scott was the play-by-play man for the Bucs' first two seasons in 1976 and 1977. Dick Crippen called the team's games in the first half of the 1978 season, with Jim Gallogly taking over for the second half. From 1979 to 1988 Mark Champion, who became the radio voice of the Detroit Lions (1989\u20132004) and then the Detroit Pistons (2001\u2013present), held that position with the Bucs.\nFormer Buccaneer Hardy Nickerson served as color commentator for one season in 2006, until he signed with the Bears as a linebackers coach on February 23, 2007. Nickerson had replaced Scot Brantley, who was the commentator from 1999 through 2005. Jesse Ventura, the famous professional wrestler, actor, and former governor of Minnesota, was Deckerhoff's partner on the Bucs radio broadcasts for one year, 1990, and former Buc David Logan held that position after Ventura until his death after the 1998 season. Dave Kocerek and Fran Curci were also color commentators for the Buccaneers during their earlier years.\nRonnie Lane previously worked as a sideline reporter.\nThe Bucs have broadcast on FM radio since signing with Top 40 station WRBQ-FM in 1992. The team moved to WQYK-FM in 1994, then to WFUS in 2004, and then to WXTB in 2017.\nWhile regular season and playoff games in the NFL are all broadcast by national television contracts on CBS, Fox, NBC, ESPN and NFL Network, the television broadcasts are for the most part handled by the individual teams. WESH simulcasts the broadcast in the Orlando area.\nCBS, Fox and NBC games are shown respectively in Tampa Bay on WTSP, WTVT and WFLA-TV, while they are shown respectively in Orlando on WKMG, WOFL and WESH. The great majority of games are aired on Fox owned-and-operated stations WTVT and WOFL, by virtue of Fox owning the rights to NFC games. WTSP and WKMG air any Buccaneers home games against American Football Conference teams. \"Monday Night Football\" games on ESPN and Thursday night games on NFL Network are simulcast locally on WMOR-TV, who also previously carried the Bucs' \"Sunday Night Football\" games when they were televised on ESPN and TNT; previously, the Bucs' appearances on the cable networks were seen locally on WFLA-TV and WFTS.\nAt WFLA, Chris Myers was the play-by-play announcer with John Lynch as color commentator. Both Myers and Lynch worked nationally with Fox Sports at the time until Lynch became the general manager of the San Francisco 49ers in 2017. Ron Jaworski previously served as color commentator, until he signed with \"Monday Night Football\" for 2007. Charles Davis also served as color commentator from 2007 to 2008.\nWTOG channel 44 also previously broadcast Buccaneers preseason games for many years, ending in 2002. Former CBS play-by-play and ESPN golf broadcaster Jim Kelly was the play-by-play announcer for many of those games in the 1980s, and Joe Namath was a commentator.\nIn the early years of the franchise, WTVT, then a CBS affiliate, broadcast some Buccaneers preseason games. Sports anchor Andy Hardy handled the play-by-play, and for one game in 1978, his broadcast partner was his friend, Florida State alumni, and movie actor Burt Reynolds.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "30839", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30839", "title": "Tennessee Titans", "text": "National Football League franchise in Nashville, Tennessee\nThe Tennessee Titans are a professional American football team based in Nashville, Tennessee. The Titans compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) South division. They play their home games at Nissan Stadium; the team will move to a new stadium with the same name, which will be completed in 2027.\nOriginally known as the Houston Oilers, the team was founded in 1959 by Houston oil tycoon Bud Adams, who remained the owner until his death in 2013. The team began play in 1960 in Houston, Texas, as a charter member of the American Football League (AFL). The Houston Oilers won the first two AFL championships along with four division titles, and joined the NFL as part of the AFL\u2013NFL merger in 1970. The Houston Oilers made playoff appearances from 1978 to 1980 and from 1987 to 1993, with Hall of Famers Earl Campbell and Warren Moon, respectively.\nIn 1997, the Houston Oilers moved to Nashville, Tennessee, playing at the Liberty Bowl Memorial Stadium in Memphis, Tennessee, for one season while waiting for a new stadium to be constructed. The team moved to Nashville's Vanderbilt Stadium in 1998. For those two seasons, the team was known as the Tennessee Oilers, but changed its name to the Titans for the 1999 season, when they moved into Adelphia Coliseum, now known as Nissan Stadium. The Titans' training facility is in Saint Thomas Sports Park, a 31-acre site at the MetroCenter complex in Nashville.\nThe Titans played in Super Bowl XXXIV in 2000, losing 23\u201316 to the St. Louis Rams. Led by Steve McNair and Eddie George, they made the playoffs in all but one season from 1999 to 2003, but only twice in the next 13 years. From 2016 to 2021, the Titans had six consecutive winning seasons and four playoff appearances. The Titans are the only NFL team to have two players rush for 2,000 yards in a season: Chris Johnson (2009) and Derrick Henry (2020).\nHistory.\nHouston Oilers.\nAfter failed attempts to start an NFL expansion team in Houston, Adams founded the Houston Oilers in 1959, as one of the eight charter members of the upstart American Football League (AFL) and a member of its Eastern Division. Beginning play at Jeppesen Stadium at the University of Houston, the team moved to Rice Stadium at Rice University in 1965. Led by quarterback George Blanda, who played with the team from 1960 to 1966, the Houston Oilers made it to each of the first three AFL championship games. The Oilers won the first two AFL championships, both against the San Diego Chargers, but lost the 1962 American Football League Championship Game 20\u201317 to the Dallas Texans, now Kansas City Chiefs, after double overtime. The Houston Oilers failed to post a winning season in the next six seasons, but in 1967, a 9\u20134\u20131 record returned the team to the AFL championship game where it lost 40\u20137 to the Oakland Raiders. The Houston Oilers moved into the Astrodome after the season, becoming the first professional football team to move into a domed stadium. After failing to qualify for the AFL playoffs in 1968, the Oilers qualified the following season in 1969, but were eliminated in the divisional round by the Oakland Raiders in a 56\u20137 blowout.\nFollowing the season, the AFL merged with the NFL in 1970, with the Houston Oilers being assigned to the new American Football Conference (AFC)'s Central division. The Houston Oilers failed to qualify for the NFL playoffs from 1970 to 1977, and posted one winning season in 1975. In 1978, the Houston Oilers selected running back Earl Campbell with the first overall pick in the 1978 NFL draft. Campbell led the team to three consecutive playoff appearances as a wildcard berth from 1978 to 1980. Campbell led the NFL in rushing yards and won the Offensive Player of the Year Award in each of those three seasons. The Oilers made it to the AFC championships in 1978 and 1979, but were defeated both times by the Pittsburgh Steelers.\nThe Houston Oilers failed to post a winning record between 1981 and 1987, a drought that ended when the Houston Oilers acquired quarterback Warren Moon in 1987. With Moon and Hall of Fame offensive linemen Mike Munchak and Bruce Matthews, the Houston Oilers made six consecutive playoff appearances from 1987 to 1993. During the 1992\u201393 NFL playoffs, the Houston Oilers earned the dubious distinction of being on the losing end of what was then the biggest comeback in NFL history when in the divisional round, the Houston Oilers' third-quarter 32-point lead against the Buffalo Bills turned into a 41\u201338 loss in overtime. This remains the largest blown lead in playoff history. After the 1993 season, Moon was traded to the Minnesota Vikings and Munchak retired to begin a coaching career. The following season, the Oilers finished with a league-worst 2\u201314 season, and Jack Pardee was fired as head coach after a 1\u20139 start and was succeeded by Jeff Fisher. The following two seasons, the Oilers drafted quarterback Steve McNair and running back Eddie George respectively, who became franchise players over the next several years. The Oilers respectively went 7\u20139 and 8\u20138 in their final two seasons in Houston.\nTennessee Oilers.\nAfter the 1995 season, Bud Adams announced the move to Tennessee. A Nashville stadium for the Tennessee Oilers would not be ready until 1999, so the Tennessee Oilers planned to play two seasons at Liberty Bowl Memorial Stadium in Memphis, Tennessee. The team was based in Nashville and commuted to Memphis, Tennessee for games.\nGames in Memphis had some of the lowest NFL attendance since the 1950s. The first seven games of the season saw attendance below 27,000 people, and two games drew fewer than 18,000.\nFor the 1998 season, the Tennessee Oilers played their home games at the stadium on the campus of Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee. That year, the team was in playoff contention until losing their last two games for another 8\u20138 record. The Tennessee Oilers were 6\u20132 in Nashville and 2\u20136 on the road.\nTennessee Titans.\nDuring the 1998 offseason, Adams appointed an advisory committee to decide on a new name for the Tennessee Oilers to coincide with the opening of their new stadium, which was renamed Nissan Stadium in 2015. On November 14, 1998, the new name of Tennessee Titans was unveiled. The name is a nod to how Nashville is nicknamed the \"Athens of the South\" for its classical architecture and large number of higher learning institutions.\nThe 1999 season marked a remarkable beginning for the Titans, as they made a dramatic run to Super Bowl XXXIV. Led by head coach Jeff Fisher and quarterback Steve McNair, the team finished the regular season with a 13\u20133 record. Their playoff journey included the famous \"Music City Miracle\" victory over the Buffalo Bills, where a last-second lateral play resulted in a kickoff return touchdown. The Titans reached the Super Bowl but narrowly lost to the St. Louis Rams, falling one yard short of a potential game-tying touchdown.\nIn the years following their Super Bowl appearance, the Titans experienced mixed success. They reached the playoffs several times in the early 2000s, with standout performances from players like running back Eddie George and defensive end Jevon Kearse. However, the team struggled with consistency and faced multiple rebuilding phases. Following the departures of George and McNair in 2003 and 2005, respectively, the Titans drafted quarterback Vince Young in 2006, who led the team to a playoff berth in 2007. Despite being named Offensive Rookie of the Year in 2006 and being a two-time Pro Bowl selection, Young's tenure was marred by injuries, inconsistency and clashes with Jeff Fisher. In 2008, Young was benched in favor of veteran Kerry Collins, who led the Titans to a league best 13\u20133 record and a playoff appearance before being defeated in the divisional round of the playoffs to the Baltimore Ravens. In 2009, following a 0\u20136 start under Collins, Young returned as starting quarterback and led the Titans to winning eight of their final ten games and narrowly missing the playoffs. The 2009 season was also notable as it was the season in which second-year running back Chris Johnson became the sixth player to run for more than 2,000 yards in a season and broke Marshall Faulk's record for most single season yards from scrimmage. Johnson made three Pro Bowl appearances with the Titans before departing after the 2013 season. Following the 2010 season, Young, Collins and Fisher all departed, and quarterback Jake Locker was drafted in 2011. After spending his rookie season as a backup, Locker's career as a starter beginning in 2012 was marked by inconsistent play and numerous injuries, which led to his retirement shortly after departing from the team after the 2014 season after a four-year career.\nAfter posting a league-worst 2\u201314 record during the 2014 season, their worst since moving to Tennessee, the Titans drafted quarterback Marcus Mariota in the 2015 NFL Draft with the second overall pick, who became the Titans' franchise quarterback for the next four seasons. Although the Titans finished with another league worst record of 3\u201313 during the 2015 season, Mariota along with multi-Pro Bowl teammates such as tight end Delanie Walker, offensive tackle Taylor Lewan and defensive tackle/defensive end Jurrell Casey, led the Titans to three consecutive winning records of 9\u20137 from 2016 to 2018. During the 2017 season, the Titans returned to the playoffs for the first time since the 2008 and won their first playoff game since 2003, overcoming a 21\u20133 halftime deficit against the Kansas City Chiefs to win 22\u201321 before being eliminated in the divisional round. The Titans saw their season end in the Divisional Round with a 35\u201314 loss to the New England Patriots. Despite their postseason success in the 2017 season, the Titans moved on from head coach Mike Mularkey.\nThe Titans entered a new era in the late 2010s with the hiring of head coach Mike Vrabel in 2018. Prominent players drafted during the 2019 season included defensive end Jeffery Simmons and wide receiver A. J. Brown, both of whom would later have prolific careers with the team. Under Vrabel's leadership, during the 2019 season, Mariota was benched in favor of offseason trade acquisition Ryan Tannehill after a 2\u20134 start and with the emergence running back Derrick Henry, who led the NFL in rushing yards and rushing touchdowns, the team returned to prominence. The Titans reached the AFC Championship Game during the 2019 season. Mariota, Walker and Casey all departed after the 2019 season.\nDerrick Henry won the Offensive Player of the Year Award in 2020 after rushing for 2,000 yards. Henry was part of a 2020 campaign that saw the Titans win the AFC South with an 11\u20135 record. The Titans' season ended with a 20\u201313 loss to the Baltimore Ravens in the Wild Card Round.\nIn the 2021 season, the Titans finished with a 12\u20135 record, won the AFC South, and got a first round bye. The Titans' season ended with a Divisional Round 19\u201316 loss to the Cincinnati Bengals. The Titans traded away Brown after the season. In 2022, the Titans suffered their first losing season since 2015 with a 7\u201310 mark, losing each of their last seven games despite a 7\u20133 start. In the 2023 season, the Titans finished with a 6\u201311 record. Following the 2023 season, Vrabel was fired as head coach. Former Bengals offensive coordinator Brian Callahan was hired to be the team's head coach before the 2024 season. Prominent departures that occurred during or after the 2023 season included Henry, Tannehill and two-time First-Team All-Pro safety Kevin Byard.\nLogos and uniforms.\nWhen the team debuted as the Houston Oilers in 1960, its logo was an oil rig derrick. Except for minor color changes throughout the years, this logo remained the same until the team was renamed the Titans in 1999. The logo was originally called \"Ol' Riggy\", but this name was dropped before the 1974 season.\nThe Oilers' uniforms consisted of blue or white jerseys, red trim, and white pants. From 1966 to 1971, the pants with both the blue and white jerseys were silver to match the color of the helmets. The team commonly wore light blue pants on the road with the white jerseys from 1972 to 1994, with the exception of the 1980 season, and selected games in the mid-1980s, when the team wore an all-white road combination. For selected games in 1973 and 1974, and again from 1981 through 1984, the Oilers wore their white jerseys at home. Coach Jeff Fisher discarded the light blue pants in 1995. From 1960 to about 1965 and from 1972 to 1974, the Oilers wore blue helmets; the helmets were silver from 1966 to 1971 and white from 1975 to 1998.\nFrom 1997 to 1998, when it was known as the Tennessee Oilers, the team had an alternate logo that combined elements of the flag of Tennessee with the derrick. The team also wore its white uniforms during home games. In its two years as the Tennessee Oilers, the team wore its colored jerseys for road games against the Miami Dolphins and a Thanksgiving Day game against the Dallas Cowboys. It wore all white exclusively in its last year as the Tennessee Oilers.\nWhen the team was renamed the Titans in 1999, it introduced a new logo that was a circle with three stars representing the state's Grand Divisions, containing a large \"T\" with a trail of flames similar to a comet. The uniforms consisted of white helmets, red trim, and either navy or white jerseys. White pants were worn with the navy jerseys, and navy pants with the white jerseys. On both the navy and white jerseys, the outside shoulders and sleeves were light Titans blue. In a game against the Washington Redskins on October 15, 2006, the Titans wore their navy jerseys with navy pants for the first time. Since 2000, the Titans have worn their dark uniforms at home. They have worn white at home during daytime contests in September home games to gain an advantage with the heat, except in the 2005, 2006 and 2008 seasons.\nIn 2003, the Titans introduced an alternate jersey that was light Titans blue with navy outside shoulders and sleeves, which was worn with blue pants. Until 2007, they wore the jersey twice in each regular-season game. They always wore the Titans blue jersey in their annual divisional game against the Houston Texans and for other selected home games. Their selection in those games was representative of the organization's ties to Houston and the AFL. On November 19, 2006, the Titans introduced light Titans blue pants in a game against the Philadelphia Eagles. In December 2006, they combined the Titans blue pants with the Titans blue jersey to create an all Titans blue uniform. Vince Young appeared in this uniform in the cover art for \"Madden NFL 08\".\nDuring the 2006 season, the Titans wore seven different uniform combinations, pairing the white jersey with all three sets of pants (white, Titans blue, navy blue), the navy jersey with the white and navy pants, and the Titans blue jersey with navy and Titans blue pants. In a game against the Atlanta Falcons on October 7, 2007, the Titans paired the navy blue jersey with the Titans blue pants for the first time. They wore the navy blue jerseys with the light blue pants against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. The team paired the Titans blue jerseys with the white pants for the first time in a home game against the Indianapolis Colts on November 14, 2013. In 2008, the Titans blue jerseys became the regular home uniforms, with the navy blue jerseys being relegated to alternate status but not worn until 2013.\nIn 2009, the Titans and the Buffalo Bills began the 2009 NFL preseason in the Hall of Fame Game. Played at Canton's Pro Football Hall of Fame Field at Fawcett Stadium on August 9, 2009, the game was nationally televised on NBC. The Titans defeated the Bills, 21\u201318. In honor of the AFL's 50th anniversary, the Titans wore Oilers' uniforms for the game. In 2009, the team honored former quarterback Steve McNair by placing a small, navy blue disc on the back of their helmets with McNair's white number nine inside of it.\nIn 2013, the team wore the navy blue jerseys twice in honor of their 15th anniversary as the Titans. The Titans wore white jerseys for all games in 2014, for the exceptions of two preseason home games, in which the team wore their light Titans blue jerseys, and a game against the Houston Texans on October 26, 2014, in which the Titans wore their navy blue uniforms.\nBeginning in 2015, navy blue became the team's primary home jersey color again, marking the first time since 2007 that the Titans wore navy as their primary home jersey. The light Titans blue jersey, which was the team's primary jersey color from 2008 to 2014, became the team's alternate jersey for a second time.\nOn April 4, 2018, the Titans debuted new uniforms that retain the color palette of navy blue, Titans blue and white, with new red and silver elements being introduced. The new helmets are navy blue with one silver sword-shaped stripe through the center and metallic gray face masks.\nOn July 23, 2023, the Titans unveiled the throwback powder blue Oilers uniforms.\nOn March 27, 2025, the light Titans blue jersey was reinstated as the team's primary home jersey, while wearing the navy blue jerseys only when the opposing home team wears white jerseys. In addition, the Oilers throwback uniform was not worn this season. The standard uniform combinations will be cream blue with navy blue pants at home and white jersey with cream blue/white pants on the road.\nRivalries.\nThe Titans share rivalries with their three AFC South opponents, Jacksonville Jaguars, Houston Texans, and Indianapolis Colts. They have historical rivalries with former divisional opponents such as the Pittsburgh Steelers, Baltimore Ravens, and Buffalo Bills.\nDivisional.\nJacksonville Jaguars.\nThe rivalry with the Jaguars began in 1995 when the Titans were the Houston Oilers. The rivalry was heated in the late 1990s and early 2000s due to the success of both franchises at the time, including a season in which Jacksonville went 14\u20132 and Tennessee went 13\u20133. That season, all three of Jacksonville's losses, including the playoffs, came against the Titans, who played that year in Super Bowl XXXIV. The rivalry cooled when both teams experienced misfortune in the late 2000s to early 2010s, but both teams ended lengthy playoff droughts in 2017. As of the 2024 season, the Titans lead the all-time series 35\u201326.\nHouston Texans.\nThe Titans\u2019 rivalry with the Houston Texans is more prevalent in Houston due to the Titans having previously played in the city. The Titans dominated the rivalry in the early 2000s, but the series has since evened out in the 2010s. As of the 2024 season, the Titans lead the all-time series 24\u201322.\nIndianapolis Colts.\nSince the creation of the AFC South, the Titans and the Colts have been division rivals. In 2011, the Titans swept the Colts after 11 straight losses. In 2018, the Colts defeated the Titans in the last game of the regular season to clinch the final Wild Card spot, eliminating Tennessee from playoff contention. In 2020, the Titans claimed the AFC South championship over the Colts due to tie-breaking measures. As of the 2024 season, the Colts lead the all-time series 39\u201322.\nConference.\nBuffalo Bills.\nWhile in the AFL, the Houston Oilers were in the same division as the Buffalo Bills, with the two teams combining for four AFL titles, but the Oilers were moved to the AFC Central division following the NFL-AFL merger. Their rivalry remained strong into the 1980s and 1990s with Warren Moon leading the Oilers against Jim Kelly and the Bills. Two of the most iconic playoff games in Oilers/Titans history have occurred against the Bills, specifically the Comeback in 1993, and the Music City Miracle on January 8, 2000. The Bills and Titans were featured in an AFL legacy game in 2009 as part of festivities commemorating the 50th anniversary of the AFL's foundation. Titans owner Bud Adams was fined $250,000 by the league following the 41\u201317 Titans win in which he obscenely gestured toward the Bills sideline. Adams and Bills owner Ralph Wilson had maintained a friendly rivalry and were the last living original AFL owners at that time. A brief resurgence of the rivalry based on shared success and mutual respect occurred between 2018 and 2022, as head coach Mike Vrabel and running back Derrick Henry led the Titans against Bills head coach Sean McDermott and quarterback Josh Allen. As of the 2024 season, the Titans lead the all-time series 30\u201321.\nBaltimore Ravens.\nIn the late 1990s and early 2000s, the Titans and the Ravens began a rivalry, which flared up when former Titans quarterback Steve McNair went to the Ravens. From the realignment of the NFL's divisions in 2002 to the 2020\u201321 NFL playoffs, the Titans have faced off against Baltimore five times in the postseason. Derrick Henry left the Titans in the 2024 offseason to play for the Ravens.&lt;ref name=\"BAL/TEN Playoff recaps\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; As of the 2024 season, the Ravens lead the all-time series 14\u201313.\nHistoric.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nAfter the move to the AFC Central division, the Titans developed a rivalry with the Pittsburgh Steelers. The Steelers were the Oilers' primary divisional rival and by the 2020s, the Titans had played them more than any other NFL team. As of the 2024 season, the Steelers lead the all-time series 49\u201332.\nTexas Governor's Cup: Dallas Cowboys/Dallas Texans.\nThe Cowboys previously led the series against the Oilers 18\u201313.\nCulture.\nFlameheads.\nDuring the Titans' first season in its new stadium, the end zone sections became known as the Flame Pit and fans began wearing head wear resembling flames. Called \"Flameheads\", the costumes became prevalent during the Titans' successful years of the early 2000s, especially during their run to Super Bowl XXXIV. Flames are tied to the organization because in Greek Mythology, the Titan Prometheus stole fire and gave it to humanity.\nCheerleaders and mascot.\nThe Tennessee Titans Cheerleaders represent the team in the NFL. They perform at every home game in Nissan Stadium and regularly do acts with the team's mascot T-Rac. They have 28 members with four captains. They perform a variety of dance moves and high-risk stunts. They attend community events in Middle Tennessee.\nT-Rac is the raccoon mascot of the Titans, debuting in the team's inaugural preseason home game in August 1999 against the Atlanta Falcons. The raccoon is the state animal of Tennessee. T-Rac appears at every game in Nissan Stadium and performs at community events in Tennessee.\nStadium traditions.\nDuring every home game's 4th quarter, the stadium plays a video of \"office linebacker\" , performed by Lester Speight, shouting his catchphrase, \"the pain train's coming\"! The phrase is followed by the playing of \"Folsom Prison Blues\" by Johnny Cash.\nAfter every Titans first down at Nissan Stadium, the jumbotron plays a scene from the movie \"300\", where the Spartans chant after King Leonidas asks, \"What is your profession?\" Titans fans simultaneously perform the chant three times, \"OOH! OOH! OOH!\"\nTitans Ring of Honor.\nIn 1999, Adams established a Titans/Oilers Hall of Fame after the 40th season of the franchise to honor past players and management, with the first class being seven that were all inducted on December 9, 1999. It was changed to Oilers/Titans Ring of Honor in 2008. Bum Phillips, Jeff Fisher and Floyd Reese were inducted in 2021. Billy \"White Shoes\" Johnson is the most recent inductee.\nSeason-by-season records.\nSource:\nPlayer information.\nFranchise leaders.\nBold denotes still active with team\n\"Italics\" denote still active but not with team\nPassing yards (regular season) (as of end of 2024 season)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRushing yards (regular season) (as of end of 2024 season)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReceiving yards (regular season) (as of end of 2024 season)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRadio and television.\nThe flagship radio station of the Titans Radio Network for several years was WKDF 103.3-FM. WGFX 104.5-FM, the original Tennessee Oilers/Titans Radio flagship station, has served as the Titans Radio flagship station since the 2010 season. Taylor Zarzour is the team's play-by-play announcer, and former Titans assistant coach Dave McGinnis, head coach of the Arizona Cardinals from 2000 to 2003, provides color commentary during games. Previous to McGinnis, former Titans tight end Frank Wycheck provided the color commentary. Larry Stone provides injury and scoring updates. The Titans Radio Network is broadcast on 70 stations.\nIn 2011, the Titans extended its agreement with existing radio partners while creating a provision allowing home games to be broadcast on SiriusXM. They were the final team in the NFL to reach such a deal.\nMost preseason games are televised on Nexstar station WKRN-TV, the ABC affiliate in Nashville, with \"The Mike Vrabel Show\", a weekly Tuesday night coach's show. The preseason games are distributed through a network consisting of Nexstar stations throughout the state and some affiliates where Nexstar has no stations.\nFor regular season games, Nashville CBS affiliate WTVF airs the most games due to its AFC-centric rights. Fox affiliate WZTV carries home games against NFC opponents, with select flexed games, NBC affiliate WSMV-TV has \"Sunday Night Football\" broadcasts, and WKRN carries the team's \"Monday Night Football\" games.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "30840", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30840", "title": "Tetrarchy", "text": "Roman system of power division among four rulers\nThe Tetrarchy was the system instituted by Roman emperor Diocletian to govern the ancient Roman Empire by dividing it between two emperors, the \"augusti\", and their junior colleagues and designated successors, the \"caesares\". It was kept in place between AD 293 and 313.\nInitially Diocletian chose Maximian as his \"caesar\" in 285, raising him to co-\"augustus\" the following year; Maximian was to govern the western provinces and Diocletian would administer the eastern ones. The role of the \"augustus\" was likened to Jupiter, while his \"caesar\" was akin to Jupiter's son Hercules. Galerius and Constantius were appointed \"caesares\" in March 293. Diocletian and Maximian retired on 1 May 305, raising Galerius and Constantius to the rank of \"augustus\". Their places as \"caesares\" were in turn taken by Valerius Severus and Maximinus Daza.\nThe orderly system of two senior and two junior rulers endured until Constantius died in July 306, and his son Constantine was unilaterally acclaimed \"augustus\" and \"caesar\" by his father's army. Maximian's son Maxentius contested Severus' title, styled himself \"princeps invictus\", and was appointed \"caesar\" by his retired father in 306. Severus surrendered to Maximian and Maxentius in 307. Maxentius and Constantine were both recognized as \"augusti\" by Maximian that same year. Galerius appointed Licinius \"augustus\" for the west in 308 and elevated Maximinus Daza to \"augustus\" in 310.\nConstantine's victory over Maxentius at the Battle of the Milvian Bridge in 312 left him in control of the western part of the empire, while Licinius was left in control of the east on the death of Maximinus Daza. Constantine and Licinius jointly recognized their sons \u2013 Crispus, Constantine II, and Licinius II \u2013 as \"caesares\" in March 317. Ultimately the tetrarchic system lasted until c.\u00a0324, when mutually destructive civil wars eliminated most of the claimants to power: Licinius resigned as \"augustus\" after losing the Battle of Chrysopolis, leaving Constantine in control of the entire empire.\nThe Constantinian dynasty's emperors retained some aspects of collegiate rule; Constantine appointed his son Constantius II as another \"caesar\" in 324, followed by Constans in 333 and his nephew Dalmatius in 335, and the three surviving sons of Constantine in 337 were declared joint \"augusti\" together, while the concept of the division of the empire under multiple joint emperors endured until the Fall of the Western Roman Empire. In the Eastern Roman Empire, \"augusti\" and \"caesares\" continued to be appointed sporadically.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"tetrarchy\" (from the , \"tetrarchia\", \"leadership of four [people]\") describes any form of government where power is divided among four individuals.\nAlthough the term \"tetrarch\" was current in antiquity, it was never used in the imperial college (as it's often called) under Diocletian. Instead, the term was used to describe independent portions of a kingdom that were ruled under separate leaders. The tetrarchy of Judaea, established after the death of Herod the Great, is the most famous example of the antique tetrarchy. The term was understood in the Latin world as well, where Pliny the Elder glossed it as follows: \"each is the equivalent of a kingdom, and also part of one\" (\"regnorum instar singulae et in regna contribuuntur\").\nAs used by the ancients, the term describes not only different governments, but also a different system of government from the Diocletianic arrangements. The Judaean tetrarchy was a set of four independent and distinct states, where each tetrarch ruled a quarter of a kingdom as they saw fit; the Diocletianic tetrarchy was a college led by a single supreme leader. When later authors described the period, this is what they emphasized: Ammianus had Constantius II admonish Gallus for disobedience by appealing to the example in submission set by Diocletian's lesser colleagues; his successor Julian compared the Diocletianic tetrarchs to a chorus surrounding a leader, speaking in unison under his command. Only Lactantius, a contemporary of Diocletian and a deep ideological opponent of the Diocletianic state, referred to the tetrarchs as a simple multiplicity of rulers.\nMuch modern scholarship was written without the term. Although Edward Gibbon pioneered the description of the Diocletianic government as a \"New Empire\", he never used the term \"tetrarchy\"; neither did Theodor Mommsen. It did not appear in the literature until used in 1887 by schoolmaster Hermann Schiller in a two-volume handbook on the Roman Empire (\"Geschichte der R\u00f6mischen Kaiserzeit\"), to wit: \"die diokletianische Tetrarchie\". Even so, the term did not catch on in the literature until Otto Seeck used it in 1897.\nCreation.\nThe first phase, sometimes referred to as the diarchy (\"rule of two\"), involved the designation of the general Maximian as co-emperor\u2014firstly as \"caesar\" (heir apparent) in 285, followed by his promotion to \"augustus\" in 286. Diocletian took care of matters in the eastern regions of the empire while Maximian similarly took charge of the western regions. In 293, Diocletian thought that more focus was needed on both civic and military problems, so with Maximian's consent, he expanded the imperial college by appointing two \"caesares\" (one responsible to each \"augustus\")\u2014Galerius and Constantius I.\nIn 305, the senior emperors jointly abdicated and retired, allowing Constantius and Galerius to be elevated in rank to \"augustus\". They in turn appointed two new \"caesares\"\u2014Severus II in the west under Constantius, and Maximinus in the east under Galerius\u2014thereby creating the second Tetrarchy.\nRegions and capitals.\nThe four tetrarchs based themselves not at Rome but in other cities closer to the frontiers, mainly intended as headquarters for the defence of the empire against bordering rivals (notably Sassanian Persia) and barbarians (mainly Germanic, and an unending sequence of nomadic or displaced tribes from the eastern steppes) at the Rhine and Danube. These centres are known as the tetrarchic capitals. Although Rome ceased to be an operational capital, Rome continued to be nominal capital of the entire Roman Empire, not reduced to the status of a province but under its own, unique Prefect of the city (\"praefectus urbi\", later copied in Constantinople).\nThe four tetrarchic capitals were:\nAquileia, a port on the Adriatic coast, and Eboracum (modern York, in northern England near the Celtic tribes of modern Scotland and Ireland), were also significant centres for Maximian and Constantius respectively.\nIn terms of regional jurisdiction there was no precise division among the four tetrarchs, and this period did not see the Roman state actually split up into four distinct sub-empires. Each emperor had his zone of influence within the Roman Empire, but little more, mainly high command in a 'war theater'. Each tetrarch was himself often in the field, while delegating most of the administration to the hierarchic bureaucracy headed by his respective praetorian prefect, each supervising several \"vicarii\", the governors-general in charge of another, lasting new administrative level, the civil \"diocese\". For a listing of the provinces, now known as \"eparchy\", within each quarter (known as a \"praetorian prefecture\"), see Roman province.\nIn the West, the \"augustus\" Maximian controlled the provinces west of the Adriatic Sea and the Syrtis, and within that region his \"caesar\", Constantius, controlled Gaul and Britain. In the East, the arrangements between the \"augustus\" Diocletian and his \"caesar\", Galerius, were much more flexible.\nThe Tetrarchs\u2019 authority is recorded not only on coins and milestones but also on boundary stones from the Levant, which document local land surveys and village boundaries.\nPublic image.\nAlthough power was shared in the tetrarchic system, the public image of the four members of the imperial college was carefully managed to give the appearance of a united empire (\"patrimonium indivisum\"). This was especially important after the numerous civil wars of the 3rd century.\nThe tetrarchs appeared identical in all official portraits. Coinage dating from the tetrarchic period depicts every emperor with identical features\u2014only the inscriptions on the coins indicate which one of the four emperors is being shown. The Byzantine sculpture \"Portrait of the Four Tetrarchs\" shows the tetrarchs again with identical features and wearing the same military costume.\nMilitary successes.\nOne of the greatest problems facing emperors in the Third Century Crisis was that they were only ever able to personally command troops on one front at any one time. While Aurelian and Probus were prepared to accompany their armies thousands of miles between war regions, this was not an ideal solution. Furthermore, it was risky for an emperor to delegate power in his absence to a subordinate general, who might win a victory and then be proclaimed as a rival emperor himself by his troops (which often happened). All members of the imperial college, on the other hand, were of essentially equal rank, despite two being senior emperors and two being junior; their functions and authorities were also equal.\nUnder the Tetrarchy a number of important military victories were secured. Both the dyarchic and the tetrarchic system ensured that an emperor was near to every crisis area to personally direct and remain in control of campaigns simultaneously on more than just one front. After suffering a defeat by the Persians in 296, Galerius crushed Narseh in 298\u2014reversing a series of Roman defeats throughout the century\u2014capturing members of the imperial household and a substantial amount of booty and gaining a highly favourable peace treaty, which secured peace between the two powers for a generation. Similarly, Constantius defeated the British usurper Allectus, Maximian pacified the Gauls, and Diocletian crushed the revolt of Domitianus in Egypt.\nDemise.\nWhen in 305 the 20-year term of Diocletian and Maximian ended, both abdicated. Their \"caesares\", Galerius and Constantius Chlorus, were both raised to the rank of \"augustus\", and two new \"caesares\" were appointed: Maximinus Daza (\"caesar\" to Galerius) and Valerius Severus (\"caesar\" to Constantius). These four formed the second tetrarchy.\nHowever, the system broke down very quickly thereafter. When Constantius died in 306, Constantine, Constantius' son, was proclaimed \"augustus\" by his father's troops; however, Galerius instead chose to promote Severus to \"augustus\" while granting Constantine the position of \"caesar\". At the same time, Maxentius, the son of Maximian, resented being left out of the new arrangements, so he rebelled against and defeated Severus before forcing him to abdicate and then arranging his murder in 307. Maxentius and Maximian both then declared themselves \"augusti\". By 308 there were therefore no fewer than four claimants to the rank of \"augustus\" (Galerius, Constantine, Maximian and Maxentius), and only one to that of \"caesar\" (Maximinus Daza).\nIn 308 Galerius, together with the retired emperor Diocletian and the supposedly retired Maximian, called an imperial \"conference\" at Carnuntum on the River Danube. The council agreed that Licinius would become \"augustus\" in the West, with Constantine as his \"caesar\". In the East, Galerius remained \"augustus\" and Maximinus remained his \"caesar\". Maximian was to retire, and Maxentius was declared a usurper. This agreement proved disastrous: by 308 Maxentius had become \"de facto\" ruler of Italy and Africa even without any imperial status, and neither Constantine nor Maximinus\u2014who had both been \"caesares\" since 306 and 305 respectively\u2014were prepared to tolerate the promotion of the \"augustus\" Licinius as their superior.\nAfter an abortive attempt to placate both Constantine and Maximinus with the meaningless title \"filius augusti\" (\"son of the \"augustus\"\", essentially an alternative title for \"caesar\"), they both had to be recognised as Augusti in 309. However, four full Augusti all at odds with each other did not bode well for the tetrarchic system.\nBetween 309 and 313 most of the claimants to the imperial office died or were killed in various civil wars. Constantine forced Maximian's suicide in 310. Galerius died naturally in 311. Maxentius was defeated by Constantine at the Battle of the Milvian Bridge in 312 and subsequently killed. Maximinus committed suicide at Tarsus in 313 after being defeated in battle by Licinius.\nBy 313, therefore, there remained only two rulers: Constantine in the West and Licinius in the East. The tetrarchic system was at an end, although it took until 324 for Constantine to finally defeat Licinius, reunite the two halves of the Roman Empire and declare himself sole \"augustus\".\nDetailed timeline.\nTwo \"caesares\" are appointed in 293, thus starting the Tetrarchy.\nAfter the retirement of the two a\"ugusti\" both previous \"caesares\" succeeded them, and two new \"caesares\" were appointed.\nAfter the sudden death of Constantius Chlorus (who died of natural causes), the \"caesar\" Flavius Severus succeeded him as \"augustus\". However, Constantius' troops immediately proclaimed Constantine, Constantius' son, as their new \"augustus\". Galerius accepted Constantine as part of the imperial college, but only as \"caesar\". On 28 October 306, Maximian's son Maxentius proclaimed himself emperor in Rome. Maximian also proclaimed himself emperor, ruling jointly with his son. Despite being accepted by the Roman Senate, they were not recognized by the other emperors.\nSeverus was taken hostage by Maximian in April 307, but Galerius still acknowledged him as the official emperor of the west. Constantine was denied the promotion to \"augustus\" even after Severus' death in September, as Galerius had decided to exclude him from the system altogether. Maximian acknowledge Constantine's status as \"augustus\", but this meant nothing given that he himself was declared an usurper. Galerius and Maximinus thus remained as the only \"legitimate\" members of the imperial college.\nAt the council of Carnutum, Diocletian decides that Licinius will be the new \"augustus\" of the west (although his western domains only consist of the Diocese of Pannonia). Constantine was given back the title of \"caesar\", which he continued to unacknowledge.\nMaximinus was proclaimed \"augustus\" by his troops in about May 310. Galerius reluctantly agreed to recognize both Maximinus and Constantine as \"augusti\", thus breaking the Diocletian's tetrarchic system.\nAfter the death of Galerius' (who died of natural causes), Licinius acquires parts of his domains, thus ruling over territories both in the East and West.\nLicinius eventually fights and defeats Maximinus, gaining all eastern territories. He then makes peace with Constantine, who remains as the emperor of the West. This joint rule lasted until 316, when Licinius rejected Constantine's election of Bassianus as \"caesar\". In the ensuing war, both \"augusti\" appointed their own sons as \"caesares\", restoring a dynastic system. Licinius appointed Valens and Martinian as \"augustus\" in 316 and 324 respectively (literary sources refer to them as \"caesar\", but coins bear the title \"augustus\"); almost nothing is known about them.\nLegacy.\nAlthough the tetrarchic system as such only lasted until 313, many aspects of it survived. The fourfold regional division of the empire continued in the form of Praetorian prefectures, each of which was overseen by a praetorian prefect and subdivided into administrative dioceses, and often reappeared in the title of the military supra-provincial command assigned to a \"magister militum\".\nThe pre-existing notion of \"consortium imperii\", the sharing of imperial power, and the notion that an associate to the throne was the designated successor (possibly conflicting with the notion of hereditary claim by birth or adoption), was to reappear repeatedly.\nThe idea of the two halves, the east and the west, re-emerged and eventually resulted in the permanent de facto division into two separate Roman empires after the death of Theodosius I; though, importantly, the Empire was never formally divided. The emperors of the eastern and western halves legally ruled as one imperial college until the Fall of the Western Roman Empire left Byzantium, the \"second Rome\", as the sole direct heir.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30841", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30841", "title": "Tao te ching", "text": ""}
{"id": "30842", "revid": "10049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30842", "title": "Tao teh ching", "text": ""}
{"id": "30843", "revid": "44275859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30843", "title": "Theism", "text": "Belief in the existence of at least one deity\nTheism is broadly defined as the belief in the existence of at least one deity. In common parlance, or when contrasted with \"deism\", the term often describes the philosophical conception of God that is found in classical theism\u2014or the conception found in monotheism\u2014or gods found in polytheistic religions\u2014or a belief in God or gods without the rejection of revelation, as is characteristic of deism.\nNon-theism and atheism is commonly understood as non-acceptance or outright rejection of theism in the broadest sense of the term (i.e., non-acceptance or rejection of belief in God or gods). Related (but separate) is the claim that the existence of any deity is unknown or unknowable; a stance known as agnosticism. \n\"Agnostic theism\" is a personal belief in one or more deities along with acceptance that the existence or non-existence of the deity or deities is fundamentally unknowable.\nA 2020 \"Philpapers\" survey of professional philosophers found that 66.72% accepted or leaned towards atheism, 18.64% accepted or leaned towards theism, and 14.64% leaned towards another opinion.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"theism\" derives from the Greek (\"the\u00f3s\") or \"theoi\" meaning 'god' or 'gods'. The term \"theism\" was first used by Ralph Cudworth (1617\u20131688). In Cudworth's definition, they are \"strictly and properly called Theists, who affirm that a perfectly conscious understanding being, or mind, existing of itself from eternity, was the cause of all other things\".\nTypes of theism.\nClassical theism.\nClassical theism is the form of theism that describes God as the Absolute Being. Central insights of classical theistic theology includes emanationism and divine simplicity. Classical theistic traditions can be observed in major religions and philosophies, such as Sufism in Islam, Vaishnavism in Hinduism, Sikhism in general, and Platonism.\nMonotheism.\nMonotheism (from Greek ) is the belief in theology that only one deity exists. Some modern day monotheistic religions include Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Mandaeism, Druze, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, Sikhism, Zoroastrianism, Rastafari, some sects of Hinduism, and Eckankar.\nPolytheism.\nPolytheism is the belief in multiple deities, which are usually assembled into a pantheon, along with their own religious sects and rituals. Polytheism was the typical form of religion before the development and spread of the Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, which enforce monotheism. It is well documented throughout history; from prehistory and the earliest records of ancient Egyptian religion and ancient Mesopotamian religion to the religions prevalent during Classical antiquity, such as ancient Greek religion and ancient Roman religion, and in ethnic religions such as Germanic, Slavic, and Baltic paganism and Native American religions.\nNotable polytheistic religions practiced today include Taoism, Chinese folk religion, Japanese Shinto, Santer\u00eda, most traditional African religions, and various neopagan faiths such as Wicca, Druidry, Romuva, and Hellenism. Hinduism, while popularly held as polytheistic, cannot be exclusively categorised as such as some Hindus consider themselves to be pantheists and others consider themselves to be monotheists. Both are compatible with Hindu texts since there exists no consensus of standardisation in the faith. Advaita Vedanta, a philosophy in Hinduism, offers a combination of monotheism and polytheism, holding that Brahman is the sole \"ultimate reality\" of the universe, yet unity with it can be reached by worshipping multiple Devas and Devies.\nA major division in modern polytheistic practices is between so-called \"soft\" polytheism and \"hard\" polytheism. \"Soft\" polytheism is the belief that different gods may be psychological archetypes, personifications of natural forces, or fundamentally one deity in different cultural contexts (e.g., Odin, Zeus, and Indra all being the same god as interpreted by Germanic, Greek, and Indic peoples, respectively)\u2014known as omnitheism. In this way, gods may be interchangeable for one another across cultures. \"Hard\" polytheism is the belief that gods are distinct, separate, real divine beings rather than psychological archetypes or personifications of natural forces. Hard polytheists reject the idea that \"all gods are one essential god\" and may also reject the existence of gods outside their own pantheon altogether.\nPolytheism is further divided according to how the individual deities are regarded:\nPantheism.\nPantheism is the belief that reality, the universe and the cosmos are identical to divinity and a supreme being or entity. Pointing to the universe as being an immanent creator deity in and of itself, the deity is understood as still expanding, creating, and eternal, or that all things compose an all-encompassing, immanent god or goddess that is manifested as the universe. As such, even astronomical objects are viewed as part of the sole deity. The worship of all gods of every religion has been conceived as a form of pantheism, but such a system is more akin to Omnism.\nPantheist belief does not recognize a distinct personal god, anthropomorphic or otherwise, but instead characterizes a broad range of doctrines differing in forms of relationships between reality and divinity. Pantheistic concepts date back thousands of years, and pantheistic elements have been identified in various religious traditions. The term \"pantheism\" was coined by mathematician Joseph Raphson in 1697, and since then has been used to describe the beliefs of a variety of individuals and organizations. Pantheism was popularized in Western culture as a theology and philosophy based on the work of the 17th-century philosopher Baruch Spinoza\u2014in particular, his book \"Ethics\". A pantheistic stance was also expressed by the 16th-century by philosopher and cosmologist Giordano Bruno.\nDeism.\nDeism typically rejects supernatural events (such as prophecies, miracles, and divine revelations) prominent in organized religion. Instead, deism holds that religious beliefs must be founded on human reason and observed features of the natural world, and that these sources reveal the existence of a supreme being as creator.\nAutotheism.\nAutotheism is the belief that divinity exists within oneself and that individuals can achieve a godlike state. It is found in various philosophical and religious traditions emphasizing personal divinity or spiritual progression.\nIn Advaita Vedanta, a Hindu philosophical school, the phrase \"aham Brahm\u0101smi (\"\"I am Brahman\") expresses the unity of the individual self (\"atman\") with the ultimate reality (\"Brahman\").\nIn Mormonism, the doctrine of exaltation suggests that faithful individuals can attain godhood in the afterlife.\nAutotheistic ideas also appear in Gnosticism, which emphasizes self-knowledge (\"gnosis\") as the path to recognizing one\u2019s divine nature, and in Friedrich Nietzsche\u2019s concept of the \"\u00dcbermensch\", which advocates transcending human limitations to create one\u2019s own values.\nAlterity theism.\nAlterity theism is a belief that the supreme being is radically transcendent to the point that it cannot be recognized as having any genuine being at all.\nAcademic opinions.\nA 2020 \"Philpapers\" survey of professional philosophers found that:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30844", "revid": "44645973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30844", "title": "Tensor product", "text": "Mathematical operation on vector spaces\nIn mathematics, the tensor product formula_1 of two vector spaces formula_2 and formula_3 (over the same field) is a vector space to which is associated a bilinear map formula_4 that maps a pair formula_5 to an element of formula_1 denoted &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nAn element of the form formula_7 is called the tensor product of formula_8 and formula_9. An element of formula_1 is a tensor, and the tensor product of two vectors is sometimes called an \"elementary tensor\" or a \"decomposable tensor\". The elementary tensors span formula_1 in the sense that every element of formula_1 is a sum of elementary tensors. If bases are given for formula_2 and formula_3, a basis of formula_1 is formed by all tensor products of a basis element of formula_2 and a basis element of formula_3.\nThe tensor product of two vector spaces captures the properties of all bilinear maps in the sense that a bilinear map from formula_18 into another vector space formula_19 factors uniquely through a linear map formula_20 (see ), i.e. the bilinear map is associated to a unique linear map from the tensor product formula_1 to formula_19.\nTensor products are used in many application areas, including physics and engineering. For example, in general relativity, the gravitational field is described through the metric tensor, which is a tensor field with one tensor at each point of the space-time manifold, and each belonging to the tensor product of the cotangent space at the point with itself.\nDefinitions and constructions.\nThe \"tensor product\" of two vector spaces is a vector space that is defined up to an isomorphism. There are several equivalent ways to define it. Most consist of defining explicitly a vector space that is called a tensor product, and, generally, the equivalence proof results almost immediately from the basic properties of the vector spaces that are so defined. \nThe tensor product can also be defined through a universal property; see , below. As for every universal property, all objects that satisfy the property are isomorphic through a unique isomorphism that is compatible with the universal property. When this definition is used, the other definitions may be viewed as constructions of objects satisfying the universal property and as proofs that there are objects satisfying the universal property, that is that tensor products exist.\nFrom bases.\nLet V and W be two vector spaces over a field F, with respective bases formula_23 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe \"tensor product\" formula_1 of V and W is a vector space that has as a basis the set of all formula_25 with formula_26 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This definition can be formalized in the following way (this formalization is rarely used in practice, as the preceding informal definition is generally sufficient): formula_1 is the set of the functions from the Cartesian product formula_28 to F that have a finite number of nonzero values. The pointwise operations make formula_1 a vector space. The function that maps formula_30 to 1 and the other elements of formula_28 to 0 is denoted &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe set formula_32 is then straightforwardly a basis of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which is called the \"tensor product\" of the bases formula_23 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nWe can equivalently define formula_1 to be the set of bilinear forms on formula_35 that are nonzero at only a finite number of elements of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. To see this, given formula_36 and a bilinear form &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, we can decompose formula_37 and formula_38 in the bases formula_23 and formula_40 as:\nformula_41\nwhere only a finite number of formula_42's and formula_43's are nonzero, and find by the bilinearity of formula_44 that:\nformula_45\nHence, we see that the value of formula_44 for any formula_36 is uniquely and totally determined by the values that it takes on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This lets us extend the maps formula_25 defined on formula_28 as before into bilinear maps formula_50 , by letting:\nformula_51\nThen we can express any bilinear form formula_44 as a (potentially infinite) formal linear combination of the formula_25 maps according to:\nformula_54\nmaking these maps similar to a Schauder basis for the vector space formula_55 of all bilinear forms on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. To instead have it be a proper Hamel basis, it only remains to add the requirement that formula_44 is nonzero at an only a finite number of elements of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and consider the subspace of such maps instead. \nIn either construction, the \"tensor product of two vectors\" is defined from their decomposition on the bases. More precisely, taking the basis decompositions of formula_57 and formula_58 as before:\nformula_59\nThis definition is quite clearly derived from the coefficients of formula_60 in the expansion by bilinearity of formula_61 using the bases formula_23 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, as done above. It is then straightforward to verify that with this definition, the map formula_63 is a bilinear map from formula_18 to formula_65 satisfying the universal property that any construction of the tensor product satisfies (see below). \nIf arranged into a rectangular array, the coordinate vector of formula_66 is the outer product of the coordinate vectors of formula_37 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Therefore, the tensor product is a generalization of the outer product, that is, an abstraction of it beyond coordinate vectors. \nA limitation of this definition of the tensor product is that, if one changes bases, a different tensor product is defined. However, the decomposition on one basis of the elements of the other basis defines a canonical isomorphism between the two tensor products of vector spaces, which allows identifying them. Also, contrarily to the two following alternative definitions, this definition cannot be extended into a definition of the tensor product of modules over a ring.\nAs a quotient space.\nA construction of the tensor product that is basis independent can be obtained in the following way.\nLet V and W be two vector spaces over a field F. \nOne considers first a vector space L that has the Cartesian product formula_18 as a basis. That is, the basis elements of L are the pairs formula_30 with formula_70 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. To get such a vector space, one can define it as the vector space of the functions formula_71 that have a finite number of nonzero values and identifying formula_30 with the function that takes the value 1 on formula_30 and 0 otherwise.\nLet R be the linear subspace of L that is spanned by the relations that the tensor product must satisfy. More precisely, R is spanned by the elements of one of the forms:\n formula_74\nwhere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_75 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThen, the tensor product is defined as the quotient space:\n formula_76\nand the image of formula_30 in this quotient is denoted &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIt is straightforward to prove that the result of this construction satisfies the universal property considered below. (A very similar construction can be used to define the tensor product of modules.)\nUniversal property.\nIn this section, the universal property satisfied by the tensor product is described. As for every universal property, two objects that satisfy the property are related by a unique isomorphism. It follows that this is a (non-constructive) way to define the tensor product of two vector spaces. In this context, the preceding constructions of tensor products may be viewed as proofs of existence of the tensor product so defined.\nA consequence of this approach is that every property of the tensor product can be deduced from the universal property, and that, in practice, one may forget the method that has been used to prove its existence. \nThe \"universal-property definition\" of the tensor product of two vector spaces is the following (recall that a bilinear map is a function that is \"separately\" linear in each of its arguments):\nThe \"tensor product\" of two vector spaces V and W is a vector space denoted as &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, together with a bilinear map formula_78 from formula_18 to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, such that, for every bilinear map &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, there is a \"unique\" linear map &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, such that formula_80 (that is, formula_81 for every formula_70 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;).\nLinearly disjoint.\nLike the universal property above, the following characterization may also be used to determine whether or not a given vector space and given bilinear map form a tensor product.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014\nLet &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and formula_19 be complex vector spaces and let formula_84 be a bilinear map. Then formula_85 is a tensor product of formula_86 and formula_87 if and only if the image of formula_88 spans all of formula_19 (that is, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;), and also formula_86 and formula_87 are formula_88-linearly disjoint, which by definition means that for all positive integers formula_93 and all elements formula_94 and formula_95 such that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, \nEquivalently, formula_86 and formula_87 are formula_88-linearly disjoint if and only if for all linearly independent sequences formula_103 in formula_86 and all linearly independent sequences formula_98 in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the vectors formula_106 are linearly independent.\nFor example, it follows immediately that if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, where formula_107 and formula_93 are positive integers, then one may set formula_109 and define the bilinear map as \nformula_110\nto form the tensor product of formula_111 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Often, this map formula_88 is denoted by formula_113 so that formula_114 \nAs another example, suppose that formula_115 is the vector space of all complex-valued functions on a set formula_116 with addition and scalar multiplication defined pointwise (meaning that formula_117 is the map formula_118 and formula_119 is the map &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;). Let formula_116 and formula_88 be any sets and for any formula_122 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, let formula_123 denote the function defined by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. \nIf formula_124 and formula_125 are vector subspaces then the vector subspace formula_126 of formula_127 together with the bilinear map: \nformula_128\nform a tensor product of formula_86 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nProperties.\nDimension.\nIf \"V\" and \"W\" are vector spaces of finite dimension, then formula_65 is finite-dimensional, and its dimension is the product of the dimensions of \"V\" and \"W\".\nThis results from the fact that a basis of formula_65 is formed by taking all tensor products of a basis element of \"V\" and a basis element of \"W\".\nAssociativity.\nThe tensor product is associative in the sense that, given three vector spaces &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, there is a canonical isomorphism: \n formula_132\nthat maps formula_133 to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThis allows omitting parentheses in the tensor product of more than two vector spaces or vectors.\nCommutativity as vector space operation.\nThe tensor product of two vector spaces formula_2 and formula_3 is commutative in the sense that there is a canonical isomorphism: \n formula_136\nthat maps formula_7 to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nOn the other hand, even when &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the tensor product of vectors is not commutative; that is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, in general.\nThe map formula_138 from formula_139 to itself induces a linear automorphism that is called a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;braiding map. \nMore generally and as usual (see tensor algebra), let formula_140 denote the tensor product of n copies of the vector space V. For every permutation s of the first n positive integers, the map:\n formula_141\ninduces a linear automorphism of &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, which is called a braiding map.\nTensor product of linear maps.\nGiven a linear map &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and a vector space W, the \"tensor product:\" \n formula_142\nis the unique linear map such that:\n formula_143\nThe tensor product formula_144 is defined similarly.\nGiven two linear maps formula_145 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, their tensor product: \n formula_146 \nis the unique linear map that satisfies: \n formula_147\nOne has: \n formula_148\nIn terms of category theory, this means that the tensor product is a bifunctor from the category of vector spaces to itself.\nIf f and g are both injective or surjective, then the same is true for all above defined linear maps. In particular, the tensor product with a vector space is an exact functor; this means that every exact sequence is mapped to an exact sequence (tensor products of modules do not transform injections into injections, but they are right exact functors).\nBy choosing bases of all vector spaces involved, the linear maps \"f\" and \"g\" can be represented by matrices. Then, depending on how the tensor formula_7 is vectorized, the matrix describing the tensor product formula_150 is the Kronecker product of the two matrices. For example, if \"V\", \"X\", \"W\", and \"U\" above are all two-dimensional and bases have been fixed for all of them, and \"f\" and \"g\" are given by the matrices:\nformula_151\nrespectively, then the tensor product of these two matrices is:\nformula_152\nThe resultant rank is at most 4, and thus the resultant dimension is 4. rank here denotes the tensor rank i.e. the number of requisite indices (while the matrix rank counts the number of degrees of freedom in the resulting array). &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nA dyadic product is the special case of the tensor product between two vectors of the same dimension.\nGeneral tensors.\nFor non-negative integers \"r\" and \"s\" a type formula_153 tensor on a vector space \"V\" is an element of:\nformula_154\nHere formula_155 is the dual vector space (which consists of all linear maps \"f\" from \"V\" to the ground field \"K\").\nThere is a product map, called the (tensor) product of tensors:\nformula_156\nIt is defined by grouping all occurring \"factors\" \"V\" together: writing formula_157 for an element of \"V\" and formula_158 for an element of the dual space:\nformula_159\nIf \"V\" is finite dimensional, then picking a basis of \"V\" and the corresponding dual basis of formula_155 naturally induces a basis of formula_161 (this basis is described in the article on Kronecker products). In terms of these bases, the components of a (tensor) product of two (or more) tensors can be computed. For example, if \"F\" and \"G\" are two covariant tensors of orders \"m\" and \"n\" respectively (i.e. formula_162 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;), then the components of their tensor product are given by:\nformula_163\nThus, the components of the tensor product of two tensors are the ordinary product of the components of each tensor. Another example: let U be a tensor of type (1, 1) with components &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, and let V be a tensor of type formula_164 with components &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Then:\nformula_165\nand:\nformula_166\nTensors equipped with their product operation form an algebra, called the tensor algebra.\nEvaluation map and tensor contraction.\nFor tensors of type (1, 1) there is a canonical evaluation map:\nformula_167\ndefined by its action on pure tensors:\nformula_168\nMore generally, for tensors of type &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, with \"r\", \"s\" &gt; 0, there is a map, called tensor contraction:\nformula_169\nOn the other hand, if formula_2 is finite-dimensional, there is a canonical map in the other direction (called the coevaluation map):\nformula_173\nwhere formula_174 is any basis of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and formula_175 is its dual basis. This map does not depend on the choice of basis.\nThe interplay of evaluation and coevaluation can be used to characterize finite-dimensional vector spaces without referring to bases.\nAdjoint representation.\nThe tensor product formula_176 may be naturally viewed as a module for the Lie algebra formula_177 by means of the diagonal action: for simplicity let us assume &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then, for each &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nformula_178\nwhere formula_179 is the transpose of \"u\", that is, in terms of the obvious pairing on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nformula_180\nThere is a canonical isomorphism formula_181 given by:\nformula_182\nUnder this isomorphism, every \"u\" in formula_177 may be first viewed as an endomorphism of formula_184 and then viewed as an endomorphism of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. In fact it is the adjoint representation ad(\"u\") of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nLinear maps as tensors.\nGiven two finite dimensional vector spaces \"U\", \"V\" over the same field \"K\", denote the dual space of \"U\" as \"U*\", and the \"K\"-vector space of all linear maps from \"U\" to \"V\" as Hom(\"U\",\"V\"). There is an isomorphism:\nformula_185\ndefined by an action of the pure tensor formula_186 on an element of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nformula_187\nIts \"inverse\" can be defined using a basis formula_188 and its dual basis formula_189 as in the section \"Evaluation map and tensor contraction\" above:\nformula_190\nThis result implies:\nformula_191\nwhich automatically gives the important fact that formula_192 forms a basis of formula_193 where formula_194 are bases of \"U\" and \"V\".\nFurthermore, given three vector spaces \"U\", \"V\", \"W\" the tensor product is linked to the vector space of \"all\" linear maps, as follows:\nformula_195\nThis is an example of adjoint functors: the tensor product is \"left adjoint\" to Hom.\nTensor products of modules over a ring.\nThe tensor product of two modules \"A\" and \"B\" over a \"commutative\" ring \"R\" is defined in exactly the same way as the tensor product of vector spaces over a field:\nformula_196\nwhere now formula_197 is the free \"R\"-module generated by the cartesian product and \"G\" is the \"R\"-module generated by these relations.\nMore generally, the tensor product can be defined even if the ring is non-commutative. In this case \"A\" has to be a right-\"R\"-module and \"B\" is a left-\"R\"-module, and instead of the last two relations above, the relation:\nformula_198\nis imposed. If \"R\" is non-commutative, this is no longer an \"R\"-module, but just an abelian group.\nThe universal property also carries over, slightly modified: the map formula_199 defined by formula_200 is a middle linear map (referred to as \"the canonical middle linear map\"); that is, it satisfies:\nformula_201\nThe first two properties make \"\u03c6\" a bilinear map of the abelian group &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. For any middle linear map formula_202 of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, a unique group homomorphism \"f\" of formula_203 satisfies &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and this property determines formula_204 within group isomorphism. See the main article for details.\nTensor product of modules over a non-commutative ring.\nLet \"A\" be a right \"R\"-module and \"B\" be a left \"R\"-module. Then the tensor product of \"A\" and \"B\" is an abelian group defined by:\nformula_205\nwhere formula_206 is a free abelian group over formula_207 and G is the subgroup of formula_206 generated by relations:\nformula_209\nThe universal property can be stated as follows. Let \"G\" be an abelian group with a map formula_210 that is bilinear, in the sense that:\nformula_211\nThen there is a unique map formula_212 such that formula_213 for all formula_214 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nFurthermore, we can give formula_203 a module structure under some extra conditions:\nComputing the tensor product.\nFor vector spaces, the tensor product formula_1 is quickly computed since bases of \"V\" of \"W\" immediately determine a basis of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, as was mentioned above. For modules over a general (commutative) ring, not every module is free. For example, Z/\"nZ is not a free abelian group (Z-module). The tensor product with Z/\"nZ is given by:\nformula_222\nMore generally, given a presentation of some \"R\"-module \"M\", that is, a number of generators formula_223 together with relations:\nformula_224\nthe tensor product can be computed as the following cokernel:\nformula_225\nHere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and the map formula_226 is determined by sending some formula_227 in the \"j\"th copy of formula_228 to formula_229 (in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;). Colloquially, this may be rephrased by saying that a presentation of \"M\" gives rise to a presentation of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This is referred to by saying that the tensor product is a right exact functor. It is not in general left exact, that is, given an injective map of \"R\"-modules &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the tensor product:\nformula_230\nis not usually injective. For example, tensoring the (injective) map given by multiplication with \"n\", \"n\" : Z \u2192 Z with Z/\"nZ yields the zero map 0 : Z/\"nZ \u2192 Z/\"n\"Z, which is not injective. Higher Tor functors measure the defect of the tensor product being not left exact. All higher Tor functors are assembled in the derived tensor product.\nTensor product of algebras.\nLet \"R\" be a commutative ring. The tensor product of \"R\"-modules applies, in particular, if \"A\" and \"B\" are \"R\"-algebras. In this case, the tensor product formula_203 is an \"R\"-algebra itself by putting:\nformula_232\nFor example:\nformula_233\nA particular example is when \"A\" and \"B\" are fields containing a common subfield \"R\". The tensor product of fields is closely related to Galois theory: if, say, \"A\" = \"R\"[\"x\"] / \"f\"(\"x\"), where \"f\" is some irreducible polynomial with coefficients in \"R\", the tensor product can be calculated as:\nformula_234\nwhere now \"f\" is interpreted as the same polynomial, but with its coefficients regarded as elements of \"B\". In the larger field \"B\", the polynomial may become reducible, which brings in Galois theory. For example, if \"A\" = \"B\" is a Galois extension of \"R\", then:\nformula_235\nis isomorphic (as an \"A\"-algebra) to the &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nEigenconfigurations of tensors.\nSquare matrices formula_236 with entries in a field formula_237 represent linear maps of vector spaces, say &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and thus linear maps formula_238 of projective spaces over &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. If formula_236 is nonsingular then formula_202 is well-defined everywhere, and the eigenvectors of formula_236 correspond to the fixed points of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The \"eigenconfiguration\" of formula_236 consists of formula_93 points in &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, provided formula_236 is generic and formula_237 is algebraically closed. The fixed points of nonlinear maps are the eigenvectors of tensors. Let formula_246 be a formula_247-dimensional tensor of format formula_248 with entries formula_249 lying in an algebraically closed field formula_237 of characteristic zero. Such a tensor formula_251 defines polynomial maps formula_252 and formula_253 with coordinates:\nformula_254\nThus each of the formula_93 coordinates of formula_202 is a homogeneous polynomial formula_257 of degree formula_258 in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The eigenvectors of formula_236 are the solutions of the constraint:\nformula_260\nand the eigenconfiguration is given by the variety of the formula_261 minors of this matrix.\nOther examples of tensor products.\nTopological tensor products.\nHilbert spaces generalize finite-dimensional vector spaces to arbitrary dimensions. There is an analogous operation, also called the \"tensor product,\" that makes Hilbert spaces a symmetric monoidal category. It is essentially constructed as the metric space completion of the algebraic tensor product discussed above. However, it does not satisfy the obvious analogue of the universal property defining tensor products; the morphisms for that property must be restricted to Hilbert\u2013Schmidt operators.\nIn situations where the imposition of an inner product is inappropriate, one can still attempt to complete the algebraic tensor product, as a topological tensor product. However, such a construction is no longer uniquely specified: in many cases, there are multiple natural topologies on the algebraic tensor product. \nTensor product of graded vector spaces.\nSome vector spaces can be decomposed into direct sums of subspaces. In such cases, the tensor product of two spaces can be decomposed into sums of products of the subspaces (in analogy to the way that multiplication distributes over addition).\nTensor product of representations.\nVector spaces endowed with an additional multiplicative structure are called algebras. The tensor product of such algebras is described by the Littlewood\u2013Richardson rule.\nTensor product of multilinear forms.\nGiven two multilinear forms formula_262 and formula_263 on a vector space formula_2 over the field formula_237 their tensor product is the multilinear form:\nformula_266\nThis is a special case of the product of tensors if they are seen as multilinear maps (see also tensors as multilinear maps). Thus the components of the tensor product of multilinear forms can be computed by the Kronecker product.\nTensor product of graphs.\nIt should be mentioned that, though called \"tensor product\", this is not a tensor product of graphs in the above sense; actually it is the category-theoretic product in the category of graphs and graph homomorphisms. However it is actually the Kronecker tensor product of the adjacency matrices of the graphs. Compare also the section Tensor product of linear maps above.\nMonoidal categories.\nThe most general setting for the tensor product is the monoidal category. It captures the algebraic essence of tensoring, without making any specific reference to what is being tensored. Thus, all tensor products can be expressed as an application of the monoidal category to some particular setting, acting on some particular objects.\nQuotient algebras.\nA number of important subspaces of the tensor algebra can be constructed as quotients: these include the exterior algebra, the symmetric algebra, the Clifford algebra, the Weyl algebra, and the universal enveloping algebra in general.\nThe exterior algebra is constructed from the exterior product. Given a vector space \"V\", the exterior product formula_267 is defined as:\nformula_268\nWhen the underlying field of \"V\" does not have characteristic 2, then this definition is equivalent to:\nformula_269\nThe image of formula_270 in the exterior product is usually denoted formula_271 and satisfies, by construction, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Similar constructions are possible for formula_272 (\"n\" factors), giving rise to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the \"n\"th exterior power of \"V\". The latter notion is the basis of differential \"n\"-forms.\nThe symmetric algebra is constructed in a similar manner, from the symmetric product:\nformula_273\nMore generally:\nformula_274\nThat is, in the symmetric algebra two adjacent vectors (and therefore all of them) can be interchanged. The resulting objects are called symmetric tensors.\nTensor product in programming.\nArray programming languages.\nArray programming languages may have this pattern built in. For example, in APL the tensor product is expressed as codice_1 (for example codice_2 or codice_3). In J the tensor product is the dyadic form of codice_4 (for example codice_5 or codice_6).\nJ's treatment also allows the representation of some tensor fields, as codice_7 and codice_8 may be functions instead of constants. This product of two functions is a derived function, and if codice_7 and codice_8 are differentiable, then codice_5 is differentiable.\nHowever, these kinds of notation are not universally present in array languages. Other array languages may require explicit treatment of indices (for example, MATLAB), and/or may not support higher-order functions such as the Jacobian derivative (for example, Fortran/APL).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30845", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30845", "title": "Tiramisu", "text": "Italian dessert\nTiramisu is an Italian dessert made with coffee-soaked ladyfingers () covered with a cream of egg yolks, sugar, and mascarpone and topped with cocoa powder. The dessert originated in northeastern Italy, and modern versions were popularized in restaurants from the late 1960s onward. Since then, tiramisu has become one of the most internationally recognized Italian desserts and has inspired many variations in home and professional cooking. The name comes from the Italian \"tirami su\", meaning \u201cpick me up\u201d or \u201ccheer me up\u201d.\nHistory.\nTiramisu appears to have been invented in the late 1960s or early 1970s, but where and when exactly is unclear. Some believe the recipe was derived from \"sbatudin\", a simpler dessert made of egg yolks and sugar. Others argue it originated from another dish, \"Dolce Torino\".\nThe tiramisu recipe is not found in cookbooks before the 1960s. It is mentioned in a \"Sydney Morning Herald\" restaurant column published in 1978. It is not mentioned in encyclopaedias and dictionaries of the 1970s, first appearing in an Italian dictionary in 1980, and in English in 1982. It is mentioned in a 1983 cookbook devoted to cooking of the Veneto region. \nObituaries for the restaurateur Ado Campeol (1928\u20132021) reported that it was invented at his restaurant Le Beccherie in Treviso on 24 December 1969 by his wife Alba di Pillo (1929\u20132021) and the pastry chef Roberto Linguanotto (1943\u20132024). The dish was added to its menu in 1972. At the time of his death in July 2024, the Le Beccherie restaurant credited Linguanotto as the creator of the tiramisu.\nIt has been claimed that tiramisu has aphrodisiac effects and was concocted by a 19th-century Treviso brothel madam, as the Accademia Del Tiramis\u00f9 explains, to \"solve the problems they may have had with their conjugal duties on their return to their wives\".\nThere is evidence of a \"tiremes\u00f9\" semi-frozen dessert served by the Vetturino restaurant in Pieris, in the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region, since 1938. This may be the name's origin, while the recipe for tiramisu may have originated as a variation of another layered dessert, zuppa inglese. Others claim it was created toward the end of the 17th century in Siena in honour of Grand Duke Cosimo III.\nOn 29 July 2017, tiramisu was entered by the Ministry of Agricultural, Food and Forestry Policies on the list of traditional Friulian and Giulian agri-food products in the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region. In 2013, Luca Zaia, President of Veneto, sought European Union protected status certification for the dessert, based on the ingredients used in 1970, so substitute ingredients, such as strawberries, could not be used in a dish called tiramisu.\nTraditional ingredients and early composition.\nTraditional tiramisu contains ladyfingers (\"savoiardi\"), egg yolks, sugar, coffee, mascarpone, and cocoa powder. Several of these components were already well established in Italian domestic cooking: \"savoiardi\" were commonly used in traditional desserts and spoon cakes, while egg-based creams such as \"zabaglione\" have a long culinary history in northern Italy. Cocoa powder became a common ingredient in home baking between the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Mascarpone, by contrast, represents the relatively more recent component that characterizes the dessert in its contemporary version. The modern stabilized variety of mascarpone became more widely available in northern Italy during the early 20th century, with documented industrial production in the province of Treviso as early as 1933 through the \u201cMascherpone Valmarino\u201d trademark. \nVariations.\nThe original tiramisu served at Le Beccherie was round. Modern versions are often made in a rectangular or square pan, making it easier to arrange the biscuits. \nA common variation is to add alcohol to the coffee that the \"savoiardi\" are soaked in. Common choices include coffee-flavoured liqueurs such as Tia Maria and Kahl\u00faa, Marsala wine, amaretto, dark rum, Madeira, port, brandy, Malibu or Irish cream. Alcohol can instead be added to the cheese mixture. \nModern versions sometimes have whipped cream or whipped egg whites, or both, combined with mascarpone. This makes the dish lighter, thick and foamy. Another variation involves the preparation of the cream with eggs heated just enough to pasteurize the mixture without scrambling the eggs. The cake is usually eaten cold.\nNumerous variations of tiramisu exist. Many replace the coffee with other ingredients such as chocolate, amaretto, lemon, strawberry, pineapple, yoghurt, banana, raspberry, and coconut. Some cooks use other cakes or sweet, yeasted bread, such as panettone, in place of the ladyfingers. Bakers living in different Italian regions often debate the use and structural qualities of utilising other types of cookies, such as pavesini for instance, in the recipe. Other cheese mixtures are used as well, some containing raw eggs, and others containing no eggs at all. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
