{"id": "32571", "revid": "16849003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32571", "title": "Volcano", "text": "Rupture in a planet's crust where material escapes\nA volcano is commonly defined as a vent or fissure in the crust of a planetary-mass object, such as Earth, that allows hot lava, volcanic ash, and gases to escape from a magma chamber below the surface.\nOn Earth, volcanoes are most often found where tectonic plates are diverging or converging, and because most of Earth's plate boundaries are underwater, most volcanoes are found underwater. For example, a mid-ocean ridge, such as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, has volcanoes caused by divergent tectonic plates whereas the Pacific Ring of Fire has volcanoes caused by convergent tectonic plates. Volcanoes resulting from divergent tectonic activity are usually non-explosive whereas those resulting from convergent tectonic activity cause violent eruptions. Volcanoes can also form where there is stretching and thinning of the crust's plates, such as in the East African Rift, the Wells Gray-Clearwater volcanic field, and the Rio Grande rift in North America. Volcanism away from plate boundaries most likely arises from upwelling diapirs from the core\u2013mantle boundary called mantle plumes, deep within Earth. This results in hotspot volcanism or intraplate volcanism, in which the plume may cause thinning of the crust and result in a volcanic island chain due to the continuous movement of the tectonic plate, of which the Hawaiian hotspot is an example. Volcanoes are usually not created at transform tectonic boundaries where two tectonic plates slide past one another.\nVolcanoes, based on their frequency of eruption or volcanism, are referred to as either active, dormant, or extinct. Active volcanoes have a history of volcanism and are likely to erupt again, while extinct ones are not capable of eruption at all as they have no magma source. \"Dormant\" volcanoes have not erupted in a long time \u2013 generally accepted as since the start of the Holocene, about 12,000 years ago \u2013 but may erupt again. However, dormant volcanoes are technically considered to be seismically \"active\". These categories aren't entirely uniform; they may overlap for certain examples.\nLarge eruptions can affect atmospheric temperature as ash and droplets of sulfuric acid obscure the Sun and cool Earth's troposphere. Historically, large volcanic eruptions have been followed by volcanic winters which have caused catastrophic famines.\nOther planets besides Earth have volcanoes. For example, volcanoes are very numerous on Venus. Mars has significant volcanoes. In 2009, a paper was published suggesting a new definition for the word 'volcano' that includes processes such as cryovolcanism. It suggested that a volcano be defined as 'an opening on a planet or moon's surface from which magma, as defined for that body, and/or magmatic gas is erupted.'\nThis article mainly covers volcanoes on Earth. See and cryovolcano for more information.\nEtymology and terminology.\nThe word \"volcano\" (; ) originates from the early 17th century, derived from the Italian name , a volcanic island in the Aeolian Islands of Italy, which in turn comes from the Latin name or , referring to Vulcan, the god of fire in Roman mythology.\nThe set of processes and phenomena involved in volcanic activity is called volcanism [early 19th century: from \"volcano\" + \"-ism\"]. The study of volcanism and volcanoes is called volcanology [mid-19th century: from \"volcano\" + \"-logy\"], sometimes spelled \"vulcanology\".\nPlate tectonics.\nAccording to the theory of plate tectonics, Earth's lithosphere, its rigid outer shell, is broken into sixteen larger and several smaller plates. These move continuously at a slow pace, due to convection in the underlying ductile mantle, and most volcanic activity on Earth takes place along plate boundaries, where plates are converging (and lithosphere is being destroyed) or are diverging (and new lithosphere is being created).\nDuring the development of geological theory, certain concepts that allowed the grouping of volcanoes in time, place, structure and composition have developed that ultimately have had to be explained in the theory of plate tectonics. For example, some volcanoes are \"polygenetic\" with more than one period of activity during their history; other volcanoes that become extinct after erupting exactly once are \"monogenetic\" (meaning \"one life\") and such volcanoes are often grouped together in a geographical region.\nDivergent plate boundaries.\nAt the mid-ocean ridges, two tectonic plates diverge from one another as hot mantle rock creeps upwards beneath the thinned oceanic crust. The decrease of pressure in the rising mantle rock leads to adiabatic expansion and the partial melting of the rock, causing volcanism and creating new oceanic crust. Most divergent plate boundaries are at the bottom of the oceans, and so most volcanic activity on Earth is submarine, forming new seafloor. Black smokers (also known as deep sea vents) are evidence of this kind of volcanic activity. Where the mid-oceanic ridge is above sea level, volcanic islands are formed, such as Iceland.\nConvergent plate boundaries.\nSubduction zones are places where two plates, usually an oceanic plate and a continental plate, collide. The oceanic plate subducts (dives beneath the continental plate), forming a deep ocean trench just offshore. In a process called flux melting, water released from the subducting plate lowers the melting temperature of the overlying mantle wedge, thus creating magma. This magma tends to be extremely viscous because of its high silica content, so it often does not reach the surface but cools and solidifies at depth. When it does reach the surface, however, a volcano is formed. Thus subduction zones are bordered by chains of volcanoes called volcanic arcs. Typical examples are the volcanoes in the Pacific Ring of Fire, such as the Cascade Volcanoes or the Japanese Archipelago, or the eastern islands of Indonesia.\nHotspots.\nHotspots are volcanic areas thought to be formed by mantle plumes, which are hypothesized to be columns of hot material rising from the core-mantle boundary. As with mid-ocean ridges, the rising mantle rock experiences decompression melting which generates large volumes of magma. Because tectonic plates move across mantle plumes, each volcano becomes inactive as it drifts off the plume, and new volcanoes are created where the plate advances over the plume. The Hawaiian Islands are thought to have been formed in such a manner, as has the Snake River Plain, with the Yellowstone Caldera being part of the North American plate currently above the Yellowstone hotspot. However, the mantle plume hypothesis has been questioned.\nContinental rifting.\nSustained upwelling of hot mantle rock can develop under the interior of a continent and lead to rifting. Early stages of rifting are characterized by flood basalts and may progress to the point where a tectonic plate is completely split. A divergent plate boundary then develops between the two halves of the split plate. However, rifting often fails to completely split the continental lithosphere (such as in an aulacogen), and failed rifts are characterized by volcanoes that erupt unusual alkali lava or carbonatites. Examples include the volcanoes of the East African Rift.\nVolcanic features.\nA volcano needs a reservoir of molten magma (e.g. a magma chamber), a conduit to allow magma to rise through the crust, and a vent to allow the magma to escape above the surface as lava. The erupted volcanic material (lava and tephra) that is deposited around the vent is known as a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;volcanic edifice, typically a volcanic cone or mountain.\nThe most common perception of a volcano is of a conical mountain, spewing lava and poisonous gases from a crater at its summit; however, this describes just one of the many types of volcano. The features of volcanoes are varied. The structure and behaviour of volcanoes depend on several factors. Some volcanoes have rugged peaks formed by lava domes rather than a summit crater while others have landscape features such as massive plateaus. Vents that issue volcanic material (including lava and ash) and gases (mainly steam and magmatic gases) can develop anywhere on the landform and may give rise to smaller cones such as Pu\u02bbu \u02bb\u014c\u02bb\u014d on a flank of K\u012blauea in Hawaii. Volcanic craters are not always at the top of a mountain or hill and may be filled with lakes such as with Lake Taup\u014d in New Zealand. Some volcanoes can be low-relief landform features, with the potential to be hard to recognize as such and be obscured by geological processes.\nOther types of volcano include mud volcanoes, which are structures often not associated with known magmatic activity; and cryovolcanoes (or ice volcanoes), particularly on some moons of Jupiter, Saturn, and Neptune. Active mud volcanoes tend to involve temperatures much lower than those of igneous volcanoes except when the mud volcano is actually a vent of an igneous volcano.\nFissure vents.\nVolcanic fissure vents are generally found at diverging plate boundaries, they are flat, linear fractures through which basaltic lava emerges. These kinds of volcanoes are non-explosive and the basaltic lava tends to have a low viscosity and solidifies slowly leading to a gentle sloping basaltic lava plateau. They often relate or constitute shield volcanoes\nShield volcanoes.\nShield volcanoes, so named for their broad, shield-like profiles, are formed by the eruption of low-viscosity basaltic or andesitic lava that can flow a great distance from a vent. They generally do not explode catastrophically but are characterized by relatively gentle effusive eruptions. Since low-viscosity magma is typically low in silica, shield volcanoes are more common in oceanic than continental settings. The Hawaiian volcanic chain is a series of shield cones, and they are common in Iceland, as well. Olympus Mons, an extinct martian shield volcano is the largest known volcano in the Solar System.\nLava domes.\nLava domes, also called dome volcanoes, have steep convex sides built by slow eruptions of highly viscous lava, for example, rhyolite. They are sometimes formed within the crater of a previous volcanic eruption, as in the case of Mount St. Helens, but can also form independently, as in the case of Lassen Peak. Like stratovolcanoes, they can produce violent, explosive eruptions, but the lava generally does not flow far from the originating vent.\nCryptodomes.\nCryptodomes are formed when viscous lava is forced upward causing the surface to bulge. The 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens was an example; lava beneath the surface of the mountain created an upward bulge, which later collapsed down the north side of the mountain.\nCinder cones.\nCinder cones result from eruptions of mostly small pieces of scoria and pyroclastics (both resemble cinders, hence the name of this volcano type) that build up around the vent. These can be relatively short-lived eruptions that produce a cone-shaped hill perhaps high. Most cinder cones erupt only once and some may be found in monogenetic volcanic fields that may include other features that form when magma comes into contact with water such as maar explosion craters and tuff rings. Cinder cones may form as flank vents on larger volcanoes, or occur on their own. Par\u00edcutin in Mexico and Sunset Crater in Arizona are examples of cinder cones. In New Mexico, Caja del Rio is a volcanic field of over 60 cinder cones.\nBased on satellite images, it has been suggested that cinder cones might occur on other terrestrial bodies in the Solar system too; on the surface of Mars and the Moon.\nStratovolcanoes (composite volcanoes).\nStratovolcanoes are tall conical mountains composed of lava flows and tephra in alternate layers, the strata that gives rise to the name. They are also known as \"composite volcanoes\" because they are created from multiple structures during different kinds of eruptions; the main conduit bringing magma to the surface branches into multiple secondary conduits and occasional laccoliths or sills, the branching conduits may form parasitic cones on the flanks of the main cone. Classic examples include Mount Fuji in Japan, Mayon Volcano in the Philippines, and Mount Vesuvius and Stromboli in Italy.\nAsh produced by the explosive eruption of stratovolcanoes has historically posed the greatest volcanic hazard to civilizations. The lavas of stratovolcanoes are higher in silica, and therefore much more viscous, than lavas from shield volcanoes. High-silica lavas also tend to contain more dissolved gas. The combination is deadly, promoting explosive eruptions that produce great quantities of ash, as well as pyroclastic surges like the one that destroyed the city of Saint-Pierre in Martinique in 1902. They are also steeper than shield volcanoes, with slopes of 30\u201335\u00b0 compared to slopes of generally 5\u201310\u00b0, and their loose tephra are material for dangerous lahars. Large pieces of tephra are called volcanic bombs. Big bombs can measure more than across and weigh several tons.\nSupervolcanoes.\nA supervolcano is defined as a volcano that has experienced one or more eruptions that produced over of volcanic deposits in a single explosive event. Such eruptions occur when a very large magma chamber full of gas-rich, silicic magma is emptied in a catastrophic caldera-forming eruption. Ash flow tuffs emplaced by such eruptions are the only volcanic product with volumes rivalling those of flood basalts.\nSupervolcano eruptions, while the most dangerous type, are very rare; four are known from the last million years, and about 60 historical VEI 8 eruptions have been identified in the geologic record over millions of years. A supervolcano can produce devastation on a continental scale, and severely cool global temperatures for many years after the eruption due to the huge volumes of sulfur and ash released into the atmosphere.\nBecause of the enormous area they cover, and subsequent concealment under vegetation and glacial deposits, supervolcanoes can be difficult to identify in the geologic record without careful geological mapping. Known examples include Yellowstone Caldera in Yellowstone National Park and Valles Caldera in New Mexico (both western United States); Lake Taup\u014d in New Zealand; Lake Toba in Sumatra, Indonesia; and Ngorongoro Crater in Tanzania.\nCaldera volcanoes.\nVolcanoes that, though large, are not large enough to be called supervolcanoes, may also form calderas (collapsed crater) in the same way. There may be active or dormant cones inside of the caldera or even a lake, such lakes are called Volcanogenic lakes, or simply, volcanic lakes.\nSubmarine volcanoes.\nSubmarine volcanoes are common features of the ocean floor. Volcanic activity during the Holocene Epoch has been documented at only 119 submarine volcanoes, but there may be more than one million geologically young submarine volcanoes on the ocean floor. In shallow water, active volcanoes disclose their presence by blasting steam and rocky debris high above the ocean's surface. In the deep ocean basins, the tremendous weight of the water prevents the explosive release of steam and gases; however, submarine eruptions can be detected by hydrophones and by the discoloration of water because of volcanic gases. Pillow lava is a common eruptive product of submarine volcanoes and is characterized by thick sequences of discontinuous pillow-shaped masses which form underwater. Even large submarine eruptions may not disturb the ocean surface, due to the rapid cooling effect and increased buoyancy in water (as compared to air), which often causes volcanic vents to form steep pillars on the ocean floor. Hydrothermal vents are common near these volcanoes, and some support peculiar ecosystems based on chemotrophs feeding on dissolved minerals. Over time, the formations created by submarine volcanoes may become so large that they break the ocean surface as new islands or floating pumice rafts.\nIn May and June 2018, a multitude of seismic signals were detected by earthquake monitoring agencies all over the world. They took the form of unusual humming sounds, and some of the signals detected in November of that year had a duration of up to 20 minutes. An oceanographic research campaign in May 2019 showed that the previously mysterious humming noises were caused by the formation of a submarine volcano off the coast of Mayotte.\nSubglacial volcanoes.\nSubglacial volcanoes develop underneath ice caps. They are made up of lava plateaus capping extensive pillow lavas and palagonite. These volcanoes are also called table mountains, tuyas, or (in Iceland) mobergs. Very good examples of this type of volcano can be seen in Iceland and in British Columbia. The origin of the term comes from Tuya Butte, which is one of the several tuyas in the area of the Tuya River and Tuya Range in northern British Columbia. Tuya Butte was the first such landform analysed and so its name has entered the geological literature for this kind of volcanic formation. The Tuya Mountains Provincial Park was recently established to protect this unusual landscape, which lies north of Tuya Lake and south of the Jennings River near the boundary with the Yukon Territory.\nHydrothermal features.\nHydrothermal features, for example geysers, fumaroles, mud pools, mud volcanoes, hot springs and acidic hot springs involve water as well as geothermal or magmatic activity. Such features are common around volcanoes and are often indicative of volcanism.\nMud volcanoes.\nMud volcanoes or mud domes are conical structures created by eruption of liquids and gases, particularly mud (slurries), water and gases, although several activities may contribute. The largest mud volcanoes are in diameter and reach high. Mud volcanoes can be seen off the shore of Indonesia, on the island of Baratang, in Balochistan and in central Asia.\nFumarole.\nFumaroles are vents on the surface from which hot steam and volcanic gases erupt due to the presence of superheated groundwater, these may indicate volcanic activity. Fumaroles erupting sulfurous gases are also often called solfataras.\nGeysers.\nGeysers are springs which will occasionally erupt and discharge hot water and steam. Geysers may indicate ongoing magmatism, water underground is heated by hot rocks and steam pressure builds up before being released along with a jet of hot water. Almost half of all active geysers are present in Yellowstone National Park, US.\nErupted material.\nThe material that is expelled in a volcanic eruption can be classified into three types:\nVolcanic gases.\nThe concentrations of different volcanic gases can vary considerably from one volcano to the next. Water vapour is typically the most abundant volcanic gas, followed by carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide. Other principal volcanic gases include hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen chloride, and hydrogen fluoride. A large number of minor and trace gases are also found in volcanic emissions, for example hydrogen, carbon monoxide, halocarbons, organic compounds, and volatile metal chlorides.\nLava flows.\nThe form and style of an eruption of a volcano is largely determined by the composition of the lava it erupts. The viscosity (how fluid the lava is) and the amount of dissolved gas are the most important characteristics of magma, and both are largely determined by the amount of silica in the magma. Magma rich in silica is much more viscous than silica-poor magma, and silica-rich magma also tends to contain more dissolved gases.\nLava can be broadly classified into four different compositions:\nBecause felsic magmas are so viscous, they tend to trap volatiles (gases) that are present, which leads to explosive volcanism. Pyroclastic flows (ignimbrites) are highly hazardous products of such volcanoes since they hug the volcano's slopes and travel far from their vents during large eruptions. Temperatures as high as are known to occur in pyroclastic flows, which will incinerate everything flammable in their path, and thick layers of hot pyroclastic flow deposits can be laid down, often many meters thick. Alaska's Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes, formed by the eruption of Novarupta near Katmai in 1912, is an example of a thick pyroclastic flow or ignimbrite deposit. Volcanic ash that is light enough to erupt high into the Earth's atmosphere as an eruption column may travel hundreds of kilometres before it falls back to ground as a fallout tuff. Volcanic gases may remain in the stratosphere for years.\nFelsic magmas are formed within the crust, usually through the melting of crust rock from the heat of underlying mafic magmas. The lighter felsic magma floats on the mafic magma without significant mixing. Less commonly, felsic magmas are produced by extreme fractional crystallization of more mafic magmas. This is a process in which mafic minerals crystallize out of the slowly cooling magma, which enriches the remaining liquid in silica.\nMafic lavas occur in a wide range of settings. These include mid-ocean ridges; Shield volcanoes (such the Hawaiian Islands, including Mauna Loa and Kilauea), on both oceanic and continental crust; and as continental flood basalts.\nMafic lava flows show two varieties of surface texture: \u02bbA\u02bba (pronounced ) and p\u0101hoehoe (), both Hawaiian words. \u02bbA\u02bba is characterized by a rough, clinkery surface and is the typical texture of cooler basalt lava flows. P\u0101hoehoe is characterized by its smooth and often ropey or wrinkly surface and is generally formed from more fluid lava flows. P\u0101hoehoe flows are sometimes observed to transition to \u02bba\u02bba flows as they move away from the vent, but never the reverse.\nMore silicic lava flows take the form of block lava, where the flow is covered with angular, vesicle-poor blocks. Rhyolitic flows typically consist largely of obsidian.\nTephra.\nTephra is made when magma inside the volcano is blown apart by the rapid expansion of hot volcanic gases. Magma commonly explodes as the gas dissolved in it comes out of solution as the pressure decreases when it flows to the surface. These violent explosions produce particles of material that can then fly from the volcano. Solid particles smaller than 2\u00a0mm in diameter (sand-sized or smaller) are called volcanic ash.\nTephra and other volcaniclastics (shattered volcanic material) make up more of the volume of many volcanoes than do lava flows. Volcaniclastics may have contributed as much as a third of all sedimentation in the geologic record. The production of large volumes of tephra is characteristic of explosive volcanism.\nDissection.\nThrough natural processes, mainly erosion, so much of the solidified erupted material that makes up the mantle of a volcano may be stripped away that its inner anatomy becomes apparent. Using the metaphor of biological anatomy, such a process is called \"dissection\". When the volcano is extinct, a plug forms on its vent, over time due to erosion, the volcanic cone slowly erodes away leaving the resistant lava plug intact. Cinder Hill, a feature of Mount Bird on Ross Island, Antarctica, is a prominent example of a dissected volcano. Volcanoes that were, on a geological timescale, recently active, such as for example Mount Kaimon in southern Ky\u016bsh\u016b, Japan, tend to be undissected. Devils Tower in Wyoming is a famous example of exposed volcanic plug.\nVolcanic eruptions.\nAs of \u00a02022[ [update]], the Smithsonian Institution's Global Volcanism Program database of volcanic eruptions in the Holocene Epoch (the last 11,700 years) lists 9,901 confirmed eruptions from 859 volcanoes. The database also lists 1,113 uncertain eruptions and 168 discredited eruptions for the same time interval.\nEruption styles are broadly divided into magmatic, phreatomagmatic (hydrovolcanic), and phreatic eruptions. The intensity of explosive volcanism is expressed using the volcanic explosivity index (VEI), which ranges from 0 for Hawaiian-type eruptions to 8 for supervolcanic eruptions:\nVolcanic activity.\nVolcanoes vary greatly in their level of activity, with individual volcanic systems having an \"eruption recurrence\" ranging from several times a year to once in tens of thousands of years. Volcanoes are informally described as erupting, active, dormant, or extinct, but the definitions of these terms are not entirely uniform among volcanologists. The level of activity of most volcanoes falls upon a graduated spectrum, with much overlap between categories, and does not always fit neatly into only one of these three separate categories.\nErupting.\nThe USGS defines a volcano as \"erupting\" whenever the ejection of magma from any point on the volcano is visible, including visible magma still contained within the walls of the summit crater.\nActive.\nWhile there is no international consensus among volcanologists on how to define an active volcano, the USGS defines a volcano as \"active\" whenever subterranean indicators, such as earthquake swarms, ground inflation, or unusually high levels of carbon dioxide or sulfur dioxide are present.\nDormant and reactivated.\nThe USGS defines a dormant volcano as any volcano that is not showing any signs of unrest such as earthquake swarms, ground swelling, or excessive noxious gas emissions, but which shows signs that it could yet become active again. Many dormant volcanoes have not erupted for thousands of years, but have still shown signs that they may be likely to erupt again in the future.\nIn an article justifying the re-classification of Alaska's Mount Edgecumbe volcano from \"dormant\" to \"active\", volcanologists at the Alaska Volcano Observatory pointed out that the term \"dormant\" in reference to volcanoes has been deprecated over the past few decades and that \"[t]he term \"dormant volcano\" is so little used and undefined in modern volcanology that the Encyclopedia of Volcanoes (2000) does not contain it in the glossaries or index\", however the USGS still widely employs the term.\nPreviously a volcano was often considered to be extinct if there were no written records of its activity. Such a generalization is inconsistent with observation and deeper study, as has occurred recently with the unexpected eruption of the Chait\u00e9n volcano in 2008. Modern volcanic activity monitoring techniques, and improvements in the modelling of the factors that produce eruptions, have helped the understanding of why volcanoes may remain dormant for a long time, and then become unexpectedly active again. The potential for eruptions, and their style, depend mainly upon the state of the magma storage system under the volcano, the eruption trigger mechanism and its timescale. For example, the Yellowstone volcano has a repose/recharge period of around 700,000 years, and Toba of around 380,000 years. Vesuvius was described by Roman writers as having been covered with gardens and vineyards before its unexpected eruption of 79 CE, which destroyed the towns of Herculaneum and Pompeii.\nAccordingly, it can sometimes be difficult to distinguish between an extinct volcano and a dormant (inactive) one. Long volcano dormancy is known to decrease awareness. Pinatubo was an inconspicuous volcano, unknown to most people in the surrounding areas, and initially not seismically monitored before its unanticipated and catastrophic eruption of 1991. Two other examples of volcanoes that were once thought to be extinct, before springing back into eruptive activity were the long-dormant Soufri\u00e8re Hills volcano on the island of Montserrat, thought to be extinct until activity resumed in 1995 (turning its capital Plymouth into a ghost town) and Fourpeaked Mountain in Alaska, which, before its September 2006 eruption, had not erupted since before 8000 BCE.\nExtinct.\nExtinct volcanoes are those that scientists consider unlikely to erupt again because the volcano no longer has a magma supply. Examples of extinct volcanoes are many volcanoes on the Hawaiian\u2013Emperor seamount chain in the Pacific Ocean (although some volcanoes at the eastern end of the chain are active), Hohentwiel in Germany, Shiprock in New Mexico, U.S., Capulin in New Mexico, U.S., Zuidwal volcano in the Netherlands, and many volcanoes in Italy such as Monte Vulture. Edinburgh Castle in Scotland is located atop an extinct volcano, which forms Castle Rock. Whether a volcano is truly extinct is often difficult to determine. Since \"supervolcano\" calderas can have eruptive lifespans sometimes measured in millions of years, a caldera that has not produced an eruption in tens of thousands of years may be considered dormant instead of extinct. An individual volcano in a monogenetic volcanic field can be extinct, but that does not mean a completely new volcano might not erupt close by with little or no warning, as its field may have an active magma supply.\nVolcanic-alert level.\nThe three common popular classifications of volcanoes can be subjective and some volcanoes thought to have been extinct have erupted again. To help prevent people from falsely believing they are not at risk when living on or near a volcano, countries have adopted new classifications to describe the various levels and stages of volcanic activity. Some alert systems use different numbers or colours to designate the different stages. Other systems use colours and words. Some systems use a combination of both.\nDecade volcanoes.\nThe Decade Volcanoes are 16 volcanoes identified by the International Association of Volcanology and Chemistry of the Earth's Interior (IAVCEI) as being worthy of particular study in light of their history of large, destructive eruptions and proximity to populated areas. They are named Decade Volcanoes because the project was initiated as part of the United Nations-sponsored International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (the 1990s). The 16 current Decade Volcanoes are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Deep Earth Carbon Degassing Project, an initiative of the Deep Carbon Observatory, monitors nine volcanoes, two of which are Decade volcanoes. The focus of the Deep Earth Carbon Degassing Project is to use Multi-Component Gas Analyzer System instruments to measure CO2/SO2 ratios in real-time and in high-resolution to allow detection of the pre-eruptive degassing of rising magmas, improving prediction of volcanic activity.\nVolcanoes and humans.\nVolcanic eruptions pose a significant threat to human civilization. However, volcanic activity has also provided humans with important resources.\nHazards.\nThere are many different types of volcanic eruptions and associated activity: phreatic eruptions (steam-generated eruptions), explosive eruptions of high-silica lava (e.g., rhyolite), effusive eruptions of low-silica lava (e.g., basalt), sector collapses, pyroclastic flows, lahars (debris flows) and volcanic gas emissions. These can pose a hazard to humans. Earthquakes, hot springs, fumaroles, mud pots and geysers often accompany volcanic activity.\nVolcanic gases can reach the stratosphere, where they form sulfuric acid aerosols that can reflect solar radiation and lower surface temperatures significantly. Sulfur dioxide from the eruption of Huaynaputina may have caused the Russian famine of 1601\u20131603. Chemical reactions of sulfate aerosols in the stratosphere can also damage the ozone layer, and acids such as hydrogen chloride (HCl) and hydrogen fluoride (HF) can fall to the ground as acid rain. Excessive fluoride salts from eruptions have poisoned livestock in Iceland on multiple occasions. Explosive volcanic eruptions release the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide and thus provide a deep source of carbon for biogeochemical cycles.\nAsh thrown into the air by eruptions can present a hazard to aircraft, especially jet aircraft where the particles can be melted by the high operating temperature; the melted particles then adhere to the turbine blades and alter their shape, disrupting the operation of the turbine. This can cause major disruptions to air travel.\nA volcanic winter is thought to have taken place around 70,000 years ago after the supereruption of Lake Toba on Sumatra island in Indonesia. This may have created a population bottleneck that affected the genetic inheritance of all humans today. Volcanic eruptions may have contributed to major extinction events, such as the End-Ordovician, Permian-Triassic, and Late Devonian mass extinctions.\nThe 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora created global climate anomalies that became known as the \"Year Without a Summer\" because of the effect on North American and European weather. The freezing winter of 1740\u201341, which led to widespread famine in northern Europe, may also owe its origins to a volcanic eruption.\nBenefits.\nAlthough volcanic eruptions pose considerable hazards to humans, past volcanic activity has created important economic resources. Tuff formed from volcanic ash is a relatively soft rock, and it has been used for construction since ancient times. The Romans often used tuff, which is abundant in Italy, for construction. The Rapa Nui people used tuff to make most of the \"moai\" statues in Easter Island.\nVolcanic ash and weathered basalt produce some of the most fertile soil in the world, rich in nutrients such as iron, magnesium, potassium, calcium, and phosphorus. Volcanic activity is responsible for emplacing valuable mineral resources, such as metal ores. It is accompanied by high rates of heat flow from Earth's interior. These can be tapped as geothermal power.\nTourism associated with volcanoes is also a worldwide industry.\nSafety considerations.\nMany volcanoes near human settlements are heavily monitored with the aim of providing adequate advance warnings of imminent eruptions to nearby populations. Also, a better modern-day understanding of volcanology has led to some better informed governmental and public responses to unanticipated volcanic activities. While the science of volcanology may not yet be capable of predicting the exact times and dates of eruptions far into the future, on suitably monitored volcanoes the monitoring of ongoing volcanic indicators is often capable of predicting imminent eruptions with advance warnings minimally of hours, and usually of days prior to any eruptions. The diversity of volcanoes and their complexities mean that eruption forecasts for the foreseeable future will be based on probability, and the application of risk management. Even then, some eruptions will have no useful warning. An example of this occurred in March 2017, when a tourist group was witnessing a presumed to be predictable Mount Etna eruption and the flowing lava came in contact with a snow accumulation causing a situational phreatic explosion causing injury to ten persons. Other types of significant eruptions are known to give useful warnings of only hours at the most by seismic monitoring. The recent demonstration of a magma chamber with repose times of tens of thousands of years, with potential for rapid recharge so potentially decreasing warning times, under the youngest volcano in central Europe, does not tell us if more careful monitoring will be useful.\nScientists are known to perceive risk, with its social elements, differently from local populations and those that undertake social risk assessments on their behalf, so that both disruptive false alarms and retrospective blame, when disasters occur, will continue to happen.\nThus in many cases, while volcanic eruptions may still cause major property destruction, the periodic large-scale loss of human life that was once associated with many volcanic eruptions, has recently been significantly reduced in areas where volcanoes are adequately monitored. This life-saving ability is derived via such volcanic-activity monitoring programs, through the greater abilities of local officials to facilitate timely evacuations based upon the greater modern-day knowledge of volcanism that is now available, and upon improved communications technologies such as cell phones. Such operations tend to provide enough time for humans to escape at least with their lives before a pending eruption. One example of such a recent successful volcanic evacuation was the Mount Pinatubo evacuation of 1991. This evacuation is believed to have saved 20,000 lives. In the case of Mount Etna, a 2021 review found 77 deaths due to eruptions since 1536 but none since 1987.\nCitizens who may be concerned about their own exposure to risk from nearby volcanic activity should familiarize themselves with the types of, and quality of, volcano monitoring and public notification procedures being employed by governmental authorities in their areas.\nVolcanoes on other celestial bodies.\nEarth's Moon has no large volcanoes and no current volcanic activity, although recent evidence suggests it may still possess a partially molten core. However, the Moon does have many volcanic features such as maria (the darker patches seen on the Moon), rilles and domes.\nThe planet Venus has a surface that is 90% basalt, indicating that volcanism played a major role in shaping its surface. The planet may have had a major global resurfacing event about 500 million years ago, from what scientists can tell from the density of impact craters on the surface. Lava flows are widespread and forms of volcanism not present on Earth occur as well. Changes in the planet's atmosphere and observations of lightning have been attributed to ongoing volcanic eruptions, although there is no confirmation of whether or not Venus is still volcanically active. However, radar sounding by the Magellan probe revealed evidence for comparatively recent volcanic activity at Venus's highest volcano Maat Mons, in the form of ash flows near the summit and on the northern flank. However, the interpretation of the flows as ash flows has been questioned.\nThere are several extinct volcanoes on Mars, four of which are vast shield volcanoes far bigger than any on Earth. They include Arsia Mons, Ascraeus Mons, Hecates Tholus, Olympus Mons, and Pavonis Mons. These volcanoes have been extinct for many millions of years, but the European \"Mars Express\" spacecraft has found evidence that volcanic activity may have occurred on Mars in the recent past as well.\nJupiter's moon Io is the most volcanically active object in the Solar System because of tidal interaction with Jupiter. It is covered with volcanoes that erupt sulfur, sulfur dioxide and silicate rock, and as a result, Io is constantly being resurfaced. Its lavas are the hottest known anywhere in the Solar System, with temperatures exceeding 1,800 K (1,500\u00a0\u00b0C). In February 2001, the largest recorded volcanic eruptions in the Solar System occurred on Io. Europa, the smallest of Jupiter's Galilean moons, also appears to have an active volcanic system, except that its volcanic activity is entirely in the form of water, which freezes into ice on the frigid surface. This process is known as cryovolcanism, and is apparently most common on the moons of the outer planets of the Solar System.\nIn 1989, the \"Voyager 2\" spacecraft observed cryovolcanoes (ice volcanoes) on Triton, a moon of Neptune, and in 2005 the \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" probe photographed fountains of frozen particles erupting from Enceladus, a moon of Saturn. The ejecta may be composed of water, liquid nitrogen, ammonia, dust, or methane compounds. \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" also found evidence of a methane-spewing cryovolcano on the Saturnian moon Titan, which is believed to be a significant source of the methane found in its atmosphere. It is theorized that cryovolcanism may also be present on the Kuiper Belt Object Quaoar.\nA 2010 study of the exoplanet COROT-7b, which was detected by transit in 2009, suggested that tidal heating from the host star very close to the planet and neighbouring planets could generate intense volcanic activity similar to that found on Io.\nHistory of volcano understanding.\nVolcanoes are not distributed evenly over the Earth's surface but active ones with significant impact were encountered early in human history, evidenced by footprints of hominina found in East African volcanic ash dated at 3.66 million years old.104 The association of volcanoes with fire and disaster is found in many oral traditions and had religious and thus social significance before the first written record of concepts related to volcanoes. Examples are: (1) the stories in the Athabascan subcultures about humans living inside mountains and a woman who uses fire to escape from a mountain,135 (2) Pele's migration through the Hawarian island chain, ability to destroy forests and manifestations of the god's temper, and (3) the association in Javanese folklore of a king resident in Mount Merapi volcano and a queen resident at a beach away on what is now known to be an earthquake fault that interacts with that volcano.\nMany ancient accounts ascribe volcanic eruptions to supernatural causes, such as the actions of gods or demigods. The earliest known such example is a neolithic goddess at \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck.203 The Ancient Greek god Hephaistos and the concepts of the underworld are aligned to volcanoes in that Greek culture.\nHowever, others proposed more natural (but still incorrect) causes of volcanic activity. In the fifth century BC, Anaxagoras proposed eruptions were caused by a great wind. By 65\u00a0CE, Seneca the Younger proposed combustion as the cause, an idea also adopted by the Jesuit Athanasius Kircher (1602\u20131680), who witnessed eruptions of Mount Etna and Stromboli, then visited the crater of Vesuvius and published his view of an Earth in \"Mundus Subterraneus\" with a central fire connected to numerous others depicting volcanoes as a type of safety valve. Edward Jorden, in his work on mineral waters, challenged this view; in 1632 he proposed sulfur \"fermentation\" as a heat source within Earth, Astronomer Johannes Kepler (1571\u20131630) believed volcanoes were ducts for Earth's tears. In 1650, Ren\u00e9 Descartes proposed the core of Earth was incandescent and, by 1785, the works of Decartes and others were synthesized into geology by James Hutton in his writings about igneous intrusions of magma. Lazzaro Spallanzani had demonstrated by 1794 that steam explosions could cause explosive eruptions and many geologists held this as the universal cause of explosive eruptions up to the 1886 eruption of Mount Tarawera which allowed in one event differentiation of the concurrent phreatomagmatic and hydrothermal eruptions from dry explosive eruption, of, as it turned out, a basalt dyke. Alfred Lacroix built upon his other knowledge with his studies on the 1902 eruption of Mount Pel\u00e9e, and by 1928 Arthur Holmes work had brought together the concepts of radioactive generation of heat, Earth's mantle structure, partial decompression melting of magma, and magma convection. This eventually led to the acceptance of plate tectonics.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32572", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32572", "title": "Vesicle (biology and chemistry)", "text": "Any small, fluid-filled, spherical organelle enclosed by a membrane\nIn cell biology, a vesicle is an organelle within or outside a cell, consisting of liquid or cytoplasm enclosed by a lipid bilayer. Vesicles form naturally during the processes of secretion (exocytosis), uptake (endocytosis), and the transport of materials within the plasma membrane. Alternatively, they may be prepared artificially, in which case they are called liposomes (not to be confused with lysosomes). If there is only one phospholipid bilayer, the vesicles are called \"unilamellar liposomes\"; otherwise they are called \"multilamellar liposomes\". The membrane enclosing the vesicle is also a lamellar phase, similar to that of the plasma membrane, and intracellular vesicles can fuse with the plasma membrane to release their contents outside the cell. Vesicles can also fuse with other organelles within the cell. A vesicle released from the cell is known as an extracellular vesicle.\nVesicles perform a variety of functions. Because it is separated from the cytosol, the inside of the vesicle can be made to be different from the cytosolic environment. For this reason, vesicles are a basic tool used by the cell for organizing cellular substances. Vesicles are involved in metabolism, transport, buoyancy control, and temporary storage of food and enzymes. They can also act as chemical reaction chambers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIUPAC definition\nClosed structure formed by amphiphilic molecules that contains solvent (usually water).\nThe 2013 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was shared by James Rothman, Randy Schekman and Thomas S\u00fcdhof for their roles in elucidating (building upon earlier research, some of it by their mentors) the makeup and function of cell vesicles, especially in yeasts and in humans, including information on each vesicle's parts and how they are assembled. Vesicle dysfunction is thought to contribute to Alzheimer's disease, diabetes, some hard-to-treat cases of epilepsy, some cancers and immunological disorders and certain neurovascular conditions.\nTypes of vesicular structures.\nVacuoles.\nVacuoles are cellular organelles that contain mostly water.\nSecretory vesicles.\nSecretory vesicles contain materials that are to be excreted from the cell. Cells have many reasons to excrete materials.\nOne reason is to dispose of wastes.\nAnother reason is tied to the function of the cell. Within a larger organism, some cells are specialized to produce certain chemicals. These chemicals are stored in secretory vesicles and released when needed.\nExtracellular vesicles.\nExtracellular vesicles (EVs) are lipid bilayer-delimited particles produced by all cells including bacteria.\nTypes.\nDifferent types of EVs may be separated based on density (by gradient differential centrifugation), size, or surface markers. However, EV subtypes have an overlapping size and density ranges, and subtype-unique markers must be established on a cell-by-cell basis. Therefore, it is difficult to pinpoint the biogenesis pathway that gave rise to a particular EV after it has left the cell.\nIn humans, endogenous extracellular vesicles likely play a role in coagulation, intercellular signaling and waste management. They are also implicated in the pathophysiological processes involved in multiple diseases, including cancer. Extracellular vesicles have raised interest as a potential source of biomarker discovery because of their role in intercellular communication, release into easily accessible body fluids and the resemblance of their molecular content to that of the releasing cells. The extracellular vesicles of (mesenchymal) stem cells, also known as the secretome of stem cells, are being researched and applied for therapeutic purposes, predominantly degenerative, auto-immune and/or inflammatory diseases.\nIn Gram-negative bacteria, EVs are produced by the pinching off of the outer membrane; however, how EVs escape the thick cell walls of Gram-positive bacteria, mycobacteria and fungi is still unknown. These EVs contain varied cargo, including nucleic acids, toxins, lipoproteins and enzymes and have important roles in microbial physiology and pathogenesis. In host\u2013pathogen interactions, gram negative bacteria produce vesicles which play roles in establishing a colonization niche, carrying and transmitting virulence factors into host cells and modulating host defense and response.\nOcean cyanobacteria have been found to continuously release vesicles containing proteins, DNA and RNA into the open ocean. Vesicles carrying DNA from diverse bacteria are abundant in coastal and open-ocean seawater samples.\nProtocells.\nThe RNA world hypothesis assumes that the first self-replicating genomes were strands of RNA. This hypothesis contains the idea that RNA strands formed ribozymes (folded RNA molecules) capable of catalyzing RNA replication. These primordial biological catalysis were considered to be contained within vesicles (protocells) with membranes composed of fatty acids and related amphiphiles. Template-directed RNA synthesis by the copying of RNA templates inside fatty acid vesicles has been demonstrated by Adamata and Szostak.\nOther types.\nGas vesicles are used by archaea, bacteria and planktonic microorganisms, possibly to control vertical migration by regulating the gas content and thereby buoyancy, or possibly to position the cell for maximum solar light harvesting. These vesicles are typically lemon-shaped or cylindrical tubes made out of protein; their diameter determines the strength of the vesicle with larger ones being weaker. The diameter of the vesicle also affects its volume and how efficiently it can provide buoyancy. In cyanobacteria, natural selection has worked to create vesicles that are at the maximum diameter possible while still being structurally stable. The protein skin is permeable to gases but not water, keeping the vesicles from flooding.\nMatrix vesicles are located within the extracellular space, or matrix. Using electron microscopy, they were discovered independently in 1967 by H. Clarke Anderson and Ermanno Bonucci. These cell-derived vesicles are specialized to initiate biomineralisation of the matrix in a variety of tissues, including bone, cartilage and dentin. During normal calcification, a major influx of calcium and phosphate ions into the cells accompanies cellular apoptosis (genetically determined self-destruction) and matrix vesicle formation. Calcium-loading also leads to formation of phosphatidylserine:calcium:phosphate complexes in the plasma membrane mediated in part by a protein called annexins. Matrix vesicles bud from the plasma membrane at sites of interaction with the extracellular matrix. Thus, matrix vesicles convey to the extracellular matrix calcium, phosphate, lipids and the annexins which act to nucleate mineral formation. These processes are precisely coordinated to bring about, at the proper place and time, mineralization of the tissue's matrix unless the Golgi are non-existent.\nMultivesicular body, or MVB, is a membrane-bound vesicle containing a number of smaller vesicles.\nFormation and transport.\nSome vesicles are made when part of the membrane pinches off the endoplasmic reticulum or the Golgi complex. Others are made when an object outside of the cell is surrounded by the cell membrane.\nVesicle coat and cargo molecules.\nThe vesicle \"coat\" is a collection of proteins that serve to shape the curvature of a donor membrane, forming the rounded vesicle shape. Coat proteins can also function to bind to various transmembrane receptor proteins, called cargo receptors. These receptors help select what material is endocytosed in receptor-mediated endocytosis or intracellular transport.\nThere are three types of vesicle coats: clathrin, COPI and COPII. The various types of coat proteins help with sorting of vesicles to their final destination. Clathrin coats are found on vesicles trafficking between the Golgi and plasma membrane, the Golgi and endosomes and the plasma membrane and endosomes. COPI coated vesicles are responsible for retrograde transport from the Golgi to the ER, while COPII coated vesicles are responsible for anterograde transport from the ER to the Golgi.\nThe clathrin coat is thought to assemble in response to regulatory G protein. A protein coat assembles and disassembles due to an ADP ribosylation factor (ARF) protein.\nVesicle docking.\nSurface proteins called SNAREs identify the vesicle's cargo and complementary SNAREs on the target membrane act to cause fusion of the vesicle and target membrane. Such v-SNARES are hypothesised to exist on the vesicle membrane, while the complementary ones on the target membrane are known as t-SNAREs.\nOften SNAREs associated with vesicles or target membranes are instead classified as Qa, Qb, Qc, or R SNAREs owing to further variation than simply v- or t-SNAREs. An array of different SNARE complexes can be seen in different tissues and subcellular compartments, with 38 isoforms currently identified in humans.\nRegulatory Rab proteins are thought to inspect the joining of the SNAREs. Rab protein is a regulatory GTP-binding protein and controls the binding of these complementary SNAREs for a long enough time for the Rab protein to hydrolyse its bound GTP and lock the vesicle onto the membrane.\nSNAREs proteins in plants are understudied compared to fungi and animals. The cell botanist Natasha Raikhel has done some of the basic research in this area, including Zheng et al 1999 in which she and her team found AtVTI1a to be essential to Golgi\u21c4vacuole transport.\nVesicle fusion.\nVesicle fusion can occur in one of two ways: full fusion or kiss-and-run fusion. Fusion requires the two membranes to be brought within 1.5\u00a0nm of each other. For this to occur water must be displaced from the surface of the vesicle membrane. This is energetically unfavorable and evidence suggests that the process requires ATP, GTP and acetyl-coA. Fusion is also linked to budding, which is why the term budding and fusing arises.\nIn receptor downregulation.\nMembrane proteins serving as receptors are sometimes tagged for downregulation by the attachment of ubiquitin. After arriving an endosome via the pathway described above, vesicles begin to form inside the endosome, taking with them the membrane proteins meant for degradation; When the endosome either matures to become a lysosome or is united with one, the vesicles are completely degraded.\nWithout this mechanism, only the extracellular part of the membrane proteins would reach the lumen of the lysosome and only this part would be degraded.\nIt is because of these vesicles that the endosome is sometimes known as a \"multivesicular body\". The pathway to their formation is not completely understood; unlike the other vesicles described above, the outer surface of the vesicles is not in contact with the cytosol.\nPreparation.\nIsolated vesicles.\nProducing membrane vesicles is one of the methods to investigate various membranes of the cell. After the living tissue is crushed into suspension, various membranes form tiny closed bubbles. Big fragments of the crushed cells can be discarded by low-speed centrifugation and later the fraction of the known origin (plasmalemma, tonoplast, etc.) can be isolated by precise high-speed centrifugation in the density gradient. Using osmotic shock, it is possible temporarily open vesicles (filling them with the required solution) and then centrifugate down again and resuspend in a different solution. Applying ionophores like valinomycin can create electrochemical gradients comparable to the gradients inside living cells.\nVesicles are mainly used in two types of research:\nArtificial vesicles.\nArtificial vesicles are classified into three groups based on their size: small unilamellar liposomes/vesicles (SUVs) with a size range of 20\u2013100\u00a0nm, large unilamellar liposomes/vesicles (LUVs) with a size range of 100\u20131000\u00a0nm and giant unilamellar liposomes/vesicles (GUVs) with a size range of 1\u2013200\u00a0\u03bcm. Smaller vesicles in the same size range as trafficking vesicles found in living cells are frequently used in biochemistry and related fields. For such studies, a homogeneous phospholipid vesicle suspension can be prepared by extrusion or sonication, or by rapid injection of a phospholipid solution into an aqueous buffer solution. In this way, aqueous vesicle solutions can be prepared of different phospholipid composition, as well as different sizes of vesicles. Larger synthetically made vesicles such as GUVs are used for in vitro studies in cell biology in order to mimic cell membranes. These vesicles are large enough to be studied using traditional fluorescence light microscopy. A variety of methods exist to encapsulate biological reactants like protein solutions within such vesicles, making GUVs an ideal system for the in vitro recreation (and investigation) of cell functions in cell-like model membrane environments. These methods include microfluidic methods, which allow for a high-yield production of vesicles with consistent sizes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32573", "revid": "3488865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32573", "title": "Victimology", "text": "Study of victimization\nVictimology is the study of victimization, including the psychological effects on victims, the relationship between victims and offenders, the interactions between victims and the criminal justice system\u2014that is, the police and courts, and corrections officials\u2014and the connections between victims and other social groups and institutions, such as the media, businesses, and social movements. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVictim of a crime.\nIn criminology and criminal law, a victim of a crime is an identifiable person who has been harmed individually and directly by the perpetrator, rather than by society as a whole. However, this may not always be the case, as with victims of white-collar crime, who may not be clearly identifiable or directly linked to crime against a particular individual. Victims of white-collar crime are often denied their status as victims by the social construction of the concept.\nThe Supreme Court of the United States first recognized the rights of crime victims to make a victim impact statement during the sentencing phase of a criminal trial in the case of \"Payne v. Tennessee\".\nA victim impact panel, which usually follows the victim impact statement, is a form of community-based or restorative justice in which the crime victims (or relatives and friends of deceased crime victims) meet with the defendant after conviction to tell the convict about how the criminal activity affected them, in the hope of rehabilitation or deterrence.\nTheories.\nRichard Quinney has argued \"the victim\" is a social construct because in order for a person to be labeled a victim, some societal agreement needs to exist. Societal power dynamics affect collective perceptions of victimization. Nils Christie classifies \"ideal victims\" as those most likely to obtain \u201cthe complete and legitimate status of being a victim\u201d when harmed. Christie writes that this is most likely to occur when the victim is perceived as weak, was participating in a reputable activity, not seen as accountable for playing a part in their victimization, and the offender is large and evil and not known to the victim.\nConsequences of crimes.\nEmotional distress as the result of crime is a recurring theme for all victims of crime. The most common problems, affecting three-quarters of victims, were psychological problems, including fear, anxiety, nervousness, self-blame, anger, shame, and difficulty sleeping. These problems often result in the development of chronic post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Post-crime distress is also linked to pre-existing emotional problems and sociodemographic variables. This has been known to become a leading case of the elderly being more adversely affected.\nVictims may experience the following psychological reactions:\nThe experience of victimization may result in increasing fear on the part of the victim, and the spread of fear in the community.\nVictim proneness.\nEnvironmental theory.\nThe environmental theory posits that the location and context of the crime bring the victim of the crime and its perpetrator together. Research published between 2010 and 2025 gives some credence to this theory.\nStudies in the early 2010s showed that crimes are negatively correlated to trees in urban environments; more trees in an area are congruent with lower victimization rates or violent crime rates. This relationship was established by studies in 2010 in Portland, Oregon and in 2012 in Baltimore, Maryland. Geoffrey Donovan of the United States Forest Service (USFS), one of the researchers, said, \"trees, which provide a range of other benefits, could improve quality of life in Portland by reducing crime...\" because \"We believe that large street trees can reduce crime by signaling to a potential criminal that a neighborhood is better cared for and, therefore, a criminal is more likely to be caught.\" Note that the presence of \"large\" street trees especially indicated a reduction in crime, as opposed to newer, smaller trees. In the 2012 Baltimore study, led by scientists from the University of Vermont and the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), a \"conservative spatially adjusted model indicated that a 10% increase in tree canopy was associated with a roughly 12% decrease in crime... [and] we found that the inverse relationship continued in both contexts, but the magnitude was 40% greater for public than for private lands.\"\nA study in the 2020s showed a strong positive association between \"routine maintenance and repair of urban public places (e.g. street construction projects) with a reduction in community violence, proxied by violent crime incidents.\" Conversely, a study in the 2020s, showed a strong positive correlation between vacant, abandoned, or \"cited\" properties with family violence. Researchers at Tulane University found about child neglect and intimate partner violence (IPV) that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The likelihood of experiencing child maltreatment at 12 months of age was more than twice as high for children living in neighborhoods with high vacant and cited property rates compared with women living in neighborhoods with fewer vacant and cited properties (OR = 2.11, 95% CI = 1.03, 4.31). Women living in neighborhoods characterized by high levels of vacant and cited properties were also more than twice as likely to report IPV (OR = 2.52, 95% CI = 1.21, 5.25). Associations remained mostly stable after controlling for key covariates.\nQuantification of victim-proneness.\nThere have been some studies recently to quantify the real existence of victim-proneness. Contrary to the popular belief that more women are repeat victims, and thus more victim-prone than men, actually men in their prime (15- to 34-year-old males) are more likely to be victims of repeated crimes.\nIn the case of juvenile offenders, the study results also show that people are more likely to be victimized as a result of a serious offense by someone they know; the most frequent crimes committed by adolescents towards someone they know were sexual assault, common assault, and homicide. Adolescents victimizing people they did not know generally committed common assault, forcible confinement, and armed or unarmed robbery.\nSex workers are, anecdotally, thought to have an abnormally high incidence of violent crime committed against them, and such crimes frequently go unresolved, but there are few victimological studies of the matter.\nFundamental attribution error.\nIn social psychology, the fundamental attribution error (also known as \"correspondence bias\" or \"attribution effect\") describes the tendency to over-value dispositional or personality-based explanations for the observed behaviors of others while under-valuing situational explanations for those behaviors. The term was coined by Lee Ross some years after a now-classic experiment by Edward E. Jones and Victor Harris (1967).\nThe fundamental attribution error is most visible when people explain the behavior of others. It does not explain interpretations of one's own behavior\u2014where situational factors are often taken into consideration. This discrepancy is called the actor\u2013observer bias. As a simple example, if Alice saw Bob trip over a rock and fall, Alice might consider Bob to be clumsy or careless (dispositional). If Alice later tripped over the same rock herself, she would be more likely to blame the placement of the rock (situational). Victim proneness or victim blaming can be a form of fundamental attribution error, and more specifically, the \"just-world phenomenon\".\nThe just-world phenomenon or Just-world fallacy is the belief that people get what they deserve and deserve what they get, which was first theorized by Melvin Lerner (1977). Attributing failures to dispositional causes rather than situational causes, which are unchangeable and uncontrollable, satisfies our need to believe that the world is fair and we have control over our life. We are motivated to see a just world because this reduces our perceived threats, gives us a sense of security, helps us find meaning in difficult and unsettling circumstances, and benefits us psychologically. Unfortunately, the just-world fallacy also results in a tendency for people to blame and disparage victims of a tragedy or an accident, such as victims of rape and domestic abuse to reassure themselves of their insusceptibility to such events. People may even blame the victim's faults in \"past lives\" to pursue justification for their bad outcome.\nVictim facilitation.\nVictim facilitation, another controversial sub-topic, but a more accepted theory than victim proneness, finds its roots in the writings of criminologists such as Marvin Wolfgang. The choice to use victim facilitation as opposed to \"victim proneness\" or some other term is that victim facilitation is not blaming the victim, but rather the interactions of the victim that make them vulnerable to a crime.\nThe theory of victim facilitation calls for study of the external elements that make a victim more accessible or vulnerable to an attack. In an article that summarizes the major movements in victimology internationally, Schneider expresses victim facilitation as a model that ultimately describes only the misinterpretation by the offender of victim behavior. It is based upon the theory of a symbolic interaction and does not alleviate the offender of their exclusive responsibility.\nIn Eric Hickey's \"Serial Murderers and their Victims,\" a major analysis of 329 serial killers in America is conducted. As part of Hickey's analysis, he categorized victims as high, low, or mixed regarding the victim's facilitation of the murder. Categorization was based upon lifestyle risk (example, amount of time spent interacting with strangers), type of employment, and their location at the time of the killing (example, bar, home or place of business). Hickey found that 13\u201315% of victims had high facilitation, 60\u201364% of victims had low facilitation and 23\u201325% of victims had a combination of high and low facilitation. Hickey also noted that among serial killer victims after 1975, one in five victims were at greater risk from hitchhiking, working as a prostitute, or involving themselves in situations in which they often came into contact with strangers.\nThere is importance in studying and understanding victim facilitation as well as continuing to research it as a sub-topic of victimization. For instance, a study of victim facilitation increases public awareness, leads to more research on victim-offender relationship, and advances theoretical etiologies of violent crime. One of the ultimate purposes of this type of knowledge is to inform the public and increase awareness so fewer people become victims. Another goal of studying victim facilitation, as stated by Maurice Godwin, is to aid in investigations. Godwin discusses the theory of victim social networks as a concept in which one looks at the areas of highest risk for victimization from a serial killer. This can be connected to victim facilitation because the victim social networks are the locations in which the victim is most vulnerable to the serial killer. Using this process, investigators can create a profile of places where the serial killer and victim both frequent.\nVictimization rate in United States.\nThe National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is a tool to measure the existence of actual, rather than reported, crimes\u2014the victimization rate. The National Crime Victimization Survey is the United States' \"primary source of information on crime victimization. Each year, data is obtained from a nationally representative sample of 77,200 households comprising nearly 134,000 persons on the frequency, characteristics and consequences of criminal victimization in the United States. This survey enables the (government) to estimate the likelihood of victimization for rape, sexual assault, robbery, assault, theft, household burglary, and motor vehicle theft for the population as a whole as well as for segments of the population such as women, the elderly, members of various racial groups, city dwellers, or other groups.\" According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), the NCVS reveals that, from 1994 to 2005, violent crime rates declined, reaching the lowest levels ever recorded. Property crimes continue to decline.\nSerial killings are waning in particular, and according to a 2020 \"ABA Journal\" report, it's in large part because \"people are less vulnerable than in the past.\" This in turn is due to several societal changes, according to experts and a news reports cited by the \"ABA Journal\": (1) \"People don't hitchhike anymore;\" (2) \"They have means of reaching out in an emergency situation using cellphones;\" (3) \"There are cameras everywhere;\u201d (4) \"parents today are less likely to allow [children] to leave home unsupervised;\" (5) \"interventions that help troubled children might reform potential killers\" (for example, social work, school nurses, and child psychology); (6) \"easy access to pornography is providing an outlet that satiates ... sexual impulses\"; and (7) \"would-be serial killers are turning instead to mass shootings.\" Other reports show some evidence that serial killings are (8) deterred generally by \"longer prison sentences\" and (9) deterred specifically by \"a reduction in parole.\"\nVictimization in Canada.\nIn Canada the Office of the Federal Ombudsman for Victims of Crime (OFOVC) is an independent resource for victims of crime. It was created in 2007 to ensure the federal government meets its responsibilities to victims of crime. The ombudsman provides information to victims about their rights under Canadian federal law, the services available to them, or to make a complaint about any federal agency or federal legislation dealing with victims of crime. The ombudsman also works to ensure that policy makers and other criminal justice personnel are aware of victims' needs and concerns and to identify important issues and trends that may negatively impact victims. Where appropriate, the Ombudsman may also make recommendations to the federal government.\nInternational Crime Victims Survey.\nMany countries have such victimization surveys. They give a much better account for the volume crimes but are less accurate for crimes that occur with a (relative) low frequency such as homicide, or victimless 'crimes' such as drug (ab)use. Attempts to use the data from these national surveys for international comparison have failed. Differences in definitions of crime and other methodological differences are too big for proper comparison.\nA dedicated survey for international comparison: A group of European criminologists started an international victimization study with the sole purpose to generate international comparative crime and victimization data. The project is now known as the International Crime Victims Survey (ICVS). After the first round in 1989, the surveys were repeated in 1992, 1996, and 2000 and 2004/2005.\nSociety as crime victim.\nOne train of thought supposes society itself is the victim of many crimes, especially such felonies as murder, homicide and manslaughter. Many lawyers, judges, and academics have espoused this sentiment.\nPenal couple.\nThe \"penal couple\" is defined as the relationship between perpetrator and victim of a crime. That is, both are involved in the event. A sociologist invented the term in 1963. The term is now accepted by many sociologists. The concept is, essentially, that \"when a crime takes place, it has two partners, one the offender and second the victim, who is providing opportunity to the criminal in committing the crime.\" The victim, in this view, is \"a participant in the penal couple and should bear some 'functional responsibility' for the crime.\" The very idea is rejected by some other victimologists as blaming the victim.\nRights of victims.\nIn 1985, the UN General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power. Also, the International Victimology Institute Tilburg (INTERVICT) and the World Society of Victimology developed a UN Convention for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power. The World Society of Victimology (WSV) is an international, non-governmental organization, holding special category consultive status with the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations as well as with the Council of Europe. Its international membership includes front-line victim service providers, academics and researchers in related social sciences, government representatives, lawyers, law enforcement, and other interested parties. The purpose of the WSV is to advance the research of victimology and practices on an international level; and to improve cooperation between global, national, and local organizations that serve victims. It's chairperson since 2024 is Gema Varona.\nUnder Indian law, there is a \"de minimis\" compensatory measure to victims of crimes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32574", "revid": "63286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32574", "title": "VESA Local Bus", "text": "Expansion bus for 486 PCs\nThe VESA Local Bus (usually abbreviated to VL-Bus or VLB) is a short-lived expansion bus introduced in 1992\u2014during the i486 generation of x86 IBM-compatible personal computers. Created by VESA (Video Electronics Standards Association), the VESA Local Bus worked alongside the then-dominant ISA bus to provide a standardized high-speed conduit intended primarily to accelerate video (graphics) operations. VLB provides a standardized fast path that add-in (video) card makers could tap for greatly accelerated 32-bit memory-mapped I/O and DMA, while still using the familiar ISA bus to handle basic device duties such as interrupts and port-mapped I/O. Some high-end 386DX motherboards also had a VL-Bus slot.\nHistorical overview.\nIn the early 1990s, the I/O bandwidth of the prevailing ISA bus, 8.33 MB/s for standard 16 bit 8.33\u00a0MHz slots, had become a critical bottleneck to PC video and graphics performance. The need for faster graphics was driven by increased adoption of graphical user interfaces in PC operating systems. While IBM did produce a viable successor to ISA with the Micro Channel Architecture offering a bandwidth of 66 MB/s, it failed in the market because hardware manufacturers did not want to pay steep licensing fees to use it. While an extension of the royalty-free ISA bus in the form of EISA open standard was developed to counter MCA, its bandwidth of 33.32 MB/s was unable to offer enough improvement over ISA to meet the significant increase in bandwidth desired for graphics. It would be superseded by Peripheral Component Interconnect (PCI), starting at speeds of 133 MB/s (32-bit at 33 MHz in the standard configuration)\nThus for a short time, a market opening occurred where video card manufacturers and motherboard chipset makers created their own proprietary implementations of local buses to provide graphics cards direct access to the processor and system memory. This avoided the limitations of the ISA bus while being less costly than a \"licensed IBM MCA machine\". At the time, the cost to migrate to an MCA architecture machine from an ISA machine was substantial. MCA machines generally did not offer ISA slots, thus a migration to MCA architecture meant that any prior investment in ISA cards was made unusable. Additionally, makers of MCA-compatible cards were subject to IBM's licensing fees, which combined with MCA's greater technical requirements and expense to implement. It did have the effect of making an MCA version of a peripheral card significantly more expensive than its ISA counterpart.\nSo while these ad-hoc manufacturer-specific solutions were effective, they were not standardized, and there were no provisions for providing interoperability. This drew the attention of the VESA consortium and resulted in a proposal for a voluntary and royalty-free local bus standard in 1992. An additional benefit from this standardization (beyond the primary goal of greater graphics card performance) was that other devices could also be designed to utilize the performance offered from VLB; notably, mass-storage controllers were offered for VLB, providing increased hard-disk performance. VLB bandwidth depended on the CPU's bus speed: It started at 100 MB/s for CPUs with a 25\u00a0MHz bus, increased to 133 MB/s at 33\u00a0MHz and 160 MB/s at 40\u00a0MHz, and reached 200 MB/s at 50\u00a0MHz.\nImplementation.\nA \"VLB slot\" itself is an \"additional\" edge connector placed in-line with the traditional ISA or EISA connector, with this extended portion often colored a distinctive brown. The result is a normal ISA or EISA slot being \"additionally\" capable of accepting VLB-compatible cards. Traditional ISA cards remain compatible, as they do not have pins past the normal ISA or EISA portion of the slot. The reverse was also true\u00a0\u2013 VLB cards are by necessity quite long in order to reach the VLB connector and were reminiscent of older full-length expansion cards from the earlier IBM XT era. The VLB portion of a slot looks similar to an IBM MCA slot, as indeed it is the same physical 116-pin connector used by MCA cards, rotated by 180 degrees. The IBM MCA standard had not been as popular as IBM expected, and there was an ample surplus of the connector, making it inexpensive and readily available.\nLimitations.\nThe VESA Local Bus was designed as a stopgap solution to the problem of the ISA bus's limited bandwidth. As such, one requirement for VLB to gain industry adoption was that it had to be a minimal burden for manufacturers to implement, in terms of board re-design and component costs; otherwise, manufacturers would not have been convinced to change from their own proprietary solutions. As VLB fundamentally ties a card directly to the 486 processor bus with minimal intermediary logic (reducing logic design and component costs), timing and arbitration duties were strongly dependent on the cards and CPU.\nThis simplicity of VLB created several factors that served to limit its useful life substantially:\n The VESA Local Bus relies heavily on the Intel 80486 CPU's memory bus design. When the Pentium processor arrived, there were major differences in its bus design, not easily adaptable to a VESA Local Bus implementation. Few Pentium motherboards with VLB slots were ever made and use VLB-to-PCI bridges such as the OPTi 82C822. This also meant that moving the bus to a computer with a non-x86 architecture was nearly impossible, within practical economic constraints.\n Most PCs that use VESA Local Bus have only one or two VLB-capable ISA slots out of the total five or six available; thus, four ISA slots generally are just that, ISA-only. This is a result of VESA Local Bus being a direct branch of the 80486 memory bus. The processor does not have sufficient electrical capacity to correctly drive (signal and power) more than two or three devices at a time directly from this bus.\n The strict electrical limitations on the bus also reduce any safety margin available, negatively influencing reliability. Glitches between cards are common, as the interaction between individual cards, combinations of cards, motherboard implementation, and even the processor itself are difficult to predict. This is especially prevalent on lower-end motherboards, as the addition of more VLB cards could overwhelm an already marginal implementation. Results can be rather spectacular when often important devices such as hard disk controllers are involved with a bus conflict with a memory-intensive device such as the ubiquitous video card.As VLB devices have direct high-speed access to system memory at the same level as the main processor, there is no way for the system to intervene if devices were mis-configured or became unstable. If two devices overwrite the same memory location in a conflict, and the hard-disk controller relies on this location (the HDD controller often \"being\" the second conflicting device), there is the all-too-common possibility of massive data corruption.\n As bus speeds of 486 systems increased, VLB stability became increasingly difficult to manage. The tightly coupled local bus design that gives VLB its speed became increasingly intolerant of timing variations, notably past 40\u00a0MHz. Intel's original 50\u00a0MHz 486 processor faced difficulty in the market, as many existing motherboards (even non-VLB designs) did not cope well with the increase in front-side bus speed to 50\u00a0MHz. If one could achieve reliable operation of VLB at 50\u00a0MHz, it was faster\u00a0\u2013 but again, this was notoriously difficult to achieve, and often it was discovered not to be possible with a given hardware configuration.The 486DX-50's successor, the 486DX2-66, circumvents this problem by using a slower but more compatible bus speed (33\u00a0MHz) and a multiplier (\u00d72) to derive the processor clock speed.\n The length of the slot and number of pins makes VLB cards notoriously difficult to install and remove. The sheer mechanical effort required is stressful to both the card and the motherboard, and breakages are not uncommon. This is compounded by the extended length of the card logic board; often there is not enough room in the PC case to angle the card into the slot, requiring it to be pushed with great force straight down into the slot. To avoid excessive flexing of the motherboard during this action, the chassis and motherboard had to be designed with good, relatively closely spaced supports for the motherboard, which is not always the case, and the person inserting the board had to distribute the downward force evenly across its top edge.Due to the length of a VLB slot and the difficult installation that results from its length, a slang alternative use of the acronym VLB is \"Very Long Bus\".\nLegacy.\nDespite these problems, the VESA Local Bus became very commonplace on later 486 motherboards, with a majority of later (post-1992) 486-based systems featuring a VESA Local Bus video card. VLB importantly offers a less costly high-speed interface for mainstream systems, as only by 1994 was PCI commonly available outside of the server market through the Pentium and Intel's chipsets. PCI finally displaced the VESA Local Bus (and also EISA) in the last years of the 486 market, with the last generation of 80486 motherboards featuring PCI slots instead of VLB-capable ISA slots. However, some manufacturers did develop and offer \"VIP\" (\"V\"LB/\"I\"SA/\"P\"CI) motherboards with all three slot types.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32575", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32575", "title": "Voice organ", "text": ""}
{"id": "32576", "revid": "34989777", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32576", "title": "Vulgate", "text": "Translation of the Bible by Jerome\nThe Vulgate () is a late-4th-century Latin translation of the Bible. It is largely the work of Saint Jerome who, in\u00a0382, had been commissioned by Pope Damasus I to revise the Gospels used by the Roman Church. Later, of his own initiative, Jerome extended this work of revision and translation to include most of the books of the Bible. \nThe Vulgate became progressively adopted as the Bible text within the Western Church. Over succeeding centuries, it eventually eclipsed the texts. By the 13th\u00a0century it had taken over from the former version the designation (the \"version commonly used\") or for short. The Vulgate also contains some \"Vetus Latina\" translations that Jerome did not work on.\nThe Catholic Church affirmed the Vulgate as its official Latin Bible at the Council of Trent (1545\u20131563), though there was no single authoritative edition of the book at that time in any language. The Vulgate did eventually receive an official edition to be promulgated among the Catholic Church as the Sixtine Vulgate (1590), then as the Clementine Vulgate (1592), and then as the \"Nova Vulgata\" (1979). The Vulgate is still currently used in the Latin Church. The Clementine edition of the Vulgate became the standard Bible text of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church, and remained so until 1979 when the \"Nova Vulgata\" was promulgated.\nTerminology.\nThe earliest known use of the term \"Vulgata\" to describe Jerome's \"new\" Latin translation was made by Roger Bacon in the 13th\u00a0century. \nThe term \"Vulgate\" was used in a 1538 edition Latin Bible by Robert Estienne which coupled the popular (i.e. the Vulgate) with the \"most improved\" (i.e., the recent new Latin translations of Pagninus, Beza and Baduell): \"Biblia utriusque testamenti juxta vulgatam translationem et eam, quam haberi potut, emendatissimam\".\nAuthorship.\nWhile the majority of the Vulgate's translation is traditionally attributed to Jerome, the Vulgate has a compound text that is not entirely Jerome's work. Jerome's translation of the four Gospels are revisions of \"Vetus Latina\" translations he did while having the Greek as reference.\nThe Latin translations of the rest of the New Testament are revisions to \"Vetus Latina\" texts, considered as being made by Pelagian circles or by Rufinus the Syrian, or by Rufinus of Aquileia. Several unrevised (deuterocanonical or non-canonical) books from \"Vetus Latina\" Old Testaments also commonly became included in the Vulgate. These are: 1 and 2\u00a0Maccabees, Wisdom, Sirach or Ecclesiasticus, Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah.\nHaving separately translated the book of Psalms from the Greek \"Hexapla Septuagint\", Jerome translated all of the books of the Jewish Bible\u2014the Hebrew book of Psalms included\u2014from Hebrew himself. He also translated the books of Tobit and Judith from Aramaic versions, the additions to the Book of Esther from the \"Common Septuagint\" and the additions to the Book of Daniel from the Greek of Theodotion.\nContent.\nThe Vulgate is \"a composite collection which cannot be identified with only Jerome's work,\" because the Vulgate contains \"Vetus Latina\" texts which are independent from Jerome's work.\nA famous historical edition of the Vulgate, the Alcuinian \"pandects\" from the end of the 700s, contains:\nJerome is connected to three different Latin versions of the Psalms, which were adopted in different Vulgate editions, regions or uses:\nJerome's work of translation.\nJerome did not embark on the work with the intention of creating a new version of the whole Bible, but the changing nature of his program can be tracked in his voluminous correspondence. \nHe had been commissioned by Damasus\u00a0I in 382 to revise the \"Vetus Latina\" text of the four Gospels from the best Greek texts. By the time of Damasus' death in\u00a0384, Jerome had completed this task, together with a more cursory revision from the Greek Common Septuagint of the \"Vetus Latina\" text of the Psalms in the Roman Psalter, a version which he later disowned and is now lost. How much of the rest of the New Testament he then revised is difficult to judge, but none of his work survived in the Vulgate text of these books. \nThe revised text of the New Testament outside the Gospels is deemed the work of other scholars. Rufinus of Aquileia has been suggested, as has Rufinus the Syrian (an associate of Pelagius) and Pelagius himself, though without specific evidence for any of them; Pelagian groups have also been suggested as the revisers. This unknown reviser worked more thoroughly than Jerome had done, consistently using older Greek manuscript sources of Alexandrian text-type. They had published a complete revised New Testament text by 410 at the latest, when Pelagius quoted from it in his commentary on the letters of Paul.\nIn Jerome's Vulgate, the Hebrew Book of Ezra\u2013Nehemiah is translated as the single book of \"Ezra\". Jerome defends this in his Prologue to Ezra, although he had noted formerly in his Prologue to the Book of Kings that some Greeks and Latins had proposed that this book should be split in two. Jerome argues that the two books of Ezra found in the Septuagint and \"Vetus Latina\", Esdras\u00a0A and Esdras\u00a0B, represented \"variant examples\" of a single Hebrew original. Hence, he does not translate Esdras\u00a0A separately even though up until then it had been universally found in Greek and Vetus Latina Old Testaments, preceding Esdras\u00a0B, the combined text of Ezra\u2013Nehemiah.\nThe Vulgate is usually credited as being the first translation of the Old Testament into Latin directly from the Hebrew Tanakh rather than from the Greek Septuagint. Jerome's extensive use of exegetical material written in Greek, as well as his use of the Aquiline and Theodotiontic columns of the Hexapla, along with the somewhat paraphrastic style in which he translated, makes it difficult to determine exactly how direct the conversion of Hebrew to Latin was. \nAugustine of Hippo, a contemporary of Jerome, states in Book\u00a0XVII ch.\u00a043 of his \"The City of God\" that \"in our own day the priest Jerome, a great scholar and master of all three tongues, has made a translation into Latin, not from Greek but directly from the original Hebrew.\" Nevertheless, Augustine still maintained that the Septuagint, alongside the Hebrew, witnessed the inspired text of Scripture. He reminded Jerome of the need for the Latin church to be in sync with the Greek church, and practical difficulty in finding any Hebrew-reading Christian scholar who could check Jerome's translation from the Hebrew. He consequently pressed Jerome for complete copies of his Hexaplar Latin translation of the Old Testament, a request that Jerome ducked with the excuses that scribes were in short supply and that the originals had been lost \"through someone's dishonesty\".\nHe used a novel layout technique \"per cola et commata\" which put each major clause on new line.\nPrologues.\nPrologues written by Jerome to some of his translations of parts of the Bible are to the Pentateuch, to Joshua, and to Kings (1\u20132 Kings and 1\u20132 Samuel) which is also called the \"Galeatum principium\". Following these are prologues to Chronicles, Ezra, Tobit, Judith, Esther, Job, the Gallican Psalms, Song of Songs, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, the minor prophets, the gospels. The final prologue is to the Pauline epistles and is better known as ; this prologue is considered not to have been written by Jerome. Related to these are Jerome's \"Notes on the Rest of Esther\" and his \"Prologue to the Hebrew Psalms\".\nA theme of the Old Testament prologues is Jerome's preference for the \"Hebraica veritas\" (i.e., Hebrew truth) over the Septuagint, a preference which he defended from his detractors. After Jerome had translated some parts of the Septuagint into Latin, he came to consider the text of the Septuagint as being faulty in itself, i.e. Jerome thought mistakes in the Septuagint text were not all mistakes made by copyists, but that some mistakes were part of the original text itself as it was produced by the Seventy translators. Jerome believed that the Hebrew text more clearly prefigured Christ than the Greek of the Septuagint, since he believed some quotes of the Old Testament in the New Testament were not present in the Septuagint, but existed in the Hebrew version; Jerome gave some of those quotes in his prologue to the Pentateuch. In the \"Galeatum principium\" (a.k.a. ), Jerome described an Old Testament canon of 22\u00a0books, which he found represented in the 22-letter Hebrew alphabet. Alternatively, he numbered the books as\u00a024, which he identifies with the 24\u00a0elders in the Book of Revelation casting their crowns before the Lamb. In the prologue to Ezra, he sets the \"twenty-four elders\" of the Hebrew Bible against the \"Seventy interpreters\" of the Septuagint.\nIn addition, many medieval Vulgate manuscripts included Jerome's epistle number\u00a053, to Paulinus bishop of Nola, as a general prologue to the whole Bible. Notably, this letter was printed at the head of the Gutenberg Bible. Jerome's letter promotes the study of each of the books of the Old and New Testaments listed by name (and excluding any mention of the deuterocanonical books); and its dissemination had the effect of propagating the belief that the whole Vulgate text was Jerome's work.\nThe prologue to the Pauline Epistles in the Vulgate defends the Pauline authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews, directly contrary to Jerome's own views\u2014a key argument in demonstrating that Jerome did not write it. The author of the is unknown, but it is first quoted by Pelagius in his commentary on the Pauline letters written before\u00a0410. As this work also quotes from the Vulgate revision of these letters, it has been proposed that Pelagius or one of his associates may have been responsible for the revision of the Vulgate New Testament outside the Gospels. At any rate, it is reasonable to identify the author of the preface with the unknown reviser of the New Testament outside the gospels.\nSome manuscripts of the Pauline epistles contain short Marcionite prologues to each of the epistles indicating where they were written, with notes about where the recipients dwelt. Adolf von Harnack, citing De Bruyne, argued that these notes were written by Marcion of Sinope or one of his followers. Many early Vulgate manuscripts contain a set of Priscillianist prologues to the gospels.\nRelation with the \"Vetus Latina\" Bible.\nThe Latin biblical texts in use before Jerome's Vulgate are usually referred to collectively as the \"Vetus Latina\", or \"Vetus Latina Bible\". \"Vetus Latina\" means that they are older than the Vulgate and written in Latin, not that they are written in Old Latin. Jerome, in his preface to the Vulgate gospels, commented that there were \"as many [translations] as there are manuscripts\"; subsequently noting the same in his preface to the Book of Joshua. \nThe translations in the \"Vetus Latina\" had accumulated piecemeal over a century or more. They were not translated by a single person or institution, nor uniformly edited. The individual books varied in quality of translation and style, and different manuscripts and quotations witness wide variations in readings. Some books appear to have been translated several times. \nThe Vulgate did not immediately supersede the \"Vetus Latina \" translations. Pandects from the Early Middle Ages sometimes had some books (e.g. deuterocanonicals, Acts, Revelation), or took phrases, or had glosses from the \"Vetus Latina\", but this declined through the High Middle Ages.\nNew Testament.\nJerome's work on the Gospels was a revision of the \"Vetus Latina\" versions, and not an entirely new translation. The base text for Jerome's revision of the gospels was a Vetus Latina text similar to the Codex Veronensis, with the text of the Gospel of John conforming more to that in the Codex Corbiensis. \nThe \"Vetus Latina\" gospels had been translated from Greek originals of the Western text-type. Comparison of Jerome's Gospel texts with those in Vetus Latina witnesses, suggests that his revision was concerned with substantially redacting their expanded \"Western\" phraseology in accordance with the Greek texts of better early Byzantine and Alexandrian witnesses. For the Gospels \"High priest\" is rendered in Vulgate Matthew; as in Vulgate Mark; and as in Vulgate John. \nIn places Jerome adopted readings that did not correspond to a straightforward rendering either of the Vetus Latina or the Greek text, so reflecting a particular doctrinal interpretation; as in his rewording \"panem nostrum\" \"supersubstantialem\" at .\nOne major change Jerome introduced was to re-order the Latin Gospels. Most Vetus Latina gospel books followed the \"Western\" order of Matthew, John, Luke, Mark; Jerome adopted the \"Greek\" order of Matthew, Mark, Luke, John. His revisions became progressively less frequent and less consistent in the gospels presumably done later. \nThe unknown reviser of the rest of the New Testament shows marked differences from Jerome, both in editorial practice and in their sources. Where Jerome sought to correct the Vetus Latina text with reference to the best recent Greek manuscripts, with a preference for those conforming to the Byzantine text-type, the Greek text underlying the revision of the rest of the New Testament demonstrates the Alexandrian text-type found in the great uncial codices of the mid-4th\u00a0century, most similar to the Codex Sinaiticus. The reviser's changes generally conform very closely to this Greek text, even in matters of word order\u2014to the extent that the resulting text may be only barely intelligible as Latin.\nOld Testament.\nJerome himself uses the term \"Latin Vulgate\" for the \"Vetus Latina\" text, so intending to denote this version as the common Latin rendering of the Greek Vulgate or Common Septuagint (which Jerome otherwise terms the \"Seventy interpreters\"). This remained the usual use of the term \"Latin Vulgate\" in the West for centuries. On occasion Jerome applies the term \"Septuagint\" (\"Septuaginta\") to refer to the Hexaplar Septuagint, where he wishes to distinguish this from the \"Vulgata\" or Common Septuagint.\nAccording to Old Testament scholar Amanda Benckhuysen: \"Jerome omits from the Vulgate the phrase \u201cwho was with her\u201d in Genesis 3:6, making Eve doubly culpable for the fall and responsible for Adam\u2019s sin. By implying Adam\u2019s absence during the serpent\u2019s conversation with Eve, the Vulgate portrays Eve as the seduced who becomes the seducer, beguiling a naive Adam to eat the forbidden fruit.\"\nPsalter.\nThe Book of Psalms, in particular, had circulated for over a century in an earlier Latin version (the Cyprianic Version), before it was superseded by the Vetus Latina version in the 4th\u00a0century. \nAfter the Gospels, the most widely used and copied part of the Christian Bible is the Book of Psalms. Consequently, Damasus also commissioned Jerome to revise the psalter in use in Rome, to agree better with the Greek of the Common Septuagint. Jerome said he had done this cursorily when in Rome, but he later disowned this version, maintaining that copyists had reintroduced erroneous readings. Until the 20th\u00a0century, it was commonly assumed that the surviving Roman Psalter represented Jerome's first attempted revision, but more recent scholarship\u2014following de Bruyne\u2014rejects this identification. The Roman Psalter is indeed one of at least five revised versions of the mid-4th\u00a0century Vetus Latina Psalter, but compared to the other four, the revisions in the Roman Psalter are in clumsy Latin, and fail to follow Jerome's known translational principles, especially in respect of correcting harmonised readings. Nevertheless, it is clear from Jerome's correspondence (especially in his defence of the Gallican Psalter in the long and detailed Epistle\u00a0106) that he was familiar with the Roman Psalter text, and consequently it is assumed that this revision represents the Roman text as Jerome had found it.\nDeuterocanonials.\nWisdom, Sirach or Ecclesiasticus, 1\u00a0and 2\u00a0Maccabees and Baruch (with the Letter of Jeremiah) are included in the Vulgate, and are purely \"Vetus Latina\" translations which Jerome did not touch.\nIn the 9th\u00a0century the \"Vetus Latina\" texts of Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah were introduced into the Vulgate in versions revised by Theodulf of Orleans and are found in a minority of early medieval Vulgate \"pandect\" bibles from that date onward. After 1300, when the booksellers of Paris began to produce commercial single volume Vulgate bibles in large numbers, these commonly included both Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah as the \"Book of Baruch\". Also beginning in the 9th\u00a0century, Vulgate manuscripts are found that split Jerome's combined translation from the Hebrew of Ezra and the Nehemiah into separate books called 1\u00a0Ezra and 2\u00a0Ezra. Bogaert argues that this practice arose from an intention to conform the Vulgate text to the authoritative canon lists of the 5th/6th\u00a0century, where 'two books of Ezra' were commonly cited. Subsequently, many late medieval Vulgate bible manuscripts introduced a Latin version, originating from before Jerome and distinct from that in the \"Vetus Latina\", of the Greek Esdras\u00a0A, now commonly termed 3\u00a0Ezra; and also a Latin version of an Ezra Apocalypse, commonly termed 4\u00a0Ezra.\nCouncil of Trent and position of the Catholic Church.\nIn the early 1500s numerous new Catholic and Protestant biblical translations or revisions in Latin appeared, and theological disputes had arisen over the canonical status of books which e.g. supported doctrines that Luther disagreed with. The Council of Trent (1545\u20131563) both finalized the biblical canon, and re-endorsed the Vulgate among Latin versions for public reading: it was to \"be held as authentic\". (In liturgical use, this was not the case: the Roman Missal uses Psalms and Pater Noster taken from the \"vetus latina\" Latin versions.) \nThe Council of Trent cited long usage in support of the Vulgate's magisterial authority:\nMoreover, this sacred and holy Synod,\u2014considering that no small utility may accrue to the Church of God, if it be made known which out of all the Latin editions, now in circulation, of the sacred books, is to be held as authentic,\u2014ordains and declares, that the said old and vulgate edition, which, by the lengthened usage of so many years, has been approved of in the Church, be, in public lectures, disputations, sermons and expositions, held as authentic; and that no one is to dare, or presume to reject it under any pretext whatever.The qualifier \"Latin editions, now in circulation\" and the use of \"authentic\" (not \"inerrant\") show the limits of this statement.\nWhen the council listed the books included in the canon, it qualified the books as being \"entire with all their parts, as they have been used to be read in the Catholic Church, and as they are contained in the Vetus Latina vulgate edition\". The fourth session of the Council specified 72\u00a0canonical books in the Bible: 45\u00a0in the Old Testament, 27\u00a0in the New Testament with Lamentations not being counted as separate from Jeremiah. On 2\u00a0June 1927, Pope Pius XI clarified this decree, allowing that the Comma Johanneum was open to dispute.\nLater, in the 20th\u00a0century, Pope Pius\u00a0XII declared the Vulgate as \"free from error whatsoever in matters of faith and morals\" in his encyclical \"Divino Afflante Spiritu\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hence this special authority or as they say, authenticity of the Vulgate was not affirmed by the Council particularly for critical reasons, but rather because of its legitimate use in the Churches throughout so many centuries; by which use indeed the same is shown, in the sense in which the Church has understood and understands it, to be free from any error whatsoever in matters of faith and morals; so that, as the Church herself testifies and affirms, it may be quoted safely and without fear of error in disputations, in lectures and in preaching [...]\"\u2014\u200a\nThe inerrancy is with respect to faith and morals, as it says in the above quote: \"free from any error whatsoever in matters of faith and morals\", and the inerrancy is not in a philological sense:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[...] and so its authenticity is not specified primarily as critical, but rather as juridical.\nThe Catholic Church has produced three official editions of the Vulgate: the Sixtine Vulgate, the Clementine Vulgate, and the \"Nova Vulgata\" (see below).\nVariants.\nAs with the \"vetus latina\" and the Greek text types, manuscript versions of the Vulgate texts exhibit a considerable number of minor variations by scribes. Regular attempts were made over the centuries to conserve Jerome's text or to purify the text of obvious errors or substitutions from \"vetus latina\" phrases: attempts such as by Cassiodorus in the 6th century, Alcuin in the 8th, Stephen Harding in the 12th, Erasmus in the 16th, to the modern Stuttgart Vulgate. \nScholars have identified families of variants, allowing tracing of influence or provenance of texts: for example, the Latin text of the Rushworth gospels belongs to the Insular or Irish family with characteristic inversions of word order.\"\"\nInfluence on Western Christianity.\nFor over a thousand years (c.\u00a0AD\u00a0400\u20131530), the Vulgate was the most commonly used edition of the most influential text in Western European society. Indeed, for most Western Christians, especially Catholics, it was the only version of the Bible as a publication ever encountered, only truly being eclipsed in the mid-20th century.\nIn about 1455, the first Vulgate published by the moveable type process was produced in Mainz by a partnership between Johannes Gutenberg and banker John Fust (or Faust). At the time, a manuscript of the Vulgate was selling for approximately 500\u00a0guilders. Gutenberg's works appear to have been a commercial failure, and Fust sued for recovery of his 2026\u00a0guilder investment and was awarded complete possession of the Gutenberg plant. Arguably, the Reformation could not have been possible without the diaspora of biblical knowledge that was permitted by the development of moveable type.\nAside from its use in prayer, liturgy, and private study, the Vulgate served as inspiration for ecclesiastical art and architecture, hymns, countless paintings, and popular mystery plays.\nReformation.\nThe fifth volume of Walton's London Polyglot of 1657 included several versions of the New Testament: in Greek, Latin (a Vulgate version and the version by Arius Montanus), Syriac, Ethiopic, and Arabic. It also included a version of the Gospels in Persian.\nThe Vulgate Latin is used regularly in Thomas Hobbes' \"Leviathan\" of 1651; in the \"Leviathan\" Hobbes \"has a worrying tendency to treat the Vulgate as if it were the original\".\nTranslations.\nBefore the publication of Pius\u00a0XII's \"Divino afflante Spiritu\", the Vulgate was the source text used for many translations of the Bible into vernacular languages. In English, the interlinear translation of the Lindisfarne Gospels as well as other Old English Bible translations, the translation of John Wycliffe, the Douay\u2013Rheims Bible, the Confraternity Bible, and Ronald Knox's translation were all made from the Vulgate.\nInfluence upon the English language.\nThe Vulgate had significant cultural influence on literature for centuries, and thus the development of the English language, especially in matters of religion. Many Latin words were taken from the Vulgate into English nearly unchanged in meaning or spelling: \"creatio\" (e.g. Genesis\u00a01:1, Heb\u00a09:11), \"salvatio\" (e.g. Is 37:32,\u00a0Eph 2:5), \"justificatio\" (e.g. Rom\u00a04:25, Heb\u00a09:1), \"testamentum\" (e.g. Mt\u00a026:28), \"sanctificatio\" (1\u00a0Ptr\u00a01:2, 1\u00a0Cor\u00a01:30), \"regeneratio\" (Mt\u00a019:28), and \"raptura\" (from a noun form of the verb \"rapere\" in 1\u00a0Thes\u00a04:17). The word \"publican\" comes from the Latin \"publicanus\" (e.g., Mt\u00a010:3), and the phrase \"far be it\" is a translation of the Latin expression \"absit.\" (e.g., Mt 16:22 in the King James Bible). Other examples include \"apostolus\", \"ecclesia\", \"evangelium\", \"Pascha\", and \"angelus\".\nCritical value.\nIn translating the 38\u00a0books of the Hebrew Bible (Ezra\u2013Nehemiah being counted as one book), Jerome was relatively free in rendering their text into Latin. Paleographer Frederic Kenyon notes that \"the translation is of unequal merit; some parts are free to the verge of paraphrase, others are so literal as to be unintelligible.\" \nJerome's translation has been regarded by scholars as very useful for reconstructing the state of the Hebrew text as it existed at his time, that being quite close to the Masoretic consonantal Hebrew text version compiled nearly 600\u00a0years after Jerome.\nManuscripts and editions.\nThe Vulgate exists in many forms. The \"Codex Amiatinus\" is the oldest surviving complete manuscript from the 8th\u00a0century. The Gutenberg Bible is a notable printed edition of the Vulgate by Johann Gutenberg in 1455. The Sixtine Vulgate (1590) is the first official Bible of the Catholic Church. The Clementine Vulgate (1592) is a standardized edition of the medieval Vulgate, and the second official Bible of the Catholic Church. The Stuttgart Vulgate is a 1969\u00a0critical edition of the Vulgate. The \"Nova Vulgata\" is the third and latest official Bible of the Catholic Church; it was published in 1979, and is a translation from modern critical editions of original language texts of the Bible.\nManuscripts and early editions.\nA number of manuscripts containing or reflecting the Vulgate survive today. Dating from the 8th\u00a0century, the Codex Amiatinus is the earliest surviving manuscript of the complete Vulgate Bible. The Codex Fuldensis, dating from around\u00a0545, contains most of the New Testament in the Vulgate version, but the four gospels are harmonised into a continuous narrative derived from the \"Diatessaron\".\nCarolingian period.\n\"The two best-known revisions of the Latin Scriptures in the early medieval period were made in the Carolingian period by Alcuin of York (c.\u2009730\u2013840) and Theodulf of Orleans (750/760\u2013821).\"\nAlcuin of York oversaw efforts to make a Latin Bible, an exemplar of which was presented to Charlemagne in\u00a0801. Alcuin's edition contained the Vulgate version. It appears Alcuin concentrated only on correcting errors of grammar, orthography and punctuation. \"Even though Alcuin's revision of the Latin Bible was neither the first nor the last of the Carolingian period, it managed to prevail over the other versions and to become the most influential edition for centuries to come.\" The success of this Bible has been attributed to the fact that this Bible may have been \"prescribed as the official version at the emperor's request.\" However, Bonifatius Fischer believes its success was rather due to the productivity of the scribes of Tours where Alcuin was abbot, at the monastery of Saint Martin; Fischer believes the emperor only favored the editorial work of Alcuin by encouraging work on the Bible in general.\n\"Although, in contrast to Alcuin, Theodulf [of Orleans] clearly developed an editorial programme, his work on the Bible was far less influential than that of hs slightly older contemporary. Nevertheless, several manuscripts containing his version have come down to us.\" Theodulf added to his edition of the Bible the Book of Baruch, which Alcuin's edition did not contain; it is this version of the Book of Baruch which later became part of the Vulgate. In his editorial activity, on at least one manuscript of the Theodulf Bible (S Paris, BNF lat. 9398), Theodulf marked variant readings along with their sources in the margin of the manuscripts. Those marginal notes of variant readings along with their sources \"seem to foreshadow the thirteenth-century \"correctoria\".\" In the 9th\u00a0century the \"Vetus Latina\" texts of Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah were introduced into the Vulgate in versions revised by Theodulf of Orleans and are found in a minority of early medieval Vulgate \"pandect\" bibles from that date onward.\nCassiodorus, Isidore of Sevilla, and Stephen Harding also worked on editions of the Latin Bible. Isidore's edition as well as the edition of Cassiodorus \"ha[ve] not come down to us.\"\nBy the 9th century, due to the success of Alcuin's edition, the Vulgate had replaced the \"Vetus Latina\" as the most available edition of the Latin Bible.\nLate Middle Ages.\nThe University of Paris, the Dominicans, and the Franciscans assembled lists of \"correctoria\"\u2014approved readings\u2014where variants had been noted.\nPrinted editions.\nRenaissance.\nThough the advent of printing greatly reduced the potential of human error and increased the consistency and uniformity of the text, the earliest editions of the Vulgate merely reproduced the manuscripts that were readily available to publishers. Of the hundreds of early editions, the most notable today is the Mazarin edition published by Johann Gutenberg and Johann Fust in 1455, famous for its beauty and antiquity. In 1504, the first Vulgate with variant readings was published in Paris. One of the texts of the Complutensian Polyglot was an edition of the Vulgate made from ancient manuscripts and corrected to agree with the Greek.\nErasmus published an edition corrected to agree better with the Greek and Hebrew in 1516. Other corrected editions were published by Xanthus Pagninus in 1518, Cardinal Cajetan, Augustinus Steuchius in 1529, Abbot Isidorus Clarius (Venice, 1542) and others. In 1528, Robertus Stephanus published the first of a series of critical editions, which formed the basis of the later Sistine and Clementine editions. John Henten's critical edition of the Bible followed in 1547.\nIn 1550, Stephanus fled to Geneva, where he issued his final critical edition of the Vulgate in 1555. This was the first complete Bible with full chapter and verse divisions and became the standard biblical reference text for late-16th\u00a0century Reformed theology.\nSixtine and Clementine Vulgates.\nAfter the Reformation, when the Catholic Church strove to counter Protestantism and refute its doctrines, the Vulgate was declared at the Council of Trent to \"be, in public lectures, disputations, sermons and expositions, held as authentic; and that no one is to dare, or presume to reject it under any pretext whatever.\" Furthermore, the council expressed the wish that the Vulgate be printed \"quam emendatissime\" (\"with fewest possible faults\").\nIn 1590, the Sixtine Vulgate was issued, under Sixtus V, as being the official Bible recommended by the Council of Trent. On 27 August 1590, Sixtus\u00a0V died. After his death, \"many claimed that the text of the Sixtine Vulgate was too error-ridden for general use.\" On 5\u00a0September of the same year, the College of Cardinals stopped all further sales of the Sixtine Vulgate and bought and destroyed as many copies as possible by burning them. The reason invoked for this action was printing inaccuracies in Sixtus\u00a0V's edition of the Vulgate. However, Bruce Metzger, an American biblical scholar, believes that the printing inaccuracies may have been a pretext and that the attack against this edition had been instigated by the Jesuits, \"whom Sixtus had offended by putting one of Bellarmine's books on the 'Index' \".\nIn the same year he became pope (1592), Clement\u00a0VIII recalled all copies of the Sixtine Vulgate. The reason invoked for recalling Sixtus\u00a0V's edition was printing errors, however the Sixtine Vulgate was mostly free of them.\nThe Sistine edition was replaced by Clement\u00a0VIII (1592\u20131605). This new edition was published in 1592 and is called today the Clementine Vulgate or Sixto-Clementine Vulgate. \"The misprints of this edition were partly eliminated in a second (1593) and a third (1598) edition.\"\nThe Clementine Vulgate is the edition most familiar to Catholics who have lived prior to the liturgical reforms following Vatican\u00a0II. Roger Gryson, in the preface to the 4th\u00a0edition of the Stuttgart Vulgate (1994), asserts that the Clementine edition \"frequently deviates from the manuscript tradition for literary or doctrinal reasons, and offers only a faint reflection of the original Vulgate, as read in the \"pandecta\" of the first millennium.\" However, historical scholar Cardinal Francis Aidan Gasquet, in the Catholic Encyclopedia, states that the Clementine Vulgate substantially represents the Vulgate which Jerome produced in the 4th century, although \"it stands in need of close examination and much correction to make it [completely] agree with the translation of St. Jerome\".\nModern critical editions.\nMost other later editions were limited to the New Testament and did not present a full critical apparatus, most notably Karl Lachmann's editions of 1842 and 1850 based primarily on the Codex Amiatinus and the Codex Fuldensis, Fleck's edition of 1840, and Constantin von Tischendorf's edition of 1864. In 1906 Eberhard Nestle published \"Novum Testamentum Latine\", which presented the Clementine Vulgate text with a critical apparatus comparing it to the editions of Sixtus\u00a0V (1590), Lachman (1842), Tischendorf (1854), and Wordsworth and White (1889), as well as the Codex Amiatinus and the Codex Fuldensis.\nTo make a text available representative of the earliest copies of the Vulgate and summarise the most common variants between the various manuscripts, Anglican scholars at the University of Oxford began to edit the New Testament in 1878 (completed in 1954), while the Benedictines of Rome began an edition of the Old Testament in 1907 (completed in\u00a01995). The Oxford Anglican scholars's findings were condensed into an edition of both the Old and New Testaments, first published at Stuttgart in 1969, created with the participation of members from both projects. These books are the standard editions of the Vulgate used by scholars.\nOxford New Testament.\nAs a result of the inaccuracy of existing editions of the Vulgate, in 1878, the delegates of the Oxford University Press accepted a proposal from classicist John Wordsworth to produce a critical edition of the New Testament. This was eventually published as \"Nouum Testamentum Domini nostri Iesu Christi Latine, secundum editionem sancti Hieronymi\" in three volumes between\u00a01889 and\u00a01954.\nThe edition, commonly known as the Oxford Vulgate, relies primarily on the texts of the Codex Amiatinus, Codex Fuldensis (Codex Harleianus in the Gospels), Codex Sangermanensis, Codex Mediolanensis (in the Gospels), and Codex Reginensis (in Paul). It also consistently cites readings in the so-called DELQR group of manuscripts, named after the \"sigla\" it uses for them: Book of Armagh\u00a0(D), Egerton Gospels\u00a0(E), Lichfield Gospels\u00a0(L), Book of Kells\u00a0(Q), and Rushworth Gospels\u00a0(R).\nBenedictine (Rome) Old Testament.\nIn 1907, Pope Pius\u00a0X commissioned the Benedictine monks to prepare a critical edition of Jerome's Vulgate, entitled \"Biblia Sacra iuxta latinam vulgatam versionem\". This text was originally planned as the basis for a revised complete official Bible for the Catholic Church to replace the Clementine edition. The first volume, the Pentateuch, was completed in\u00a01926. For the Pentateuch, the primary sources for the text are the Codex Amiatinus, the Codex Turonensis (the Ashburnham Pentateuch), and the Ottobonianus Octateuch. For the rest of the Old Testament (except the Book of Psalms) the primary sources for the text are the Codex Amiatinus and Codex Cavensis.\nFollowing the Codex Amiatinus and the Vulgate texts of Alcuin and Theodulf, the Benedictine Vulgate reunited the Book of Ezra and the Book of Nehemiah into a single book, reversing the decisions of the Sixto-Clementine Vulgate.\nIn 1933, Pope Pius\u00a0XI established the Pontifical Abbey of St Jerome-in-the-City to complete the work. By the 1970s, as a result of liturgical changes that had spurred the Vatican to produce a new translation of the Latin Bible, the \"Nova Vulgata\", the Benedictine edition was no longer required for official purposes, and the abbey was suppressed in 1984. Five monks were nonetheless allowed to complete the final two volumes of the Old Testament, which were published under the abbey's name in 1987 and 1995.\nStuttgart Vulgate.\nBased on the editions of Oxford and Rome, but with an independent examination of the manuscript evidence and extending their lists of primary witnesses for some books, the W\u00fcrttembergische Bibelanstalt, later the Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft (German Bible Society), based in Stuttgart, first published a critical edition of the complete Vulgate in 1969. The work has continued to be updated, with a fifth edition appearing in 2007. The project was originally directed by Robert Weber, OSB (a monk of the same Benedictine abbey responsible for the Benedictine edition), with collaborators Bonifatius Fischer, Jean Gribomont, Hedley Frederick Davis Sparks (also responsible for the completion of the Oxford edition), and Walter Thiele. Roger Gryson has been responsible for the most recent editions. It is thus marketed by its publisher as the \"Weber-Gryson\" edition, but is also frequently referred to as the Stuttgart edition.\nThe Weber-Gryson includes of Jerome's prologues and the Eusebian Canons.\nIt contains two Psalters, the \"Gallicanum\" and the \"juxta Hebraicum\", which are printed on facing pages to allow easy comparison and contrast between the two versions. It has an expanded Apocrypha, containing Psalm\u00a0151 and the Epistle to the Laodiceans in addition to\u00a03 and\u00a04\u00a0Ezra and the Prayer of Manasses. In addition, its modern prefaces in Latin, German, French, and English are a source of valuable information about the history of the Vulgate.\n\"Nova Vulgata\".\nThe \"Nova Vulgata\" (\"Nova Vulgata Bibliorum Sacrorum Editio\"), also called the Neo-Vulgate, is the official Latin edition of the Bible published by the Holy See for use in the contemporary Roman rite. It is not a critical edition of the historical Vulgate, but a revision of the text intended to accord with modern critical Hebrew and Greek texts and produce a style closer to Classical Latin.\nIn 1979, the \"Nova Vulgata\" was promulgated as \"typical\" (standard) by John Paul\u00a0II.\nOnline versions.\nThe title \"Vulgate\" is currently applied to three distinct online texts which can be found from various sources on the Internet. The text being used can be ascertained from the spelling of Eve's name in Genesis\u00a03:20:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nClementine Vulgate\nOxford Vulgate\nStuttgart Vulgate\nNova Vulgata\nMiscellaneous translations\nWorks about the Vulgate"}
{"id": "32578", "revid": "51059816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32578", "title": "Vermont", "text": "U.S. state\nVermont () is a landlocked state in the New England region of the Northeastern United States. It borders Massachusetts to the south, New Hampshire to the east, New York to the west, and the Canadian province of Quebec to the north. According to the most recent U.S. census estimates, the state has an estimated population of 648,493, making it the second-least populated of all U.S. states. It is the nation's sixth-smallest state by total area. The state's capital of Montpelier is the least populous U.S. state capital. No other U.S. state has a most populous city with fewer residents than Burlington.\nNative Americans have inhabited the area for about 12,000 years. The competitive tribes of the Algonquian-speaking Abenaki and Iroquoian-speaking Mohawk were active in the area at the time of European encounter. During the 17th century, French colonists claimed the territory as part of New France. Conflict arose when the Kingdom of Great Britain began to settle colonies to the south along the Atlantic coast; France was defeated in 1763 in the Seven Years' War, ceding its territory east of the Mississippi River to Britain. Thereafter, the nearby British Thirteen Colonies disputed the extent of the area called the New Hampshire Grants to the west of the Connecticut River, encompassing present-day Vermont. The provincial government of New York sold land grants to settlers in the region, which conflicted with earlier grants from the government of New Hampshire. The Green Mountain Boys militia protected the interests of the established New Hampshire land grant settlers. Ultimately, a group of settlers with New Hampshire land grant titles established the Vermont Republic in 1777 as an independent state during the American Revolutionary War. The Vermont Republic abolished slavery before any other U.S. state. It was admitted to the Union in 1791 as the 14th state.\nThe geography of the state is marked by the Green Mountains, which run north\u2013south up the middle of the state, separating Lake Champlain and other valley terrain on the west from the Connecticut River Valley that defines much of its eastern border. A majority of its terrain is forested with hardwoods and conifers. The state has warm, humid summers and cold, snowy winters.\nVermont's economic activity of $40.6 billion in 2022[ [update]] is ranked last on the list of U.S. states and territories by GDP, but 21st in GDP per capita. Known for its progressivism, the state was one of the first in the U.S. to recognize same-sex civil unions and marriage, has the highest proportion of renewable electricity generation at 99.9%, and is one of the least religious and least racially/ethnically diverse states. Dairy, forestry, maple syrup, and wine are important sectors in Vermont's agricultural economy. Vermont produces approximately 50% of the nation's maple syrup.\nToponymy.\nThe 17th-century French explorer Samuel de Champlain is sometimes credited with coining the name \"Vermont\", but it did not in fact appear until 1777, when, at the suggestion of Thomas Young, it was adopted as the name of the Vermont Republic (replacing \"New Connecticut\", the name the republic had borne for the first six months of its existence). It represents a French translation of \"Green Mountain(s)\", the name of the mountain range that bisects the state. The latter name first appeared in 1772 in the context of the Green Mountain Boys.\nHistory.\nPre-colonial.\nThe first humans to inhabit what is now Vermont arrived about 11,000 years ago, as the glaciers of the last ice age receded. Small groups of hunter-gatherers followed herds of caribou, elk, and mastodon through the grasslands of the Champlain Valley. At that time much of the region was mixed tundra. The oldest human artifacts are 11,000 year old projectile points found along the eastern shore of the saltwater Champlain Sea. This time is known as the Paleo-Indian period.\nBy about 8,000 years ago, the Champlain Sea had become the freshwater Lake Champlain and the climate was more temperate, bringing increased diversity of flora and fauna. This was the beginning of the Archaic period. By about 4,300 years ago, the forests were as they are today. Large mammals underwent extinction or migrated north, and the human population became reliant on smaller game and plants. People developed fishing equipment and stone cookware, and practiced woodworking and food storage. They had time for travel, leisure, and performed elaborate ceremonies. Most of the state's territory was occupied by the Abenaki, south-western parts were inhabited by the Mohicans and south-eastern borderlands by the Pocumtuc and the Pennacook.\nOver 3,000 years ago, the Woodland period began. Food was increasingly sourced from domesticated plants, including maize, beans, and squash. Agriculture meant a change from dispersed hunter-gatherering towards the establishment of larger settlements. Pottery was made from local clay, and tools were made from chert found along the Winooski River. Canoes were used for fishing and travel.\nThe arrival of European explorers in the 1600s marked the end of the Woodland period and the beginning of the Abenaki. At that time, there were about 10,000 Indigenous people in what is now Vermont, of whom an estimated 75\u201390% were killed by European diseases like smallpox. Survivors moved north to New France or assimilated with European settlers. Today, there are no Indian reservations in Vermont. In 2021[ [update]], 0.2% of live births in Vermont were to American Indian people.\nNearly all information about the Pre-Columbian era of Vermont is from found artifacts. About 750 prehistoric sites are known in Vermont, but few have been excavated by archaeologists, and those on private property benefit from no legal protection.\nAbout 20 native toponyms survive in the state, including Lake Bomoseen, Lake Memphremagog, Missisquoi River, Monadnock Mountain, and Winooski.\nColonial.\nIn 1609, Samuel de Champlain led the first European expedition to Lake Champlain. He named the lake after himself and made the first known map of the area. The land that is now Vermont remained part of New France until 1763.\nThe French had a military presence around Lake Champlain, since it was an important waterway, but they did very little colonization. In 1666, they built Fort Sainte Anne on Isle La Motte to defend Canada from the Iroquois. It was abandoned by 1670. A short-lived settlement existed at Pointe \u00e0 l'Algonquin, now Windmill Point, Alburgh. A village with a church, saw mill and fifty huts existed at the present site of Swanton. Much of the eastern shore of Lake Champlain was mapped out with seigniories, but settlers were unwilling to populate the area, possibly because of continual warfare and raiding there.\nThe English also made unsuccessful attempts to colonize the area in the 1600s. In 1724, they built Fort Dummer near what is now Brattleboro, but it remained a small and isolated outpost, often under attack by the Abenaki.\nWith the 1763 Treaty of Paris, France ceded its claims east of the Mississippi River to the Kingdom of Great Britain, making the area more attractive to settlement. At the same time, New England was overcrowded; new land was needed for settlement. The territory west of the Connecticut River was the last unsettled part of New England, and both the Province of New Hampshire and the Province of New York laid claim to it.\nIn 1749, New Hampshire governor Benning Wentworth began to auction land in an uncolonized area between Lake Champlain and the Connecticut River. This area became known as the New Hampshire Grants. This westward expansion was started to increase New Hampshire's tax base and claim the timber there, White Pine in particular.\nThere were eventually 135 New Hampshire Grants. The first of Benning Wentworth's grants included a town named after himself: Bennington. A typical town, it was , contained 48 lots, with land set aside for a school, a church, and a town center. Five hundred acres of the best land was kept by Wentworth for later resale.\nSettlers came from across New England, and were obliged to \"Plant and Cultivate Five Acres of Land\" within five years. Some settlers kept to the agreement and started farms. Others, like Ethan Allen, did not. They wanted to sell the land for profit. Those who purchased New Hampshire Grants ran into disagreements with New York, which began selling off the same land as land patents.\nIn 1764, King George III proclaimed the territory to be under the jurisdiction of New York, which meant that the New Hampshire Grant landowners did not have legal title. Meanwhile, New York continued selling large tracts of land, many of which overlapped with those already inhabited. The dispute led to Ethan Allen forming the Green Mountain Boys, an illicit militia that attacked New York settlers and speculators through arson and mob violence. They eventually repelled the New Yorkers, and went on, with Benedict Arnold, to fight in the American Revolutionary War, where they captured Fort Ticonderoga from the British.\nSovereignty.\nOn January 15, 1777, representatives of the New Hampshire Grants declared the independence of Vermont. For the first six months of its existence, it was called the Republic of New Connecticut.\nOn June 2, 1777, a second convention of 72 delegates met and adopted the name \"Vermont\". This was on the advice of Thomas Young, a mentor of Ethan Allen. He advised them on how to achieve admission into the newly independent United States of America as the 14th state. On July 4, they completed the drafting of the first Constitution of Vermont (in effect from 1777 to 1786) at the Windsor Tavern, and adopted it on July 8. This was the first written constitution in North America to ban adult slavery, stating that male slaves become free at the age of 21 and females at 18. It provided for universal adult male suffrage and established a public school system.\nRevolutionary War.\nThe Battle of Bennington was fought on August 16, 1777. A combined American force under General John Stark, attacked the Hessian column at Hoosick, New York, just across the border from Bennington. It killed or captured virtually the entire Hessian detachment. General John Burgoyne never recovered from this loss and eventually surrendered the remainder of the 6,000-man force at Saratoga, New York, on October 17 of that year.\nThe battles of Bennington and Saratoga together are recognized as the turning point in the Revolutionary War because they were the first major defeat of a British army. The anniversary of the battle is celebrated in Vermont as a legal holiday.\nThe Battle of Hubbardton (July 7, 1777) was the only Revolutionary battle within the present boundaries of Vermont. Although the Continental forces suffered defeat, the British forces were damaged to the point that they did not pursue the Americans (retreating from Fort Ticonderoga) any further.\nAdmission to the Union.\nVermont continued to govern itself as a sovereign entity based in the eastern town of Windsor for 14 years. The independent state of Vermont issued its own coinage from 1785 to 1788 and operated a national postal service. Thomas Chittenden was the Governor in 1778\u20131789 and in 1790\u20131791.\nBecause the state of New York continued to assert that Vermont was a part of New York, Vermont could not be admitted to the Union under Article IV, Section3 of the Constitution until the legislature of New York consented. On March 6, 1790, the legislature made its consent contingent upon a negotiated agreement on the precise boundary between the two states. When commissioners from New York and Vermont met to decide on the boundary, Vermont's negotiators insisted on also settling the property ownership disputes with New Yorkers, rather than leaving that decision to a federal court. The negotiations were successfully concluded in October 1790 with an agreement that Vermont would pay $30,000 to New York to be distributed among New Yorkers who claimed land in Vermont under New York land patents. In January 1791, a convention in Vermont voted 105\u20134 to petition Congress to become a state in the federal union. Congress acted on February 18, 1791, to admit Vermont to the Union as the 14th state as of March 4, 1791; two weeks earlier on February 4, 1791, Congress had decided to admit Kentucky as the 15th state as of June 1, 1792. Vermont became the first state to enter the Union after the original 13 states. The revised constitution of 1786, which established a greater separation of powers, continued in effect until 1793, two years after Vermont's admission to the Union.\nUnder the Act \"To Secure Freedom to All Persons Within This State,\" slavery was officially outlawed by state law on November 25, 1858, less than three years before the American Civil War. Vermonters provided refuge at several sites for escaped slaves fleeing to Canada, as part of the Underground Railroad.\nCivil War.\nFrom the mid-1850s on, some Vermonters became abolitionists, which they had previously worked to contain in the South. Abolitionist Thaddeus Stevens was born in Vermont and later represented a district in Pennsylvania in Congress. He developed as a national leader and later promoted Radical Republican goals after the American Civil War. As the Whig Party declined and the Republican Party grew, Vermont supported Republican candidates. In 1860, it voted for Abraham Lincoln, giving him the largest margin of victory of any state.\nDuring the American Civil War, Vermont sent 33,288 troops into United States service, of which 5,224 (more than 15 percent) died.\nThe northernmost land action of the war was the St. Albans Raid\u2014the robbery of three St. Albans banks, perpetrated in October 1864 by Confederate agents. A posse pursued the Confederate raiders into Canada and captured several, before having to turn them over to Canadian officials. Canada reimbursed the banks, released, and later re-arrested some of the perpetrators.\nPost\u2013Civil War to the present.\nDemographic changes.\nBeginning in the mid-19th century, Vermont industries attracted numerous Irish, Scottish, and Italian immigrants, adding to its residents of mostly English and some French Canadian ancestry. Many of the immigrants migrated to Barre, where many worked as stonecutters of granite, for which there was a national market. Vermont granite was used in major public buildings throughout the United States.\nIn this period, many Italian and Scottish women operated boarding houses to support their families. Such facilities helped absorb new residents and taught them the new culture; European immigrants peaked in number between 1890 and 1900. Typically immigrants boarded with people of their own language and ethnicity, but sometimes they boarded with others.\nGradually, the new immigrants assimilated into the state. Times of tension aroused divisions. In the early 20th century, some Vermonters were alarmed about the decline of rural areas; people left farming to move to cities and others seemed unable to fit within society. In addition, there was a wave of immigration by French Canadians, and Protestant Anglo-Americans feared being overtaken by the new immigrants, who added to the Catholic population of Irish and Italians. Based on the colonial past, some Yankee residents considered the French Canadians to have intermarried too frequently with Native Americans.\nIn 1970, the population of Vermont stood at 444,732. By 1980, it had increased by over 65,000 to 511,456. That change, an increase of 15 percent, was the largest increase in Vermont's population since the days of the Revolutionary War.\nIn 2002, the State of Vermont incorrectly reported that the Abenaki people had migrated north to Quebec by the end of the 17th century; however, in 2011, the State of Vermont designated the Elnu Abenaki Tribe and the Nulhegan Band of the Coosuk Abenaki Nation as state-recognized tribes; in 2012 it recognized the Abenaki Nation of Missisquoi and the Koasek Traditional Band of the Koos Abenaki Nation. In 2016, the state governor proclaimed Columbus Day as Indigenous Peoples Day. Vermont has no federally recognized tribes.\nPolitical changes.\nVermont approved women's suffrage decades before it became part of the national constitution. Women were first allowed to vote in the elections of December 18, 1880, when they were granted limited suffrage. They were first allowed to vote in town elections, and later in state legislative races.\nIn 1931, Vermont was the 29th state to pass a eugenics law. Vermont, like other states, sterilized some patients in institutions and persons it had identified through surveys as degenerate or unfit. It nominally had permission from the patients or their guardians, but abuses were documented. Two-thirds of the sterilizations were done on women, and poor, unwed mothers were targeted, among others. There is disagreement about how many sterilizations were performed; most were completed between 1931 and 1941, but such procedures were recorded as late as 1970.\nIn 1964, the U.S. Supreme Court decision in \"Reynolds v. Sims\" required \"one man, one vote\" redistricting in all states. It had found that many state legislatures had not redistricted and were dominated by rural interests, years after the development of densely populated and industrial urban areas. In addition, it found that many states had an upper house based on geographical jurisdictions, such as counties. This gave disproportionate power to rural and lightly populated counties. The court ruled there was no basis for such a structure. Major changes in political apportionment took place in Vermont and other affected states.\nIn the 21st century, Vermont increasingly became defined by its progressivism. It was the first state to introduce civil unions in 2000 and the first state to legalize same-sex marriage in 2009, unforced by court challenge or ruling. On January 22, 2018, Vermont became the first state to legalize cannabis for recreational use by legislative action, and the ninth state in the United States to legalize marijuana for medical purposes. This law was signed by Republican Governor Phil Scott.\nGeography.\nVermont is located in the New England region of the northeastern United States and comprises , making it the 45th-largest state. It is the only state that does not have any buildings taller than. Land comprises and water comprises , making it the 43rd-largest in land area and the 47th in water area. In total area, it is larger than El Salvador and smaller than Haiti. It is the only landlocked state in New England, and it is the easternmost and smallest in area of all US landlocked states.\nThe Green Mountains in Vermont form a north\u2013south spine running most of the length of the state, slightly west of its center. In the southwest portion of the state are located the Taconic Mountains. In the northwest, near Lake Champlain, is the fertile Champlain Valley. In the south of the valley is Lake Bomoseen.\nThe west bank of the Connecticut River marks the state's eastern border with New Hampshire, though much of the river flows within New Hampshire. 41% of Vermont's land area is part of the Connecticut River's watershed.\nLake Champlain, the sixth-largest body of fresh water in the United States, separates Vermont from New York in the northwest portion of the state.\nFrom north to south, Vermont is long. Its greatest width, from east to west, is at the Canada\u2013U.S. border; the narrowest width is near the Massachusetts border. The width averages . The state's geographic center is approximately east of Roxbury, in Washington County. There are fifteen U.S. federal border crossings between Vermont and Canada.\nSeveral mountains have timberlines with delicate year-round alpine ecosystems, including Mount Mansfield, the highest mountain in the state; Killington Peak, the second-highest; Camel's Hump, the state's third-highest; and Mount Abraham, the fifth-highest peak. Areas in Vermont administered by the National Park Service include the Marsh-Billings-Rockefeller National Historical Park (in Woodstock) and the Appalachian National Scenic Trail.\nThe topography and climate make sections of Vermont subject to large-scale flooding. Incidents include the Great Vermont Flood of 1927, which killed 84 and damaged much of the state's infrastructure, the flood of 1973, which covered many of the state's roads in the southeast, and Tropical Storm Irene in 2011, which caused substantial damage throughout the state. In response to the 1927 flood, the federal government funded construction of six flood control dams in the state, run by the Army Corps of Engineers. These extreme rain and flooding events are expected to intensify with climate change.\nCities.\nVermont has ten incorporated cities. The most populous city in Vermont is Burlington. Its metropolitan area is also the most populous in the state, with an estimate of 225,562 as of 2020.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLargest towns.\nAlthough these towns are large enough to be considered cities, they are not incorporated as such.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nThe annual mean temperature for the state is . Vermont has a humid continental climate, with muddy springs, in general a mild early summer, hot Augusts; it has colorful autumns: Vermont's hills reveal red, orange, and (on sugar maples) gold foliage as cold weather approaches. Winters are colder at higher elevations. It has a K\u00f6ppen climate classification of Dfb, a temperate continental climate.\nThe rural northeastern section known as the \"Northeast Kingdom\" often averages colder than the southern areas of the state during winter. The annual snowfall averages between depending on elevation. Vermont is the seventh coldest state in the country.\nThe highest recorded temperature was , at Vernon, on July 4, 1911. The lowest recorded temperature was , at Bloomfield, on December 30, 1933; this is the lowest temperature recorded in New England alongside Big Black River, which recorded a verified in 2009. The agricultural growing season ranges from 120 to 180 days. The United States Department of Agriculture plant hardiness zones for the state range between zone 3b, no colder than , in the Northeast Kingdom and northern part of the state and zone 5b, no colder than , in the southern part of the state. The state receives between 2,200 and 2,400 hours of sunshine annually. New England as a whole receives a range of less than 2,000 hours of sunshine in part of New Hampshire to as much as 2,600 hours of sunshine per year in Connecticut and Rhode Island.\nClimate change.\nClimate change in Vermont encompasses the effects of climate change, attributed to anthropogenic increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide.\nThe state is already seeing effects of climate change that affect its ecosystems, economy and public health. According to the state government, rainfall has significantly increased in the last 50 years, storms and flooding have increased, and winters have become warmer and shorter. These changes have affected the winter tourism industry, and caused a decline in critical agricultural and woodland industries like maple sugaring.\nThe state openly acknowledges and is developing programs that respond to global warming. Vermont was one of the first states in the United States to adopt greenhouse gas emissions goals, in 2006.\nGeology.\nThere are five distinct physiographic regions of Vermont. Categorized by geological and physical attributes, they are the Northeastern Highlands, the Green Mountains, the Taconic Mountains, the Champlain Lowlands, and the Vermont Piedmont.\nAbout 500 million years ago, Vermont was part of Laurentia and located in the tropics. The central and southern Green Mountain range include the oldest rocks in Vermont, formed about one billion years ago during the first mountain building period (or orogeny). Subsequently, about 400 million years ago, the second mountain building period created Green Mountain peaks that were tall, three to four times their current height and comparable to the Himalayas. The geological pressures that created those peaks remain evident as the Champlain Thrust, running north\u2013south to the west of the mountains (now the eastern shore of Lake Champlain). It is an example of geological fault thrusting where bedrock is pushed over the newer rock formation.\nAs a result of tectonic formation, Vermont east of the Green Mountains tends to be formed from rocks produced in the Silurian and Devonian periods, and western Vermont mainly from the older Pre-Cambrian and Cambrian material. Several large deposits within the state contain granite. The remains of the Chazy Formation can be observed in Isle La Motte which was one of the first tropical reefs. It is the site of the limestone Fisk Quarry, which contains a collection of ancient marine fossils, such as stromatoporoids, that date to 200 million years ago. At one point, Vermont is believed to have been connected to Africa (Pangaea); the fossils found and the rock formations found on the coasts in both Africa and America are evidence affirming the Pangaea theory.\nIn the past four centuries, Vermont has experienced a few earthquakes, rarely centered under the state. The highest ranked, in 1952, had a Richter magnitude scale 6.0 and was based in Canada.\nFauna.\nThe state contains 41 species of reptiles and amphibians (including the spring peeper), 89 species of fish, of which 12 are nonnative; 193 species of breeding birds, 58 species of mammals (including black bears, eastern chipmunks, coyotes, fishers, red and gray foxes, porcupines, and woodchucks), more than 15,000 insect species (including luna moths), and 2,000 higher plant species, plus fungi, algae, and 75 different types of natural communities. Vermont contains one species of venomous snake, the timber rattlesnake, which is confined to a few acres in western Rutland County.\nWildlife has suffered because of human development in the state. By the mid-19th century, wild turkeys were eradicated in the state through hunting and habitat destruction. Sixteen were reintroduced in 1969, and had grown to a flock estimated to number 45,000 in 2009. In 2013, hunters killed 6,968 of these. Since 1970, reduction of farmland has resulted in reduced environment for, and resulted in a decline in, numbers of various shrubland birds, including the American woodcock, brown thrasher, eastern towhee, willow flycatcher, golden-winged warbler, blue-winged warbler, field sparrow, and Baltimore oriole. Ospreys, whose eggs were previously damaged by DDT, began to reappear in 1998 and by 2010, were no longer endangered in the state.\nSeveral species have declined or disappeared from the state, including bats, many of which have been killed by white-nose syndrome, the New England cottontail, outcompeted by the eastern cottontail rabbit, and the yellow-banded bumblebee, gone as one of 19 species of bee in decline.\nInvasive species and organisms include the Asian spotted wing drosophila, a destroyer of crops, and eastern equine encephalitis virus whose antibodies were found in moose or deer in each of Vermont's counties.\nFlora.\nVermont is in the temperate broadleaf and mixed forests biome. Much of the state, in particular the Green Mountains, is covered by the conifers and northern hardwoods of the New England-Acadian forests. The western border with New York and the area around Lake Champlain lies within the Eastern Great Lakes lowland forests. The southwest corner of the state and parts of the Connecticut River are covered by northeastern coastal forests of mixed oak.\nInvasive wild honeysuckle has been deemed a threat to the state's forests, native species of plants, and wildlife. Many of Vermont's rivers, including the Winooski River, have been subjected to artificial barriers to prevent flooding.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate change appears to be affecting the maple sugar industry. Sugar maples have been subject to stress by acid rain, asian long-horned beetles, and pear thrips. In 2011, the deer herd had grown too large for the habitat, and many resorted to eating bark to survive the winter, destroying trees in the process. In addition, the sugar maples need a certain period of cold to produce sap for maple syrup. The time to tap these trees has shrunk to one week in recent years. The tree may be replaced by the more aggressive Norway maples, in effect forcing the sugar maples to \"migrate\" north to Canada.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the state of Vermont had a population of 643,085 in the 2020 U.S. census. Vermont was one of two states with fewer people than the District of Columbia; Wyoming was the other. The center of population of Vermont is located in Washington County, in the town of Warren.\nThe influx of domestic migrants in the 1960s to 1980s brought outlooks different than those of the native-born population. As one example, since 1988, Vermont has consistently voted for Democrats in national elections, despite having been the most Republican state in the nation for more than 100 years after the party's founding in the 1850s.\nInward migration to Vermont began to wane during the 2000s, and became emigration during the 2010s. This trend reversed in the 2020s, with about 4,500 new residents domestically migrating to the state between 2020 and 2021. Chittenden County has seen the most rapid population growth, experiencing a 7.5% increase between 2010 and 2020. In 2018, the top countries of origin for immigrants in Vermont were Canada, Nepal, Jamaica, the Philippines and Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nRace and ethnicity.\nAs of 2022, 94% of Vermont's residents identify as racially White, and 92.2% of all residents are White people without Hispanic origin, making it one of the least diverse states in the U.S., except for Maine. When including French Canadians, the French made up the largest ancestral and ethnic group, with 20% of Vermont's population identify as such, with Irish and English also making up large portions of the populace.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVital statistics.\nA total of 5,384 babies were born in 2021, a 4.89% increase from 2020. Of those births, 90.3% were non-Hispanic white. The fertility rate was 1.371, a slight increase from 2020.\nDialect.\nLinguists have identified speech patterns found among Vermonters as belonging to Western New England English, a dialect of New England English, which features full pronunciation of all \"r\" sounds, pronouncing \"horse\" and \"hoarse\" the same, and pronouncing vowels in \"father\" and \"bother\" the same, none of which are features traditionally shared in neighboring Eastern New England English. Some rural speakers realize the \"t\" as a glottal stop (\"mitten\" sounds like \"mi'in\" and \"Vermont\" like \"Vermon' \"). A dwindling segment of the Vermont population, generally both rural and male, pronounces certain vowels in a distinctive manner (e.g. \"cows\" with a raised vowel as and \"ride\" with a backed, somewhat rounded vowel as ).\nEastern New England English\u2014also found in New Hampshire, Maine and eastern Massachusetts\u2014was common in eastern Vermont in the mid-twentieth century and before, but has become rare. This accent drops the \"r\" sound in words ending in \"r\" (\"farmer\" sounds like \"farm-uh\") and adds an \"r\" sound to some words ending in a vowel (\"idea\" sounds like \"idee-er\") was common. Those characteristics in eastern Vermont appear to have been inherited from West Country and Scots-Irish ancestors.\nVermont is one of three states (along with Maine and New Hampshire) where French is the second-most spoken language at home, which is largely due to the state's proximity to the province of Quebec. New England French, a unique dialect spoken in many of Vermont's Francophone homes, is derived from Quebec French, in contrast to the Brayon French which predominates in the Francophone regions of northern Maine which were settled primarily by Acadians.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the Pew Research Center in 2014, 37% reported no religion, the highest rate of irreligion of all U.S. states. The Pew Research Center also determined the largest religion was Christianity; Catholics made up 22% of the population and Protestants were 30%. In contrast with Southern U.S. trends, the majority of Protestants are mainline Protestant, dominated by Methodism. The United Methodist Church was the largest mainline Protestant denomination in Vermont, followed by the American Baptist Churches USA and United Church of Christ. Evangelical Protestants were dominated by independent Baptist churches. Major non-Christian religions were Judaism, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, and other faiths. The largest non-Christian religious group outside of irreligion were Unitarians. An estimated 3.1% of the irreligious were atheist.\nWith the publication of a study by the Public Religion Research Institute in 2020, Christianity spread among Protestantism, Catholicism, and non-mainstream Christians including Mormonism and the Jehovah's Witnesses were approximately 64% of the adult population. The religiously unaffiliated were determined to be an estimated 30% of the total adult population according to the Public Religion Research Institute. As of 2022 per the Public Religion Research Institute, Vermont became plurality irreligious, and consistently ranks as one of the most secular states in the United States. The 2022 study estimated 48% of the population were religiously unaffiliated, while 45% were Christian altogether (Catholic, Protestant, Mormon, and Jehovah's Witness).\nThe Association of Religion Data Archives reported that in 2020, the religiously affiliated population were primarily Christian. The single largest Christian denominations were the following: the Catholic Church (124,208); United Church of Christ (11,882); and the United Methodist Church (9,652). Non-denominational Protestants numbered 29,830. Among the largest Christian denominations at this study, Catholics had an adherence rate of 208.70 per 1,000 people; the United Church of Christ 18.48 per 1,000 people; and United Methodists 15.01 per 1,000 people. ARDA's 2020 membership tabulations reflected the Pew Research Center's 2014 study where 21% of the population attended religious services weekly, 32% once or twice a month, and 47% seldom/never. In a 2018 research article by the National Christian Foundation, non-churchgoing Christians nationwide did not attend religious services often through practicing the faith in other ways, not finding a house of worship they liked, disliking sermons and feeling unwelcomed, and logistics.\nEconomy.\nIn 2024, Real GDP (inflation-adjusted, chained 2017 dollars) for Vermont was US$36 billion. GDP per capita (real, chained 2017 dollars) in 2024 was $55,577. Vermont's nominal GDP for 2024 was $45.7 billion, the lowest among all U.S. states.\nIn 2021[ [update]], Vermont had a total employment of 239,758, and the total employer establishments were 20,696. As of 2019[ [update]], Canada was Vermont's largest foreign trade partner, followed by Taiwan. Quebec received 75% of the state's exports to Canada. In 2022[ [update]], 7,457 new businesses were registered in Vermont. Retail sales reached $10.8 billion in 2017[ [update]], according to U.S. Census Bureau data.\nPersonal income.\nIn 2021[ [update]], the state had a median household income of $67,674, with approximately 10.3% of the population at or below the poverty line. The median wage in the state was $22.75 hourly or $47,320 annually in 2022[ [update]]. In 2007, about 80% of the 68,000 Vermonters who qualify for food stamps received them. 40% of seniors 75 years or older live on annual incomes of $21,660 or less. In 2011, 15.2% of Vermonters received food stamps. This compares to 14.8% nationally.\nIn 2011, 91,000 seniors received an annual average of $14,000 from Social Security. This was 59% of the average senior's income. This contributed $1.7 billion to the state's economy.\nAgriculture.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], agriculture, along with forestry and other animal industry, contributed 0.45% of the state's gross domestic product. As of May\u00a02022[ [update]], about 0.16% of the state's working population was engaged in agriculture jobs.\nDairy farming.\nDairy farming remains a primary source of agricultural income. In the second half of the 20th century, developers had plans to build condos and houses on what was relatively inexpensive, open land. Vermont's government responded with a series of laws controlling development to prevent the decline of Vermont's dairy industry. This proved ineffective, as the number of Vermont dairy farms has declined nearly 95% from the 11,206 dairy farms operating in 1947. As of December\u00a02021[ [update]], the state had 568 dairy farms, a decline from 658 in 2019, 1,138 in 2006, and fewer than 1,500 in 2003. The number of dairy farms has been diminishing by roughly 10% annually. Dairy farms control 80% of open land.\nIn 2021[ [update]], 28.5% (162) of the state's dairy farms were certified organic. The number of cattle in Vermont had declined by 40%; however, milk production has doubled in the same period due to tripling the production per cow. While milk production rose, Vermont's market share declined. Within a group of states supplying the Boston and New York City markets (called \"Federal order Class I\"), Vermont was third in market share, with 10.6%; New York has 44.9% and Pennsylvania has 32.9%. In 2007, dairy farmers received a record $23.60 for (11.63 gallons at $2.03/gallon) of milk. This dropped in 2008 to $17 ($1.46/gallon). The average dairy farm produced 1.3 million pounds of milk annually in 2008.\nThe dairy barn remains characteristic of Vermont, but the 95% decrease in dairy farms between 1947 and 2021 means that preservation of dairy barns has increasingly become a matter of preserving historic legacy rather than meeting a basic need of an agricultural economy. The Vermont Barn Census, organized in 2009 by educational and nonprofit state and local historic preservation programs, has worked to record the number, condition, and features of barns throughout Vermont.\nA significant amount of milk is shipped into the Boston market. Therefore, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts certifies that Vermont farms meet Massachusetts sanitary standards. Without this certification, a farmer may not sell milk for distribution into the bulk market. In 2019, two-thirds of all milk in New England was produced by Vermont dairies.\nForestry.\nForestry has always been a staple to the economy, comprising 1% of the total gross state output and 9% of total manufacturing as of 2013. In 2007, Windham County contained the largest concentration of kilns for drying lumber east of the Mississippi River. The decline of farms has resulted in a regrowth of Vermont's forests due to ecological succession. Today, most of Vermont's forests are secondary. The state and non-profit organizations are actively encouraging regrowth and careful forest management. Over 78% of the land area of the state is forested compared to only 37% in the 1880s, when sheep farming was at its peak and large amounts of acreage were cleared for grazing. Over 85% of that area is non-industrial, private forestland owned by individuals or families. In 2013, of wood was harvested in Vermont. A large amount of Vermont forest products are exports with being shipped overseas plus an additional to Canada. Most of it was processed within the state. In this century the manufacture of wood products has fallen by almost half. The annual net growth has been estimated at . The USDA estimates that remain in the state. Forest products also add to carbon sequestration since lumber and timber used in houses and furniture hold carbon for long periods of time while the trees that were removed are replaced overtime with new growing stock.\nIn 2017, the price of wood products had either plummeted or remained the same when compared to previous decades, which meant there was cause for concern with jobs in the industry. For example, in 1994, the price of a thousand board feet was $300, the same as it was in 2017. The price of wood chips has halved in the same time frame. In 1980, the price for a cord of wood was $50; in 2017, $25. For lack of demand, Vermont's forests are growing twice as fast as they are being cut.\nOther.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], Vermont was the leading producer of maple syrup in the United States at , representing 50.7% of the nation's total production. In 2021[ [update]], its production value totaled $56.0 million at $32.00/gallon. There were about 2,000 maple products producers in 2010. The wine industry in Vermont started in 1985. As of 2007, there were 14 wineries.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], apple growing is the third largest contributor to the state's agricultural economy, after dairy and maple syrup. Vermont orchards primarily grow McIntosh apples, and the industry has seen a steady decline as consumer preferences have shifted to newer apple varieties. The number of acres devoted to apple growing decreased from approximately 3,700 in 1997 to just 1,700 in 2017, and many of the orchards now focus on growing apples for cider production and providing Pick-Your-Own orchards to appeal to the state's agritourism market. In 1999, apples and apple pie were named the official state fruit and state pie, respectively. Around 23% of Vermont's vegetable farms are organic.\nManufacturing.\nAs of 2015, GlobalFoundries was the largest private employer in the state and provided jobs to 3,000 employees at its plant in the village of Essex Junction within Chittenden County.\nA growing part of Vermont's economy is the manufacture and sale of artisan foods, fancy foods, and novelty items trading in part upon the Vermont \"brand\", which the state manages and defends. Examples of these specialty exports include Ben and Jerry's Ice Cream, Burton Snowboards, Cabot Cheese, Fine Paints of Europe, King Arthur Flour, the Vermont Teddy Bear Company, Vermont Creamery, several microbreweries, and ginseng growers.\nIn 2010, a University of Connecticut study reported that Vermont, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire tied as the most costly states in the U.S. for manufacturers.\nEnergy.\nVermont has no fossil fuel reserves, however its forest products industry provides fuel for electricity generation and home heating. Electricity consumption per capita ranks it among the lowest 20% of states, and total electricity consumption was the lowest in the United States. Vermont consumed three times more electricity than it generated in-state in 2019, and imported its largest share of electricity from Canada. Vermont's 99.9% share of electricity generation from renewable sources was the highest among all 50 states.\nHealth.\nAn increasingly aging population is expected to increase demand for aging-related services and healthcare. The University of Vermont Medical Center, with more than 8,800 employees, is the largest employer in the state.\nIn 2010, all of Vermont's hospitals billed patients $3.76 billion, and collected $2 billion. 92,000 people are enrolled in Medicare. In 2011, Medicare spent $740\u00a0million on health care in the state.\nLabor.\nIn 2009, the state attained a high of 361,290 workers.\nAs of 2006, there were 305,000 workers in Vermont. Eleven percent of these are unionized. Out of a workforce of 299,200 workers, 52,000 were government jobs, federal, state, and local.\nA modern high unemployment rate of 9% was reached in June 1976. A modern low of 2.4% was measured in February 2000. As of October 2019, the unemployment rate was 2.2%.\nEmployment grew 7.5% from 2000 to 2006. From 1980 to 2000, employment grew by 3.4%; nationally it was up 4.6%. Real wages were $33,385 in 2006 constant dollars and remained there in 2010; the nation, $36,871.\nAs of 2014, the Pew Research Center estimated that farms in the state employed fewer than 5,000 illegal immigrants. In 2017, Vermont Governor Phil Scott announced that the state was \"exploring a legal challenge\" to the executive order signed by President Donald Trump for Vermont law enforcement authorities to cooperate with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement and \"perform the functions of immigration officers in relation to the investigation, apprehension, or detention of aliens\".\nInsurance.\nCaptive insurance plays an increasingly large role in Vermont's economy. With this form of alternative insurance, large corporations or industry associations form standalone insurance companies to insure their own risks, thereby substantially reducing their insurance premiums and gaining a significant measure of control over types of risks to be covered. There are also significant tax advantages to be gained from the formation and operation of captive insurance companies. According to the Insurance Information Institute, Vermont in 2009 was the world's third-largest domicile for captive insurance companies, following Bermuda and the Cayman Islands.\nIn 2009, there were 560 such companies.\nIn 2010, the state had 900 such companies.\nRecreation.\nSummer camps such as Camp Abnaki, Camp Billings, Camp Dudley, and Camp Hochelaga contribute to Vermont's tourist economy.\nIn 2005, visitors made an estimated 13.4 million trips to the state, spending $1.57 billion.\nIn 2012, fall accounted for $460\u00a0million of income, about one-quarter of all tourism.\nIn 2011, the state government earned $274\u00a0million in taxes and fees from tourism. 89% of the money came from out-of-state visitors. Tourism supported over 26,000 jobs, 7.2% of total employment.\nAccording to the 2000 census, almost 15% of all housing units in Vermont were vacant and classified \"for seasonal, recreational, or occasional use\". This was the second highest percentage nationwide, after Maine. In some Vermont cities, vacation homes owned by wealthy residents of New England and New York constitute the bulk of all housing stock. According to one estimate, as of 2009, 84% of all houses in Ludlow were owned by out-of-state residents. Other notable vacation-home resorts include Manchester and Stowe.\nHunting.\nHunting is controlled for black bear, wild turkeys, deer, and moose. There are 5,500 bears in the state. The goal is to keep the numbers between 4,500 and 6,000.\nIn 2010, there were about 141,000 deer in the state, which is in range of government goals. However, these are distributed unevenly and when in excess of , reduce timber growth.\nIn 2012, hunting of migratory birds was limited to October 13 to December 16. Waterfowl hunting is also controlled by federal law.\nSkiing and snowmobiling.\nSome of the largest ski areas in New England are located in Vermont. Skiers and snowboarders visit Burke Mountain Ski Area, Bolton Valley, Smugglers' Notch, Killington Ski Resort, Mad River Glen, Stowe Mountain Resort, Cochrans Ski Area, Sugarbush, Stratton, Jay Peak, Okemo, Saskadena Six, Mount Snow, Bromley, Brattleboro Ski Hill, and Magic Mountain Ski Area. Summer visitors tour resort towns like Stowe, Manchester, Quechee, Wilmington, Woodstock, Mount Snow, and. The effects of global warming have been predicted to shorten the length of the ski season across Vermont, which would continue the contraction and consolidation of the ski industry in Vermont and threaten individual ski businesses and communities that rely on ski tourism.\nIn winter, Nordic and backcountry skiers visit to travel the length of the state on the Catamount Trail. Several horse shows are annual events. Vermont's state parks, historic sites, museums, golf courses, and new boutique hotels with spas were designed to attract tourists.\nIn 2000\u20132001, there were 4,579,719 skier and snowboarder visits to the state. There were 4,125,082 visits in 2009\u20132010, a rise from recent years.\nIn 2008, there were 35,000 members of 138 snowmobiling clubs in Vermont. The combined association of clubs maintains of trail often over private lands. The industry is said to generate \"hundreds of millions of dollars worth of business.\"\nQuarrying.\nThe towns of Rutland and Barre are the traditional centers of marble and granite quarrying and carving in the U.S. For many years Vermont was also the headquarters of the smallest union in the U.S., the Journeymen Stonecutters' Association of North America, of about 500 members. The first marble quarry in America was on Mount Aeolus overlooking East Dorset. The granite industry attracted numerous skilled stonecutters in the late 19th century from Italy, Scotland, and Ireland. Barre is the location of the Rock of Ages quarry, the largest dimension stone granite quarry in the United States. Vermont is the largest producer of slate in the country. The highest quarrying revenues result from the production of dimension stone. The Rock of Ages quarry in Barre is one of the leading exporters of granite in the country. The work of the sculptors of this corporation can be seen down the road at the Hope Cemetery, where there are gravestones and mausoleums.\nNonprofits and volunteerism.\nThere were 2,682 nonprofit organizations in Vermont in 2008, with $2.8 billion in revenue. The state ranked ninth in the country for volunteerism for the period 2005\u201308. 35.6% of the population volunteered during this period. The national average was 26.4%.\nEducation.\nVermont was named the nation's smartest state in 2005 and 2006. In 2006, there was a gap between state testing standards and national, which is biased in favor of the state standards by 30%, on average. This puts Vermont 11th-best in the nation. Most states have a higher bias. However, when allowance for race is considered, a 2007 U.S. Government list of test scores shows Vermont white fourth graders performed 25th in the nation for reading (229) and 26th for math (247). White eighth graders scored 18th for math (292) and 12th for reading (273). The first three scores were not considered statistically different from average. White eighth graders scored significantly above average in reading. Statistics for black students were not reliable because of their small representation in the testing.\nIn 2017, spending $1.6 billion on education for 76,000 public school children, represented more than $21,000 per student.\n\"Education Week\" ranked the state second in high school graduation rates for 2007.\nIn 2011, 91% of the population had graduated from high school compared with 85% nationally. Almost 34% have at least an undergraduate degree compared with 28% nationally.\nIn 2013, the ratio of pupils to teachers was the lowest in the country.\nHigher education.\nVermont's largest university is The University of Vermont (UVM), a public land-grant research university and one of the original eight Public Ivies. In addition, Vermont State University and the Community College of Vermont reside within the Vermont State Colleges system. The state has several other private colleges, including Bennington College, Champlain College, Middlebury College, Norwich University, Saint Michael's College, and Vermont Law and Graduate School.\nResearch at the University of Vermont by George Perkins Marsh and the influence of Vermont-born philosopher and educator John Dewey brought about the concepts of electives and learning-by-doing.\nTransportation.\nThe Vermont Agency of Transportation (VTrans) is responsible for transportation infrastructure. The principal mode of travel in Vermont is via car, with 93.4% of Vermont households owning a car in 2021[ [update]]. Four car ferry routes operate across Lake Champlain. Passenger rail is provided by Amtrak's daily \"Vermonter\" and \"Ethan Allen Express\" trains. Intercity bus operators include Vermont Translines, Greyhound Lines, and Megabus. A number of public transit agencies operate bus service at the local, county, and regional levels. Patrick Leahy Burlington International Airport is the state's primary airport.\nRoad.\nIn 2012, there were 605,000 vehicles registered, nearly one for every person. This is similar to average car ownership nationwide. In 2012, about half of greenhouse gas emissions in the state were from vehicles.\nIn 2010, Vermont owned of highway. This was the third smallest quantity among the 50 states. 2.5% of the highways were listed as \"congested\", the fifth lowest in the country. The highway fatality rate was one per , tenth lowest in the nation. The highways cost to maintain, the 17th highest in the states. 34.4% of its 2,691 bridges were rated deficient or obsolete, the eighth worst in the nation. A 2005\u201306 study ranked Vermont 37th out of the states for \"cost-effective road maintenance\", a decline of thirteen places since 2004\u201305.\nIn 2007, Vermont was ranked the third safest state for highway fatalities. One third of these fatal crashes involved a drunken driver. On average, 20\u201325 people die each year from drunk driving incidents, and 70\u201380 people are in fatal car crashes in the state. Collisions with moose constitute a traffic threat, particularly in northern Vermont, and cause several deaths per year. In 2009, 93% of Vermont motorists were insured, tying with Pennsylvania for the highest percentage. In 2008, Vermont was the fifth best state for fewest uninsured motorists at 6%.\nTrucks weighing less than can use Vermont's interstate highways. The limit for state roads is . This means that vehicles too heavy for the interstates can legally use only secondary roads.\nIn 1968, Vermont outlawed the use of billboards for advertisement along its roads. It is one of only four states in the U.S. to have done this, along with Hawaii, Maine, and Alaska, and is a source of pride among Vermonters. The consensus from the state's Act 250 commission was that billboards obstruct and distract from scenic views of countryside, critical to Vermont's pastoral image.\nFerry.\nThere is a year-round ferry service to and from New York State across Lake Champlain from Charlotte to Essex and Grand Isle to Plattsburgh. Operated by the Lake Champlain Transportation Company (LCTC), the Grand Isle - Plattsburgh ferry operates 24 hours a day, while the Charlotte ferry serves a limited schedule.\nSeasonal service from Shoreham to Ticonderoga is provided by the Fort Ticonderoga Ferry.\nRail.\nPassenger service is provided by Amtrak's \"Vermonter\" and \"Ethan Allen Express,\" while freight service is provided by the New England Central Railroad, the Vermont Railway, and the Green Mountain Railroad.\nThe \"Ethan Allen Express\" serves Burlington Union Station, , , , and , while the \"Vermonter\" serves St. Albans, Essex Junction, Waterbury, Montpelier, Randolph, White River Junction, Windsor, Bellows Falls, and Brattleboro.\nIntercity bus.\nGreyhound Lines stops in Bennington, Bellows Falls, Brandon, Burlington, Colchester, Ferrisburgh, Manchester, Middlebury, Montpelier, Rutland, Wallingford, and White River Junction. Vermont Translines, an intercity bus company founded by Premier Coach in 2013 partnering with Greyhound and starting service on June 9, 2014, serves Milton, Colchester, Burlington, Middlebury, Brandon, Rutland, Wallingford, Manchester and Bennington. Additionally, Bennington hosts the weekday-operating Albany-Bennington Shuttle, an intercity bus operated by Yankee Trails World Travel.\nLocal bus.\nA patchwork of transit providers operate local bus service in every Vermont county, though route frequency and coverage are often limited outside major cities. Many operators also provide paratransit and regional express bus services. Green Mountain Transit is the largest operator in the state, with weekday ridership of as of the third quarter of 2025. Other major systems are Marble Valley Regional Transit District (The Bus), Southeast Vermont Transit (MOOver), Tri-Valley Transit, Rural Community Transportation, Advance Transit, and Green Mountain Community Network.\nAir.\nPatrick Leahy Burlington International Airport is the largest in the state, with regular flights to Atlanta, Charlotte, Chicago, Denver, Detroit, Washington Dulles, JFK, LaGuardia, Newark, Orlando, and Philadelphia. Airlines serving the airport include American, Breeze, Delta, Sun Country, and United. Beta Technologies operates an eVTOL manufacturing and testing facility at the airport. Additionally, the airport houses the 134th fighter squadron of the 158th fighter wing. Known as the \"Green Mountain Boys\", the squadron is armed with the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II and is tasked with protecting the Northeastern United States from the air.\nRutland-Southern Vermont Regional Airport has three daily flights to Boston via Cape Air.\nMedia.\nNewspapers of record.\nVermont statute requires the Vermont Secretary of State to designate newspapers that provide general coverage across the state as the \"Newspapers of Record\". As of 2019, these include:\nBroadcast and web media.\nVermont hosts 93 radio broadcast stations. The top categories are talk/information (11), country (9) and classic rock (9). The top owner of radio broadcast stations is Vermont Public Radio (11 broadcast frequencies and 13 low-power, local transmitters). Other companies had five or fewer stations. The state has 15 online radio stations.\nVermont hosts 10 high-power television broadcast stations, three of which are satellites of a primary station. Represented are the following networks and number of high-power transmitters, ABC (1), CBS (1), Fox (1), NBC (2), PBS (4), and RTV (1). In addition, it has 17 low-power television broadcast stations, which in several cases are satellites of the high-power stations.\nThe \"Rumble Strip\" podcast features conversations with everyday Vermonters and in 2021 won a Peabody award.\nElectrical utilities.\nVermont electric power needs are served by over twenty utilities. The largest is Green Mountain Power, a subsidiary of \u00c9nergir which also took over Central Vermont Public Service. Together this company represents 70% of the retail customers in Vermont. The state is a small electricity consumer compared with other states. Therefore, its electricity sector has the lowest carbon footprint in the country. As of 2010, the state had the lowest wholesale electricity costs in New England.\nPublic health.\nIn 2010, Vermont was the sixth highest ranked state for Well-Being in a study by Gallup and Healthways. In 2010, the state stood third in physical well-being of children.\nIn 2010, Vermont was ranked the highest in the country for health outcomes.\nIn 2000, the state implemented the Vermont Child Health Improvement Program to improve preventive services and management of chronic conditions. In 2011, the state ranked third in the nation in child health system performance. In 2011, the March of Dimes gave Vermont an \"A\", ranking it number one in the country on its Prematurity Report Card.\nThe state scored well in cessation of smoking, obesity, fewer occupational fatalities, prevalence of health insurance, and low infant mortality. A problem area was a high prevalence of binge drinking. While ranking sixth from best for adults in obesity in 2009, the state still had 22% obese with a rate of 27% for children 10\u201317. The ranking for children was ninth best in the nation.\nIn 1993, the obesity rate for adults was 12%. Vermonters spend $141 million annually in medical costs related to obesity. The combined figures for overweight and obese adults rose from 40.7% in 1990 to 58.4% in 2010. This is better than most other states.\nIn 2011, Vermont led the nation in the rate of young people who had consumed alcohol in the past month; one-third of people aged 11 through 20. One-fifth of that group had binged during that time. The state was second for the use of marijuana by young people; 30% of adults 18 to 25 in the past month.\nIn 2009, Vermont was ranked second in the nation for safety. Crime statistics on violence were used for the criteria.\nIn 2007, Vermont was ranked among the best five states in the country for preventing \"premature death\" in people under 75 years of age. The rate of survival was twice that of the five lowest performing states.\nParts of the state have been declared federal disaster areas on 28 occasions from 1963 to 2008.\nIn 2007, the Environmental Protection Agency cited Chittenden and Bennington as counties with 70 parts per billion of smog which is undesirable.\nIn 2008, about 100,000 Vermonters got their health care through the federal government, Medicare, Tri-Care, and the Veteran's Administration. An additional 10,000 Vermonters work for employers who provide insurance under federal law under ERISA. About 20% of Vermonters receive health care outside of Vermont; 20% of the care provided within the state is to non-Vermonters. In 2008, the state had an estimated 7.6% with no medical insurance, down from 9.8% in 2005. In 2008, the Vermont Health Access Program for low-income, uninsured adults cost from $7 to $49 per month. A \"Catamount Health\" premium assistance program was available for Vermonters who do not qualify for other programs. Total monthly premiums ranged from $60 to $393 for an individual. There was a $250 deductible. Insured paid $10 toward each generic prescription. 16.9% of residents 18 to 35 were uninsured, the highest group.\nHealth care spending increased from $2.3 billion in 2000 to $4.8 billion in 2009.\nIn 2009, adult day care services cost more in Vermont than any other state\u2014$150 daily.\nThe state started air drops of rabies bait for raccoons in 1997. Known rabies cases in raccoons peaked in 2007 at 165. The program is in cooperation with neighboring states and Canada.\nLaw and government.\nVermont is federally represented in the United States Congress by two senators and one representative.\nThe state is governed by a constitution which divides governmental duties into legislative, executive, and judicial branches: the Vermont General Assembly, the governor of Vermont and the Vermont Supreme Court. The governorship and the General Assembly serve two-year terms including the governor, 30 senators, and 150 representatives. There are no term limits for any office. The state capital is in Montpelier.\nThere are three types of incorporated municipalities in Vermont: towns, cities, and villages. Like most of New England, there is slight provision for autonomous county government. Counties and county seats are merely convenient repositories for various government services such as state courts, with several elected officers such as a state's attorney and sheriff. All county services are directly funded by the state of Vermont. The next effective governmental level below state government are municipalities. Most of these are towns.\nFinances and taxation.\nVermont is the only state in the union not to have a balanced-budget requirement, yet it has had a balanced budget every year since 1991.\nIn 2007, Moody's gave its top bond credit rating (Aaa) to the state.\nThe state uses enterprise funds for operations that are similar to private business enterprises. The Vermont Lottery Commission, the Liquor Control Fund, and the Unemployment Compensation Trust Fund, are the largest of the State's enterprise funds.\nAlso in 2007, Vermont was the 14th highest out of 50 states and the District of Columbia for state and local taxation, with a per capita load of $3,681. The national average was $3,447.\nVermont collects a state personal income tax in a progressive structure of five different income brackets, with marginal tax rates ranging from 3.6% to 9.5%. In 2008, the top 1% of Vermont residents provided 30% of the income tax revenue; around 2,000 people had sufficient income to be taxed at the highest marginal rate of 9.5%.\nVermont's general state sales tax rate is 6%, which is imposed on sales of tangible personal property, amusement charges, fabrication charges, some public utility charges and some service contracts. Some towns and cities impose an additional 1% Local Option Tax. There are 46 exemptions from the sales tax, including exemptions for food, medical items, manufacturing machinery, equipment and fuel, residential fuel and electricity, clothing, and shoes. A use tax is imposed on the buyer at the same rate as the sales tax. The buyer pays the use tax when the seller fails to collect the sales tax or the items are purchased from a source where no tax is collected. The use tax applies to items taxable under the sales tax.\nVermont does not collect inheritance taxes, but does impose a state estate tax; a Vermont estate tax return must be filed if the estate must file a federal estate tax return (the requirement for which depends on federal law). Vermont does not collect a gift tax.\nProperty taxes are levied by municipalities for the support of education and municipal services. Vermont does not assess tax on personal property. Property taxes are based on appraisal of the fair market value of real property. Rates vary from 0.97% on homesteaded property in Ferdinand, Essex County, to 2.72% on nonresidents' property in Barre City. Statewide, towns average 1.77% to 1.82% tax rate.\nIn 2007, Vermont counties were among the highest in the country for property taxes. Chittenden ($3,809 median), Windham ($3,412), Addison ($3,352), and Windsor ($3,327) ranked in the top 100, out of 1,817 counties in the nation with populations greater than 20,000. Twelve of the state's 14 counties stood in the top 20%. Median annual property taxes as a percentage of median homeowners income, 5.4%, was rated as the third highest in the nation in 2011.\nTo equitably support education, some towns are required by Act 60 to send some of their collected taxes to be redistributed to school districts lacking adequate support.\nPolitics.\nVermont is one of four states (Texas, California, and Hawaii) that previously claimed status as independent nations. Vermont is the only state to have voted for presidential candidate William Wirt from the Anti-Masonic Party, and Vermont was one of only two states to vote against Franklin D. Roosevelt in all four of his presidential campaigns (the other was Maine).\nVermont's history of independent political thought has led to movements for the establishment of the Second Vermont Republic and other plans advocating secession.\nVermont is the only state in the United States that requires voters to be sworn in, having established the voter's oath or affirmation in 1777. All white men were granted universal suffrage in 1777.\nState politics.\nRepublicans dominated local Vermont politics from the party's founding in 1854 until the mid-1970s, and at the presidential level until the 1990s. Before the 1960s, rural interests dominated the legislature. As a result, cities, particularly the older sections of Burlington and Winooski, were neglected and fell into decay, and people began to move out to newer suburbs.\nA series of one man, one vote decisions made by the United States Supreme Court in the 1960s required states to redraw their legislative districts to accurately reflect population. As a result, urban areas in Vermont gained political power.\nThe legislature was redistricted under one-person, one-vote in the 1960s. It passed the Land Use and Development Law (Act 250) in 1970, to discourage suburban sprawl and to limit major growth to already developed areas. The law, the first of its kind in the nation, created nine District Environmental Commissions appointed by the governor, who judged land development and subdivision plans that would affect the state's environment and many small communities significantly. As a result of Act 250, Vermont was the last state to get a Walmart (there are now six Walmarts in the state, as of November 2017, but only three \u2014 in Williston, St. Albans, and Derby \u2014 were newly built from the ground up). Because of the successful attempts to dilute what is perceived as the original intent of Act 250, and other development pressures, Vermont has been designated one of America's most \"endangered historic places\" by the National Trust for Historic Preservation.\nFrom 1856 (the first presidential election after the Republican Party's founding) to 1988, Vermont voted Republican in every presidential election except 1964, when Democrat Lyndon B. Johnson became the first of his party to carry the state amidst a national landslide. Since 1992, Vermont has voted Democratic in every presidential election, marking a massive shift in the state's politics.\nIn 1995, the state banned the spreading of manure from December 15 to April 1, to prevent run-off and protect the water. Therefore, farms must have environmentally approved facilities to store manure during this time frame.\nWhile the state voted largely Democratic, Republican governor Douglas won all counties but Windham in the 2006 election.\nA controversy dating from 1999 has been over the adoption of civil unions, an institution which grants same-sex couples nearly all the rights and privileges of marriage at the state, but not federal, level. In \"Baker v. Vermont\" (1999), the Vermont Supreme Court ruled that, under the Constitution of Vermont, the state must either allow same-sex marriage or provide a \"separate, but equal\" status for them. The state legislature chose the second option, by creating the institution of civil union; the bill was passed by the legislature and signed into law by Governor Howard Dean.\nIn April 2009, the state legislature overrode governor Jim Douglas's veto to allow same-sex marriage, becoming the first state in the nation to legalize same-sex marriage through legislation. In September 2009, Vermont became the fourth state in which same-sex couples could marry. The previous three were Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Iowa.\nIn 2007, the state's House of Representatives rejected a measure which would have legalized assisted suicide for the terminally ill, by a vote of (82\u201363). With the governor's signature on May 20, 2013, Vermont became the fourth state to pass a \"death with dignity\" law \u2014 the first to be passed through legislation, rather than by ballot initiative.\nMinor parties and independents flourish. Rules which eliminate smaller parties from the ballot in most states do not exist in Vermont. As a result, voters often have extensive choices for general elections. Among others, this more open policy enabled independents like Bernie Sanders to win election as mayor of Burlington, as a U.S. congressman, and as a U.S. senator.\nA political issue has been Act 60, which balances taxation for education funding. This has resulted in the town of Killington trying to secede from Vermont and join New Hampshire, due to what the locals say is an unfair tax burden.\nThe Vermont constitution and the courts supports the right of a person to walk (fish and hunt) on any unposted, unfenced land. That is, trespass must be proven by the owner; it is not automatically assumed.\nVermont has some of the least restrictive gun control laws in the country. A permit or license is not required for purchasing or carrying firearms. Concealed carry and open carry of a firearm is legal over the age of 16, with those below 16 requiring parental permission.\nVermont has a pro-sanctuary city law.\nThe state is an alcoholic beverage control state. In 2007, through the Vermont Department of Liquor Control, it took in over $14\u00a0million from the sale and distribution of liquor.\nIn 2013, Vermont became the 17th state to decriminalize marijuana. The statute makes possession of less than an ounce of the drug punishable by a small fine, rather than arrest and possible jail time.\nIn 2014, Vermont became the first state to call for a constitutional convention to overturn the Supreme Court's decision in \"Citizens United v. FEC\".\nIn 2014, Vermont became the first state to mandate labeling of genetically modified organisms in the retail food supply.\nA distinctive law of Vermont is public nudity. The state's legislation calls for nudity in public to be a constitutional right of Vermonters, so long as \"lewd and lascivious\" acts are not performed in public view, and that the nudist does not undress in the presence of others. One reason this law was implemented is to protect skinny-dippers who frequent swimming holes, a long-time tradition in the state. There are other restrictions and bylaws on the municipal level concerning problematic nudity, but walking in the nude is legally protected in all 251 towns and cities in Vermont.\nIn January 2018, Governor Phil Scott opted to sign H.511, the Vermont marijuana legalization bill, which allows adults 21 and older to possess up to one ounce of marijuana and grow up to two mature plants starting July 1, 2018.\nFederal politics.\nHistorically, Vermont was considered one of the most reliably Republican states in the country in terms of national elections. From 1856 to 1988, Vermont voted Democratic only once, in Lyndon B. Johnson's landslide victory of 1964 against Barry M. Goldwater. It was also one of only two states\u2014Maine is the other\u2014where Franklin D. Roosevelt was completely shut out in all four of his presidential bids. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Republican presidential candidates frequently won the state with over 70% of the vote.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, many people moved in from out of state. Much of this immigration included the arrival of more liberal political influences of the urban areas of New York and the rest of New England in Vermont. The brand of Republicanism in Vermont has historically been a moderate one, and combined with the newcomers from out of state, this made Vermont friendlier to Democrats as the national GOP moved to the right. As evidence of this, in 1990 Bernie Sanders, a self-described democratic socialist, was elected to Vermont's lone seat in the House as an independent. Sanders became the state's junior Senator in 2007. However, for his entire career in the House and Senate, Sanders has caucused with the Democrats and is counted as a Democrat for the purposes of committee assignments and voting for party leadership.\nAfter narrowly supporting George H. W. Bush in 1988, it gave Democrat Bill Clinton a 16-point margin in 1992\u2014the first time the state had gone Democratic since 1964. Vermont has voted Democratic in every presidential election since.\nSince 2004, Vermont has been one of the Democrats' most loyal states. It gave John Kerry his fourth-largest margin of victory in the presidential campaign against George W. Bush; he won the state's popular vote by 20 percentage points, taking almost 59% of the vote. (Kerry, from neighboring Massachusetts, also became the first Northern Democrat ever to carry Vermont; Johnson was from Texas, Clinton from Arkansas and Al Gore, triumphant in Vermont in 2000, from Tennessee.) Essex County in the state's northeastern section was the only county to vote for Bush. Vermont is the only state that did not receive a visit from George W. Bush during his tenure as President of the United States. Indeed, George W. Bush and Donald Trump are the only Republicans to win the White House without carrying Vermont.\nIn 2008, Vermont gave Barack Obama his third-largest margin of victory (37 percentage points) and third-largest vote share in the nation by his winning the state 68% to 31%. Only Obama's birth state of Hawaii and Washington, D.C. were stronger Democratic victories. The same held true in 2012, when Obama carried Vermont 67% of the vote to 31% for Mitt Romney, and in 2016, when Hillary Clinton won with 57% of the vote to 30% for Donald Trump.\nVermont's two senators are independent Bernie Sanders and Democrat Peter Welch. The state is represented by an at-large member of the House, Democrat Becca Balint, who succeeded Welch in 2023.\nCulture.\nVermont festivals include the Vermont Maple Festival, Festival on the Green, The Vermont Dairy Festival in Enosburg Falls, the Apple Festival (held each Columbus Day Weekend), the Marlboro Music Festival, the Guilford Country fair and the Vermont Brewers Festival. The Vermont Symphony Orchestra is supported by the state and performs throughout the area.\nSince 1973 the Sage City Symphony, formed by composer Louis Calabro, has performed in the Bennington area. In 1988, a number of Vermont-based composers including Gwyneth Walker formed the Vermont Composers Consortium, which was recognized by the governor proclaiming 2011 as \"The Year of the Composer\".\nBurlington, Vermont's largest city, hosts the annual Vermont International Film Festival, which presents ten days in October of independent films. The Brattleboro-based Vermont Theatre Company presents an annual summer Shakespeare festival. Brattleboro also hosts the summertime Strolling of the Heifers parade which celebrates Vermont's dairy culture. The annual Green Mountain Film Festival is held in Montpelier.\nIn the Northeast Kingdom, the Bread and Puppet Theatre holds weekly shows in Glover in a natural outdoor amphitheater.\nOne of Vermont's best known musical acts is the rock band Phish, whose members met while attending school in Vermont and spent much of their early years playing at venues across the state.\nThe Vermont-based House of LeMay performs several shows a year, hosts the annual \"Winter is a Drag Ball\", and performs for fundraisers.\nExamples of folk art found in Vermont include the Vermontasaurus in Post Mills, a community in Thetford.\nThe rate of volunteerism in Vermont was eighth in the nation with 37% in 2007. The state stood first in New England. In 2011, Vermont residents were ranked as the healthiest in the country.\nSports.\nWinter sports.\nWinter sports are popular in New England, and Vermont's winter sports attractions are a big part of Vermont tourism. Some well known attractions include Burke Mountain ski area, Jay Peak Resort, Killington Ski Resort, Stowe Mountain Resort, the Quechee Club Ski Area, and Smugglers' Notch Resort.\nVermont natives in the snowboarding profession include Kevin Pearce, Ross Powers, Hannah Teter, and Kelly Clark. Others learned snowboarding in the state, such as Louie Vito and Ellery Hollingsworth.\nVermont Olympic gold medalists include Barbara Cochran,\nHannah Kearney,\nKelly Clark,\nRoss Powers,\nand Hannah Teter.\nBaseball.\nThe largest professional franchise is the Vermont Lake Monsters of the Futures Collegiate Baseball League, based in Burlington. They were named the Vermont Expos before 2006. Up until the 2011 season, they were the affiliate of the Washington Nationals (formerly the Montreal Expos). Up until 2020, they played in the New York-Penn League of Single-A and were the Single-A affiliate of the Oakland Athletics\nBasketball.\nCurrently the highest-ranked teams in basketball representing Vermont are the NCAA's Vermont Catamounts\u2014male and female.\nThe Vermont Frost Heaves, the 2007 and 2008 American Basketball Association national champions, were a franchise of the Premier Basketball League, and were based in Barre and Burlington from the fall of 2006 through the winter of 2011.\nFootball.\nThe Vermont Bucks, an indoor football team, were based in Burlington and began play in 2017 as the founding team in the Can-Am Indoor Football League. For 2018, the Bucks joined the American Arena League, but folded prior to playing in the new league. The University of Vermont abolished its intercollegiate football team, the Vermont Catamounts, in 1974.\nHockey.\nVermont is home to the University of Vermont Men's and Women's hockey teams. Vermont's only professional hockey team was the Vermont Wild who played in the Federal Hockey League during the 2011\u201312 season, but the team folded before the season ended.\nSoccer.\nThe Vermont Voltage were a USL Premier Development League soccer club that played in St. Albans.\nVermont Green FC are a USL League 2 club that will play at University of Vermont's Virtue Field in Burlington.\nIn 2024, the University of Vermont Catamounts men's soccer team won the NCAA Division I National Championship, becoming the first UVM team sport to win a national championship as well as the first America East Conference team to win a national championship. They defeated Marshall 2\u20131 in overtime, finishing a Cinderella run in the tournament.\nAnnually since 2002, high school statewide all stars compete against New Hampshire in ten sports during \"Twin State\" playoffs.\nMotorsport.\nVermont also has a few auto racing venues. The most popular of them is Thunder Road International Speedbowl in Barre, Vermont. It is well known for its tight racing and has become well known in short track stock car racing. Other racing circuits include the USC sanctioned Bear Ridge Speedway, and the NASCAR sanctioned Devil's Bowl Speedway. Some NASCAR Cup drivers have come to Vermont circuits to compete against local weekly drivers such as Tony Stewart, Clint Bowyer, Kyle Busch, Kenny Wallace, Ken Schrader, and Christopher Bell. Kevin Lepage from Shelburne, Vermont is one of a few professional drivers from Vermont. Racing series in Vermont include NASCAR Whelen All-American Series, American Canadian Tour, and Vermont's own Tiger Sportsman Series.\nOther.\nRugby Union is represented at the collegiate level and adult club level with 5 men's sides and 1 women's side. All compete in the NERFU conference and some have won national championships.\nResidents.\nThe following were either born in Vermont or resided there for a substantial period during their lives and whose names are widely known.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32579", "revid": "8855946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32579", "title": "Venice, Los Angeles", "text": "Neighborhood in Los Angeles, California, US\nVenice is a neighborhood of the City of Los Angeles within the Westside region of Los Angeles County, California, United States.\nVenice was founded by Abbot Kinney in 1905 as a seaside resort town. It was an independent city until 1926, when it was annexed by the city of Los Angeles. Venice is known for its canals, a beach, and Ocean Front Walk, a pedestrian promenade that features performers, fortune-tellers, and vendors.\nHistory.\n19th century.\nIn 1839, a region called La Ballona that included the southern parts of Venice, was granted by the Mexican government to Ygnacio and Augustin Machado and Felipe and Tomas Talamantes, giving them title to Rancho La Ballona. Later this became part of Port Ballona.\nFounding.\nVenice, originally called \"Venice of America\", was founded by wealthy developer Abbot Kinney in 1905 as a beach resort town, west of Los Angeles. He and his partner, Francis Ryan, had bought of ocean-front property south of Santa Monica in 1891. They built a resort town on the north end of the property, called Ocean Park, which was soon annexed to Santa Monica. After Ryan died, Kinney and his new partners continued building south of Navy Street. After the partnership dissolved in 1904, Kinney, who had won the marshy land on the south end of the property in a coin flip with his former partners, began to build a seaside resort like the namesake Italian city.\nWhen Venice of America opened on July 4, 1905, Kinney had dug several miles of canals to drain the marshes for his residential area, built a pier with an auditorium, ship restaurant, and dance hall, constructed a hot salt-water plunge, and built a block-long arcaded business street with Venetian architecture. Kinney hired artist Felix Peano to design the columns of the buildings.22 Included in the capitals are several faces, modeled after Kinney and a woman named Nettie Bouck.\nTourists, mostly arriving on the \"Red Cars\" of the Pacific Electric Railway from Los Angeles and Santa Monica, then rode the Venice Miniature Railway and gondolas to tour the town. The biggest attraction was Venice's gently sloping beach. Cottages and housekeeping tents were available for rent.\nThe population (3,119 residents in 1910) soon exceeded 10,000; the town drew 50,000 to 150,000 tourists on weekends.\nAmusement pier.\n For the amusement of the public, Kinney hired aviators to do aerial stunts over the beach. One of them, a movie aviator and Venice airport owner B. H. DeLay implemented the first lighted airport in the United States on DeLay Field (previously known as Ince Field). After a marine rescue attempt was thwarted, he organized the first aerial police force in the nation. DeLay performed many of the world's first aerial stunts for motion pictures in Venice.\nAttractions on the Kinney Pier became more amusement-oriented by 1910, when a Venice Miniature Railway, Aquarium, Virginia Reel, Whip, Racing Derby, and other rides and game booths were added. Since the business district was allotted only three one-block-long streets, and the City Hall was more than a mile away, other competing business districts developed. Unfortunately, this created a fractious political climate. Kinney, however, governed with an iron hand and kept things in check. When he died in November 1920, Venice became harder to govern. With the amusement pier burning six weeks later in December 1920, and Prohibition (which had begun the previous January), the town's tax revenue was severely affected.\nThe Kinney family rebuilt their amusement pier quickly to compete with Ocean Park's Pickering Pleasure Pier and the new Sunset Pier. When it opened, it had two roller coasters, a new Racing Derby, a Noah's Ark, a Mill Chutes, and many other rides. By 1925, with the addition of a third coaster, a tall Dragon Slide, Fun House, and Flying Circus aerial ride, it was the finest amusement pier on the West Coast. Several hundred thousand tourists visited on weekends. In 1923, Charles Lick built the Lick Pier at Navy Street in Venice, adjacent to the Ocean Park Pier at Pier Avenue in Ocean Park. Another pier was planned for Venice in 1925 at Leona Street (now Washington Street).\nPolitics.\nIn 1922, the Venice treasurer James T. Peasgood was convicted of embezzling thousands of dollars from the city government. By 1925, Venice's politics had become unmanageable because its roads, water, and sewage systems badly needed repair and expansion to keep up with its growing population. When it was proposed that Venice consolidate with Los Angeles, the board of trustees voted to hold an election. Consolidation was approved at the election in November 1925, and Venice was merged with Los Angeles in 1926.\nMany streets were paved in 1929, following a three-year court battle led by canal residents. Afterward, the Department of Recreation and Parks intended to close three amusement piers, but had to wait until the first of the tidelands leases expired in 1946.\nOil.\nIn 1929, oil was discovered south of Washington Street on the Venice Peninsula, now known as the Marina Peninsula neighborhood of Los Angeles. Within two years, 450 oil wells covered the area, and drilling waste clogged the remaining waterways. The short-lived boom provided needed income to the community, which otherwise suffered during the Great Depression. Most of the wells had been capped by the 1970s, and the last wells, near the Venice Pavilion, were capped in 1991.\nNeglect.\nAfter annexation, the city of Los Angeles showed little interest in maintaining the unusual neighborhood. Most of the canals were filled in and paved over, and the former lagoon became a traffic circle. The neighborhood lacked the automobile-centric, homogeneous character that the city sought to cultivate in the post-World War II era, and was perceived as a dated, obsolete remnant of earlier decades' land speculation.\nLos Angeles had neglected Venice so long that, by the 1950s, the neglect had led to the area being labeled the \"Slum by the Sea\". Except for new police and fire stations in 1930, the city spent little on improvements after annexation. The city did not pave Trolleyway (Pacific Avenue) until 1954, when county and state funds became available. Low rents for run-down bungalows attracted predominantly European immigrants (including a substantial number of Holocaust survivors) and young counterculture artists, poets, and writers. The Beat Generation hung out at the Gas House on Ocean Front Walk and Venice West Cafe on Dudley.\nPast gang activity.\nThe Venice Shoreline Crips and the Latino Venice 13 (V-13) were the two main gangs active in Venice. V13 dates back to the 1950s, while the Shoreline Crips were founded in the early 1970s, making them one of the first Crip sets in Los Angeles. In the early 1990s, V-13 and the Shoreline Crips were involved in a fierce battle over crack cocaine sales territories.\nBy 2002, the number of gang members in Venice had been reduced due to gentrification and increased police presence. According to a \"Los Angeles City Beat\" article, by 2003, many Los Angeles Westside gang members had resettled in the city of Inglewood.\nHousing and homelessness.\nVenice Beach is one of the most difficult places in the United States to build new housing due to stringent zoning regulations. Between 2007 and 2022, the number of available housing units actually decreased, despite a massive increase in property values and construction activity over the same period. The neighborhood was developed early in the history of Los Angeles, and as such, much of the housing stock predates the current system of zoning regulations by decades. In the areas along Pacific Avenue, many early 1900s multifamily buildings still exist, some housing as many as 30 units on a single lot with no parking. Current regulations mandate lower housing densities (most commonly 1 unit per 1,500 square feet of lot area).\nAs per a 2020 count, there were around 2,000 homeless people in Venice, up from 175 in 2014. Many of them take up residence in tents and tent cities. An LAPD official said that the increased homeless population has contributed to a spike in crimes in Venice in 2021. In February 2020, the city opened A Bridge Home Venice Beach, a 154-bed transitional housing shelter at a former Metro bus yard, which closed in 2024.\nGeography.\nVenice is bounded on the northwest by the Santa Monica city line. The northern apex of the Venice neighborhood is at Walgrove Avenue and Rose Avenue, abutting the Santa Monica Airport. On the east, the boundary runs north\u2013south on Walgrove Avenue to the neighborhood's eastern apex at Zanja Street, thus including the Penmar Golf Course but excluding Venice High School. The boundary runs on Lincoln Boulevard to Admiralty Way, excluding all of Marina del Rey, south to Ballona Creek.\nCityscape.\nAbbot Kinney Boulevard.\nAbbott Kinney Boulevard is a principal attraction, with stores, restaurants, bars, and art galleries lining the street. The street was described as \"a derelict strip of rundown beach cottages and empty brick industrial buildings called West Washington Boulevard,\" and in the late 1980s community groups and property owners pushed for renaming a portion of the street to honor Abbot Kinney. The renaming was widely considered as a marketing strategy to commercialize the area and bring new high-end businesses to the area.\n72 Market Street Oyster Bar and Grill.\n72 Market Street Oyster Bar and Grill was one of several historical footnotes associated with Market Street in Venice, one of the first streets designated for commerce when the city was founded in 1905. During the depression era, Upton Sinclair had an office there when he was running for governor, and the same historic building where the restaurant was located was also the site of the first Ace/Venice Gallery in the early 1970s.\nHistoric post office.\nThe Venice Post Office, a red-tile-roofed 1939 New Deal building designed by Louis A. Simon on Windward Circle, featured one of two remaining murals painted in 1941 by Modernist artist Edward Biberman. Developer Abbot Kinney is in the center surrounded by beachgoers in old-fashioned bathing suits, men in overalls, and a wooden roller coaster representing the Venice Pier on one side with contrasting industrial oil derricks that were once ubiquitous in the area on the other side. Senior curator of American Art at Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA), Ilene Susan Fort, said this is one of the better New Deal post office murals both artistically and historically. Although it contains brightly colored elements with amusing details, the intrusion of the ominous oil rigs and wells was very relevant at the time.\nAfter the post office closed in 2012, movie producer Joel Silver unveiled plans to purchase it for 7.5\u00a0million and revamp the building as the new headquarters of his company, Silver Pictures. The sale included the stipulation that he, or any future owner, preserve the New Deal-era murals and allow public access. Restoration of the nearly pristine mural took over a year and cost about $100,000. LACMA highlighted the mural with an exhibit that displayed additional Biberman artworks, rare historical documents, and Venice ephemera with the restored mural. Silver has a long-term lease on the mural that is still owned by the US Postal Service. In May 2019, according to the \"Hollywood Reporter\", Silver sold the building for 22.5\u00a0million to U.K. investor Alex Dellal and his real estate group founded by Jack Dellal. Status of the planned renovation remains subject to further approvals. The mural's whereabouts are unknown, putting the lessee in violation of the lease agreement's public access requirement.\nResidences and streets.\nMany of Venice's houses have their principal entries from pedestrian-only streets and have house numbers on these footpaths. (Automobile access is by alleys in the rear.) The inland walk streets are made up primarily of around 620 single-family homes. Like much of the rest of Los Angeles, however, Venice is known for traffic congestion. It lies away from the nearest freeway, and its unusually dense network of narrow streets was not planned for modern traffic.\nVenice Beach.\nVenice Beach, which receives millions of visitors a year, has been labeled as \"a cultural hub known for its eccentricities\" as well as a \"global tourist destination\". It includes the promenade that runs parallel to the beach, the Venice Beach Boardwalk, Muscle Beach, and the Venice Beach Recreation Center with handball courts, paddle tennis courts, a skate dancing plaza, and numerous beach volleyball courts. It also includes a bike trail and many businesses on Ocean Front Walk.\nThe basketball courts in Venice are renowned across the country for their high level of streetball; numerous professional basketball players developed their games or have been recruited on these courts.\nVenice Beach will host triathlon, the start of the marathon and the start of road cycling during the 2028 Summer Olympics.\nAlong the southern portion of the beach, at the end of Washington Boulevard, is the Venice Fishing Pier. A concrete structure, it first opened in 1964, was closed in 1983 due to El Ni\u00f1o storm damage, and re-opened in the mid-1990s. On December 21, 2005, the pier again suffered damage when waves from a large northern swell caused part of it to fall into the ocean. The pier remained closed until May 25, 2006, when it was reopened after an engineering study concluded that it was structurally sound.\nThe Venice Breakwater is an acclaimed local surf spot in Venice. It is located north of the Venice Pier and lifeguard headquarters and south of the Santa Monica Pier. This spot is sheltered on the north by an artificial barrier, the breakwater, consisting of an extending sand bar, piping, and large rocks at its end.\nIn late 2010, the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors conducted a $1.6\u00a0million replacement of 30,000 cubic yards of sand at Venice Beach eroded by rainstorms in recent years. Although Venice Beach is located in the city of Los Angeles, the county is responsible for maintaining the beach under an agreement reached between the two governments in 1975.\nOakwood.\nOakwood lies inland from the tourist areas and is one of the few historically African-American areas in West Los Angeles.\nEast of Lincoln.\nEast of Lincoln is separated from Oakwood by Lincoln Boulevard. It extends east to the border with Mar Vista. Aside from the commercial strip on Lincoln (including the Venice Boys and Girls Club and the Venice United Methodist Church), the area almost entirely consists of small homes and apartments as well as Penmar Park and (bordering Santa Monica) Penmar Golf Course.\nA housing project, Lincoln Place Apartment Homes, built by the Housing Authority of the City of Los Angeles, is currently undergoing a $140\u00a0million renovation to add 99 new market-rate apartment homes and to update the remaining 696 existing homes. A new pool, two-story fitness center, resident park, and sustainable landscaping are being added. Aimco, which acquired the property in 2003, had previously been in a legal battle to determine whether or not Lincoln Place could be demolished and rebuilt. In 2010, Aimco settled with tenants and agreed to reopen the project and return scores of evicted residents to their homes and add hundreds of units to the Venice area.\nVenice Walk Streets.\nThe Venice Walk Streets are four pedestrian-only residential streets.\nThe streets are Marco Place, Amoroso Place, and Nowita Place, running between Lincoln Boulevard and Shell Avenue, and Crescent Place, running from Superba Avenue to Palms Boulevard.\nLos Angeles recognizes a larger North Venice Walk Streets Historic District.\n\u201cThe walk streets, narrower than regular streets, are too small for regulation street sweepers,\" so the streets had a designated smaller-size street sweeper.\nSubsections.\nAccording to the Venice Neighborhood Council, the area can be subdivided further into the following districts:\nClimate.\nLike much of the rest of coastal southern California, Venice has a warm-summer Mediterranean climate, with mild, wet winters and warm, dry summers. Temperatures are moderate all year, and the neighborhood boasts over 300 sunshine days per year. As a result of seasonal lag, fall is usually warmer than spring in Venice. Because of its coastal location, morning fog is a common phenomenon in May and June, but occasionally in July and August, as well. Los Angeles residents have a particular terminology for this phenomenon: the \"May Gray\", the \"June Gloom\", \"No-Sky July\", and \"Fogust\"; during these events, the fog will usually burn off by noon, but the fog may also linger all day. The record high of was observed on September 27, 2010, while the record low is , recorded on January 14, 2007. Venice is in USDA plant hardiness zone 10b, closely bordering on 11a.\nDemographics.\nThe 2000 U.S. census counted 37,705 residents in the 3.17-square-mile Venice neighborhood\u2014an average of 11,891 people per square mile, about the norm for Los Angeles; in 2008, the city estimated that the population had increased to 40,885. The median age for residents was 35, considered the average for Los Angeles; the percentages of residents aged 19 through 49 were among the county's highest.\nThe ethnic breakdown was 64.2% Non-Hispanic White, 21.7% Latino (of any racial origin); 5.4% African American; 4.1% Asian, and 4.6% of other origins. About 22.3% of residents had been born abroad, a relatively low figure for Los Angeles; Mexico (38.4%) and the United Kingdom (8.5%) were their most common places of birth.\nForty-nine percent of Venice residents aged 25 and older had earned a four-year degree by 2000, a high figure for both the city and the county. The percentages of residents of that age with a bachelor's degree or a master's degree were considered high for the county.\nThe median yearly household income in 2008 dollars was $67,647, a high figure for Los Angeles. The percentage of households earning $125,000 was considered high for the city. The average household size of 1.9 people was low for both the city and the county. Renters occupied 68.8% of the housing stock, and house- or apartment owners held 31.2%. Property values have been increasing lately due to the presence of technology companies such as Google Inc. (which in 2011 began leasing 100,000 square feet of space in Venice) and Snap Inc. (which formerly leased property on Market Street and Abbot Kinney).\nThe percentages of never-married men (51.3%), never-married women (40.6%), divorced men (11.3%), and divorced women (15.9%) were among the county's highest. The percentage of veterans who had served during the Vietnam War was among the county's highest.\nArts and culture.\nVenice has been known as a preferred location for creative artists. In the 1950s and 1960s, Venice became a center for the Beat generation, and there was an explosion of poetry and art, which continues today. Major writers and artists throughout the decades have included Stuart Perkoff, John Thomas, Frank T. Rios, Tony Scibella, Lawrence Lipton, John Haag, Saul White, Millicent Borges Accardi Robert Farrington, Philomene Long, and Tom Sewell.\nArchitecture.\nOriginally established as a planned city imitating Venice, Italy, Venice is home to a large number of early 1900s buildings built to emulate Italian Renaissance architecture. Particularly along Windward Avenue, where an arched arcade covers the sidewalks on portions of both sides of the street. Similar buildings originally formed a continuous arcade from the boardwalk to the former lagoon (now the Windward traffic circle), but these were condemned by the City of Los Angeles after annexation. Only through the efforts of local preservationists were the few buildings that remain able to be preserved, although many were substantially modified.\nDesigners Charles and Ray Eames had their offices at the Bay Cities Garage on Abbot Kinney Boulevard from 1943 on, when it was still part of Washington Boulevard; Eames products were also manufactured there until the 1950s. The brick building's interior was redesigned by Frank Israel in 1990 as a creative workspace, opening up the interior and creating sightlines through the building.\nOriginally located at the Venice home of Pritzker Prize\u2013winning architect and SCI-Arc founder Thom Mayne, the Architecture Gallery was in existence for just ten weeks in 1979 and featured new work by then-emerging architects Frank Gehry, Eric Owen Moss, and Morphosis. Constructed on a long, narrow lot in 1981, the Indiana Avenue Houses/Arnoldi Triplex was designed Frank Gehry in partnership with artists Laddie John Dill and Charles Arnoldi. Frank Gehry has designed several well-known houses in Venice, including the Jane Spiller House (completed 1979) and the Norton House (completed 1984) on Venice Beach. In 1994, sculptor Robert Graham designed a fortress-like art studio and residence for himself and his wife, actress Anjelica Huston, on Windward Avenue.\nArt.\nIn the 1970s, performance artist Chris Burden created some of his early, groundbreaking work in Venice. Other notable artists who maintained studios in the area include Charles Arnoldi, Jean-Michel Basquiat, John Baldessari, Larry Bell, Billy Al Bengston, James Georgopoulos, Dennis Hopper, and Ed Ruscha. Organized by the Hammer Museum throughout one weekend in 2012, the open-air Venice Beach Biennial (about the Venice Biennale in Italy) brought together 87 artists, including site-specific projects by established artists like Evan Holloway, Barbara Kruger as well as boardwalk veteran Arthure Moore. In the 1980s and 1990s, the Venice Beach boardwalk became a mecca for street performances, turning it into a popular tourist attraction. Chainsaw jugglers, break dancers, acrobats, and comics like Michael Colyar could be seen daily. Many performers like the Jim Rose Circus got their start on the boardwalk.\nVenice Boardwalk murals.\nVenice Beach boardwalk murals include:\nVenice Public Art Walls.\nThe Venice Art Walls were built in 1961 as part of the Venice Pavilion, a recreation and performing arts facility. It was a popular hangout spot for locals owing to its proximity to the beach and large number of concrete tables. The central area of the pavilion, known as \"the pit\", was surrounded by flat concrete walls that made for ideal painting surfaces. The pit became a hotbed of the growing graffiti movement in Los Angeles in the 1970s and 1980s, with many prominent artists and graffiti crews painting elaborate pieces on the pavilion's walls. The area's thriving counterculture and arts scene, along with law enforcement's general neglect of the area, made it an ideal location for artists to paint. Thirty-eight years later the Venice Pavilion was torn down but some of the walls, along with two large, conical concrete structures, were maintained. They were restored in 2000 as part of a renovation of the beachfront park area at the end of Windward Avenue, and ever since, artists have been allowed to paint there freely and legally.\nMusic.\nVenice was where the rock band The Doors was formed in 1965 by UCLA alumni Ray Manzarek and Jim Morrison. The Doors would go on to be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame with Morrison being considered one of the greatest rock frontmen. Venice is the birthplace of Jane's Addiction in the 1980s. Perry Farrell, frontman and founder of Lollapalooza, was a longtime Venice resident until 2010.\nVenice in the 1980s also had bands playing music known as crossover thrash, a hardcore punk/thrash metal musical hybrid. The most notable of these bands is Suicidal Tendencies. Other Venice bands such as Beow\u00fclf, No Mercy, and Excel were also featured on the compilation album \"Welcome to Venice\".\nPublic libraries.\nThe Los Angeles Public Library operates the Venice\u2013Abbot Kinney Memorial Branch.\nStreet performers and eclectic characters.\nVenice is well known for its street performers, or buskers. The most famous is Harry Perry, a turbaned, roller-skating guitar player. Other well-known Venice street performers include the Venice Beach Glass Man, Echoman, Dr. Geek, Sid Weiss, and the Chain Saw Juggler.\nThough not a street performer, \"Boston Dawna\" Chaet was a notable Venice character in the 1990s who cut hair by day, and patrolled the streets by night on her bicycle, assisting the local police and making numerous citizens' arrests to keep the neighborhood safe.\nParks and recreation.\nThe Venice Beach Recreation Center comprises several facilities. The installation has basketball courts (unlighted/outdoor), several children's play areas with a gymnastics apparatus, chess tables, handball courts (unlighted), paddle tennis courts (unlighted), and volleyball courts (unlighted). At the south end of the area is the Muscle Beach outdoor gymnasium. In March 2009, the city opened a sophisticated $2\u00a0million skate park, the Venice Beach Skate Park, on the sand towards the north. The Graffiti Walls are on the beach side of the bike path in the same vicinity.\nThe Oakwood Recreation Center, which also acts as a Los Angeles Police Department stop-in center, includes an auditorium, an unlighted baseball diamond, lighted indoor basketball courts, unlighted outdoor basketball courts, a children's play area, a community room, a lighted American football field, an indoor gymnasium without weights, picnic tables, and an unlighted soccer field.\nThe Westminster Off-Leash Dog Park is located in Venice.\nGovernment.\nVenice is a neighborhood in the city of Los Angeles represented by District 11 on the Los Angeles City Council. City services are provided by the City of Los Angeles. There is a Venice Neighborhood Council that advises the LA City Council on local issues.\nCounty, state, and federal representation.\nThe Los Angeles County Department of Health Services SPA 5 West Area Health Office serves Venice.\nThe United States Postal Service operates the Venice Post Office at 313 Grand Boulevard.\nEducation.\nSchools within Venice include:\nInfrastructure.\nFire department.\nThe Los Angeles Fire Department operates Station 63, which serves Venice with two engines, a truck, and an ALS rescue ambulance.\nPolice.\nThe Los Angeles Police Department serves the area through the Pacific Community Police Station as well as a beach sub-station.\nLifeguards.\nLifeguard protection is administered by the Los Angeles County Lifeguards of the Los Angeles County Fire Department.\nIn popular culture.\nVenice has been the location of numerous movies, TV shows, and video games. Common locations for filming include the piers, skate park, restaurant, canals, boardwalk, and the schools.\nSome productions include the following:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32581", "revid": "50602483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32581", "title": "Van Diemen's Land", "text": "1825\u20131856 British colony, later called Tasmania\nVan Diemen's Land was the colonial name of the island of Tasmania during the European exploration and colonisation of Australia in the 19th century. The Aboriginal-inhabited island was first visited by the Dutch ship captained by Abel Tasman in 1642, working under the sponsorship of Anthony van Diemen, the Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies. The British retained the name when they established a settlement in 1803 before it became a separate colony in 1825. Its penal colonies became notorious destinations for the transportation of convicts due to the harsh environment, isolation and reputation for being escape-proof. \nThe name was changed to Tasmania on 1 January 1856 to dissociate the island from its convict past and to honour its European discoverer, Abel Tasman. The old name had become a byword for horror in England because of the severity of its convict settlements such as Macquarie Harbour and Port Arthur. When the island became a self-governing colony in 1855, one of the first acts of the new legislature was to change its name.\nWith the passing of the Australian Constitutions Act 1850, Van Diemen's Land (along with New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Victoria, and Western Australia) was granted responsible self-government with its own elected representative and parliament. The last penal settlement in Tasmania was closed in 1877.\nToponym.\nThe island was named by colonisers in honour of Anthony van Diemen, Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies who had sent the Dutch explorer Abel Tasman on his voyage of discovery in the 1640s. In 1642 Tasman became the first known European to land on the shores of Tasmania. After landing at Blackman Bay and later raising the Dutch flag at North Bay, Tasman named the island \"Anthoonij van Diemenslandt\" (Anthony Van Diemen's land) in his patron's honour.\nThe demonym for inhabitants of Van Diemen's Land was \"Van Diemonian\", though contemporaries used the spelling \"Vandemonian\". Anthony Trollope used the latter term; \"They are (the Vandemonians) united in their declaration that the cessation of the coming of convicts has been their ruin.\"\nIn 1856, Van Diemen's Land was renamed \"Tasmania\", removing the unsavoury link the name Van Diemen's Land had with its penal settlements (and the \"demon\" connotation). Tasmania was chosen as it honoured the explorer Abel Tasman, the first European to visit the island. Within 21 years the last penal settlement in Tasmania at Port Arthur was permanently closed in 1877.\nHistory.\nExploration.\nIn 1642, Abel Tasman discovered the western side of the island and named it on behalf of the Dutch. He sailed around the south to the east, landing at Blackman Bay and assumed it was part of the Australian mainland.\nBetween 1772 and 1798, recorded European visits were only to the southeastern portion of the island and it was not known to be an island until Matthew Flinders and George Bass circumnavigated it in the sloop in 1798\u20131799.\nIn 1773, Tobias Furneaux in , explored a great part of the south and east coasts of Van Diemen's Land and made the earliest British chart of the island. He discovered the opening to D'Entrecasteaux Channel and, at Bruny Island, named Adventure Bay for his ship.\nIn 1777, James Cook took on water and wood in Tasmania and became cursorily acquainted with some indigenous peoples on his third voyage of discovery. Cook named the Furneaux Group of islands at the eastern entrance to Bass Strait and the group now known as the Low Archipelago.\nFrom at least the settlement of New South Wales, sealers and whalers operated in the surrounding waters and explored parts.\nIn January 1793, a French expedition under the command of Antoine Bruni d'Entrecasteaux anchored in Recherche Bay and a period of five weeks was spent in that area, carrying out explorations into both natural history and geography. A few months later, British East India Company Captain John Hayes, with the ships \"Duke of Clarence\" and \"Duchess\", resupplied with wood and water at Adventure Bay and explored and named the Derwent River and many surrounding features.\nIn 1802 and 1803, the French expedition commanded by Nicolas Baudin explored D'Entrecasteaux Channel and Maria Island and carried out charting of Bass Strait. Baudin had been associated, like Peyroux, with the resettlement of the Acadians from French Canada\u00a0-- mostly from what is now called the New Brunswick\u2013Nova Scotia area -- to Louisiana.\nEarly colonisation.\nAround 1784\u20131785, Henri Peyroux de la Coudreni\u00e8re, a serial entrepreneur in colonial schemes, wrote a \"memoir on the advantages to be gained for the Spanish crown by the settlement of Van Diemen's Land\". After receiving no response from the Spanish government, Peyroux proposed it to the French government, as \"M\u00e9moire sur les avantages qui r\u00e9sulteraient d'une colonie puissante \u00e0 la terre de Di\u00e9men\" but nothing came of his scheme.\nSealers and whalers based themselves on the Tasmanian islands from 1798.\nIn August 1803, New South Wales Governor Philip King sent Lieutenant John Bowen to establish a small military outpost on the eastern shore of the Derwent River to forestall any claims to the island arising from the activities of the French explorers.\nFrom 24 September 1804 until 4 February 1813, there were two administrative divisions in Van Diemen's Land, Cornwall County in the north and Buckingham County in the south. The border between the counties was defined as the 42nd parallel (now between Trial Harbour and Friendly Beaches). Cornwall County was administered by William Paterson while Buckingham County was administered by David Collins.\nMajor-General Ralph Darling was appointed Governor of New South Wales in 1825. In the same year he visited Hobart Town. On 3 December of 1825, he proclaimed the establishment of the independent colony, of which he became governor for three days.\nIn 1836, the new governor, Sir John Franklin, sailed to Van Diemen's Land, together with William Hutchins (1792-1841), who was to become the colony's first Archdeacon.\nIn 1856, the colony was granted responsible self-government with its representative parliament, and the name of the island and colony was officially changed to Tasmania on 1 January 1856.\nPenal colony.\nFrom the early 1800s to the 1853 abolition of penal transportation (known simply as \"transportation\"), Van Diemen's Land was the primary penal colony in Australia. Following the suspension of transportation to New South Wales, all transported convicts were sent to Van Diemen's Land. In total, some 73,000 convicts were transported to Van Diemen's Land or about 40% of all convicts sent to Australia.\nMale convicts served their sentences as assigned labour to free settlers or in gangs assigned to public works. Only the most difficult convicts (mostly re-offenders) were sent to the Tasman Peninsula prison known as Port Arthur. Female convicts were assigned as servants in free settler households or sent to a female factory (women's workhouse prison). There were five female factories in Van Diemen's Land.\nConvicts completing their sentences or earning their ticket-of-leave often promptly left Van Diemen's Land. Many settled in the new free colony of Victoria, to the dismay of the free settlers in towns such as Melbourne.\nOn 6 August 1829, the brig , a government-owned vessel used to transport goods, people, and convicts, set sail from Hobart Town for Macquarie Harbour Penal Station on a routine voyage carrying supplies and convicts. While the ship was becalmed in Recherche Bay, convicts allowed on deck attacked their guards and took control of the brig. The mutineers marooned officers, soldiers, and convicts who did not join the mutiny without supplies. The convicts then sailed the \"Cyprus\" to Canton, China, where they scuttled her and claimed to be castaways from another vessel. On the way, \"Cyprus\" visited Japan during the height of the period of severe Japanese restrictions on the entry of foreigners, the first Australian ship to do so.\nTensions sometimes ran high between the settlers and the \"Vandemonians\" as they were termed, particularly during the Victorian gold rush when a flood of settlers from Van Diemen's Land rushed to the Victorian goldfields.\nComplaints from Victorians about recently released convicts from Van Diemen's Land re-offending in Victoria was one of the contributing reasons for the eventual abolition of transportation to Van Diemen's Land in 1853. \nDemographics.\nPopulation summary.\nAccording to the 1851 Census of Van Diemen's Land, there was a total population of 70,130 individuals, with 62.85% being males and 37.14% being females. Non-convicts, i.e. free people, comprised 75.6% of the population and convicts, 24.3%, which was an increase since the 1848 Census. Of the males who were not a part of the Military, or convicts on public works, 71% were free and 28.57% were bond. Of the females who were not part of the Military, or convicts on public works, 84.15% were free and 15.84% were bond. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "32582", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32582", "title": "Vampyrellidae", "text": "Family of single-celled organisms\nThe family Vampyrellidae is a subgroup of the order Vampyrellida (or Aconchulinida) within the supergroup Rhizaria. Based on molecular sequence data, the family currently comprises the genus \"Vampyrella\", and maybe several other vampyrellid amoebae (e.g. \"Gobiella\"). The cells are naked and characterised by radiating, filose pseudopodia (also referred to as filopodia) and an orange colouration of the main cell body.\nIn former times the family Vampyrellidae contained several genera (e.g. \"Vampyrella\", \"Gobiella\", \"Leptophrys\", \"Platyreta\", \"Theratromyxa\") and was identical with the order Vampyrellida, also known under the name \"Aconchulinida\". However, based on molecular sequence data the family Vampyrellidae was restricted to a subgroup containing only the genus \"Vampyrella\", and a different family Leptophryidae was established for the genera \"Leptophrys\", \"Platyreta\" and \"Theratromyxa\".\nCharacteristics.\nWhen free-floating, the cell is spherical and around 30 \u03bcm across, with long radially directed filose pseudopods as well as distinctive shorter club-shaped ones, so that it resembles a heliozoan. Moving, the cell stretches out and takes a more typical amoeboid form, with an obvious distinction between the clear periphery and pseudopods and the greenish interior. In this form it finds its way into algae cells and feeds on their interiors. At least one genus, Theratromyxa, also feeds on soil nematodes. A few other vampyrellids are parasitic on fungi. As such, these vampyrellids can be an important control of parasitic rust fungus of wheat and other crops.\nVampyrellids characteristically have mitochondria with tubular cristae. Together with the nucleariids they include the majority of the naked filose amoebae.\nSystematics and phylogeny.\nGenera and species.\nThere are at least 19 credibly described species that are either proved or likely to belong to the family Vampyrellidae, all of them belonging to the genus \"Vampyrella\".\nPhylogenetic tree.\nThe following cladogram depicts the relationships between Vampyrellidae and other vampyrellid families. Of the 19 species, only 2 species of \"Vampyrella\" have been genetically sequenced, which limits the information on the internal relationships of the genus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32583", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32583", "title": "VLSI", "text": ""}
{"id": "32585", "revid": "50930741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32585", "title": "Volgograd", "text": "City in Volgograd Oblast, Russia\nVolgograd, formerly Tsaritsyn (1589\u20131925) and Stalingrad (1925\u20131961), is the largest city and the administrative centre of Volgograd Oblast, Russia. The city lies on the western bank of the Volga, covering an area of , with a population of slightly over one million residents. Volgograd is the 16th-largest city by population size in Russia, the third-largest city of the Southern Federal District, and the fourth-largest city on the Volga.\nThe city was founded as the fortress of \"Tsaritsyn\" in 1589. By the 19th century, Tsaritsyn had become an important river-port and commercial centre, leading to its rapid population growth. In November 1917, at the start of the Russian Civil War, Tsaritsyn came under Bolshevik control. It fell briefly to the White Army in mid-1919 but returned to Bolshevik control in January 1920. In 1925, the city was renamed \"Stalingrad\" in honor of Joseph Stalin, who took part in defending the city against the White Army who had then ruled the country. During World War II, Axis forces attacked the city, leading to the Battle of Stalingrad, the largest and bloodiest battle in World WarII, from which it received the title of Hero City. The Soviet victory at Stalingrad is widely held to be the turning point of World War II, leading to the destruction of the German army in the East. In 1961, Nikita Khrushchev's administration renamed the city to \"Volgograd\" as part of de-Stalinization.\nVolgograd today is the site of \"The Motherland Calls\", an high statue dedicated to the heroes of the Battle of Stalingrad, which is the tallest statue in Europe, as well as the second tallest statue of a woman in the world. The city has many tourist attractions, such as museums, sandy beaches, and a self-propelled floating church. Volgograd was one of the host cities of the 2018 FIFA World Cup.\nEtymology.\nTsaritsyn was established in 1555 and was named after the Tsaritsa River. It was written as , with the hard sign.\nWhen Vladimir Lenin died in 1924, Joseph Stalin took charge as the General Secretary; Tsaritsyn was renamed Stalingrad in honour of his role in the defence of the city. The name is derived from the compound of Stalin (; his name) and grad (: name for a settlement in Russian).\nIn the aftermath of Stalin's death, Nikita Khrushchev announced the policy of de-Stalinization. The name was changed to Volgograd in 1961, derived from the name of the Volga river, on whose bank the city is situated.\nHistory.\nTsaritsyn.\nAlthough the city may have originated in 1555, documented evidence of \"Tsaritsyn\" at the confluence of the Tsaritsa and Volga rivers dates from 1589. The structure stood slightly above the mouth of the Tsaritsa River on the right bank. It soon became the nucleus of a trading settlement.\nAt the beginning of the 17th century, the garrison consisted of 350 to 400 people. In 1607 the fortress garrison rebelled for six months against the troops of Tsar Vasili Shuisky. In the following year saw the construction of the first stone church in the city, dedicated to St. John the Baptist.\nIn 1670, troops of Stepan Razin captured the fortress; they left after a month. In 1708 the insurgent Cossack Kondraty Bulavin (died July 1708) held the fortress. In 1717 in the Kuban pogrom, raiders from the Kuban under the command of the Crimean Tatar Bakhti Gerai blockaded, the town and enslaved thousands, in the area. In August 1774 Cossack leader Yemelyan Pugachev unsuccessfully attempted to storm the city.\nIn 1691, Moscow established a customs-post at Tsaritsyn. In 1708 Tsaritsyn was assigned to the Kazan Governorate; in 1719 to the Astrakhan Governorate. According to the census in 1720, the city had a population of 408 people. In 1773 the settlement was designated as a provincial and district town. From 1779 it belonged to the Saratov Viceroyalty. In 1780 the city came under the newly established Saratov Governorate.\nIn the 19th century, Tsaritsyn became an important river-port and commercial center. As a result, it also became a hub for migrant workers; in 1895 alone, over 50,000 peasant migrants came to Tsaritsyn in search of work. The population expanded rapidly, increasing from fewer than 3,000 people in 1807 to about 84,000 in 1900. By 1914, the population had again jumped and was estimated at 130,000. Sources show 893 Jews registered as living there in 1897, with the number exceeding 2,000 by the middle of the 1920s. At the turn of the nineteenth century, Tsaritsyn was essentially a frontier town; almost all of the structures were wooden, with neither paved roads nor utilities. The first railway reached the town in 1862. The first theatre opened in 1872, the first cinema in 1907. In 1913 Tsaritsyn got its first tram-line, and the city's first electric lights were installed in the city center.\nBetween 1903 and 1907, the area was one of the least healthy in Europe, with a mortality rate of 33.6 for every 1000 persons. Untreated sewage spilled into the river, causing several cholera epidemics between 1907 and 1910. Although the region had an active Sanitary Executive Commission that sent out instructions on the best ways to prevent outbreaks and dispatched a delegate from the Anti-Plague Commission to Tsaritsyn in 1907, local municipal officials did not put any precautions into place, citing economic considerations. The city's drinking water came directly from the river, the intake pipe dangerously close to both the port and the sewage drain. There were neither funds nor political will to close the port (the main hub of economic activity) or move the intake pipes. As a result, in the three years spanning 1908 to 1910, Tsaritsyn lost 1,045 people to cholera. With a population of only 102,452 at the time, that amounted to a 1.01% loss of the population.\nBetween 1908 and 1911, Tsaritsyn was home to Sergei Trufanov, also known as the 'mad monk' Iliodor. He spent most of his time causing infighting and power struggles within the Russian Orthodox Church, fomenting anti-semitic zeal and violence in local populations, attacking the press, denouncing local municipal officials and causing unrest wherever he went. The most permanent mark he left on the city was the Holy Spirit Monastery (), built in 1909, parts of which still stand today.\nIn light of the explosive population growth, the lack of political action on sanitation and housing, the multiple epidemics and the presence of volatile personalities, it is no surprise that the lower Volga region was a hotbed of revolutionary activity and civil unrest. The inability of the Tsarist government to provide basic protections from cholera on the one hand and subjecting the populace to strict but ineffective health measures on the other, caused multiple riots in 1829, in the 1890s and throughout the first decade of the 1900s, setting the stage for multiple Russian revolutions and adding fuel to the political fire. During the Russian Civil War of 1917\u20131923, Tsaritsyn came under Soviet control from November 1917. In 1918, White Movement troops under Pyotr Krasnov, the Ataman of the Don Cossack Host, besieged Tsaritsyn. The Reds repulsed three assaults by the Whites. However, in June 1919 the White Armed Forces of South Russia, under the command of General Denikin, captured Tsaritsyn, and held it until January 1920. The fighting from July 1918 to January 1920 became known as the Battle for Tsaritsyn.\nStalingrad.\nOn April 10, 1925, the city was renamed Stalingrad, in honor of Joseph Stalin, General Secretary of the Communist Party. This was officially to recognize the city and Stalin's role in its defense against the Whites between 1918 and 1920.\nOnce the Soviets established control, ethnic and religious minorities were targeted. The only Jewish school in the area was closed down in 1926. In 1928, a campaign was launched by the Regional Executive Council to close down the synagogue in Stalingrad. Due to local resistance, they were not successful until 1929, when the council convened a Special Commission. The Commission convinced local municipal authorities that the building was in need of major repairs, was unsafe and much too small for the over 800 worshippers who regularly attended for high holidays.\nIn 1931, the German settlement-colony Old Sarepta (founded in 1765) became a district of Stalingrad. Renamed \"Krasnoarmeysky Rayon\" (or \"Red Army District\"), it was the largest area of the city. The first higher education institute was opened in 1930. A year later, the Stalingrad Industrial Pedagogical Institute, now Volgograd State Pedagogical University, was opened. Under Stalin, the city became a center of heavy industry and transshipment by rail and river.\nBattle of Stalingrad.\nDuring World War II, German and Axis forces attacked the city, which, in 1942, became the site of one of the war's pivotal battles. The Battle of Stalingrad was the deadliest single battle in the history of warfare (casualties estimates vary between 1,250,000 and 2,500,000).\nThe battle began on August 23, 1942, and on the same day, the city suffered heavy aerial bombardment that reduced most of it to rubble. Martial law had already been declared in the city on July 14. By September, the fighting reached the city center. It was of unprecedented intensity; the city's central railway station changed hands thirteen times, and the Mamayev Kurgan (one of the highest points of the city) was captured and recaptured eight times.\nBy early November, the German forces controlled 90 percent of the city and had cornered the Soviets in two narrow pockets, but they were unable to eliminate the last pockets of Soviet resistance before Soviet forces launched a huge counterattack on November 19. This resulted in the Soviet encirclement of the German Sixth Army and other Axis units. On January\u00a031, 1943, Field Marshal Friedrich Paulus, the Sixth Army's commander, surrendered; by February\u00a02, with the elimination of straggling German troops, the Battle of Stalingrad was over.\nThe bombing campaign and five months of fighting destroyed 99% of the city. Of the population of more than half a million before the battle, only 1,515 remained following the battle's conclusion.\nIn 1945, the Soviet Union awarded Stalingrad the title Hero City for its resistance. Great Britain's King George VI awarded the citizens of Stalingrad the jewelled \"Sword of Stalingrad\" in recognition of their bravery.\nA number of cities around the world (especially those that had suffered similar wartime devastation) established sister, friendship, and twinning links (see list below) in the spirit of solidarity or reconciliation. One of the first \"sister city\" projects was that established during World War II between Stalingrad and Coventry in the United Kingdom; both had suffered extensive devastation from aerial bombardment. In March 2022, this twinning link was suspended because of the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nVolgograd.\nOn 10 November 1961, Nikita Khrushchev's administration changed the name of the city to Volgograd (\"Volga City\") as part of his programme of de-Stalinization following Stalin's death. This action was and remains somewhat controversial, because Stalingrad has such importance as a symbol of resistance during World War II.\nDuring Konstantin Chernenko's brief rule in 1984, proposals were floated to revive the city's Stalinist name for that reason. There was a strong degree of local support for a reversion, but the Russian Soviet government did not accept such proposals. \nOn May 21, 2007, Roman Grebennikov of the Communist Party was elected as mayor with 32.47% of the vote, a plurality. Grebennikov became Russia's youngest mayor of a federal subject administrative center at the time.\nIn 2010, Russian monarchists and leaders of the Orthodox organizations demanded that the city should take back its original name of Tsaritsyn, but the authorities rejected their proposal.\nOn January 30, 2013, the Volgograd City Council passed a measure to use the title \"Hero City Stalingrad\" in city statements on nine specific dates annually. On the following dates, the title \"Hero City Stalingrad\" can officially be used in celebrations:\nIn addition, in January 2013, 50,000 people signed a petition to Russian president Vladimir Putin, asking that the city's name be permanently changed to Stalingrad. President Putin has replied that such a move should be preceded by a local referendum and that the Russian authorities will look into how to bring about such a referendum. In 2025, the city's airport was renamed as Stalingrad International Airport following a decree by Putin in memory of the battle.\nGovernance.\nIn 2011, the City Duma canceled direct election of the mayor and confirmed the position of City Manager. This was short-lived, as in March 2012, Volgograd residents voted for relevant amendments to the city charter to reinstate the direct mayoral elections.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nThe Administrative divisions of Volgograd consists of 8 districts; Traktorozavodsky district, Krasnooktyabrsky district, Dzerzhinsky, Tsentraly district, Voroshilovsky district, Kirovsky district, Sovietsky District and Krasnoarmeysky district.\nVolgograd is the administrative center of Volgograd Oblast. Within the framework of administrative divisions, it is incorporated as the city of oblast significance of Volgograd\u2014an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the city of oblast significance of Volgograd is incorporated as Volgograd Urban Okrug.\nEconomy.\nAlthough the city was on an important trade route for moving timber, grain, cotton, cast iron, fish, salt and linseed oil, the economic reach of the Volga was relatively small. When the first rail lines were linked up to Moscow in 1871, this isolated area was suddenly and efficiently connected to the rest of the empire. Thanks to that connection, the province became a major producer, processor and exporter of grain, supplying most of Russia. By the 1890s, the economy of Volgograd (then Tsaritsyn), relied mainly on the trade of grain, naphtha, fish and salt. Modern Volgograd remains an important industrial city. Industries include shipbuilding, oil refining, steel and aluminum production, manufacture of heavy machinery and vehicles at the Volgograd Tractor Plant and Titan-Barrikady plant, and chemical production. The large Volgograd Hydroelectric Plant is a short distance to the north of Volgograd. South of the city near the river Lukoil operates the large Volgograd Refinery.\nTransportation.\nVolgograd is a major railway junction served by the Privolzhskaya Railway. Rail links from the Volgograd railway station include Moscow; Saratov; Astrakhan; the Donbas region of Ukraine; the Caucasus and Siberia. It stands at the east end of the Volga\u2013Don Canal, opened in 1952 to link the two great rivers of Southern Russia. European route E40, the longest European route connecting Calais in France with Ridder in Kazakhstan, passes through Volgograd. The M6 highway between Moscow and the Caspian Sea also passes through the city. The Volgograd Bridge, under construction since 1995, was inaugurated in October 2009. The city river terminal is the center for local passenger shipping along the Volga River.\nThe Stalingrad International Airport provides air links to major Russian cities as well as Antalya, Yerevan and Aktau.\nVolgograd's public transport system includes a light rail service known as the Volgograd Metrotram. Local public transport is provided by buses, trolleybuses and trams.\nThe Volga River still is a very important communication channel.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEthnic composition.\nAt the time of the official 2010 Census, the ethnic makeup of the city's population whose ethnicity was known (999,785) was:\nCulture.\nMamayev Kurgan Memorial Complex.\nA memorial complex commemorating the battle of Stalingrad, dominated by an immense allegorical sculpture \"The Motherland Calls\", was erected on the Mamayev Kurgan (Russian: \u041c\u0430\u043c\u0430\u0435\u0432 \u041a\u0443\u0440\u0433\u0430\u043d), the hill that saw some of the most intense fighting during the battle. This complex includes the Hall of Military Glory, a circular building housing an eternal flame and bearing plaques with the names of the fallen heroes of the Battle of Stalingrad. This memorial features an hourly changing of the guard that draws many tourists during the warmer months. Across from this Hall, there is a statue called Mother's Sorrow, which depicts a grieving woman holding a fallen soldier in her arms. During the summer months, this statue is surrounded by a small water feature, called the Lake of Tears. Further down the hill of this complex, there is a Plaza of Heroes (also known as Heroes' Square), featuring multiple allegorical sculptures of heroic deeds. This plaza is sometimes referred to by the title of the most famous of these sculptures, called \"Having withstood, we conquered death\".\nPanorama Museum.\nThe Panorama Museum of the Battle of Stalingrad is a large cultural complex that sits on the shore of the Volga river. It is located on the site of the \"Penza Defense Junction\", a group of buildings along Penzenskaya Street (now Sovetskaya Street), which was defended by the 13th Guards Rifle Division. The complex includes Gerhardt's Mill, which is preserved in its bombed out state. The museum on the complex grounds houses the largest painting in Russia, a panoramic painting of the battlefield as seen from Mamayev Kurgan, where \"The Motherland Calls\" statue now stands. This museum also features Soviet military equipment from the 1940s, numerous exhibits of weapons (including a rifle of the famous sniper Vasily Zaytsev), uniforms, personal belongings of generals and soldiers involved in the battle and detailed maps and timelines of the battle.\nPlanetarium.\nThe Volgograd Planetarium was a gift from East Germany in honor of what would have been Stalin's 70th birthday. Neoclassical in style, the building facade is designed like a Roman temple, with six Tuscan columns topped by capitals decorated with stars. Designed by Vera Ignatyevna Mukhina, the dome is crowned by a female personification of Peace, holding an astrolabe with a dove. Opened in 1954, it was only the second purpose-built planetarium in the Soviet Union. The entryway interior features a mural of Stalin in the white uniform of a naval admiral, surrounded by lilies and doves, more symbols of peace. On either side of the mural, are busts of Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, a Soviet rocket scientist, and Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet pilot and cosmonaut and the first human to venture into outer space. On the second floor, there are large stained glass windows, featuring images related to Soviet space exploration. The planetarium was outfitted with a Zeiss projector, the first produced by the Carl Zeiss Company in their Jena plant after the end of World War 2. The projector supplied was the UPP-23/1s model, which was produced between 1954 and 1964; it is still operational and in regular use at the Volgograd Planetarium. The projector was supplemented by a digital system in 2019; the Fulldome Pro model LDX12. Zeiss also provided the 365mm refractor telescope for the observatory, which is still in operation today. The planetarium hosts scientific and educational lectures, provides Fulldome shows, has scheduled tours, features daytime and nighttime observations and runs an astronomy club for children.\nOther.\nAcross the street from the Panorama Museum, stands Pavlov's House, another surviving monument to the Battle of Stalingrad. Several monuments and memorials can be found nearby, including a statue of Lenin, a statue in honor of children who survived war and another to the Pavlov's House defenders.\nThe Musical Instrument Museum is a branch of the Volgograd regional Museum of local lore.\nReligion.\nAs a port city along an important and busy trading route, Volgograd has always been a diverse place. An 1897 survey reveals 893 Jews (512 men and 381 women), 1,729 Muslims (938 men and 791 women), and 193 Catholics (116 men and 77 women).\nHoly Spirit Monastery.\nLand for the Holy Spirit Monastery was originally allocated in 1904, but construction did not begin until 1909 and was not complete until 1911. Sergei Trufanov, also known as the 'mad monk' of Tsaritsyn, was the driving force behind fundraising and getting the project off the ground. The original complex had a church that could accommodate 6,000 people, the monastery itself could house 500 and an auditorium that held 1,000. There was a school, space for workshops, a printing office and an almshouse. The land the monastery stood on also hosted multiple gardens, a fountain and several inner yards.\nIn 1912, the monastery was divided to a male and female section, housing both monks and nuns. In 1914, the school on the grounds of the Holy Spirit Monastery became part of the city school system and in 1915, housed 53 girls whose fathers were on the front lines. During the Russian Civil War, an infirmary was set up and the complex was alternately used by both the Bolsheviks and the Whites. In 1923, once the area was under firm Bolshevik control, the monastery was closed. During the following decades, the complex was used as an orphanage, a library, a cinema and a student hostel. Eventually, many of the buildings fell into disuse and became dilapidated. At the onset of the Second World War, the complex was given to the military and many of the original buildings were demolished.\nAfter the collapse of the USSR in 1991, the Diocese of Volgograd was established and the military began the process of transferring what was left of the Holy Spirit Monastery back to the church. A theological school was established in 1992 and restoration of the site continues today.\nAlexander Nevsky Cathedral.\nConstruction of the cathedral began on April 22, 1901, with the laying of the foundation stone by Bishop Hermogenes. The domes were installed in 1915 and consecration took place on May 19, 1918. Almost as soon as it was built, the cathedral fell out of use. The Soviet powers closed it down officially in 1929, with the crosses and bells removed and the liturgical objects confiscated. The cathedral was then used as a motor depot and eventually demolished in 1932. In 2001, the long project of rebuilding the cathedral was begun. The first foundation stone was laid in 2016 and the finished replica was finally consecrated in 2021 by Patriarch Kirill.\nThe new church stands in central Volgograd, bounded by Communist Street () and Mir Street () on the north and south and Volodarsk Street () and Gogol Street () on the west and east, respectively. This area is also a park, called Alexander's Garden (). The cathedral stands across the street from a World War 2 monument, and a statue of and chapel for, the eponymous Alexander Nevsky.\nFloating Churches.\nVolgograd, hosts one of the few self-propelled floating churches in the world: the chapel boat of Saint Vladimir of Volgograd. Spearheaded by Vladimir Koretsky and assisted by a Dutch Orthodox priest who was part of the organization Aid to the Church in Need (ACN), the Saint Vladimir was consecrated in October 2004 on the shore of the Volga. Originally a decommissioned landing craft found in a shipyard outside St. Petersburg, it took two years to convert it into a floating church. The boat chapel sports three shining domes and was decorated with icons and religious motifs by a local Volgograd artist. On its maiden voyage, the Saint Vladimir reached Astrakhan in the south and Saratov in the north; traveling an 800 kilometer (~500 mile) span of the Volga River.\nIn addition to this self propelled church, Vladimir Koretsky first built two other floating churches in Volgograd, both of which must be towed by another craft. The Saint Innocent was originally a repair vessel and was located in a shipyard in Volgograd. Despite it being in poor condition, the boat had good sized cabins and a kitchen unit; the hull was restored, the largest cabins were merged and a single shining dome was added. Icons and sacred relics were donated by parishes from all over the country and the floating church was consecrated on 22 May 1998. During its first year in operation, it visited 28 villages, where 446 people were baptised and 1,500 received communion. The Saint Innocent was mobile for four months of the year, operating mostly on the Don River, and spent the rest of the time moored in Pyatimorsk, providing a semi permanent church for that rural locality.\nDue to the success of the Saint Innocent, the ACN launched the creation of a second floating church, this time built atop an old barge. Christened the Saint Nicholas, in honor of the original floating church built in 1910, it was moored at a yacht club in Volgograd for several years, serving as a place of worship for passing ships crews. It was later towed to Oktyabrsky, a remote southern village of the Volgograd Oblast, to serve as a semi-permanent church.\nAll of these floating churches were inspired by the original; a retrofitted tug-passenger steamer, which ran between Kazan and Astrakhan, named the Saint Nicholas. Commissioned in 1858, it was first christened the Kriushi, then the Pirate, until it was purchased by the Diocese of Astrakhan in 1910 and converted into a church. It served for 8 years, traveling up and down the Volga River, sometimes clocking 4,000 miles a year. Much like every other church in Russia, it was decommissioned in 1918 by the Soviets. It made such an impact on the local population however, that almost 80 years later, it was the inspiration for a new \"flotilla of God\".\nVolgograd Synagogue.\nAlso known as Beit David Synagogue, it was named after David Kolotilin, a Jewish leader during the Soviet period. Although some sources claim that this was the first synagogue to serve the Jews of Volgograd, was constructed in 1888, and its original purpose was exclusively that of a synagogue, there is little evidence to support this. What little documentation exists suggests that it was indeed built at the turn of the century, but its original purpose is unknown. In fact, a 1903 tourist guide to Tsaritsyn warns that almost all of the buildings in the town are wooden and makes no mention of this structure, so an 1888 construction date is highly unlikely. It is a two-story, rectangular building, made of brick and richly decorated. The architectural style is typical of residential buildings constructed in Tsaritsyn after the turn of the century. The original building barely survived the Battle of Stalingrad; it was in ruins as late as 1997, with broken windows and gaping holes made by Nazi bombs. Some sources suggest that the building was reconstructed, but not restored, by 1999. Emissaries of the Chabad-Lubavitch organization launched a campaign to return the building to the Jewish community and were finally successful in 2003. With the help of multiple fundraising campaigns and generous donors, including Edward Shifrin and Alex Schneider, the synagogue was restored. An annex was constructed in 2005 to mimic the original style and the building was rededicated in 2007. The prayer hall can be found on the first floor, with communal offices on the second. Located at 2 Balachninskaya Street in the center of Volgograd. In addition to regular religious services, it also hosts a soup kitchen, a Jewish day school and an overnight children's camp. As of 2022, the community was led by Rabbi Zalman Yoffe.\nEducation.\nHigher education facilities include:\nSports.\nVolgograd was a host city to four matches of the FIFA World Cup in 2018. A new modern stadium, Volgograd Arena, was built for this occasion on the bank of the Volga River to serve as the venue. The stadium has a seating capacity for 45,000 people, including a press box, a VIP box and seats for people with limited mobility.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nVolgograd is/was twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nVolgograd has a hot-summer humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfa\") with hot summers and cold winters, which borders with cold semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BSk\"). Precipitation is low and spread more or less evenly throughout the year.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32586", "revid": "255060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32586", "title": "V-chip", "text": "Censorship technology based on parental guidance ratings\nV-chip is a technology used in television set receivers in Canada, Mexico, Brazil, and the United States, that allows the blocking of programs based on their ratings category. It is intended for use by parents to manage their children's television viewing based on blocking systems. Televisions manufactured for the United States market since January 2000 are required to have the V-chip technology. Since the idea for blocking programs in this way was patented and tested in Canada by Brett West and John P. Gardner in 1994, the device remains in use into the age of digital television, with the concept since extending into streaming media and digital media players as a basic framework for content restriction.\nAnalog V-chip technology works much like closed captioning and uses the vertical blanking interval in the television signal. The system receives a special code in the broadcast signal that indicates the show's score according to a simple numerical rating system for violence, sex, and language. The programs' signals are encoded based on their rating, on line 21 of the broadcast signal's vertical blanking interval using the XDS protocol, and this is detected by the television set's V-chip. If the program rating is outside the level configured as acceptable on that particular television, the program will be blocked. The V-chip does not block infomercial, news or sportscasts, which are unrated.\nThe V-chip has a four-digit numerical password in order to keep older children from changing its settings. The V-chip can be overridden by anyone who reads the television's instruction and finds out how to reset the password to 0000 (built into the V-chip in case the parents themselves forget the password that they set).\nThe phrase \"V-chip\" was purportedly coined by then-Representative Ed Markey of Massachusetts. According to him the \"V\" stands for \"violence\". By contrast, in an interview with Tim Collings, one of the people who claim to have invented the device, he said that it was intended to stand for \"viewer control\".\nHistory.\nIn 1975, the Family Viewing Hour was introduced in the United States, in which broadcasters had to play TV content suitable for all ages. This idea was quickly abandoned because broadcasters felt it violated their First Amendment rights by restricting what content they could play. The inventor of the V-chip technology originally meant for it to be a simple tool that parents could use to restrict their children's television viewing. He did not expect it would become a national standard for all televisions.\nImplementation.\nIn 1993, Keith Spicer met with top American executives and disclosed information about the V-Chip Technology. \"Tim Collings' creation holds promise in the future of the television industry, and the more exposure achieved, the more nations are able to benefit.\" Discussions took place about the increasing amount of violence on TV and the importance of monitoring and blocking shows. This sparked interest, but no steps were taken for implementation. In 1994 the technology was presented at a \"Violence on TV\" conference in France and later again at a conference in Belgium. This is where Al Gore first became familiarized with the concept of the V-Chip and the exposure helped him to advise Bill Clinton, which led to the decision to pass the Telecommunications Act of 1996. Once the V-Chip gained the ability to block multiple shows at the same time interest in the technology expanded significantly. In January 1998 exclusive rights to the V-Chip were sold to Tri-Vision Electronics Inc.\nForces leading to development.\nScientific-technical.\nAfter being inspired to make a change in the violent programming available to youth, Oregon engineer John Jackson developed the V-chip. Jackson conducted an independent study in Southern Oregon to determine the effects of television on violence. In Canada in the early 1990s, studies on the possible effects of television on violence were conducted by the Canadian Radio-Television Commission, a committee of Parliament, and Heritage Canada. The reports all concluded that violence on television in Canada was a serious problem.\nThe V-chip gained popularity when it was revealed at a Technology Exposition at the G7 meetings in Brussels in 1995.\nPolitical.\nOne of the driving forces of the development of the V-chip was the signing of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 by President Bill Clinton. The television industry was given the opportunity to establish ratings for its programming. The act also ordered that half of all television sets at least 13\u2033 after July 1, 1999, had to have the V-chip installed and that all television sets at least 13\u2033 after January 1, 2000, had to have it installed. In addition, the Federal Communications Commission supported the act and worked to enforce it.\nThe Telecommunications Act.\nThe V-chip was an added provision in Bill Clinton's Telecommunications Act of 1996. He said, \"If every parent uses this chip wisely, it can become a powerful voice against teen violence, teen pregnancy, teen drug use, and for both learning and entertainment,\" as he signed the law on February 8, 1996. \"We're handing the TV remote control back to America's parents so that they can pass on their values and protect their children.\" The addition of the V-chip into the Telecommunications Act was helpful to attract American voters for the 1996 Clinton-Gore campaign.\nThe portion of the overall act that affects the V-chip is of Title V. This section, \"Obscenity and Violence,\" addresses the influence parents may have over their children's viewing capabilities on cable television. Section 551, Parental Choice in Television Programming, outlines the effects that violence has on the youth of a nation and addresses how parents should exercise the control to limit and/or block what information their children are in fact viewing and what is being broadcast into their private homes. Also addressed is the inclusion of the implementation of a rating code for violence within television programming. Parents should be informed of the content of a program prior to its airing so that appropriate precautions may be made to protect their children from said material. The V-Chip technology would be employed in such an event.\nRatings.\nIn 1996, the United States Congress decreed that the television industry should create a voluntary rating system for its shows called the TV parental guidelines. Three main associations (the National Association of Broadcasters, the National Cable Television Association, and the Motion Picture Association of America) would establish this rating system. Along with the three founding associations, the chairman of the FCC would select five members of the advocacy community to participate in establishing television ratings. Altogether the FCC chairman, six members from each broadcasting industry and the five non-industry members make up a total of 24 participants. These ratings are the icons that appear in the corner of the television screen at the beginning of every show and after each commercial break for many broadcasters. These ratings include TV-Y, TV-Y7, TV-Y7-FV, TV-G, TV-PG, TV-14, and TV-MA.\nTV-Y includes all television programs designed to be appropriate for all children. TV-Y7 programs are directed to older children, specifically aged 7 and above. TV-Y7-FV programs are also directed to older children aged 7 and above with the addition that this rating denotes fantasy or animated violence. TV-G includes programs appropriate for all ages because it contains little to no violence, no strong language, and little to no sexual situations. TV-PG programs may include materials that parents may find unsuitable, including moderate violence, some sexual situations, or infrequent coarse language. TV-14 programs have parents strongly cautioned for materials unsuitable for children under 14 years of age. Finally, TV-MA programs are specifically designed to be viewed by adults aged 17 and up.\nInvention and patent.\nInvention.\nTim Collings states he developed the V-chip technology while he was an engineering professor at Simon Fraser University in British Columbia, but he did not obtain a patent on the technology.\nPatent.\nAn idea for blocking programs in this way was patented by Brett West and John P. Gardner in 1994 and tested in Canada. The patent was number 5,550,575. Two others separately patented devices similar or identical to the V-chip: John Olivo of Parental Guide of Omaha, and an Air Force captain by the name of Carl Elam. Collings, Olivo, and Elam all claim to have invented the technology.\nCriticisms.\nUsage.\nOn April 25, 2007, the Federal Communications Commission released a report entitled \"In the Matter of Violent Television Programming And Its Impact On Children\". The report discusses the low usage of V-chip technology. In its analysis, the report addresses the following studies:\nAccording to a 2003 study, parents' low level of V-chip use is explained in part by their unawareness of the device and the \"multi-step and often confusing process\" necessary to use it. Only 27% of all parents in the study group could figure out how to program the V-chip, and many parents \"who might otherwise have used the V-Chip were frustrated by an inability to get it to work properly.\"\nThe Kaiser Family Foundation conducted a telephone survey in 2004 of 1,001 parents of children ages 2\u201317. The results of that survey showed:\nA March 2007 Zogby poll indicated, among other things, that 88% of respondents did not use a V-chip or cable box parental controls in the previous week, leading the Parents Television Council to call the\ntelevision industry's V-chip education campaign a failure. This poll did not measure whether parents were aware of the V-chip and chose not to use it.\nThe networks feared that a single profanity would block an entire program. They also feared that they would lose advertising revenue because advertisers would not pay for time slots during programs that might be blocked.\nLack of supporting research.\nThe American Civil Liberties Union argues, \"Research has not proven that watching violence on television causes watchers to commit violence\" citing the Federal Trade Commission's \"Marketing Violent Entertainment to Children: A Review of the Self-Regulation and Industry Practices in the Motion Picture, Music Recording, &amp; Electronic Game Industries\" report in September 2001 as support. In ACLU's website, ACLU quoted the FTC in saying, \"Most researchers and investigators agree that exposure to media violence alone does not cause a child to commit a violent act, and that it is not the sole, or even the most important, factor in contributing to youth aggression, anti-social attitudes, and violence.\"\nAccording to J.M. Balkin, author of \"Media Filters and the V-Chip\", people \"want to filter out dangerous ideas and views they do not agree with or expressions that offend and anger them.\" There is also cultural and familial differences; an action, activity, or behavior may be deemed as \"appropriate\" for one culture or for one family but may very well be considered \"inappropriate\" for another culture or for another family. Balkin says some people believe that the use of the V-chip is a way for the government to \"intervene and impose binding moral standards\" on others.\nExpenses.\nWhile the V-chip is fairly inexpensive to add to individual television sets, a large amount of money has been spent educating people on the technology. $550 million was spent to educate parents on the V-chip, but they are no more aware of the technology or the ways in which it can be put to use now than they were before the funds were spent.\nInfringement on rights.\nAnother argument brought up is that it is not the government's right to monitor or censor what viewers watch on television. According to this argument, because the government regulates the rating system, it is also regulating much of parents' decision making processes on their children's viewing habits. Caroline Fredrickson, of the American Civil Liberties Union, stated, \"These FCC recommendations are political pandering. The government should not replace parents as decision makers in America's living rooms. There are some things that the government does well. But deciding what is aired and when on television is not one of them.\"\nInsufficient number of users.\nDespite the amount that has been spent on educating parents on use of the V-chip, there is still a low proportion of users. Of parents who have access to the V-chip, just 20% actually use it. As reported in 2007, 52% of parents who had access to the V-chip were unaware of its existence, and 27% of parents who knew of the V-chip's existence opted not to try it. Tim Winters, the Executive director for the Parents Television Council stated, \"What I see is a solution that's flawed at every level. Conceptually, it's not bad, but practically, it's abhorrent.\"\nFrom 1999 to 2001, a research study was conducted at the University of Pennsylvania Annenberg Public Policy Center to observe the use of the V-chip in family households. The study was conducted on a total of 150 families with children between the ages of 7 and 10 who had V-chip television sets in their homes. Over the course of a year, families' use of the V-chip technology was observed to draw conclusions about the overall use of the V-chip in family environments.\nThree experimental groups (\"High Information\", \"Low Information\", \"Control Group\") were used to determine how crucial pre-emptive training and informational sessions on the V-chip were to their actual use. The first group was given a new TV, equipped with V-chip technology, and detailed information about the V-chip. The second group was also given a new TV equipped with V-chip technology but no special training on the V-chip. The control group was not given a new TV or special training but was followed over the same time period to observe their V-chip use.\nOverall, the study found this:\nMany families either had no idea that their television possessed a V-chip or gave up after struggling to program it. Even families who were given extensive information on the V-chip still opted to not use the technology. Overall, this study suggests that there are an insufficient number of households that implement the V-chip technology.\nSupport.\nWhile a lot of controversies have been sparked by the V-chip, what sets it apart from other issues is that the V-chip imposes no government constraints on television programming itself; it is up to an individual family's discretion to choose which programs to block. When Congressman Ed Markey, chair of the House Telecommunications Subcommittee, introduced the first V-chip legislation, he told the press that parents \"will be given the power to send a message directly to the industry. The government will not be involved.\"\nParental responsibility.\nWhile the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and Parents Television Council (PTC) research has shown low percentages in parental involvement in television viewing control, Television Watch, a Charleston, South Carolina-based organization advocating the use of parental controls like the V-chip, has consistently found otherwise in its research. They found in June 2007 that the majority of parents personally monitor their children's television viewing in some way, whether through use of the V-chip or other means. TV Watch has also found that most parents know that they have the option of the V-chip or other parental controls to monitor their children's television viewing, and believe it is primarily their responsibility, not that of the government, to protect children from inappropriate content on television.\nIn response to the PTC survey on the V-chip that claimed the device's failure, TV Watch maintains that the survey was \"flawed by faulty analysis and biased methodology\". TV Watch also participated in a Kaiser Family Foundation forum in June 2007, based on recent Kaiser research, which claims that most parents do monitor their children's television viewing, whether or not by means of the V-chip.\nExpenses.\nIn March 1998, \"The Washington Times\" reported that the V-chip was envisioned to be inexpensive. A V-chip decoder for existing sets was reckoned between $5\u201310 (though it was not readily available in the consumer market). Since 2000, every television set with screens of 13\u2033 or larger has required V-chip techonolgy as part of the set, and over time became a low-cost part of most television operating systems, even for sets under 13\".\nEase of monitoring for parents.\nThe TV ratings system is designed to aid parents in deciding what programming they deem appropriate for their children to watch. One such site that explains the ratings system is TheTVBoss.org, which was created by the United States Ad Council. The website explains the various options for controlling children's viewing patterns. It also contains instructions for activating the chip.\nSupport from PTA groups.\nMany parents' groups are in favor of monitoring children's viewing habits, mostly for the purpose of building family values. \"America's families will be now the ultimate judges of [the new ratings system's] effectiveness,\" said Lois Joan White, Parent-Teacher Association president, in 1997 in support of V-chip technology. The V-chip is also supported by other websites like FamilySafeMedia.com, which presents technologies like the Weemote and TVGuardian as alternatives to the V-chip.\nThe V-chip and commercials.\nThe V-chip has provided parents and guardians the ability to monitor and block television shows that are unfavorable for children to watch in specific households by reading the information that is encoded in the rated program and blocking it based upon that rating it has been given. Due to the increasing variety of technology that is being developed and used in the household, however, parents are concerned that their children will be exposed to the same content they are trying to block through unrated commercials. Because commercials are not rated, the V-chip does not have the ability to censor lewd or inappropriate commercials. This raises issues because children can see the same content that they are blocked on regular shows while watching commercials. This causes the V-Chip to be ineffective unless it applies to both television programs as well as commercials.\nBecause rating commercials globally would be a difficult task, a possible suggestion would be to limit inappropriate commercials and promotions shown at certain times that children watch television. In order to give children some protection from seeing inappropriate commercials, certain improvements to the V-Chip should be made that can follow the same standard across all areas of media that include \"broadcast, cable, satellite, DVRs and, to the extent possible, the Internet.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32587", "revid": "28979433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32587", "title": "Veganism", "text": "Practice of abstaining from exploitation of animals and the use of animal products\nVeganism is the practice of abstaining from the use of animal products and the consumption of animal source foods, and an associated philosophy that rejects the commodity status of animals. A person who practices veganism is known as a vegan; the word is also used to describe foods and materials that are compatible with veganism.\nEthical veganism excludes all forms of animal use, whether in agriculture for labour or food (e.g., meat, fish and other animal seafood, eggs, honey, and dairy products such as milk or cheese), in clothing and industry (e.g., leather, wool, fur, and some cosmetics), in entertainment (e.g., zoos, exotic pets, and circuses), or in services (e.g., mounted police, working animals, and animal testing). People who follow a vegan diet for the benefits to the environment, their health or for religion are regularly also described as vegans.\nAlthough individuals have been renouncing the consumption of products of animal origin since ancient times, the term \"veganism\" itself was coined in 1944 by Donald and Dorothy Watson. The aim was to differentiate it from vegetarianism, which rejects the consumption of meat but accepts the consumption of other products of animal origin, such as milk, dairy products, eggs, and other animal products. Interest in veganism increased significantly in the 2010s.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrigins.\nHistorical background.\nVegetarianism can be traced back to the Indus Valley civilization in 3300\u20131300\u00a0BCE in the Indian subcontinent, particularly in northern and western ancient India. Early vegetarians included Indian philosophers such as Parshavnatha, Mahavira, Acharya Kundakunda, Umaswati, Samantabhadra, and Valluvar, as well as the Indian emperors Chandragupta Maurya and Ashoka. \nOne of the earliest known vegans was the Arab poet al-Ma'arri, famous for his poem \"I No Longer Steal From Nature\". (c.\u2009973\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091057).\nAnother vegan who predated the term \"vegan\" was English philosopher Lewis Gompertz.\nAncient vegan arguments were based on health, the transmigration of souls, animal welfare, and the view \u2014 espoused by Porphyry in (\"On Abstinence from Animal Food\", c.\u2009268\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009270) \u2014 that if humans deserve justice, then so do animals.\nDevelopment in the 19th century.\nVegetarianism established itself as a significant movement in 19th-century Britain and the United States. A minority of vegetarians avoided animal food entirely. In 1813, the poet Percy Bysshe Shelley published \"A Vindication of Natural Diet\", advocating \"abstinence from animal food and spirituous liquors\", and in 1815, William Lambe, a London physician, said that his \"water and vegetable diet\" could cure anything from tuberculosis to acne. Lambe called animal food a \"habitual irritation\" and argued that \"milk eating and flesh-eating are but branches of a common system and they must stand or fall together\". Sylvester Graham's meatless Graham diet\u2014mostly fruit, vegetables, water, and bread made at home with stoneground flour\u2014became popular as a health remedy in the 1830s in the United States. The first known vegan cookbook was Asenath Nicholson's \"Kitchen Philosophy for Vegetarians\", published in 1849.\nSeveral vegan communities were established around this time. In Massachusetts, Amos Bronson Alcott, father of the novelist Louisa May Alcott, opened the Temple School in 1834 and Fruitlands in 1844, and in England, James Pierrepont Greaves founded the Concordium, a vegan community at Alcott House on Ham Common, in 1838.\nDevelopment in the 20th century.\nC. W. Daniel published an early vegan cookbook, Rupert H. Wheldon's \"No Animal Food: Two Essays and 100 Recipes\", in 1910. The consumption of milk and eggs became a battleground over the following decades within the Vegetarian Society. There were regular discussions about it in the \"Vegetarian Messenger\"; it appears from the correspondence pages that many opponents of veganism were vegetarians.\nDuring a visit to London in 1931, Mahatma Gandhi\u2014who had joined the Vegetarian Society's executive committee when he lived in London from 1888 to 1891\u2014gave a speech to the Society arguing that it ought to promote a meat-free diet as a matter of morality, not health. Lacto-vegetarians acknowledged the ethical consistency of the vegan position but regarded a vegan diet as impracticable and were concerned that it might be an impediment to spreading vegetarianism if vegans found themselves unable to participate in social circles where no non-animal food was available. This became the predominant view of the Vegetarian Society, which in 1935 stated: \"The lacto-vegetarians, on the whole, do not defend the practice of consuming the dairy products except on the ground of expediency.\"\nEtymology.\nIn August 1944, several members of the Vegetarian Society asked that a section of its newsletter be devoted to non-dairy vegetarianism. When the request was denied, Donald Watson, secretary of the Leicester branch, set up a new quarterly newsletter, \"The Vegan News\", in November 1944. The word \"vegan\" was invented by Watson and Dorothy Morgan, a schoolteacher he later married. The word is based on \"the first three and last two letters of 'vegetarian'\" because it marked, in Watson's words, \"the beginning and end of vegetarian\". \"The Vegan News\" asked its readers if they could think of anything better than \"vegan\" to stand for \"non-dairy vegetarian\". They suggested \"allvega\", \"neo-vegetarian\", \"dairyban\", \"vitan\", \"benevore\", \"sanivores\", and \"beaumangeur\".\nAccording to Joanne Stepaniak, the word \"vegan\" was first published independently in 1962 by the \"Oxford Illustrated Dictionary\", defined as \"a vegetarian who eats no butter, eggs, cheese, or milk\".\nFounding of The Vegan Society.\nThe first edition of \"The Vegan News\" attracted more than 100 letters, including from George Bernard Shaw, who resolved to give up eggs and dairy. The Vegan Society held its first meeting in early November at the Attic Club, 144 High Holborn, London. In attendance were Donald Watson, Elsie B. Shrigley, Fay K. Henderson, Alfred Hy Haffenden, Paul Spencer and Bernard Drake, with Mme Pataleewa (Barbara Moore, a Russian-British engineer) observing. World Vegan Day is held every 1 November to mark the founding of the Society, and the Society considers November World Vegan Month.\n\"The Vegan News\" changed its name to \"The Vegan\" in November 1945, by which time it had 500 subscribers. It published recipes and a \"vegan trade list\" of animal-free products, such as toothpastes, shoe polishes, stationery and glue. Vegan books appeared, including \"Vegan Recipes\" by Fay K. Henderson (1946) and \"Aids to a Vegan Diet for Children\" by Kathleen V. Mayo (1948).\nThe Vegan Society soon made clear that it rejected the use of animals for any purpose, not only in diet. In 1947, Watson wrote: \"The vegan renounces it as superstitious that human life depends upon the exploitation of these creatures whose feelings are much the same as our own\". From 1948, \"The Vegan\"'s front page read: \"Advocating living without exploitation\", and in 1951, the Society published its definition of \"veganism\" as \"the doctrine that man should live without exploiting animals\". In 1956, its vice-president, Leslie Cross, founded the Plantmilk Society and in 1965, as Plantmilk Ltd and later Plamil Foods, it began production of one of the first widely distributed soy milks in the Western world.\nSpread to the United States.\nThe first vegan society in the U.S. was founded in 1948 by Catherine Nimmo and Rubin Abramowitz in California, who distributed Watson's newsletter. In 1960, H. Jay Dinshah founded the American Vegan Society (AVS), linking veganism to the concept of \"ahimsa\", \"non-harming\" in Sanskrit.\nDefinition.\nDistinctions may be made between several categories of veganism. \"Ethical veganism\" means avoiding using animals, animal products, and animal-tested products for any purpose, when practicable. The motivation behind this is concern about animal welfare. Another term is \"environmental veganism\", which refers to the avoidance of animal products on the grounds that the industrial farming of animals is environmentally damaging and unsustainable. \"Dietary veganism\", whose practitioners are also known as \"strict vegetarians\", refrain from consuming meat, eggs, dairy products, and any other animal-derived substances. This can be for religious reason too.\nSince 1988, The UK's Vegan Society gives this definitions of veganism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Veganism is a philosophy and way of living which seeks to exclude\u2014as far as is possible and practicable\u2014all forms of exploitation of, and cruelty to, animals for food, clothing or any other purpose; and by extension, promotes the development and use of animal-free alternatives for the benefit of animals, humans and the environment. In dietary terms it denotes the practice of dispensing with all products derived wholly or partly from animals.\u2014\u200a\nA 2021 study found this to be the most popular definition amongst vegans from a number of other prominent definitions. It also found that while most vegans ranked diet-only based definitions such as \"strict vegetarianism\" last, non-vegans picked these far more frequently.\nThe German consumer protection minister conference approved a definition for food suitable for vegans on 22 April 2016. In 2021, the International Organization for Standardization published standard ISO 23662 on \"definitions and technical criteria for foods and food ingredients suitable for vegetarians or vegans and for labelling and claims\". However, this was rejected by the Dutch Vegan Association who found the standard inconsistent with their vision.\nIncreasing interest.\nHistory of alternative food movements.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, a vegetarian food movement emerged as part of the counterculture in the United States that focused on concerns about diet, the environment, and a distrust of food producers, leading to increasing interest in organic gardening. One of the most influential vegetarian books of that time was Frances Moore Lapp\u00e9's 1971 \"Diet for a Small Planet\". It sold more than three million copies and suggested \"getting off the top of the food chain\".\nThe following decades saw research by a group of scientists and doctors in the U.S., including Dean Ornish, Caldwell Esselstyn, Neal D. Barnard, John A. McDougall, Michael Greger, and biochemist T. Colin Campbell, who argued that diets based on animal fat and animal protein, such as the Western pattern diet, were unhealthy. They produced a series of books that recommend vegan or vegetarian diets, including McDougall's \"The McDougall Plan\" (1983), John Robbins's \"Diet for a New America\" (1987), which associated meat eating with environmental damage, and \"Dr. Dean Ornish's Program for Reversing Heart Disease\" (1990). In 2003 two major North American dietitians' associations claimed that well-planned vegan diets were suitable for all life stages. This was followed by the film \"Earthlings\" (2005), Campbell's \"The China Study\" (2005), Rory Freedman and Kim Barnouin's \"Skinny Bitch\" (2005), Jonathan Safran Foer's \"Eating Animals\" (2009), and the film \"Forks Over Knives\" (2011).\nIn the 1980s, veganism became associated with punk subculture and ideologies, particularly straight edge hardcore punk in the U.S. and anarcho-punk in the United Kingdom. This association continues into the 21st century, as evidenced by the prominence of vegan punk events such as Fluff Fest in Europe.\nVegan diet into the mainstream.\nThe vegan diet became increasingly mainstream in the 2010s, especially in the latter half. \"The Economist\" declared 2019 \"the year of the vegan\". Chain restaurants began marking vegan items on their menus and supermarkets improved their selection of vegan-processed food.\nThe global mock-meat market increased by 18 percent between 2005 and 2010, and in the U.S. by eight percent between 2012 and 2015, to $553\u00a0million a year. The Vegetarian Butcher (), the first known vegetarian butcher shop, selling mock meats, opened in the Netherlands in 2010, while America's first vegan butcher, the Herbivorous Butcher, opened in Minneapolis in 2016. Since 2017, more than 12,500 chain restaurant locations have begun offering Beyond Meat and Impossible Foods products, including Carl's Jr. outlets offering Beyond Burgers and Burger King outlets serving Impossible Whoppers. Plant-derived meat sales in the U.S. grew 37% between 2017 and 2019.\nIn 2011, Europe's first vegan supermarkets appeared in Germany: Veganz in Berlin and Vegilicious in Dortmund. In 2013, the Oktoberfest in Munich (traditionally a meat-heavy event) offered vegan dishes for the first time in its 200-year history.\nBy 2016, 49% of Americans were drinking plant milk, and 91% still drank dairy milk. In the U.K., the plant milk market increased by 155 percent in two years, from 36\u00a0million litres (63\u00a0million imperial pints) in 2011 to 92\u00a0million (162\u00a0million imperial pints) in 2013. There was a 185% increase in new vegan products between 2012 and 2016 in the U.K. In 2017, the United States School Nutrition Association found 14% of school districts across the country were serving vegan school meals compared to 11.5% of schools offering vegan lunch in 2016.\nIn total, as of 2016[ [update]], the largest share of vegan consumers globally currently reside in Asia Pacific with nine percent of people following a vegan diet. In 2017, veganism rose in popularity in Hong Kong and China, particularly among millennials. China's vegan market was estimated to rise by more than 17% between 2015 and 2020, which is expected to be \"the fastest growth rate internationally in that period\". This exceeds the projected growth in the second and third fastest-growing vegan markets internationally in the same period, the United Arab Emirates (10.6%) and Australia (9.6%) respectively.\nIn 2018, Jacy Reese Anthis's book \"The End of Animal Farming\" argued that veganism will completely replace animal-based food by 2100. The book was featured in \"The Guardian\", \"The New Republic\", and \"Forbes\", among other newspapers and magazines.\nThe growth of schools serving vegan school meals has increased in recent years with the lunches added by Los Angeles, California in 2018, Portland, Maine in 2019, and New York City in 2022.\nIn January 2021, 582,538 people from 209 countries and territories signed up for Veganuary, breaking the previous year's record of 400,000. That month, ONA in France became the first vegan restaurant in the country to receive a Michelin star. That year, 79 more vegan restaurants around the world received Michelin stars. At the end of the year, a poll conducted by \"The Guardian\" showed that a new high of 36% of the British public were interested in veganism.\nPrevalence across the globe.\nThe prevalence of veganism differs wildly per country and region and a minority everywhere. Around 10% of people are vegan in India, and around 2% in many developed Western countries.\nThe city with the most vegan restaurants per resident in 2021 according to data collected from HappyCow was Chiang Mai (Thailand), followed by Ubud (Bali, Indonesia), Phuket (Thailand), Tel Aviv (Israel), and Lisbon (Portugal).\nVegan cuisine and foods.\nVegan cuisine is a style of cooking defined by the inclusion of grains, legumes, nuts, vegetables, fruits, meat alternatives (including tofu, tempeh, and seitan), vegan cheese, and plant milks and by the exclusion of animal-based dairy, eggs, animal-based meat and animal tissue products (such as gelatin or animal-derived rennet), and insect-based honey. Vegan cuisine differs from vegetarian cuisine, which often includes honey, dairy, and eggs.\nMeat alternatives.\nVegan meat alternatives are commonly sold in forms like vegetarian sausage, mince, or veggie burgers. They are often made from soybeans, seitan (wheat gluten), beans, lentils, rice, mushrooms or vegetables. Meat substitutes have been made in China since at least the Tang dynasty (618 to 907 common era), including mock duck made from seitan. They are much newer to Western countries. Some famous Western producers of vegan meat alternatives include Impossible Foods and Beyond Meat. In the late 2010s many meat producers and supermarkets also started making their own brands of vegan meat substitutes as well.\nPlant milk and dairy product alternatives.\nPlant milks\u2014such as soy milk, almond milk, cashew milk, grain milks (oat milk, flax milk and rice milk), hemp milk, and coconut milk\u2014are used in place of cow or goat milk. Soy milk provides around 7\u00a0g (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444oz) of protein per cup (240\u00a0mL or 8\u00a0fl\u00a0oz), compared with 8\u00a0g (2/7oz) of protein per cup of cow's milk. Almond milk is lower in dietary energy, carbohydrates, and protein. \nNeither plant milk nor cow milk should be used as a replacement for breast milk for babies. Babies who are not breastfed may be fed commercial infant formula, normally based on cow milk or soy. The latter is known as soy-based infant formula or SBIF.\nButter and margarine can be replaced with alternate vegan products. Vegan cheeses are made from seeds, soybeans, coconut oil, tapioca, and rice, among other ingredients; and can replicate the meltability of dairy cheese. Nutritional yeast is also a common substitute for the taste of cheese in vegan recipes. Dairy yoghurt can be replaced with plant-derived products such as soy yoghurt. Various types of plant cream have been created to replace dairy cream, and some types of imitation whipped cream are non-dairy.\nIn the 2010s and 2020s, a number of companies have genetically engineered yeast to produce cow milk proteins, whey, or fat, without the use of cows. These include Perfect Day, Novacca, Motif FoodWorks, Remilk, Final Foods, Imagindairy, Nourish Ingredients, and Circe.\nEgg replacements.\nBaking powder, silken (soft) tofu, mashed potato, bananas, flaxseeds, and aquafaba from chickpeas can also be used as egg substitutes. Which one of these works depends on the egg property the replacement is meant to emulate. Scrambled tofu, for instance, replaces scrambled eggs, but tofu does not act as a binding agent for cakes like raw eggs, flaxseeds or bananas do. As of 2019 in the U.S., many vegan egg substitutes were available, including products used for \"scrambled\" eggs, cakes, cookies, and doughnuts.\nRaw veganism.\nRaw veganism, combining veganism and raw foodism, excludes all animal products and food cooked above . A raw vegan diet includes vegetables, fruits, nuts, grain and legume sprouts, seeds, and sea vegetables. There are many variations of the diet, including fruitarianism.\nAnimal products.\nGeneral.\nWhile vegans broadly abstain from animal products, there are many ways in which animal products are used, and different individuals and organizations that identify with the practice of veganism may use some limited animal products based on philosophy, means or other concerns. Philosopher Gary Steiner argues that it is not possible to be entirely vegan, because animal use and products are \"deeply and imperceptibly woven into the fabric of human society\".\n\"Animal Ingredients A to Z\" (2004) and \"Veganissimo A to Z\" (2013) list which ingredients might be animal-derived. The British Vegan Society's sunflower logo and PETA's bunny logo mean the product is certified vegan, which includes no animal testing. The Leaping Bunny logo signals no animal testing, but it might not be vegan. The Vegan Society criteria for vegan certification are that the product contain no animal products, and that neither the finished item nor its ingredients have been tested on animals by, or on behalf of, the manufacturer or by anyone over whom the manufacturer has control. Its website contains a list of certified products, as does Australia's Choose Cruelty Free (CCF). The British Vegan Society will certify a product only if it is free of animal involvement as far as possible and practical, including animal testing, but \"recognises that it is not always possible to make a choice that avoids the use of animals\", an issue that was highlighted in 2016 when it became known that the UK's newly introduced \u00a35 note contained tallow.\nClothing.\nMany clothing products may be made of animal products such as silk, wool (including lambswool, shearling, cashmere, angora, mohair, and a number of other fine wools), fur, feathers, pearls, animal-derived dyes, leather, snakeskin, or other kinds of skin or animal product. Most leather clothing is made from cow skins. Vegans discourage the use of leather but may continue to wear leather they bought before adopting the diet on the grounds that they are not financially supporting the meat industry. However, vegans try to work towards a point where they no longer own animal products. Ethical vegans may wear clothing items and accessories made of non-animal-derived materials such as hemp, linen, cotton, canvas, polyester, artificial leather (pleather), rubber, and vinyl. Leather alternatives can come from materials such as cork, pi\u00f1a (from pineapples), cactus, and mushroom leather. Some vegan clothes, in particular leather alternatives, are made of petroleum-based products, which has triggered criticism because of the environmental damage involved in their production.\nToiletries.\nWhile dietary vegans might use animal products in toiletries, ethical veganism extends not only to matters of food but also to the use of animal products, and rejects the commodification of animals altogether. Ethical vegans replace personal care products and household cleaners containing animal products with vegan products. Animal ingredients are ubiquitous because they are relatively inexpensive. After animals are slaughtered for meat, the leftovers are put through a rendering process and some of that material, particularly the fat, is used in toiletries. Vegans also avoid using sea sponges.\nCommon animal-derived ingredients include tallow in soap; collagen-derived glycerine, which used as a lubricant and humectant in many haircare products, moisturizers, shaving foams, soaps and toothpastes; lanolin from sheep's wool, often found in lip balm and moisturizers; stearic acid, a common ingredient in face creams, shaving foam and shampoos (like glycerine, it can be plant-derived, but is usually animal-derived); lactic acid, an alpha-hydroxy acid derived from animal milk, used in moisturizers; allantoin\u2014from the comfrey plant or cow urine\u2014found in shampoos, moisturizers and toothpaste; and carmine from scale insects, such as the female cochineal, used in food and cosmetics to produce red and pink shades;\nBeauty Without Cruelty, founded as a charity in 1959, was one of the earliest manufacturers and certifiers of animal-free personal care products.\nHair extensions.\nHair extensions are generally avoided by ethical vegans since they are made from human hair, but ethical vegans may use synthetic alternatives. Environmental vegans avoid synthetic hair extensions due to their biodegradability.\nInsect products.\nHoney, silk, and other direct insect products are not considered suitable for vegans. Exploiting the labour of bees and harvesting their energy source is seen as immoral, and commercial beekeeping operations can harm and even kill bees. In addition to eating insects whole, a number of common additives are made from or by insects and therefore not vegan, e.g.: Cochineal (E120), Shellac (E904), and Beeswax (E901).\nPet food.\nSome vegans use plant-derived pet food to feed their pets. Motivation for this can be the impact on food animals and the environmental impact of meat-based pet food. This is particularly true for domesticated cats and dogs, for which vegan pet food is available.\nThis practice has been met with caution and criticism, especially regarding vegan cat diets because, unlike omnivorous dogs, felids are obligate carnivores, which means they need synthetic supplements added to a plant-based diet. There are concerns plant-based pet foods are not meeting nutritional guidelines. This is common among conventional pet foods too, and survey of 29 pet food manufacturers actually found plant-based pet foods to be more likely to be nutritionally sound. A 2023 systematic review found no evidence of considerable effects on health; however, it was pointed out that included studies had potential issues with selection bias, were not long term, or used low sample sizes.\nOther products and farming practices.\nA concern is the case of medications, which are routinely tested on animals to ensure they are effective and safe, and may also contain animal ingredients, such as lactose, gelatine, or stearates. There may be no alternatives to prescribed medication or these alternatives may be unsuitable, less effective, or have more adverse side effects. Experimentation with laboratory animals is also used for evaluating the safety of vaccines, food additives, cosmetics, household products, workplace chemicals, and many other substances. Vaccines may also be produced using animal products. E.g. most flu vaccines are manufactured using eggs.\nFarming of fruits and vegetables may include fertilizing the soil with animal manure \u2013 even on organic farms, possibly causing a concern to vegans for ethical or environmental reasons. \"Vegan\" (or \"animal-free\") farming uses plant compost only.\nAnimal use.\nGeneral.\nVegans oppose the use of animals for any purpose, including food, clothing, toiletries, testing, and places that use animals for entertainment.\nHorseback riding.\nVegans oppose horseback riding on the basis that it is unnecessary and exploitative. While The Vegan Society acknowledges that there are ways to minimize cruelty in \"breaking\" a horse, they believe that the fact that horses need to be broken at all shows that horses do not naturally expect to be ridden. The Vegan Society also points out that in the modern age, horseback riding is a hobby rather than a legitimate means of transportation.\nZoos and aquariums.\nVegans avoid visiting zoos and aquariums on the belief that they exploit animals for entertainment. Some vegans may visit animal sanctuaries as an alternative.\nPets.\nMany vegans do not purchase pets, due to an ethical stance against practices such as artificial insemination and separating animals from their offspring, but may adopt or rescue a domestic animal that cannot live independently. According to Vegan FTA, an animal rights organisation, vegans do not keep exotic pets, such as birds, tortoises, and fish, believing that because they have not been domesticated, they do not belong in captivity.\nResearch and guidance.\nConclusions in scientific review articles range from stating benefits, to concluding that evidence is not yet sufficient, to identifying possible health problems. One review reported moderate evidence that adhering to a vegan diet for at least 12 weeks may be effective in individuals with overweight or type 2 diabetes to induce a meaningful decrease in body weight and improve glycemia. A second reported that vegetarian diets, including vegan diets, are associated with lower risk for vascular disease, obesity, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes. A third claimed that a vegan diet may be effective for reducing body weight, lowering the risk of cancer, and providing a lower risk of all-cause mortality. People on a vegan diet with diabetes or cardiovascular diseases may have lower levels of disease biomarkers.\nA Cochrane review of randomized controlled trials found that there is \"currently insufficient information to draw conclusions about the effects of vegan dietary interventions on cardiovascular disease risk factors\". There is inconsistent evidence for vegan diets providing an effect on metabolic syndrome. A meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies concluded that vegan diets are associated with reduced risk of ischemic heart disease, but no clear association was found for cardiovascular disease and stroke. There is tentative evidence of an association between vegan diets and reduced risk of cancer. Vegans may be at risk of low bone mineral density.\nPositions of dietetic and government associations.\nThe Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics and Dietitians of Canada claim that properly planned vegetarian or vegan diets are appropriate for all life stages, including pregnancy and lactation. The Australian National Health and Medical Research Council similarly believe a well-planned vegan diet is viable for any age, as does the British Dietetic Association, British National Health Service and the Canadian Pediatric Society.\nAs of 2024 the German Society for Nutrition (DGE) holds that for healthy adults a vegan diet can be healthful, when B12 is supplemented and the diet is well-planned so that critical nutrients are provided. Because data is lacking the DGE does not recommend for or against vegan diets for vulnerable groups like children, young people, elderly and pregnant or breastfeeding women. If individuals in these groups decide for a vegan diet, they are suggested to seek professional advice, as planning the diet in these cases is complex and irreversible consequences cannot be ruled out, when the diet is not well planned. The DGE highlights that a vegan diet is exceptionally environmental friendly and can reduce greenhouse gases by about 70\u201380%, while having other environmental benefits, too. As of 2022, 45% of government nutritional guidelines discuss vegan meat or milk alternatives, or both.\nPregnancy, infants and children.\nThe Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics consider well-planned vegetarian and vegan diets \"appropriate for all stages of the life cycle, including pregnancy, lactation, infancy, childhood, adolescence, older adulthood, and for athletes.\" The German Society for Nutrition cautioned against a vegan diet for pregnant women, breastfeeding women, babies, children, and adolescents. The position of the Canadian Pediatric Society is that \"well-planned vegetarian and vegan diets with appropriate attention to specific nutrient components can provide a healthy alternative lifestyle at all stages of fetal, infant, child and adolescent growth. It is recommended that attention should be given to nutrient intake, particularly protein, vitamins B12 and D, essential fatty acids, iron, zinc, and calcium.\"\nNutrients and potential deficiencies.\nVegan diets tend to be higher in dietary fiber, magnesium, folic acid, vitamin C, vitamin E, iron, and phytochemicals, and lower in dietary energy, saturated fat, cholesterol, omega-3 fatty acid, vitamin D, calcium, zinc, and vitamin B12. As a result of the elimination of all animal products, a poorly planned vegan diet can lead to nutritional deficiencies that counteract its beneficial effects and cause serious health issues, some of which can only be prevented with fortified foods or dietary supplements. Vitamin B12 supplementation is important because its deficiency can cause blood disorders and potentially irreversible neurological damage; this danger is also one of the most common in poorly planned non-vegan diets. The American Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics states that special attention may be necessary to ensure that a vegan diet provides adequate amounts of vitamin B12, omega-3 fatty acids, vitamin D, calcium, iodine, iron, and zinc. It also states that concern that vegans and vegan athletes may not consume an adequate amount and quality of protein is unsubstantiated.\nThese nutrients are available in plant foods, with the exception of vitamin B12, which can be obtained only from B12-fortified vegan foods or supplements. Vitamin B12 deficiency occurs in up to 80% of all vegans in some Asian countries. Iodine may also require supplementation, such as using iodized salt.\nPhilosophy.\nEthical veganism.\nEthical veganism is based on opposition to speciesism, the assignment of value to individuals based on (animal) species membership alone. Divisions within animal rights theory include the utilitarian, protectionist approach, which pursues improved conditions for animals. It also pertains to the rights-based abolitionism, which seeks to end human ownership of non-humans. Abolitionists argue that protectionism serves only to make the public feel that animal use can be morally unproblematic (the \"happy meat\" position). A common argument used while advocating for ethical veganism is the argument from marginal cases. The argument presents the idea that if negative rights are prescribed to human infants, cognitively and/or physically disabled humans, then by logical extension, animals should also be granted the same negative rights as no morally relevant characteristics exist between animals and marginal-case human beings.\nDonald Watson, co-founder of The Vegan Society, asked why he was an ethical vegan, replied, \"If an open-minded, honest person pursues a course long enough, and listens to all the criticisms, and in one's own mind can satisfactorily meet all the criticisms against that idea, sooner or later one's resistance against what one sees as evil tradition has to be discarded.\" Of bloodsports, he has said that \"to kill creatures for fun must be the very dregs\" and that vivisection and animal experimentation \"is probably the cruelest of all Man's attack on the rest of Creation.\" He has also said, \"vegetarianism, whilst being a necessary stepping-stone between meat eating and veganism, is only a stepping stone.\"\nAlex Hershaft, co-founder of the Farm Animal Rights Movement and Holocaust survivor, says he \"was always bothered by the idea of hitting a beautiful, living, innocent animal over the head, cutting him up into pieces, then shoving the pieces into [his] mouth\" and that his experiences in the Nazi Holocaust allowed him \"to empathize with the conditions of animals in factory farms, auction yards, and slaughterhouses\" because he \"knows firsthand what it's like to be treated like a worthless object.\" Several animal rights activists, including Isaac Bashevis Singer, Gary Yourofsky and Karen Davis, have compared the cruel treatment of animals in CAFOs and slaughterhouses to the Holocaust.\nLaw professor Gary Francione, an abolitionist, argues that all sentient beings should have the right not to be treated as property, and that veganism must be the baseline for anyone who believes that non-humans have intrinsic moral value. Philosopher Tom Regan, also a rights theorist, argues that animals possess value as \"subjects-of-a-life\", because they have beliefs, desires, memory and the ability to initiate action in pursuit of goals. The right of subjects-of-a-life not to be harmed can be overridden by other moral principles, but Regan argues that pleasure, convenience and the economic interests of farmers are not weighty enough. Philosopher Peter Singer, a protectionist and utilitarian, argues that there is no moral or logical justification for failing to count animal suffering as a consequence when making decisions, and that killing animals should be rejected unless necessary for survival. Despite this, he writes that \"ethical thinking can be sensitive to circumstances\" and that he is \"not too concerned about trivial infractions\".\nAn argument by Bruce Friedrich, also a protectionist, holds that strict veganism harms animals because it focuses on personal purity rather than encouraging people to give up whatever animal products they can. For Francione, this is similar to arguing that, because human-rights abuses can never be eliminated, we should not defend human rights in situations we control. By failing to ask a server whether something contains animal products, we reinforce that the moral rights of animals are a matter of convenience, he argues. He concludes from this that the protectionist position fails on its own consequentialist terms.\nPhilosopher Val Plumwood maintained that ethical veganism is \"subtly human-centred\", an example of what she called \"human/nature dualism\", because it views humanity as separate from the rest of nature. Ethical vegans want to admit non-humans into the category that deserves special protection rather than recognize the \"ecological embeddedness\" of all. Plumwood wrote that animal food may be an \"unnecessary evil\" from the perspective of the consumer who \"draws on the whole planet for nutritional needs\"\u2014and she strongly opposed factory farming\u2014but for anyone relying on a much smaller ecosystem, it is very difficult or impossible to be vegan.\nBioethicist Ben Mepham, in his review of Francione and Garner's book \"The Animal Rights Debate: Abolition or Regulation?\", concludes, \"if the aim of ethics is to choose the right, or best, course of action in specific circumstances 'all things considered', it is arguable that adherence to such an absolutist agenda is simplistic and open to serious self-contradictions. Or, as Farlie puts it, with characteristic panache: 'to conclude that veganism is the \"only ethical response\" is to take a big leap into a very muddy pond'.\" He cites as examples the adverse effects on animal wildlife derived from the agricultural practices necessary to sustain most vegan diets and the ethical contradiction of favoring the welfare of domesticated animals but not that of wild animals; the imbalance between the resources that are used to promote the welfare of animals as opposed to those destined to alleviate the suffering of the approximately one billion human beings who undergo malnutrition, abuse and exploitation; the focus on attitudes and conditions in Western developed countries, leaving out the rights and interests of societies whose economy, culture and, in some cases, survival rely on a symbiotic relationship with animals.\nDavid Pearce, a transhumanist philosopher, has argued that humanity has a \"hedonistic imperative\" not merely to avoid cruelty to animals caused by humans but also to redesign the global ecosystem such that wild animal suffering in nature ceases to exist. In pursuit of abolishing suffering, Pearce promotes predation elimination among animals and the \"cross-species global analogue of the welfare state\". Fertility regulation could maintain herbivore populations at sustainable levels, \"a more civilised and compassionate policy option than famine, predation, and disease\". The increasing number of vegans and vegetarians in the transhumanism movement has been attributed in part to Pearce's influence.\nA growing political philosophy that incorporates veganism as part of its revolutionary praxis is veganarchism, which seeks \"total abolition\" or \"total liberation\" for all animals, including humans. Veganarchists identify the state as unnecessary and harmful to animals, both human and non-human, and advocate for the adoption of veganism in a stateless society. The term was popularized in 1995 by Brian A. Dominick's pamphlet \"Animal Liberation and Social Revolution\", described as \"a vegan perspective on anarchism or an anarchist perspective on veganism\".\nDirect action is a common practice among veganarchists (and anarchists generally) with groups like the Animal Liberation Front (ALF), the Animal Rights Militia (ARM), the Justice Department (JD) and Revolutionary Cells \u2013 Animal Liberation Brigade (RCALB) often engaging in such activities, sometimes criminally, to further their goals. Steven Best, animal rights activist and professor of philosophy at the University of Texas at El Paso, advocates this approach, and has been critical of vegan activists like Francione for supporting animal liberation but not total liberation, which would include not only opposition to \"the property status of animals\" but also \"a serious critique of capitalism, the state, property relations, and commodification dynamics in general.\" In particular, he criticizes the focus on the simplistic and apolitical \"Go Vegan\" message directed mainly at wealthy Western audiences, while ignoring people of color, the working class and the poor, especially in the developing world, noting that \"for every person who becomes vegan, a thousand flesh eaters arise in China, India and Indonesia.\" The \"faith in the singular efficacy of conjectural education and moral persuasion,\" Best writes, is no substitute for \"direct action, mass confrontation, civil disobedience, alliance politics, and struggle for radical change.\" Donald Watson has said he \"respects the people enormously who do it, believing that it's the most direct and quick way to achieve their ends.\" Sociologist David Nibert of Wittenberg University posits that any movement towards global justice would necessitate not only the abolition of animal exploitation, particularly as a food source for humans, but also transitioning towards a socioeconomic alternative to the capitalist system, both of which dovetail into what he calls the animal\u2013industrial complex.\nSome vegans also embrace the philosophy of anti-natalism, as they see the two as complementary in terms of \"harm reduction\" to animals and the environment.\nVegan social psychologist Melanie Joy described the ideology in which people support the use and consumption of animal products as carnism, as a sort of opposite to veganism.\nExploitation concerns.\nThe Vegan Society has written, \"by extension, [veganism] promotes the development and use of animal-free alternatives for the benefit of humans.\" Many ethical vegans and vegan organizations cite the poor working conditions of slaughterhouse workers as a reason to reject animal products. The first vegan activist, Donald Watson, has asked, \"If these butchers and vivisectors weren't there, could we perform the acts that they are doing? And, if we couldn't, we have no right to expect them to do it on our behalf. Full stop! That simply compounds the issue. It means that we're not just exploiting animals; we're exploiting human beings.\"\nEnvironmental veganism.\nEnvironmental vegans focus on conservation, rejecting the use of animal products on the premise that fishing, hunting, trapping and farming, particularly factory farming, are environmentally unsustainable. According to a 2006 United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization report, \"Livestock's Long Shadow\", around 26% of the planet's terrestrial surface is devoted to livestock grazing. The report also concluded that livestock farming (mostly of cows, chickens and pigs) affects the air, land, soil, water, biodiversity and climate change. Livestock consumed 1,174\u00a0million tonnes of food in 2002\u2014including 7.6\u00a0million tonnes of fishmeal and 670\u00a0million tonnes of cereals, one-third of the global cereal harvest. Paul Watson of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society called pigs and chicken \"major aquatic predators\", because livestock eat 40 percent of the fish that are caught.\nA 2010 UN report, \"Assessing the Environmental Impacts of Consumption and Production\", argued that animal products \"in general require more resources and cause higher emissions than plant-based alternatives\". It proposed a move away from animal products to reduce environmental damage. \nA 2015 study determined that significant biodiversity loss can be attributed to the growing demand for meat, a significant driver of deforestation and habitat destruction, with species-rich habitats converted to agriculture for livestock production. A 2017 World Wildlife Fund study found that 60% of biodiversity loss can be attributed to the vast scale of feed crop cultivation needed to rear tens of billions of farm animals, which puts enormous strain on natural resources, resulting in extensive loss of lands and species. In 2017, 15,364 world scientists signed a warning to humanity calling for, among other things, \"promoting dietary shifts towards mostly plant-based foods\".\nA 2018 study found that global adoption of plant-exclusive diets would reduce agricultural land use by 76% (3.1\u00a0billion hectares, an area the size of Africa) and cut total global greenhouse gas emissions by 28%. Half of this emissions reduction came from avoided emissions from animal production including methane and nitrous oxide, and half from trees re-growing on abandoned farmlands that remove carbon dioxide from the air. The authors conclude that avoiding meat and dairy is the \"single biggest way\" to reduce one's impact on Earth.\nThe 2019 IPBES \"Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services\" found that industrial agriculture and overfishing are the primary drivers of the extinction crisis, with the meat and dairy industries having a substantial impact. On 8 August 2019, the IPCC released a summary of the 2019 special report which asserted that a shift towards plant-exclusive diets would help to mitigate and adapt to climate change.\nA 2022 study found that for high-income nations alone 100 billion tons of carbon dioxide could be removed from the air by the end of the century through a shift to plant-exclusive diets and re-wilding of farmlands. The researchers coined the term \"double climate dividend\" to describe the effect that re-wilding after a diet shift can have. But they note: \"We don't have to be purist about this, even just cutting animal intake would be helpful. If half of the public in richer regions cut half the animal products in their diets, you're still talking about a massive opportunity in environmental outcomes and public health\".\nA 2023 study published in \"Nature Food\" found that a vegan diet vastly decreases the impact on the environment from food production, such as reducing emissions, water pollution and land use by 75%, reducing the destruction of wildlife by 66% and the usage of water by 54%.\nDietary veganism.\nSome people follow a vegan diet but not other aspects of veganism. Dietary veganism is limited to following a plant-exclusive diet. Dietary veganism is in contrast to ethical veganism which is defined as a philosophical belief that is a protected characteristic under the UK's Equality Act 2010. Authors like Richard Twine and Breeze Harper argue that dietary veganism cannot be called veganism, as veganism is more than a diet. Gary L. Francione has argued that the promotion of \"dietary veganism\" lacks the moral imperative expressed by Leslie J. Cross, an early and influential vice-president of The Vegan Society, who said in 1949 that veganism was \"the abolition of the exploitation of animals by man\".\nThe Vegan Society of Canada have criticized dietary veganism stating, \"since veganism is not a list of ingredients there is also no such thing as a dietary vegan. Veganism cannot be split into sub-components; this is a case where the whole is greater than the sum of its parts\". Others have suggested that the arguments for dietary veganism can be extended to support ethical veganism.\nFeminist veganism.\nPioneers.\nOne leading activist and scholar of feminist animal rights is Carol J. Adams. Her premier work, \"The Sexual Politics of Meat: A Feminist-Vegetarian Critical Theory\" (1990), noted the relationship between feminism and meat consumption. Since its release, Adams has published several other works, including essays, books, and keynote addresses. In one of her speeches, \"Why feminist-vegan now?\"\u2014adapted from her original address at the \"Minding Animals\" conference in Newcastle, Australia (2009)\u2014she said, \"the idea that there was a connection between feminism and vegetarianism came to [her] in October 1974\". Other authors have echoed Adams's ideas and expanded on them. Feminist scholar Angella Duvnjak wrote in \"Joining the Dots: Some Reflections on Feminist-Vegan Political Practice and Choice\" (2011) that she was met with opposition when she pointed out the connection between feminist and vegan ideals, even though the connection seemed more than obvious to her and other scholars.\nAnimal and human abuse parallels.\nOne of the central concepts that animates feminist veganism is the idea that there is a connection between the oppression of women and the oppression of animals. For example, Marjorie Spiegal compared the consumption or servitude of animals for human gain to slavery. This connection is further mirrored by feminist vegan writers like Carrie Hamilton, who wrote that violent \"rapists sometimes exhibit behavior that seems to be patterned on the mutilation of animals\", suggesting there is a parallel between rape and animal cruelty.\nCapitalism and feminist veganism.\nFeminist veganism also relates to feminist thought through the common critique of the capitalist means of production. In an interview, Carol J. Adams highlighted \"meat eating as the ultimate capitalist product, because it takes so much to make the product, it uses up so many resources\". This extensive use of resources for meat production is discouraged in favor of using that productive capacity for other food products that have a less detrimental impact on the environment.\nReligious veganism.\nStreams within a number of religious traditions encourage veganism, sometimes on ethical or environmental grounds. Scholars have especially noted the growth in the 21st century of Jewish veganism, as well as Jain veganism. Some religious interpretations, such as Christian vegetarianism, Hindu vegetarianism, and Buddhist vegetarianism, also recommend or mandate a vegan diet. Donald Watson argued, \"If Jesus were alive today, he'd be an itinerant vegan propagandist instead of an itinerant preacher of those days, spreading the message of compassion, which, as I see it, is the only useful part of what religion has to offer and, sad as it seems, I doubt if we have to enroll our priest as a member of the Vegan Society.\"\nBlack veganism.\nIn the U.S., Black veganism is a social and political philosophy as well as a diet. It connects the use of nonhuman animals with other social justice concerns such as racism, and with the lasting effects of slavery, such as the subsistence diets of enslaved people enduring as familial and cultural food traditions. Dietary changes caused by the Great Migration also meant former farmers, who had previously been able to grow or forage vegetables, became reliant on processed foods.\nAccording to Oakland activist AshEL Eldridge, the movement is about the Black community reclaiming its food sovereignty and \"decolonizing\" Black Americans' diet. According to Shah, the area where most vegans of color feel the greatest rift with mainstream veganism is in its failure to recognize the intersectionality with other social justice issues, such as food access.\nPolitics and activism.\nIn 2021, vegan climate activist Greta Thunberg called for more vegan food production and consumption worldwide. Parties like Tierschutzpartei in Germany and PACMA in Spain have pro-vegan agendas. They cooperate via Animal Politics EU. In the European Union, meat producers and vegans debate whether vegan food products should be allowed to use terms like \"sausages\" or \"burgers\". The EU bans labeling vegan products with dairy-related words like \"almond milk\", a rule instated in 2017. As of 2019[ [update]], six countries in Europe apply higher value-added tax (VAT) rates to vegan plant milk than to cow milk, which pro-vegan activists have called discrimination.\nDemographics.\nOne out of 10 Americans over 18 consider themselves vegan or vegetarian as of January 2022. A study comparing personality traits of vegans, vegetarians and omnivores found that vegans were higher in openness and agreeableness than omnivores. \nBased on a survey of 8 thousand vegans in the US in 2013, relatively many people eating a plant based diet are women (almost 4 out of 5) with fewer men (about 1 out of 5). A study published in 2017 on a smaller sample found similar numbers on gender.\nRights.\nIn some countries, vegans have some rights to meals and legal protections against discrimination.\nSymbols.\nMultiple symbols have been developed to represent veganism. Several are used on consumer packaging, including the Vegan Society trademark and the Vegan Action logo, to indicate products without animal-derived ingredients. Various symbols may also be used by members of the vegan community to represent their identity and in the course of animal rights activism, such as a vegan flag.\nMedia depictions.\nVeganism is often misrepresented in media. Some argue that veganism has been dismissed in news media or that clickbait culture often portrays feminists and vegans as \"irrational extremists.\" This is because in Western societies, \"meat-based diets are the norm\" with those who avoid meat still representing \"a small minority,\" with more women than men as vegan and vegetarian, with women being \"under-represented in the mass media,\" the latter influencing more to be vegetarians. Others have noted those who are vegetarian and vegan are met with \"acceptance, tolerance, or hostility\" after they divulge they are vegetarian or vegan. There are a number of vegan stereotypes, including claims they hate meat-eaters, are always hungry, weak, angry, or moralistic. The hatred of vegans has been termed as vegaphobia by some individuals. Farhad Manjoo, in 2019, stated that \"preachy vegans are something of a myth,\" and argued that in pop culture, and generally, it is \"still widely acceptable to make fun of vegans.\"\nLiterature.\nOften vegan or vegetarian characters are portrayed as fringe characters, although other novels cast them as protagonists or encourage people to become vegetarians or vegans. Some have argued that there are more vegan cookbooks than \"vegan literature\" There are also books that introduce \"vegan identity to children\" or encourage people to \"write for\" animals. Also, Bruce Banner in \"Ultimate Wolverine vs. Hulk\" and Karolina Dean in \"Runaways\", who is also known as Lucy in the Sky or L.S.D., are vegans. The latter is a lesbian, a vegan, and \"an ardent animal lover...committed to a life completely free of meat and dairy.\"\nTV shows.\nJessica Cruz / Green Lantern, a lead character in the animated series \"DC Super Hero Girls\", is not only pacifist, but also a vegan and environmentalist, resulting in her becoming friends with Pam Isley. She often professes her commitment to the environment and plant-exclusive meals.\nThe series \"City of Ghosts\" featured a chef, Sonya, who runs a vegan cafe in Leimert Park, Los Angeles. Draculaura in \"Monster High\" has also been called \"one of the very few outspoken vegan cartoon characters out there\".\nSocial media.\nBy the 2010s, social media sites like Instagram became prominent in the promotion of veganism, more than a fad, with people trying to \"change the world by being vegan\" as stated by various media outlets.\nEconomics.\nThe U.S. market for vegan food was valued at $3.9 billion in 2017 and at $8.1 billion in 2023.\nVegan veto vote.\nThe vegan veto vote happens when a mixed group of non-vegan and vegans dine out together and the vegans in the group veto restaurants with few vegan options and steer the group to a restaurant with many vegan menu items. Restaurants report that adding more vegan items increases their business. Journalist Avery Yale Kamila reported that Maine restaurants were using the vegan veto vote to fill restaurant seats in the slow winter months. The vegan veto vote has been recognized by market researchers since 2007. Industry magazine QSR reported: \"As customers demand more complex menus, healthier options, and increased convenience, brands have to work harder to eliminate possible veto votes.\" The Vegetarian Resource Group reported in 2003 that 50 restaurant owners at that year's National Restaurant Association Show mentioned the vegan veto vote affecting their businesses.\nPotential economic impact.\nAccording to a 2016 study, if everyone in the U.S. switched to a vegan diet, the country would save $208.2\u00a0billion in direct health-care savings, $40.5\u00a0billion in indirect health-care savings, $40.5\u00a0billion in environmental savings, and $289.1\u00a0billion in total savings by 2050. The study also found that if everybody in the world switched to a vegan diet, the global economy would save $684.4\u00a0billion in direct health-care savings, $382.6\u00a0billion in indirect health-care savings, $569.5\u00a0billion in environmental savings, and $1.63\u00a0trillion in total savings by 2050.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32590", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32590", "title": "Vegetarian", "text": ""}
{"id": "32591", "revid": "20685249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32591", "title": "Vegetarianism", "text": "Abstaining from the consumption of meat\nVegetarianism is the practice of abstaining from the consumption of meat (red meat, poultry, seafood, insects, and the flesh of any other animal). It may also include abstaining from eating all by-products of animal slaughter. A person who practices vegetarianism is known as a vegetarian.\nVegetarianism may be adopted for various reasons. Many people object to eating meat out of respect for sentient animal life. Such ethical motivations have been codified under various religious beliefs as well as animal rights advocacy. Other motivations for vegetarianism are health-related, political, environmental, cultural, aesthetic, economic, taste-related, or relate to other personal preferences. Vegans are regularly also described as vegetarians, especially by carnists.\nA small number of towns and cities around the world are exclusively vegetarian or have outlawed meat, including Rishikesh in India, which banned meat, fish, and eggs in 1956. A larger number of towns and cities are vegetarian-friendly. In other locations, finding vegetarian food can pose some difficulties.\nThere are many variations of the vegetarian diet: an ovo-vegetarian diet includes eggs and a lacto-vegetarian diet includes dairy products, while a lacto-ovo vegetarian diet includes both. As the strictest of vegetarian diets, a vegan diet excludes all animal products, and can be accompanied by abstention from the use of animal-derived products, such as leather shoes.\nVegetarian diets pose some difficulties. For vitamin B12, depending on the presence or absence of eggs and dairy products in the diet or other reliable B12 sources, vegetarians may incur a nutritional deficiency. Packaged and processed foods may contain minor quantities of animal ingredients. While some vegetarians scrutinize product labels for such ingredients, others do not object to consuming them, or are unaware of their presence.\nEtymology.\nThe first written use of the term \"vegetarian\" originated in the early 19th century, when authors referred to a \"vegetable regimen\" diet. Historically, 'vegetable' could be used to refer to any type of edible vegetation. Modern dictionaries explain its origin as a compound of \"vegetable\" (adjective) and the suffix \"-arian\" (in the sense of \"agrarian\"). The term was popularized with the foundation of the Vegetarian Society in Manchester in 1847, although it has been used before in writing first attributed to actress, writer and abolitionist Fanny Kemble, in her \"Journal of a Residence on a Georgian plantation in 1838\u20131839\". The earliest occurrences of the term seem to be related to Alcott House\u2014a school on the north side of Ham Common, London\u2014which was opened in July 1838 by James Pierrepont Greaves. From 1841, it was known as \"A Concordium, or Industry Harmony College\", and the institution then began to publish its own pamphlet, \"The Healthian\". It provides some of the earliest appearances of the term \"vegetarian\".\n\"Vegetarian\" etymology.\nThe term \"vegetarian\" has been in use since around 1839 to refer to what was previously called a vegetable regimen or diet. Its origin is an irregular compound of \"vegetable\" and the suffix \"-arian\" (in the sense of \"supporter, believer\" as in \"humanitarian\"). \nHistory.\nIn 2025, a study published in \"Science\" measured nitrogen isotope ratios in fossilized teeth and determined that Australopithecus was almost entirely vegetarian.\nThe earliest record of vegetarianism comes from the 9th century BCE, inculcating tolerance towards all living beings. Parshwanatha and Mahavira, the 23rd and 24th \"tirthankaras\" in Jainism, respectively, revived and advocated ahimsa and Jain vegetarianism between the 8th and 6th centuries BCE; the most comprehensive and strictest form of vegetarianism. In Indian culture, vegetarianism has been closely connected with the attitude of nonviolence towards animals (called \"ahimsa\" in India) for millennia and was promoted by religious groups and philosophers. The \u0100c\u0101r\u0101\u1e45ga S\u016btra from 5th century BCE advocates Jain-vegetarianism and forbids the monks from walking on grass in order to avoid inflicting pain on them and prevent small insects dwelling inside from getting killed. The ancient Indian work of the \"Tirukku\u1e5fa\u1e37\", dated before the 5th century CE, explicitly and unambiguously emphasizes shunning meat and non-killing as a common man's virtues. Chapter 26 of the Tirukkural, particularly couplets 251\u2013260, deals exclusively on moral vegetarianism or veganism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVegetarianism in ancient IndiaThroughout the whole country the people do not kill any living creature, nor drink intoxicating liquor, nor eat onions or garlic. The only exception is that of the Chandalas. That is the name for those who are (held to be) wicked men, and live apart from others. ... In that country they do not keep pigs and fowls, and do not sell live cattle; in the markets there are no butchers' shops and no dealers in intoxicating drink. In buying and selling commodities they use cowries. Only the Chandalas are fishermen and hunters, and sell flesh meat.\n \u2014 Faxian, Chinese pilgrim to India (4th/5th century CE)\n , A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms (translated by James Legge)\nAmong the Hellenes, Egyptians, and others, vegetarianism had medical or ritual purification purposes. Vegetarianism was also practiced in ancient Greece and the earliest reliable evidence for vegetarian theory and practice in Greece dates from the 6th century BCE. The Orphics, a religious movement spreading in Greece at that time, also practiced and promoted vegetarianism. Greek teacher Pythagoras, who promoted the altruistic doctrine of metempsychosis, may have practiced vegetarianism, but is also recorded as eating meat. A fictionalized portrayal of Pythagoras appears in Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", in which he advocates a form of strict vegetarianism. It was through this portrayal that Pythagoras was best known to English-speakers throughout the early modern period and, prior to the coinage of the word \"vegetarianism\", vegetarians were referred to in English as \"Pythagoreans\". Vegetarianism was also practiced about six centuries later in another instance (30\u00a0BCE\u201350\u00a0CE) in the northern Thracian region by the Moesi tribe (who inhabited present-day Serbia and Bulgaria), feeding themselves on honey, milk, and cheese.\nIn Japan in 675, the Emperor Tenmu prohibited the killing and the eating of meat during the busy farming period between April and September but excluded the eating of wild birds and wild animals. These bans and several others that followed over the centuries were overturned in the nineteenth century during the Meiji Restoration. In China, during the Song dynasty, Buddhist cuisine became popular enough that vegetarian restaurants appeared where chefs used ingredients such as beans, gluten, root vegetables and mushrooms to create meat analogues including pork, fowl, eggs and crab roe and many meat substitutes used even today such as tofu, seitan and konjac originate in Chinese Buddhist cuisine.\nFollowing the Christianization of the Roman Empire in late antiquity, vegetarianism practically disappeared from Europe, as it did elsewhere, except in India. Several orders of monks in medieval Europe restricted or banned the consumption of meat for ascetic reasons, but none of them eschewed fish. Moreover, the medieval definition of \"fish\" included such animals as seals, porpoises, dolphins, barnacle geese, puffins, and beavers. Vegetarianism re-emerged during the Renaissance, becoming more widespread in the 19th and 20th centuries. In 1847, the first Vegetarian Society was founded in the United Kingdom; Germany, the Netherlands, and other countries followed. In 1886, the vegetarian colony Nueva Germania was founded in Paraguay, though its vegetarian aspect would prove short-lived. The International Vegetarian Union, an association of the national societies, was founded in 1908. In the Western world, the popularity of vegetarianism grew during the 20th century as a result of nutritional, ethical, and\u2014more recently\u2014environmental and economic concerns.\nVegetarian locations.\nA small number of cities, towns, and intentional communities around the world are exclusively vegetarian where no meat is sold or consumed due to religious and cultural influences. In all-vegetarian locations, meat and sometimes other animal products are sometimes officially outlawed. In other exclusively vegetarian cities, meat is not sold or served due to cultural influences but is not officially outlawed. Some religious centers in India have banned all meat sales within municipal boundaries. For example, in 1956, Rishikesh banned the sale of meat, fish, and eggs.\nLocations where residents are vegetarian and only vegetarian food is consumed within city limits include:\nHeavily-vegetarian locations.\nThe percentage of vegetarians varies by country. India has the highest percentage of vegetarian residents, and Mexico has the second highest percentage of vegetarian residents. In general, vegetarians are a minority. However, a number of cities and towns around the world have much larger vegetarian populations who constitute a majority of municipal residents. Heavily-vegetarian locations include:\nVarieties.\nThere are a number of vegetarian diets that exclude or include various foods:\nWithin the \"ovo-\" groups, there are many who refuse to consume fertilized eggs (with balut being an extreme example); however, such distinction is typically not specifically addressed.\nSome vegetarians also avoid products that may use animal ingredients not included in their labels or which use animal products in their manufacturing. For example, sugars that are whitened with bone char, cheeses that use animal rennet (enzymes from animal stomach lining), gelatin (derived from the collagen inside animals' skin, bones, and connective tissue), some cane sugar (but not beet sugar) and beverages (such as apple juice and alcohol) clarified with gelatin or crushed shellfish and sturgeon, while other vegetarians are unaware of, or do not mind, such ingredients. In the 21st century, 90% of rennet and chymosin used in cheesemaking are derived from industrial fermentation processes, which satisfy both kosher and halal requirements.\nIndividuals sometimes label themselves \"vegetarian\" while practicing a semi-vegetarian diet, as some dictionary definitions describe vegetarianism as sometimes including the consumption of fish, or only include mammalian flesh as part of their definition of meat, while other definitions exclude fish and all animal flesh. In other cases, individuals may describe themselves as \"flexitarian\".\nThese diets may be followed by those who reduce animal flesh consumed as a way of transitioning to a complete vegetarian diet or for health, ethical, environmental, or other reasons. Semi-vegetarian diets include:\nSemi-vegetarianism is contested by vegetarian groups, such as the Vegetarian Society, which states that vegetarianism excludes all animal flesh.\nConsumption of eggs is not considered to be a part of a vegetarian diet in India, as egg is an animal product that gives birth to the next generation of the relevant species.\nHealth research.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOn average, vegetarians consume a lower proportion of calories from fat (particularly saturated fatty acids), fewer overall calories, more fiber, potassium, and vitamin C, than do non-vegetarians. Vegetarians generally have a lower body mass index. These characteristics and other lifestyle factors associated with a vegetarian diet may contribute to the positive health outcomes that have been identified among vegetarians.\n \"Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010\" \u2013 A report issued by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services\nIn Western countries, the most common motive for people practicing vegetarianism is health consciousness. The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics has stated that at all stages of life, a properly planned vegetarian diet can be \"healthful, nutritionally adequate, and may be beneficial in the prevention and treatment of certain diseases.\" Vegetarian diets offer lower levels of saturated fat, cholesterol and animal protein, and higher levels of carbohydrates, fibre, magnesium, potassium, folate, vitamins C and E, and phytochemicals.\nBones.\nStudies have shown that a (non-lacto) vegetarian diet may increase the risk of calcium deficiency and low bone mineral density. A 2019 review found that vegetarians have lower bone mineral density at the femoral neck and lumbar spine compared to omnivores. A 2020 meta-analysis found that infants fed a lacto-vegetarian diet exhibited normal growth and development. A 2021 review found no differences in growth between vegetarian and meat-eating children.\nDiabetes.\nVegetarian diets are under preliminary research for their potential to help people with type 2 diabetes.\nCardiovascular system.\nMeta-analyses have reported a reduced risk of death from ischemic heart disease and from cerebrovascular disease among vegetarians.\nMental health.\nReviews of vegan and vegetarian diets showed a possible association with depression and anxiety, particularly among people under 26\u2009years old. Another review found no significant associations between a vegetarian diet and depression or anxiety.\nEating disorders.\nThe American Dietetic Association discussed that vegetarian diets may be more common among adolescents with eating disorders, indicating that vegetarian diets do not cause eating disorders, but rather \"vegetarian diets may be selected to camouflage an existing eating disorder\".\nMortality risk.\nA 2012 study found a reduced risk in all-cause mortality in vegetarians. A 2017 review found a lower mortality (\u221225%) from ischemic heart disease.\nDiet composition and nutrition.\nWestern vegetarian diets are typically high in carotenoids, but relatively low in omega-3 fatty acids and vitamin B12. Vegans can have particularly low intake of vitamin B and calcium if they do not eat enough items such as collard greens, leafy greens, tempeh and tofu (soy). High levels of dietary fiber, folic acid, vitamins C and E, and magnesium, and low consumption of saturated fat are all considered to be beneficial aspects of a vegetarian diet. A well planned vegetarian diet will provide all nutrients in a meat-eater's diet to the same level for all stages of life.\nProtein.\nProtein intake in vegetarian diets tends to be lower than in meat diets but can meet the daily requirements for most people. Studies at Harvard University as well as other studies conducted in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and various European countries, confirmed that vegetarian diets provide sufficient protein intake as long as a variety of plant sources are available and consumed.\nIron.\nVegetarian diets typically contain similar levels of iron to non-vegetarian diets, but this has lower bioavailability than iron from meat sources, and its absorption can sometimes be inhibited by other dietary constituents. According to the Vegetarian Resource Group, consuming food that contains vitamin C, such as citrus fruit or juices, tomatoes, or broccoli, is a good way to increase the amount of iron absorbed at a meal. Vegetarian foods rich in iron include black beans, cashews, hempseed, kidney beans, broccoli, lentils, oatmeal, raisins, jaggery, spinach, cabbage, lettuce, black-eyed peas, soybeans, many breakfast cereals, sunflower seeds, chickpeas, tomato juice, tempeh, molasses, thyme, and whole-wheat bread. The related vegan diets can often be higher in iron than vegetarian diets, because dairy products are low in iron. Iron stores often tend to be lower in vegetarians than non-vegetarians, and a few small studies report very high rates of iron deficiency (up to 40%, and 58% of the respective vegetarian or vegan groups). However, the American Dietetic Association states that iron deficiency is no more common in vegetarians than non-vegetarians (adult males are rarely iron deficient); iron deficiency anaemia is rare no matter the diet.\nVitamin B12.\nVitamin B12 is not generally present in plants but is naturally found in foods of animal origin. Lacto-ovo vegetarians can obtain B12 from dairy products and eggs, and vegans can obtain it from manufactured fortified foods (including plant-based products and breakfast cereals) and dietary supplements. A strict vegan diet avoiding consumption of all animal products risks vitamin B12 deficiency, which can lead to hyperhomocysteinemia, a risk factor for several health disorders, including anemia, neurological deficits, gastrointestinal problems, platelet disorders, and increased risk for cardiovascular diseases. The recommended daily dietary intake of B12 in the United States and Canada is 0.4 mcg (ages 0\u20136 months), rising to 1.8 mcg (9\u201313 years), 2.4 mcg (14+ years), and 2.8 mcg (lactating female). While the body's daily requirement for vitamin B12 is in microgram amounts, deficiency of the vitamin through strict practice of a vegetarian diet without supplementation can increase the risk of several chronic diseases.\nFatty acids.\nPlant-based, or vegetarian, sources of Omega 3 fatty acids include soy, walnuts, pumpkin seeds, canola oil, kiwifruit, hempseed, algae, chia seed, flaxseed, echium seed and leafy vegetables such as lettuce, spinach, cabbage and purslane. Purslane contains more Omega 3 than any other known leafy green. Olives (and olive oil) are another important plant source of unsaturated fatty acids. Plant foods can provide alpha-linolenic acid which the human body uses to synthesize the long-chain n-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA. EPA and DHA can be obtained directly in high amounts from oily fish, fish oil, or algae oil. Vegetarians, and particularly vegans, have lower levels of EPA and DHA than meat-eaters. While the health effects of low levels of EPA and DHA are unknown, it is unlikely that supplementation with alpha-linolenic acid will significantly increase levels.. Significantly, for vegetarians, certain algae such as spirulina are good sources of gamma-linolenic acid (GLA), alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), linoleic acid (LA), stearidonic acid (SDA), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and arachidonic acid (AA).\nCalcium.\nCalcium intake in vegetarians and vegans can be similar to non-vegetarians, as long as the diet is properly planned. Lacto-ovo vegetarians that include dairy products can still obtain calcium from dairy sources like milk, yogurt, and cheese.\nNon-dairy milks that are fortified with calcium, such as soymilk and almond milk can also contribute a significant amount of calcium in the diet. Broccoli, bok choy, and kale have also been found to have calcium that is well absorbed in the body. Though the calcium content per serving is lower in these vegetables than a glass of milk, the absorption of the calcium into the body is higher. Other foods that contain calcium include calcium-set tofu, blackstrap molasses, turnip greens, mustard greens, soybeans, tempeh, almonds, okra, dried figs, and tahini. Though calcium can be found in Spinach, swiss chard, beans and beet greens, they are generally not considered to be a good source since the calcium binds to oxalic acid and is poorly absorbed into the body. Phytic acid found in nuts, seeds, and beans may also impact calcium absorption rates. See the National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements for calcium needs for various ages, the Vegetarian Resource Group and the Vegetarian Nutrition Calcium Fact Sheet from the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics for more specifics on how to obtain adequate calcium intake on a vegetarian or vegan diet.\nVitamin D.\nVitamin D needs can be met via the human body's own generation upon sufficient and sensible exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light in sunlight. Products including milk, soy milk and cereal grains may be fortified to provide a source of vitamin D. For those who do not get adequate sun exposure or food sources, vitamin D supplementation may be necessary.\nVitamin D2.\nVitamin D2, or ergocalciferol is found in fungus (except alfalfa which is a plantae) and created from viosterol, which in turn is created when ultraviolet light activates ergosterol (which is found in fungi and named as a sterol from ergot). Any UV-irradiated fungus including yeast form vitamin D2. Human bioavailability of vitamin D2 from vitamin D2-enhanced button mushrooms via UV-B irradiation is effective in improving vitamin D status and not different from a vitamin D2 supplement according to study. For example, vitamin D2 from UV-irradiated yeast baked into bread is bioavailable.\nBy visual assessment or using a chromometer, no significant discoloration of irradiated mushrooms, as measured by the degree of \"whiteness\", was observed making it hard to discover if they have been treated without labeling. Claims have been made that a normal serving (approx. 3 oz or 1/2 cup, or 60 grams) of mushrooms treated with ultraviolet light increase their vitamin D content to levels up to 80 micrograms, or 2700 IU if exposed to just 5 minutes of UV light after being harvested.\nCholine.\nCholine is a nutrient that helps transfer signals between nerve cells and is involved in liver function. It is highest in dairy foods and meat but it is possible to be obtained through a vegan diet.\nEthics and diet.\nGeneral.\nWith regard to the ethics of eating meat, scholars consider vegetarianism an ideology and a social movement. Ethical reasons for choosing vegetarianism vary and are usually predicated on the interests of non-human animals. In many societies, controversies and debates have arisen over the ethics of eating animals. Some people, while not vegetarians, refuse to eat the flesh of certain animals due to cultural taboo, such as cats, dogs, horses or rabbits. Others support meat eating for scientific, nutritional and cultural reasons, including religious ones. Some meat eaters abstain from the meat of animals reared in particular ways, such as factory farms, or avoid certain meats, such as veal or foie gras. Some people follow vegetarian or vegan diets not because of moral concerns involving the raising or consumption of animals in general, but because of concerns about the specific treatment and practices involved in the processing of animals for food. Others still avoid meat out of concern that meat production places a greater burden on the environment than production of an equivalent amount of plant protein. Ethical objections based on consideration for animals are generally divided into opposition to the act of killing in general, and opposition to certain agricultural practices surrounding the production of meat.\nEthics of killing for food.\nEthical vegetarians believe that killing an animal, like killing a human, especially one who has equal or lesser cognitive abilities than the animals in question, can only be justified in extreme circumstances and that consuming a living creature for its enjoyable taste, convenience, or nutrition value is not a sufficient cause. Another common view is that humans are morally conscious of their behavior in a way other animals are not, and therefore subject to higher standards. Jeff McMahan proposes that denying the right to life and humane treatment to animals with equal or greater cognitive abilities than mentally disabled humans is an arbitrary and discriminatory practice based on habit instead of logic. Opponents of ethical vegetarianism argue that animals are not moral equals to humans and so consider the comparison of eating livestock with killing people to be fallacious. This view does not excuse cruelty, but maintains that animals do not possess the rights a human has.\nDairy and eggs.\nOne of the main differences between a vegan and a lacto-ovo vegetarian diet is the avoidance of both eggs and dairy products such as milk, cheese, butter and yogurt. Ethical vegans do not consume dairy or eggs because they state that their production causes the animal suffering or a premature death.\nTo produce milk from dairy cattle, farmers separate calves from their mothers soon after birth to retain cow milk for human consumption.\nTreatment of animals.\nEthical vegetarianism has become popular in developed countries particularly because of the spread of factory farming and environmental consciousness. Some believe that the current mass-demand for meat cannot be satisfied without a mass-production system that disregards the welfare of animals, while others believe that practices like well-managed free-range farming or the consumption of game (particularly from species whose natural predators have been significantly eliminated) could substantially alleviate consumer demand for mass-produced meat.\nReligion and diet.\nJainism teaches vegetarianism as moral conduct, as do some sects of Hinduism. Buddhism in general does not prohibit meat eating, but Mahayana Buddhism encourages vegetarianism as beneficial for developing compassion. Other denominations that advocate a vegetarian diet include the Seventh-day Adventists, the Rastafari movement, the Ananda Marga movement and the Hare Krishnas. Sikhism does not equate spirituality with diet and does not specify a vegetarian or meat diet.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nWhile there are no dietary restrictions in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1, the son of the religion's founder, noted that a vegetarian diet consisting of fruits and grains was desirable, except for people with a weak constitution or those that are sick. He stated that there are no requirements that Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds become vegetarian, but that a future society should gradually become vegetarian. `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 also stated that killing animals was contrary to compassion. While Shoghi Effendi, the head of the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith in the first half of the 20th century, stated that a purely vegetarian diet would be preferable since it avoided killing animals, both he and the Universal House of Justice, the governing body of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds have stated that these teachings do not constitute a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed practice and that Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds can choose to eat whatever they wish but should be respectful of others' beliefs.\nBuddhism.\nTheravadins in general eat meat. If Buddhist monks \"see, hear or know\" a living animal was killed specifically for them to eat, they must refuse it or else incur an offense. However, this does not include eating meat which was given as alms or commercially purchased. In the Theravada canon, Shakyamuni Buddha did not make any comment discouraging them from eating meat (except specific types, such as human, elephant, horse, dog, snake, lion, tiger, leopard, bear, and hyena flesh) but he specifically refused to institute vegetarianism in his monastic code when a suggestion had been made.\nIn several Sanskrit texts of Mahayana Buddhism, Buddha instructs his followers to avoid meat. However, each branch of Mahayana Buddhism selects which sutra to follow, and some branches, including the majority of Tibetan and Japanese Buddhists, actually do eat meat.\nMeanwhile, Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese Buddhism (in some sectors of East Asian Buddhism) monks and nuns are expected to abstain from meat, and traditionally, to abstain from eggs and dairy as well.\nDifferent Buddhist traditions have differing teachings on diet, which may also vary for ordained monks and nuns compared to others. Many interpret the precept \"not to kill\" to require abstinence from meat, but not all. In Taiwan, \"su\" vegetarianism excludes not only all animal products but also vegetables in the allium family (which have the characteristic aroma of onion and garlic): onion, garlic, scallions, leeks, chives, or shallots.\nChristianity.\nVarious groups within Christianity have practiced specific dietary restrictions for various reasons. The Council of Jerusalem in around 50 AD, recommended Christians keep following some of the Jewish food laws concerning meat. The early sect known as the Ebionites are considered to have practiced vegetarianism. Surviving fragments from their Gospel indicate their belief that \u2013 as Christ is the Passover sacrifice and eating the Passover lamb is no longer required \u2013 a vegetarian diet may (or should) be observed. However, orthodox Christianity does not accept their teaching as authentic. Indeed, their specific injunction to strict vegetarianism was cited as one of the Ebionites' \"errors\".\nAt a much later time, the Bible Christian Church founded by Reverend William Cowherd in 1809 followed a vegetarian diet. Cowherd was one of the philosophical forerunners of the Vegetarian Society. Cowherd encouraged members to abstain from eating of meat as a form of temperance.\nSeventh-day Adventists are encouraged to engage in healthy eating practices, and lacto-ovo-vegetarian diets are recommended by the General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists Nutrition Council (GCNC). They have also sponsored and participated in many scientific studies exploring the impact of dietary decisions upon health outcomes. The GCNC has in addition adapted the USDA's food pyramid for a vegetarian dietary approach. However, the only kinds of meat specifically frowned upon by the SDA health message are unclean meats, or those forbidden in scripture.\nAdditionally, some monastic orders follow a pescatarian diet, and members of the Eastern Orthodox Church follow a vegan diet during fasts. There is also a strong association between the Quakers and vegetarianism dating back at least to the 18th century. The association grew in prominence during the 19th century, coupled with growing Quaker concerns in connection with alcohol consumption, anti-vivisection and social purity. The association between the Quaker tradition and vegetarianism, however, becomes most significant with the founding of the Friends' Vegetarian Society in 1902 \"to spread a kindlier way of living amongst the Society of Friends.\"\nSeventh-day Adventist.\nThe Seventh-day Adventist Church is well known for presenting a health message that recommends vegetarianism and expects adherence to the kosher laws in Leviticus 11. Obedience to these laws means abstinence from pork, shellfish, and other animals proscribed as \"unclean\". The church discourages its members from consuming alcoholic beverages, tobacco or illegal drugs (compare Christianity and alcohol). In addition, some Adventists avoid coffee, tea, cola, and other beverages containing caffeine.\nThe pioneers of the Adventist Church had much to do with the common acceptance of breakfast cereals into the Western diet, and the \"modern commercial concept of cereal food\" originated among Adventists. John Harvey Kellogg was one of the early founders of Adventist health work. His development of breakfast cereals as a health food led to the founding of Kellogg's by his brother William. In both Australia and New Zealand, the church-owned Sanitarium Health and Wellbeing Company is a leading manufacturer of health and vegetarian-related products, most prominently Weet-Bix. Kellogg encouraged his students Daniel H. Kress and Lauretta E. Kress to study medicine together at the University of Michigan Medical School and become public advocates of vegetarianism; together they published an important vegetarian cookbook and became early founders of what was later Washington Adventist Hospital.\nResearch funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health has shown that the average Adventist in California lives 4 to 10 years longer than the average Californian. The research, as cited by the cover story of the November 2005 issue of \"National Geographic\", asserts that Adventists live longer because they do not smoke or drink alcohol, have a day of rest every week, and maintain a healthy, low-fat vegetarian diet that is rich in nuts and beans. The cohesiveness of Adventists' social networks has also been put forward as an explanation for their extended lifespan.\nSince Dan Buettner's 2005 \"National Geographic\" story about Adventist longevity, his book, \"The Blue Zones: Lessons for Living Longer From the People Who've Lived the Longest\", named Loma Linda, California, a \"blue zone\" because of the large concentration of Seventh-day Adventists. He cites the Adventist emphasis on health, diet, and Sabbath-keeping as primary factors for Adventist longevity.\nAn estimated 35% of Adventists practice vegetarianism or veganism, according to a 2002 worldwide survey of local church leaders. North American Adventist health study recruitments from 2001 to 2007 found a similar prevalence of vegetarianism/veganism. A small majority of Adventists, 54%, were conventional meat-eaters. Of the remaining 46% it was found that 28% were Ovo/Lacto-vegetarians, 10% were Pesco-vegetarians and 8% were vegans. It is common for Adventists who choose to eat meat to also eat plant-based foods; 6% of the \"meat-eaters\" group restricted their intake of meat/fish to no more than once per week.\nHinduism.\nThough there is no strict rule on what to consume and what not to, the food habits of Hindus vary according to their specific caste and sub-caste, community, location, custom and varying traditions. Historically and currently, a majority of Hindus (about 70%) eat meat, while a large proportion of Hindus are vegetarian (about 30%).\nSome sects of Hinduism such as Vaishnavism follow the purest form of vegetarianism as an ideal while Shaktism and Tantric sects freely consume chicken, mutton (goat and sheep meat), fish and eggs. The reasons stated by Jains and Vaishnavas are: the principle of nonviolence (\"ahimsa\") applied to animals; the intention to offer only \"pure\" (vegetarian) food to a deity and then to receive it back as \"prasada\"; and the conviction that a \"sattvic\" diet is beneficial for a healthy body. A \"sattvic\" diet is lacto-vegetarian, which includes dairy, but excludes eggs. An overwhelming majority of the Hindus consider the cow to be a holy and sacred animal whose slaughter for meat is forbidden. Thus, beef is a taboo for the majority of Hindus, Jains and Sikhs\nIslam.\nSome followers of Islam, or Muslims, chose to be vegetarian for health, ethical, or personal reasons. However, the choice to become vegetarian for non-medical reasons can sometimes be controversial due to conflicting fatwas and differing interpretations of the Quran. Though some more traditional Muslims may keep quiet about their vegetarian diet, the number of vegetarian Muslims is increasing.\nSri Lankan Sufi master Bawa Muhaiyaddeen, who established The Bawa Muhaiyaddeen Fellowship of North America in Philadelphia. The former Indian president Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam was also famously a vegetarian.\nIn January 1996, The International Vegetarian Union announced the formation of the Muslim Vegetarian/Vegan Society.\nMany non-vegetarian Muslims will select vegetarian (or seafood) options when dining in non-halal restaurants. However, this is a matter of not having the right kind of meat rather than preferring not to eat meat on the whole.\nJainism.\nFollowers of Jainism believe that all living organisms, including microorganisms, are living and have a soul, and have one or more senses out of five senses. They go to great lengths to minimise any harm to any living organism. Most Jains are lacto-vegetarians, but more devout Jains do not eat root vegetables, because they believe that root vegetables contain many more microorganisms as compared to other vegetables, and that, by eating them, violence against these microorganisms is inevitable. They therefore prefer eating beans and fruits, whose cultivation involves killing fewer microorganisms. No products obtained from already-dead animals are allowed because of potential violence against decomposing microorganisms. Some particularly dedicated individuals are fruitarians. Honey is forbidden, being the regurgitation of nectar by bees and potentially containing eggs, excreta and dead bees. Many Jains do not consume plant parts that grow underground such as roots and bulbs, because the plants themselves and tiny animals may be killed when the plants are pulled up.\nJudaism.\nWhile classical Jewish law neither requires nor prohibits the consumption of meat, Jewish vegetarians often cite Jewish principles regarding animal welfare, environmental ethics, moral character, and health as reasons for adopting a vegetarian or vegan diet.\nRabbis may advocate vegetarianism or veganism primarily because of concerns about animal welfare, especially in light of the traditional prohibition on causing unnecessary \"pain to living creatures\" (tza'ar ba'alei hayyim). Some Jewish vegetarian groups and activists believe that the halakhic permission to eat meat is a temporary leniency for those who are not ready yet to accept the vegetarian diet.\nThe book of Daniel starts in its first chapter with the benefits of vegetarianism. Due to its size, its late time of origin and its revealing content, the book is of particular importance for the time of the following exile, which lasts now for 2000 years and technically still goes on until the Temple in Jerusalem is rebuilt. A diet described as \"pulse and water\" is presented along benefits such as accordance with the biblical dietary laws, health, beauty, wisdom and vision. Vegetarianism can be seen as a safeguard around the dietary laws or the beautification of them.\nJewish vegetarianism and veganism have become especially popular among Israeli Jews. In 2016, Israel was described as \"the most vegan country on Earth\", as five percent of its population eschewed all animal products. Interest in veganism has grown among both non-Orthodox and Orthodox Jews in Israel.\nRastafari.\nWithin the Afro-Caribbean community, a minority are Rastafari and follow the dietary regulations with varying degrees of strictness. The most orthodox eat only \"Ital\" or natural foods, in which the matching of herbs or spices with vegetables is the result of long tradition originating from the African ancestry and cultural heritage of Rastafari. \"Ital\", which is derived from the word vital, means essential to human existence. Ital cooking in its strictest form prohibits the use of salt, meat (especially pork), preservatives, colorings, flavorings and anything artificial. Most Rastafari are vegetarian.\nSikhism.\nThe tenets of Sikhism do not advocate a particular stance on either vegetarianism or the consumption of meat, but leave the decision of diet to the individual. The tenth guru, Guru Gobind Singh, however, prohibited \"Amritdhari\" Sikhs, or those that follow the Sikh Rehat Maryada (the Official Sikh Code of Conduct) from eating Kutha meat, or meat which has been obtained from animals which have been killed in a ritualistic way. This is understood to have been for the political reason of maintaining independence from the then-new Muslim hegemony, as Muslims largely adhere to the ritualistic halal diet.\n\"Amritdharis\" that belong to some Sikh sects (e.g. Akhand Kirtani Jatha, Damdami Taksal, Namdhari and Rarionwalay, etc.) are vehemently against the consumption of meat and eggs (though they do consume and encourage the consumption of milk, butter and cheese). This vegetarian stance has been traced back to the times of the British Raj, with the advent of many new Vaishnava converts. In response to the varying views on diet throughout the Sikh population, Sikh Gurus have sought to clarify the Sikh view on diet, stressing their preference only for simplicity of diet. Guru Nanak said that over-consumption of food (Lobh, Greed) involves a drain on the Earth's resources and thus on life. Passages from the \"Guru Granth Sahib\" (the holy book of Sikhs, also known as the \"Adi Granth\") say that it is \"foolish\" to argue for the superiority of animal life, because though all life is related, only human life carries more importance: \"Only fools argue whether to eat meat or not. Who can define what is meat and what is not meat? Who knows where the sin lies, being a vegetarian or a non-vegetarian?\" The Sikh langar, or free temple meal, is largely lacto-vegetarian, though this is understood to be a result of efforts to present a meal that is respectful of the diets of any person who would wish to dine, rather than out of dogma.\nEnvironment and diet.\nEnvironmental vegetarianism is based on the concern that the production of meat and animal products for mass consumption, especially through factory farming, is environmentally unsustainable. According to a 2006 United Nations initiative, the livestock industry is one of the largest contributors to environmental degradation worldwide, and modern practices of raising animals for food contribute on a \"massive scale\" to air and water pollution, land degradation, climate change, and loss of biodiversity. The initiative concluded that \"the livestock sector emerges as one of the top two or three most significant contributors to the most serious environmental problems, at every scale from local to global.\"\nIn addition, animal agriculture is a large source of greenhouse gases. According to a 2006 report it is responsible for 18% of the world's greenhouse gas emissions as estimated in 100-year CO2 equivalents. Livestock sources (including enteric fermentation and manure) account for about 3.1 percent of US anthropogenic GHG emissions expressed as carbon dioxide equivalents. This EPA estimate is based on methodologies agreed to by the Conference of Parties of the UNFCCC, with 100-year global warming potentials from the IPCC Second Assessment Report used in estimating GHG emissions as carbon dioxide equivalents.\nMeat produced in a laboratory (called in vitro meat) may be more environmentally sustainable than regularly produced meat. Reactions of vegetarians vary. Rearing a relatively small number of grazing animals can be beneficial, as the Food Climate Research Network at Surrey University reports: \"A little bit of livestock production is probably a good thing for the environment\".\nIn May 2009, Ghent, Belgium, was reported to be \"the first [city] in the world to go vegetarian at least once a week\" for environmental reasons, when local authorities decided to implement a \"weekly meatless day\". Civil servants would eat vegetarian meals one day per week, in recognition of the United Nations' report. Posters were put up by local authorities to encourage the population to take part on vegetarian days, and \"veggie street maps\" were printed to highlight vegetarian restaurants. In September 2009, schools in Ghent are due to have a weekly \"veggiedag\" (\"vegetarian day\") too.\nPublic opinion and acceptance of meat-free food is expected to be more successful if its descriptive words focus less on the health aspects and more on the flavor.\nLabor conditions and diet.\nSome groups, such as PETA, promote vegetarianism as a way to offset poor treatment and working conditions of workers in the contemporary meat industry. These groups cite studies showing the psychological damage caused by working in the meat industry, especially in factory and industrialised settings, and argue that the meat industry violates its labourers' human rights by assigning difficult and distressing tasks without adequate counselling, training and debriefing. However, the working conditions of agricultural workers as a whole, particularly non-permanent workers, remain poor and well below conditions prevailing in other economic sectors. Accidents, including pesticide poisoning, among farmers and plantation workers contribute to increased health risks, including increased mortality. According to the International Labour Organization, agriculture is one of the three most dangerous jobs in the world.\nEconomics and diet.\nSome vegetarians are economic vegetarians who avoid meat due to cost considerations. Vegetarians also have an impact on the economy. In 2022, sales of vegetarian food in the UK was estimated at \u00a31.16 billion. The US-based Plant Based Food Association found that the sales of plant-based foods in the U.S. alone amounts to $13.7 billion a year. Vegans have been found to influence the business at restaurants through what is referred to as the vegan veto vote. \nEconomic vegetarianism.\nSimilar to environmental vegetarianism is the concept of economic vegetarianism. An economic vegetarian is someone who practices vegetarianism from either the philosophical viewpoint concerning issues such as public health and curbing world starvation, the belief that the consumption of meat is economically unsound, part of a conscious simple living strategy or just out of necessity. According to the Worldwatch Institute, \"Massive reductions in meat consumption in industrial nations will ease their health care burden while improving public health; declining livestock herds will take pressure off rangelands and grainlands, allowing the agricultural resource base to rejuvenate. As populations grow, lowering meat consumption worldwide will allow more efficient use of declining per capita land and water resources, while at the same time making grain more affordable to the world's chronically hungry.\" According to estimates in 2016, adoption of vegetarianism would contribute substantially to global healthcare and environmental savings.\nDemographics.\nPrejudice researcher Gordon Hodson argues that vegetarians and vegans frequently face discrimination where eating meat is held as a cultural norm.\nTurnover.\nResearch suggests that, at least in the United States, vegetarianism has a high turnover rate, with less than 20% of adopters persisting for more than a year. Research shows that lacking social support contributes to lapses. A 2019 analysis found that adhering to any kind of restricted diet (gluten-free, vegetarian, kosher, teetotal) was associated with feelings of loneliness and increased social isolation.\nVegetarians or vegans who adopted their diet abruptly might be more likely to eventually abandon it when compared to individuals adopting their diet gradually with incremental changes.\nCountry-specific information.\nThe rate of vegetarianism by country varies substantially from relatively low levels in countries such as the Netherlands (5%) to more considerable levels in India (20\u201340%). Estimates for the number of vegetarians per country can be subject to methodological difficulties, as respondents may identify as vegetarian even if they include some meat in their diet, and thus some researchers suggest the percentage of vegetarians may be significantly overestimated.\nMedia.\nVegetarianism is occasionally depicted in mass media. Some scholars have argued that mass media serves as a \"source of information for individuals\" interested in vegetarianism or veganism, while there are \"increasing social sanctions against eating meat\". Over time, societal attitudes of vegetarianism have changed, as have perceptions of vegetarianism in popular culture, leading to more \"vegetarian sentiment\". Even so, there are still existing \"meat-based\" food metaphors which infuse daily speech, and those who are vegetarian and vegan are met with \"acceptance, tolerance, or hostility\" after they divulge they are vegetarian or vegan. Some writers, such as John L. Cunningham, editor of the Vegetarian Resource Group's newsletter, have argued for \"more sympathetic vegetarian characters in the mass media\".\nLiterature.\nIn Western literature, vegetarianism, and topics that relate to it, have informed a \"gamut of literary genres\", whether literary fiction or those fictions focusing on utopias, dystopias, or apocalypses, with authors shaped by questions about human identity and \"our relation to the environment\", implicating vegetarianism and veganism. Others have pointed to the lack of \"memorable characters\" who are vegetarian. There are also vegetarian themes in horror fiction, science fiction and poetry.\nIn 1818, Mary Shelley published the novel \"Frankenstein\". Writer and animal rights advocate Carol J. Adams argued in her seminal book, \"The Sexual Politics of Meat\" that the unnamed creature in the novel was a vegetarian. She argued that the book was \"indebted to the vegetarian climate\" of its day and that vegetarianism is a major theme in the novel as a whole. She notes that the creature gives an \"emotional speech\" talking about its dietary principles, which makes it a \"more sympathetic being\" than others. She also said that it connected with Vegetarianism in the Romantic Era who believed that the Garden of Eden was meatless, rewrote the myth of Prometheus, the ideas of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and feminist symbolism. Adams concludes that it is more likely that the \"vegetarian revelations\" in the novel are \"silenced\" due to the lack of a \"framework into which we can assimilate them.\" Apart from Adams, scholar Suzanne Samples pointed to \"gendered spaces of eating and consumption\" within Victorian England which influenced literary characters of the time. This included works such as Alfred, Lord Tennyson's poem titled \"The Charge of the Light Brigade,\" Christina Rossetti's volume of poetry titled \"Goblin Market and Other Poems\", Lewis Carroll's \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\", Mary Seacole's autographical account titled \"Wonderful Adventures of Mrs. Seacole in Many Lands\", and Anthony Trollope's novel titled \"Orley Farm\". Samples also argued that vegetarianism in the Victorian era \"presented a unique lifestyle choice that avoided meat but promoted an awareness of health\", which initially was seen as rebellious but later became more normalized.\nIn Irene Clyde's 1909 feminist utopian novel, \"Beatrice the Sixteenth\", Mary Hatherley accidentally travels through time, discovering a lost world, which is a postgender society named Armeria, with the inhabitants following a strict vegetarian diet, having ceased to slaughter animals for over a thousand years. Some reviewers of the book praised the vegetarianism of the Armerians.\nJames Joyce's 1922 novel, \"Ulysses\" is said to have vegetarian themes. Scholar Peter Adkins argued that while Joyce was critical of the vegetarianism of George A.E. Russell, the novel engages with \"questions of animal ethics through its portrayal of Ireland's cattle industry, animal slaughter and the cultural currency of meat,\" unlike some of his other novels. He also stated that the novel \"historicizes and theorizes animal life and death,\" and that it demonstrates the ways that symbolism and materiality of meat are \"co-opted within patriarchal political structures,\" putting it in the same space as theorists like Carol J. Adams, Donna J. Haraway, Laura Wright, and Cary Wolfe, and writers such as J. M. Coetzee.\nIn 1997, S. Rene\u00e9 Wheeler wrote in the \"Vegetarian Journal\", saying that \"finding books with vegetarian themes\" is important for helping children \"feel legitimate in being vegetarian.\" In 2004, writer J. M. Coetzee argued that since the \"mode of consciousness of nonhuman species is quite different from human consciousness,\" it is hard for writers to realize this for animals, with a \"temptation to project upon them feelings and thoughts that may belong only to our own human mind and heart,\" and stated that reviewers have ignored the presence of animals in his books. He also stated that animals are present in his \"fiction either not at all or in a merely subsidiary role\" because they occupy \"a subsidiary place in our lives\" and argued that it is not \"possible to write about the inner lives of animals in any complex way.\"\nIn 2014, \"The New Yorker\" published a short story by Jonathan Lethem titled \"Pending Vegan\" which follows \"one family, a husband and wife and their four-year-old twin daughters\" on a trip to SeaWorld in San Diego, California. The protagonist of the story, Paul Espeseth, renames himself \"Pending Vegan\" in order to acknowledge his \"increasing uneasiness with the relationship between man and beast.\"\nIn 2016, a three-part Korean novel by Han Kang titled \"The Vegetarian\" was published in the U.S., which focuses on a woman named Young-hye, who \"sees vegetarianism as a way of not inflicting harm on anything,\" with eating meat symbolizing human violence itself, and later identifies as a plant rather than as a human \"and stops eating entirely.\" Some argued the book was \nmore about mental illness than vegetarianism. Others compared it to fictional works by Margaret Atwood.\nTelevision.\nVegetarians, and vegetarian themes, have appeared in various TV shows, such as \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\", \"True Blood\", \"The Simpsons\", \"King of the Hill\", and \"South Park\".\nMr. Spock of \"\" has been called \"television's first vegetarian.\" He and his fellow Vulcans do not eat meat due to a \"philosophy of non-violence.\" He is identified as vegetarian following an episode where he was \"transported back to pre-civilised times\" and ate meat, and in Richard Marranca, in an issue of the \"Vegetarian Journal\", said that for Spock, like Kwai Chang Caine in \"Kung Fu\", \"vegetarianism was something authentic and taken for granted; it was the right thing to do based on compassion and logic.\"\nIn 1995, \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Lisa the Vegetarian\" aired. Before recording their lines for the episode, showrunner David Mirkin, who had recently stopped consuming meat, gave Linda and Paul McCartney \"a container of his favorite turkey substitute,\" with both voicing characters in an episode which focused around vegetarianism. Critic Alan Siegel said that before the episode vegetarians had been portrayed as \"rarely as anything but one-dimensional hippies\" but that this episode was different as it was \"told from the point of view of the person becoming a vegetarian.\" He said that the episode was one of the \"first times on television that vegetarians saw an honest depiction of themselves\" and of people's reaction to their dietary choices. The idea for the episode was originally proposed by David X. Cohen and the McCartneys agreed on the condition that Lisa remain a vegetarian, with both satisfied with how the episode turned out. In the episode, Lisa decides to stop eating meat after bonding with a lamb at a petting zoo. Her schoolmates and family members ridicule her for her beliefs, but with the help of Apu as well as Paul and Linda McCartney, she commits to vegetarianism. The staff promised that she would remain a vegetarian, resulting in one of the few permanent character changes made in the show. In an August 2020 interview, McCartney said that he and is wife were worried that Lisa \"would be a vegetarian for a week, then Homer would persuade her to eat a hot dog,\" but were assured by the producers that she would remain that way, and he was delighted that they \"kept their word.\"\nIn September 1998, the \"King of the Hill\" episode \"And They Call It Bobby Love\" aired on FOX. In the episode, \"Bobby has a relationship with a vegetarian named Marie. She later dumps him after he eats a steak in front of her.\" In the March 2002 \"South Park\" episode \"Fun with Veal\", Stan Marsh becomes a vegetarian after he learns that veal is made of baby cows, which Cartman makes fun of. The episode ends with the boys, including Stan, getting grounded, but not before going out with their parents for burgers, meaning that Stan is no longer a vegetarian. In the DVD commentary, the creators said they wanted to balance their message of not eating baby animals, by at the same time not advocating people abstain from meat consumption altogether.\nAang, in the animated series \"\" and \"The Legend of Korra\" was vegetarian. According to the show's creators, \"Buddhism and Taoism have been huge inspirations behind the idea for \"Avatar\".\" As shown in \"The King of Omashu\" and \"The Headband\", a notable aspect of Aang's character is his vegetarian diet, which is consistent with Buddhism, Hinduism, and Taoism. In the Brahmajala Sutra, a Buddhist code of ethics, vegetarianism is encouraged.\nOther fictional characters who are vegetarians include Count Duckula in \"Count Duckula\", Beast Boy in \"Teen Titans\" and \"Teen Titans Go!\", Lenore in \"Supernatural\", and Norville \"Shaggy\" Rogers in the animated series \"What's New, Scooby Doo?\". Before the latter animated series, Shaggy was known for having an \"enormous appetite\" earlier in the Scooby-Doo franchise. The decision to make Shaggy a vegetarian occurred after his voice actor, Casey Kasem, convinced the producers to do so, since he was a vegan who supported animal rights and opposed factory farming, saying he would refuse to voice Shaggy unless the character was vegetarian.\nAn October 2019 \"South Park\" episode, \"Let Them Eat Goo\", featured a vegetarian character. Additionally, Steven Universe, the protagonist in the show \"Steven Universe\" and the limited epilogue series, \"Steven Universe Future\", is a vegetarian. In the episode \"Snow Day\" of \"Steven Universe Future\", Steven tells the Gems he lives with that he has been a vegetarian for a month, drinks protein shakes and mentions that he does \"his own skincare routine.\"\nFilm.\nIn the 1999 film, \"Notting Hill\", Keziah, played by Emma Bernard is a vegetarian. In one scene, Keziah tells William \"Will\" Thacker (played by Hugh Grant), that she is a fruitarian. She says she believes that \"fruits and vegetables have feeling\", meaning she opposes cooking them, only eating things that have \"actually fallen off a tree or bush\" and that are dead already, leading to what some describe as a negative depiction.\nIn the 2000 film, \"But I'm A Cheerleader\", before Megan, one of the film's protagonists, is sent to a conversion therapy camp, her parents and others claim she is a lesbian because she is a vegetarian. \"Legally Blonde\", a 2001 film, also featured a vegetarian\u2014Elle Woods. When she introduces herself at Harvard Law School, she describes herself and her dog as \"Gemini vegetarians\".\nIn the 2012 film, \"Life of Pi\", Pi, played by Suraj Sharma, is a vegetarian based on his 3 religions: Hindu, Christian, and Muslim. And in the ship scene, one Taiwanese Sailor, played by Bo-Chieh Wang, is a vegetarian from his Buddhism religion to eat rice and the vegetarian gravy.\nIn the 2018 Hollywood blockbuster, \"Black Panther\", M'Baku (voiced by Winston Duke), the Jabari tribe leader who lives in the mountains of Wakanda, declares to a White CIA agent named Everett Ross (voiced by Martin Freeman), \"if you say one more word, I'll feed you to my children!\" After Everett is shaken by these words, he jokes, saying he is kidding because all those in his tribe, including himself, are vegetarians. Some praised this scene for challenging a stereotype of Black culture and the perception of what vegetarians look like. Duke later said that some Black outlets cooked vegan meals for him, and said that the scene is \"kind of teaching kids that eating vegetables is cool,\" which is something he is for.\nVegetarian themes have also been noted in the \"Twilight\" novel (2005\u20132008) and film franchise (2008\u20132012), \"The Road\" (2006) and \"The Year of the Flood\" (2009). In March 2020, scholar Nathan Poirer reviewed \"Thinking Veganism in Literature and Culture: Towards a Vegan Theory\", a book edited by Emelia Quinn and Benjamin Westwood, and he concluded that veganism could \"infiltrate popular culture without being perceived as threatening,\" while noting others who contribute to the book examining vegan cinema that \"challenges the normality of human supremacy by situating humans as potential prey,\" and stating that the essays outline ways veganism can be successful in popular culture.\nReviewers said that the Netflix original film, \"Okja\", which focused on factory farming, talks about genetically modified animals, and features a radical environmentalist group, had an impact on people's diets. Some said the film would convince audience members to become vegetarians, saying the film encourages people to eat less meat, comparing it to the impact of the documentaries \"Food, Inc.\", \"Blackfish\", \"The Cove\", and \"Cowspiracy\", Jonathan Safran Foer's book, \"Eating Animals\", the films \"Charlotte's Web\", \"Babe\", and \"Chicken Run\", and to the themes of \"Watership Down\". The film was also described as the \"ultimate vegetarian film.\" The film's co-writer, Jon Ronson, who is also vegetarian, said that while the film will \"turn people vegetarian\", this was not his intention nor that of director Bong Joon-ho. In an interview with The Independent, Joon-ho said that he did not \"expect the entire audience to convert to veganism after watching the film\" and said that he does not have an issue with meat consumption, but asked the audience to consider where their food comes from, and said if that happens, then the \"level of meat consumption will gradually decline.\" Joon-Ho told LA Times that in his view, the food industry is \"always trying to do is try to thicken the walls of the slaughterhouse so that nobody can peer inside it,\" with LA Times noting that Joon-Ho became vegan after visiting a slaugherhouse in South Korea, but ended the diet change after two months. Paul Dano, who plays Jay in the film, also told GQ that, while he is a meat-eater, it made him want to \"be more conscientious consumer\" and said it is easy to \"forget that when we put our dollar down we are supporting something.\"\nOther scholars noted vegetarian themes in the films \"The Fault in Our Stars\", \"The Princess Diaries\" series, and the 2009 film, \"Vegetarian\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32593", "revid": "2970138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32593", "title": "Vegemite", "text": "Australian brand of spread made from yeast\n \nVegemite ( ) is a brand of a thick, dark brown Australian food spread made from leftover brewers' yeast extract with various vegetable and spice additives. It was developed by Cyril Callister in Melbourne, Victoria, for the Fred Walker Company in 1922 and was first sold in stores on 25 October 1923. \nA spread for sandwiches, toast, crumpets and cracker biscuits as well as a filling for pastries, Vegemite is similar to other yeast-based spreads such as Marmite in the UK and its New Zealand version, Australian Promite, MightyMite, AussieMite, OzEmite, German Vitam-R and Swiss Cenovis.\nVegemite has a strong flavour. It is salty, slightly bitter, malty and has an umami flavour similar to beef bouillon (because it is rich in glutamates). It is low-FODMAP, vegan, kosher and halal. It is known for being high in B vitamins.\nFollowing the death of Fred Walker in 1935, the Vegemite brand came under the ownership of the American company Kraft Foods. However, in 2017 the brand returned to Australian ownership when the Bega Group purchased it alongside other assets from Mondelez International (formerly Kraft Foods Inc.).\nHistory.\nBeginnings.\nIn 1919, following the disruption of British Marmite imports after World War\u00a0I, the Australian company Fred Walker &amp; Co. gave Cyril Callister the task of developing a spread from the used yeast being dumped by breweries. Callister had been hired by the chairman Fred Walker.\nCallister used autolysis to break down the yeast cells from waste obtained from the Carlton &amp; United brewery. Concentrating the clear liquid extract and blending with salt, celery and onion extracts formed a sticky black paste.\nFollowing a competition to name the new spread with a prize pool of \u00a3A50 (), \"Vegemite\" was selected by Fred Walker's daughter Sheilah, and it was registered as a trademark in Australia in 1919; the name of the person who coined the name is not known. \nVegemite first appeared on the market in 1923 with advertising emphasising its value to children's health, but it failed to sell well. Faced with growing competition from Marmite, from 1928 to 1935 the product was renamed \"Parwill\" to make use of the advertising slogan \"Marmite but Parwill\", a two-step pun on the new name and that of its competitor; i.e. \"If Ma [mother] might ... then Pa [father] will.\" This attempt to expand market share was unsuccessful and the name reverted to Vegemite, but it did not recover its lost market share.\nCommercial success.\nIn 1925, Walker had established the Kraft Walker Cheese Co. as a joint venture company with J. L. Kraft &amp; Bros to market processed cheese and, following the failure of Parwill, in 1935 he used the success of Kraft Walker Cheese to promote Vegemite. Following the death of Walker in 1935, the Fred Walker Company was absorbed by Kraft Walker Cheese Co., a subsidiary of Kraft Co. In a two-year campaign to promote sales, Vegemite was given away free with Kraft Walker cheese products (with a coupon redemption) and this was followed by poetry competitions with imported American Pontiac cars being offered as prizes. Sales responded and in 1939 Vegemite was officially endorsed by the British Medical Association as a rich source of B vitamins. Rationed in Australia during World War II, Vegemite was included in Australian Army rations and by the late 1940s was used in nine out of ten Australian homes.\nRecent years.\nIn April 1984, a jar of Vegemite became the first product in Australia to be electronically scanned at a checkout.\nVegemite is produced in Australia at its Port Melbourne manufacturing facility, which produces more than 22 million jars annually. Virtually unchanged from Callister's original recipe, Vegemite now far outsells Marmite and other similar spreads in Australia. The billionth jar of Vegemite was produced in October 2008.\nVegemite was also produced in New Zealand for over 50 years, but as of August 2006 production had ceased. The New Zealand version of Marmite remains successful there.\nAcquisition by Bega Cheese.\nThe Vegemite brand was owned by Mondelez International (formerly Kraft Foods Inc. until 2012) until January 2017, when it was acquired by the Australian Bega Group in a US$460,000,000 agreement for full Australian ownership after Bega would buy most of Mondelez International's Australia and New Zealand grocery and cheese business.\nConsumption.\nA common way of eating Vegemite is on toasted bread with a layer of butter or margarine. Only a small amount of Vegemite is required due to its strong flavour. A Vegemite sandwich consists of two slices of buttered bread and Vegemite, but other ingredients such as cheese, lettuce, avocado or tomato may be added.\nVegemite can be used as a filling for pastries, such as the cheesymite scroll, or it may be used in more exotic dishes.\nThe official Vegemite website contains several recipes using Vegemite in foods such as pasta, burgers, pizzas, casseroles, and even ice cream. It has also suggested using Vegemite as an additive to soups or two-minute noodles.\nKosher and halal certification.\nLimited quantities of kosher Vegemite were first produced in the 1980s; a 2004 decision to cease certification was reversed after a backlash from Jewish consumers. Around 2009, Kraft contracted with the Kashrut Authority in New South Wales for their kashrut supervision services, and by 2010, all jars and tubes of ordinary Vegemite were labelled with the authority's stamp. In 2010, Vegemite also received halal certification.\nVegan certification.\nWhile the makers of Vegemite have long claimed that Vegemite was suitable for vegans, it was not until World Vegan Day 2019 that it received vegan certification\nfrom the Vegan Australia Certified program.\nA Vegemite nutritionist said that \"the spread had always been a fitting choice for vegans\".\nNutritional information.\nVegemite is a source of B\u00a0vitamins, specifically thiamine, riboflavin, niacin and folate (B1, B2, B3 and B9, respectively). The base version contains no vitamin B12 (cobalamin) although both vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) and vitamin B12 are added to the low-salt formulation.\nThe main ingredient of Vegemite is yeast extract, which contains a high concentration of glutamic acid, the source of Vegemite's umami flavour. Vegemite does not contain any fat, added sugar or animal content. It contains gluten (a composite of storage proteins) as the yeast is derived from brewing.\nOne 5 gram serving contains 173 mg of sodium, which is 8% of the recommended daily intake of sodium. Australia only defines low salt foods, but by UK standards Vegemite is classified as a high salt content food.\nA low-salt version of Vegemite was introduced in September 2014. It has a 25% reduction in sodium content. The low-salt version is also fortified with vitamin B6 and vitamin B12.\nAdvertising and branding.\nOriginally promoted as a healthy food for children, during World War\u00a0II advertising emphasised its medicinal value:\nVegemite fights with the men up north! If you are one of those who don't need Vegemite medicinally, then thousands of invalids are asking you to deny yourself of it for the time being.\nAt the same time, \"Sister MacDonald\" insisted that Vegemite was essential for \"infant welfare\" in magazines. Later advertisements began to promote the importance of the B complex vitamins to health.\nVegemite's rise to popularity was helped by the marketing campaigns written by J.\u00a0Walter Thompson advertising that began in 1954, using groups of smiling, healthy children singing a catchy jingle titled \"We're happy little Vegemites\".\nWe're happy little Vegemites\nAs bright as bright can be.\nWe all enjoy our Vegemite\nFor breakfast, lunch, and tea.\nOur mummies say we're growing stronger\nEvery single week,\nBecause we love our Vegemite\nWe all adore our Vegemite\nIt puts a rose in every cheek.\nFirst aired on radio in 1954, the jingle was transferred to television in 1956. This advertising campaign continued until the late 1960s but, as it was targeted to children, it was discontinued in favour of ads promoting the product to all ages. In the late 1980s the original black and white television commercial was remastered, partially colourised and reintroduced. This commercial was to be broadcast periodically from 1991 to 2010. The two young twin girls who sang this advertising jingle were known as the \"Vegemite Twins\".\nIn March 2007, Kraft announced that they were trying to trace the eight original children from the campaign to celebrate the advertisement's 50th anniversary and to take part in a new campaign. The 1956 commercial was to be remade with the original children, now grown, to forge a link between \"the new generation and the old ad\". The media took up the search on Kraft's behalf with all eight children identified in eight days and resulted in many TV specials and interviews in the Australian national media. The 50-year reunion campaign won the \"Arts, Entertainment &amp; Media Campaign of the Year\" award at the November 2007 Asia Pacific PR Awards.\nVariations.\nVegemite Singles.\nDuring the 1990s, Kraft released a product in Australia known as Vegemite Singles. It combined two of Kraft's major products, Kraft Singles and Vegemite, into one, thus creating Vegemite-flavoured cheese. This extension of the Vegemite product line was an attempt by Kraft to capitalise on the enormous popularity of Vegemite and cheese sandwiches (made by placing a slice of cheese into a Vegemite sandwich). Vegemite Singles were later taken off the market.\nVegemite Cheesybite.\nOn 13 June 2009, Kraft released a new version of Vegemite. The formula combines Vegemite and Kraft cream cheese, spreads more easily and has a considerably less salty and milder taste than the original. To coincide with the release of the new recipe, Kraft ran a competition to give the new flavour a name. The new name was announced during the broadcast of the 2009 AFL Grand Final as \"iSnack 2.0\". The name was chosen by a panel of marketing and communication experts to appeal to a younger market, capitalising on the popularity of Apple's iPod and iPhone. The choice immediately drew universal criticism and ridicule within Australia. Within days, opinion columns and social networking sites were flooded with derision and vitriol; and, after only four days, Kraft released plans to abandon the \"iSnack\" name, admitting that it may have been a mistake. Two days later, Kraft opened a new poll on its website, and the final name was announced on 7 October 2009 as \"Vegemite Cheesybite\", with Kraft claiming that the name had received 36% of the 30,357 votes that were cast for a name option, or approximately 10,900 votes. The popular suggestion \"Cheesymite\", long associated with the popular Cheesymite scroll, was already trademarked by other organisations. The product has been renamed \"Vegemite &amp; Cheese\" under Bega's ownership.\nMy First Vegemite.\nIn 2011, Kraft Foods Australia launched \"My First Vegemite\", a special formulation of original Vegemite for children aged older than one year. According to Kraft, the new formula has a \"milder taste\" and \"additional health benefits including iron, B6 and B12 vitamins as well as 50% less sodium\", and was designed in response to consumer demand for foods with lower sugar and salt content plus additional health benefits. Immediate reaction and media reports regarding the new formula were largely positive, but Kraft Foods Australia discontinued the \"My First Vegemite\" product line in 2012 due to poor sales performance.\nChocolate and Vegemite.\nIn April 2015, Cadbury announced that it was to release a Vegemite-flavoured block of chocolate on 1 June. The chocolate block is Cadbury's Caramello block updated by mixing vegemite with the chocolate. Critics described the taste as similar to salted caramel with a pleasant umami aftertaste. Criticism varied from \"love it\" to \"tastes like they mixed the caramel and turkish delight filling with a lot of salt\" to \"needs more salt\", with several tasters commenting that they thought the aftertaste was unpleasant.\nVegemite Blend 17.\nIn 2017, a premium variety, Vegemite Blend 17, was released for a limited time. It promised a \"richer bolder taste\" but at double the price of the standard product.\nOther products.\nOther commercial products with Vegemite flavour include Smith's Crisps, In a Biskit, bagel crisps, sausages, meat pies,\nand Arnott's Shapes.\nBans and rumours of bans.\nIn October 2006, an Australian news company reported that Vegemite had been banned in the United States, and that the United States Customs Service had gone so far as to search Australians entering the country for Vegemite because it naturally contains folate, a B\u00a0vitamin approved as an additive in the United States for just a few foods, including breakfast cereals. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration later stated that there were no plans to subject Vegemite to an import ban, or withdraw it from supermarket shelves. The United States Customs and Border Protection tried to dispel the rumour, stating on its website that \"there is no known prohibition on the importation of Vegemite\" and \"there is no official policy within CBP targeting Vegemite for interception\". The story of the \"ban\" later took on the status of urban legend. While Vegemite has never been popular in the US, it can still be purchased at supermarkets that stock imported food items.\nFollowing newspaper reports in May 2011 that Vegemite and Marmite had been banned and were being removed from shelves in Denmark, outraged fans set up several Facebook groups. In response, Denmark's Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries stated that neither spread had been banned but that the respective companies had not applied for licences to market their products in Denmark. In 2004, Denmark had passed legislation prohibiting the sale of food products fortified with vitamins as a danger to health.\nVegemite is banned from Victorian prisons, with the bans beginning to come into effect from the 1990s, to prevent inmates from brewing alcohol using the paste's high yeast content\u2014even though Vegemite contains no live yeast. Similar bans were proposed in 2015 for a number of dry communities in outback Australia, but they were not enacted. In 2025, convicted murderer Andre McKechnie challenged the prison ban, arguing that it deprived him of the right to enjoy his culture as an Australian. The case is set for trial in 2026.\nIn 2025, the owner of an Australian-themed cafe in Toronto was informed by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) that, due to its added Vitamin B content, Vegemite is not permitted to be sold in Canada. After an intervention from the Australian government, the CFIA clarified that the \"level of risk to human health from the added vitamins present in the product is low\" and permitted its sale again.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Australian rock band Men at Work refer to a \"Vegemite sandwich\" in the second verse of their 1981 hit song \"Down Under\", from their debut studio album \"Business as Usual\".\nAustralian band King Gizzard &amp; the Lizard Wizard have a song called \"Vegemite\" on their 2014 album Oddments.\n\"True Blue\", a country music song written by Australian singer-songwriter John Williamson, mentions Vegemite.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32594", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32594", "title": "Vietnam veteran", "text": "Soldiers who served during the Vietnam War\nA Vietnam veteran is an individual who performed active ground, naval, or air service in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam War.\nThe term has been used to describe veterans who served in the armed forces of South Vietnam, the United States Armed Forces, and other South Vietnam\u2013backed allies, whether or not they were stationed in Vietnam during their service. However, the more common usage distinguishes between those who served \"in-country\" and those who did not serve in Vietnam by referring to the \"in-country\" veterans as \"Vietnam veterans\" and the others as \"Vietnam-era veterans.\" Regardless, the U.S. government officially refers to all as \"Vietnam-era veterans.\"\nIn the United States, the term \"Vietnam veteran\" is not typically used in relation to members of the People's Army of Vietnam or the Viet Cong (also known as the National Liberation Front) due to the United States' alliance with South Vietnamese forces.\nHowever, in many parts of east and southeast Asia, the term \"Vietnam veteran\" may also apply to allies of the North Vietnamese, including the People's Army of Vietnam, the Viet Cong (National Liberation Front), the People's Liberation Army of China, and the Korean People's Army of North Korea.\nSouth Vietnamese veterans.\nWhile the exact numbers are not entirely known, it is estimated that several million served in the South Vietnamese armed forces, the vast majority in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN). From 1969 to 1971, there were around 22,000 ARVN combat deaths per year. The army reached its peak strength of about 1,000,000 soldiers in 1972. The official number of South Vietnamese personnel killed in action was 220,357.\nFollowing the North Vietnamese victory on April 30, 1975, South Vietnamese veterans were arrested and detained in labor camps in desolate areas. The veterans and their families were detained without trial for decades at a time. After being released, they faced significant discrimination from the Communist government. A significant proportion of the surviving South Vietnamese veterans left the country for Western countries including the United States and Australia, either by or through the Humanitarian Operation (HO).\nU.S. veterans.\nAccording to the U.S. Department of Labor, the Vietnam Era Veterans' Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 (VEVRAA) states, \"A Vietnam era veteran\" is a person who:\nIn 2004, the U.S. Census Bureau reported there were 8.2 million Vietnam-era veterans who were living in the United States, with 2.59 million of them being reported to have actually served \"in-country.\"\nMore than 58,000 U.S. military personnel died as a result of the conflict. That includes deaths from all categories including deaths while missing, captured, non-hostile deaths, homicides, and suicides. The Department of Veterans Affairs recognizes veterans that served in the country, then known as the Republic of Vietnam, from February 28, 1961, to May 7, 1975, as being eligible for such programs as the department's Readjustment Counseling Services program, also known as the Vet Centers. The Vietnam War was the last American war in which the U.S. government employed conscription.\nAmerican servicemen who served between January 9, 1962, and May 7, 1975, are presumed to have been exposed to herbicides, such as Agent Orange.\nPTSD.\nMany Vietnam veterans suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in unprecedented numbers, with PTSD affecting as many as 15.2% of Vietnam veterans. Referred to as the first \"pharmacological war\" in history, the U.S. war in Vietnam was so called because of the unprecedented level of psychoactive drugs that U.S. servicemen used. The U.S. military had routinely provided heavy psychoactive drugs, including amphetamines, to American servicemen, which left them unable to process adequately their war traumas at the time. The U.S. armed forces readily distributed large amounts of \"speed\" (stimulants), in the form of Dexedrine (dextroamphetamine), an amphetamine twice as strong as Benzedrine, to American servicemen. Soldiers embarking on long-range reconnaissance missions or ambushes, according to standard military instruction, were supposed to be given 20 milligrams of dextroamphetamine for 48 hours of combat readiness. But this instruction for heavy drugs was rarely followed: the drug was issued, according to veterans, \"like candies,\" with little or no attention paid to the dose and frequency of administering the drug. In the period 1966\u20131969, the U.S. military provided 225 million tablets of stimulants, mostly dextroamphetamine, according to a 1971 report by the Select Committee on Crime of the U.S. House of Representatives. According to a member of a long-range reconnaissance platoon, the drugs \"gave you a sense of bravado as well as keeping you awake. Every sight and sound was heightened. You were wired into it all and at times you felt really invulnerable.\" Servicemen who participated in infiltrating Laos, a secret intervention by the United States in the Laotian Civil War, on four-day missions received 12 tablets of an opioid (Darvon), 24 tablets of codeine (an opioid analgesic), and 6 pills of dextroamphetamine. Also, those serving in special units departing for a tough, long mission were injected with steroids.\nHowever, pumping the soldiers with speed and heavy anti-psychotics like Thorazine (chlorpromazine) came with a price that veterans paid later. By alleviating the symptoms, the anti-psychotics and narcotics offered temporary relief. However, these serious drugs administered in the absence of professional psychiatric supervision and proper psychotherapy merely suppressed the problems and symptoms, but veterans years later often experienced those problems untreated and amplified. This is a large part of the reason why very few servicemen, compared to previous wars, required medical evacuation due to combat-stress breakdowns, but PTSD levels among veterans after the war are at unprecedented levels compared to previous wars.\nVeterans from other nations.\nNationals of other nations fought in the American-led anti-communist coalition, usually as armed forces of allied nations, such as Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, and South Korea, but sometimes as members of the U.S. Armed Forces. The Republic of China (Taiwan), Spain, and the Philippines contributed assistance in non-combat roles.\nAustralian veterans.\nAustralia deployed approximately three battalions of infantry, one regiment of Centurion tanks, three RAAF Squadrons (2SQN Canberra Bombers, 9SQN Iroquois Helicopters, and 35 SQN Caribou Transports), 2 batteries of Royal Australian Artillery and a Special Air Service Regiment (SASR) Squadron. The Royal Australian Navy (RAN) performed a variety of operational tasks at sea, ashore and in the air. The 1st Australian Task Force consisted of Army, Navy, and Air Force personnel and commanded all Australian operations from 1966 until 1972. 1st Australian Logistic Support Group (1 ALSG) was 1 ATF's ground support unit, composed of engineer, transport, ordnance, medical, and service corps units. Australian Army training teams followed the withdrawal of combat forces in 1971. According to the Australian Government Nominal Roll of Vietnam Veterans 13,600 members of the Royal Australian Navy, 41,720 members of the Australian Army, and 4,900 members of the Royal Australian Air Force served in Vietnam from 1962 to 1975. According to official statistics, 501 personnel died or went missing in action during the Vietnam War and 2,400 were wounded.\nCanadian veterans.\nDuring the Vietnam era, more than 30,000 Canadians served in the U.S. Armed Forces; 110 Canadians died in Vietnam, and seven are listed as missing in action. Fred Griffin, a military historian with the Canadian War Museum, estimated in \"Vietnam Magazine\" (\"Perspectives\") that approximately 12,000 of these personnel served in Vietnam. Most of these were Canadians who lived in the United States. The military of Canada did not participate in the war effort.\nNew Zealand veterans.\nInitially, New Zealand provided a 25-man team of RNZE engineers from 1964 to 1965. In May 1965, New Zealand replaced the engineers with a 4-gun artillery battery (140 men) which served until 1971. 750 men served with the battery during this time. In 1967 the first of two rifle companies of infantry, designated Victor Company, arrived shortly thereafter followed by Whiskey company. Over 1,600 New Zealand soldiers saw action in these companies, over 5 years and 9 tours. Also in 1967 a military medical team consisting of RNZAF, RNZN, and RNZAMC medical staff arrived and remained until 1971. (This team was additional but separate from the civilian medical team that had arrived in 1963 and left in 1975.) In 1968 an NZSAS troop arrived, serving 3 tours before their withdrawal. Most New Zealanders operated in Military Region 3 with 1 ATF, in Nui Dat in Phuoc Thuy Province, North East of Saigon. RNZAF flew troops and supplies, did helicopter missions (as part of RAAF), or worked as Forward Air Controllers in the USAF. Other New Zealanders from various branches of service were stationed at 1 ALSG in Vung Tau and New Zealand V Force Headquarters in Saigon. At the height of New Zealand's involvement in 1968, the force was 580 men. Along with the United States and Australia, New Zealand contributed 2 combined-service training teams to train ARVN and Cambodian troops from 1971 until 1972. New Zealand and Australian combat forces were withdrawn in 1971. New Zealand's total contribution numbered nearly 4,000 personnel from 1964 until 1972. 37 were killed and 187 were wounded. As of 2010, no memorial has been erected to remember these casualties. Like the United States and Australia, the New Zealand veterans were rejected by the people and the government after returning and did not receive a welcome home parade until 2008. The Tribute also included a formal Crown Apology. Despite high mortality rates among New Zealand Vietnam veterans attributed to Agent Orange, the New Zealand Government has been accused of ignoring the issue until only recently. The New Zealand documentary \"Jungle Rain: The NZ Story Of Agent Orange and the Vietnam War\" (2006) discusses the Agent Orange issue in depth.\nSouth Korean veterans.\nSouth Korea deployed approximately two army divisions (Capital Mechanized Infantry Division, 9th Infantry Division), one Marine Corps Brigade (2nd Marine Brigade) and other support units.\nThroughout the Vietnam War, South Korea sent approximately 320,000 servicemen to Vietnam. At the peak of their commitment, in 1968, South Korea maintained a force of approximately 48,000 men in the country. All troops were withdrawn in 1973. About 5,099 South Koreans were killed and 10,962 wounded during the war.\nThai veterans.\nThailand sent nearly 40,000 volunteer soldiers to South Vietnam during the war and peaked at 11,600 by 1969. Units included the elite Queen's Cobras and the renowned Black Panther Division of the Royal Thai Army Volunteer Force. The Royal Thai Air Force provided personnel transport and supply runs in liaison with the Republic of Vietnam Air Force and the United States Air Force (USAF). The Royal Thai Navy also contributed personnel. The last of the Thai troops left Vietnam in April 1972, with 351 killed and 1,358 wounded.\nPhilippine veterans.\nThe Philippines sent the \"Philippine Civic Action Group\" (PHILCAG-V), which entered Vietnam in September 1966, to set up operations in a base camp in Tay Ninh Province northwest of Saigon. The non-combat force included an engineer construction battalion, medical and rural community development teams, a security battalion, and a logistics and headquarters element. The team's strength peaked at 2068. Even though the role of PHILCAG-V was humanitarian, 9 personnel were killed and 64 wounded throughout their 40-month stay through sniper attacks, land mines, and booby traps. The team left Vietnam in 1969.\nChinese veterans.\nThe People's Republic of China deployed the most foreign troops to assist North Vietnam, with nearly 320,000 troops of the People's Liberation Army. The logistical support provided by China allowed for continuous operations and guerrilla warfare tactics used by the North Vietnamese forces, regardless of American-led attempts to stop the flow of resources down the \"Ho Chi Minh trail\" to South Vietnam (Republic of Vietnam). American forces were unable to retaliate against Chinese targets, as it was believed that by doing so, America would escalate the already strained effects of the Cold War, and believed it would invite retaliation by the Soviet Union.\nUSSR veterans.\nThe Soviet Union deployed roughly 4,500 soldiers, technicians, and pilots to Vietnam, surreptitiously, to help turn the war in favor of the North. Whilst their presence was never acknowledged by the USSR or any of her successor nations, Soviet involvement was an open secret. The Soviet Union's policy on the units deployed was to label them \"military consultants.\" This deployment resulted in the development of the North Vietnamese air force, then it was formed against the United States' involvement in the war. From 1975 to 2002, forty-four Soviet servicemen were killed in Vietnam, mainly in aviation accidents. The military collaboration at Cam Ranh Base was continued by the later government of Russia until 2002.\nStereotypes.\nThere are persistent stereotypes about Vietnam veterans as psychologically devastated, bitter, homeless, drug-addicted people, who had a hard time readjusting to society, primarily because of the uniquely divisive nature of the Vietnam War in the context of U.S. history. That social division has expressed itself by the lack both of public and institutional support for the former servicemen that would normally be expected by returning combatants. In a material sense also, veterans benefits for Vietnam-era veterans were dramatically less than those enjoyed after World War II. The Vietnam-Era Veterans' Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974, as amended, \u00a0https://, was meant to try to help the veterans overcome the issues.\nIn 1979, http:// established the first Vet Centers, after a decade of effort by combat vets and others who realized that Vietnam veterans in America and elsewhere (including Australia) were facing specific kinds of readjustment problems, later identified as post-traumatic stress (PTS). Veterans, particularly in Southern California, were responsible for many of those early lobbying and subsequent Vet Center treatment programs. They founded one of the first local organizations by and for Vietnam veterans in 1981, now known as Veterans Village. Other notable organizations that were founded then included the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies and the National Organization for Victim Assistance. The organizations continue to study and/or certify post-traumatic stress disorder responders and clinicians. To find closure, thousands of former American soldiers have visited and some have decided to move permanently to Vietnam to confront the psychological and physical remnants of the Vietnam War. They participate in the removal of unexploded mines and bombs, help people affected by Agent Orange, teach English to the Vietnamese and conduct Vietnam War battlefield tours for tourists.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Vietnam veteran has been depicted in fiction and film of variable quality. A major theme is the difficulties of soldiers readjusting from combat to civilian life. This theme had occasionally been explored in the context of World War Two in such films as \"The Best Years of Our Lives\" (1946) and \"The Men\" (1950). However, films featuring Vietnam veterans constitute a much larger genre.\nThe first appearance of a Vietnam veteran in a film seems to be \"The Born Losers\" (1967) featuring Tom Laughlin as Billy Jack. Bleaker in tone are such films as \"Hi, Mom!\" (1970) in which vet Robert De Niro films pornographic home movies before deciding to become an urban guerrilla, \"The Strangers in 7A\" where a team of former paratroopers blow up a bank and threaten to blow up a residential apartment building, \"The Hard Ride\" (1971) and \"Welcome Home, Soldier Boys\" (1972) in which returning vets are met with incomprehension and violence.\nIn many films, like \"Gordon's War\" (1973) and \"Rolling Thunder\" (1977), the veteran uses his combat skills developed in Vietnam to wage war on evil-doers in America. This is also the theme of \"Taxi Driver\" (1976) in which Robert De Niro plays Vietnam veteran Travis Bickle who wages a one-man war against society whilst he makes plans to assassinate a presidential candidate. This film inspired John W. Hinckley to make a similar attempt against President Ronald Reagan. In a similar vein is \"First Blood\" (1982), which stars Sylvester Stallone in the iconic role of John Rambo, a Vietnam vet who comes into conflict with a small-town police department.\nSuch films as \"Welcome Home, Johnny Bristol\" (1972), and \"The Ninth Configuration\" (1979) were innovative in depicting veterans suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder before this syndrome became widely known. In \"Born on the Fourth of July\" (1989) Tom Cruise portrays disenchanted Vietnam veteran Ron Kovic who, wounded in action and requiring the use of a wheelchair, leads rallies against the war. A more recent example is Bruce Dern's portrayal of a down-and-out veteran in the film \"Monster\" (2003). B-movies that feature Vietnam veterans with an emphasis on action, violence, and revenge, belong into the exploitation subgenre called \"vetsploitation.\"\nIn television, the first Vietnam veteran to be a regular character in a U.S. dramatic series was Lincoln Case on \"Route 66\". Case, played by Glenn Corbett, was introduced in 1963, long before the major U.S. buildup in Vietnam. \"Linc\" Case was initially portrayed as an angry, embittered man, not only because of his harrowing wartime experiences (which included being taken prisoner and escaping a POW camp) but also because of his grim childhood and continuing estrangement from much of his family. The show depicted his effort to make peace with himself and others.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, service in Vietnam was part of the backstory of many TV characters, particularly in police or detective roles. The wartime experiences of some of these characters, such as \"MacGyver\", Rick Simon of \"Simon &amp; Simon\", or Sonny Crockett on \"Miami Vice\", were mentioned only occasionally and rarely became central to story lines. To a degree, writing in a Vietnam background provided a logical chronology, but also served to give these characters more depth, and explain their skills, e.g. MacGyver having served in a bomb disposal unit. \"China Beach\", which aired in the late 1980s, was the only television program that featured women who were in Vietnam as military personnel or civilian volunteers.\nThomas Magnum of \"Magnum, P.I.\", Stringfellow Hawke of \"Airwolf\", and the characters of \"The A-Team\" were characters whose experiences in Vietnam were more frequently worked into plot lines. They were part of an early 1980s tendency to rehabilitate the image of the Vietnam vet in the public eye.\nThe documentary \"In the Shadow of the Blade\" (released in 2004) reunited Vietnam veterans and families of the war dead with a restored UH-1 \"Huey\" helicopter in a cross-country journey to tell the stories of Americans affected by the war.\nAn example in print is Marvel Comics' the Punisher, also known as Frank Castle. Castle learned all of his combat techniques from his time as a Marine as well as from his three tours of combat during Vietnam. It is also where he acquired his urge to punish the guilty, which goes on to be a defining trait in Castles' character.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32597", "revid": "19992876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32597", "title": "Vilnius", "text": "Capital and largest city of Lithuania\nVilnius ( , ) is the capital of and largest city in Lithuania and the most-populous city in the Baltic states. The city's estimated January 2025 population was 607,667, and the Vilnius urban area (which extends beyond the city limits) has an estimated population of 747,864.\nVilnius is notable for the architecture of its Old Town, considered one of Europe's largest and best-preserved old towns. The city was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1994. The architectural style known as Vilnian Baroque is named after the city, which is farthest to the east among Baroque cities and the largest such city north of the Alps.\nThe city was noted for its multicultural population during the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, with contemporary sources comparing it to Babylon. Its Jewish influence had led to its being called \"the Jerusalem of Lithuania\", and Napoleon called it \"the Jerusalem of the North\" when he passed through in 1812. Before World War II and the Holocaust, Vilnius was one of Europe's most important Jewish centers. The city's current demographics are additionally marked by repatriations of Poles, who made up the majority of inhabitants before the war.\nVilnius was a 2009 European Capital of Culture with Linz in Austria. In 2021, the city was named one of fDi's 25 Global Cities of the Future. Vilnius is a financial centre, ranked 76th globally and 29th in Europe on the Global Financial Centres Index. The city is an important center for the global fintech industry. It hosted the 2023 NATO Summit. In 2025 Vilnius was the European Green Capital. Vilnius is a member of Eurocities and the Union of Capitals of the European Union (UCEU).\nEtymology and other names.\nThe name of Vilnius first appeared in Latin-edited letters by Gediminas from the year 1323, in the form \"Vilna\" (\"in civitate nostra regia, dicta Vilna\"). In another letter from 1325, the form \"Wilno\" also appears (\"Datum Wilno\"). Both forms ultimately originate from the old Lithuanian name of the tributary river Vilnia (meaning ripple), which flows into the Neris River in the center of old Vilnius, near the Castle Hill. The name of the river was transferred to the city. The form \"Wilno\" is still used in the Polish language today. The Lithuanian form \"Vilnius\", which is used today, was recorded at the turn of the 16th and 17th centuries in Mikalojus Dauk\u0161a's \u201cPostil,\u201d but it only became widespread during the Lithuanian national revival at the end of the 19th century.\nThe form \"Vilna\" made its way into Western European languages and for a long time served as the standard designation for the city of Vilnius, especially in historical and diplomatic texts. The most notable non-Lithuanian names for the city include , , (\"Vilnia\"), , , (\"Vilno\"), (\"Vilne\"), (\"Vilna\"). A Russian name dating to the Russian Empire was \u0412\u0438\u043b\u044c\u043d\u0430 (\"Vilna\"), although \u0412\u0438\u043b\u044c\u043d\u044e\u0441 (\"Vilnyus\") is now used.\nAccording to a legend recorded around the 1530s, Grand Duke Gediminas (c. 1275\u20131341) was hunting in the sacred forest near \u0160ventaragis' Valley, where the Vilnia River flows into the Neris. The successful hunt for a wisent lasted longer than expected, and Gediminas decided to spend the night in the valley. That night, he dreamed of a huge Iron Wolf standing on top of a hill, howling loudly. Upon awakening, the Duke asked the \"krivis\" Lizdeika to interpret the dream. The chief priest explained:What is destined for the ruler and the State of Lithuania, is thus: the Iron Wolf represents a castle and a city which will be established by you on this site. This city will be the capital of the Lithuanian lands and the dwelling of their rulers, and the glory of their deeds shall echo throughout the world.\nGediminas, obeying the gods, built two castles: the Lower Castle in the valley, and the Crooked Castle on Bald Hill. He moved his court there, declared it his permanent seat and capital, and developed the surrounding area into a city he named Vilnius.\nHistory.\nVilnius's history dates to the Stone Age. The city at least from 1323 until 1795 was the capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Later Vilnius was ruled by imperial and Soviet Russia, Napoleonic France, Imperial and Nazi Germany, interwar Poland, and again became a capital of Lithuania in the 20th century.\nA Baltic settlement since its foundation, Vilnius became significant in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The city was first mentioned in letters by Grand Duke Gediminas, who invited Jews and Germans to settle and built a wooden castle on a hill. Vilnius became a city when it was given city rights in 1387, after the Christianization of Lithuania, and was settled by craftsmen and merchants of a variety of nationalities. It was the capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (until 1795) within the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. Vilnius flourished under the Commonwealth, especially after the 1579 establishment of Vilnius University by the Lithuanian Grand Duke Stephen B\u00e1thory. The city became a cultural and scientific center, attracting migrants from east and west. It had diverse communities, with Polish, Jewish, Orthodox, and German populations. The city experienced a number of invasions and occupations, including by the Teutonic Knights, Russia and, later, Germany.\nUnder imperial Russian rule, Vilnius became the capital of Vilna Governorate and had a number of cultural revivals during the 19th and early 20th centuries by Jews, Poles, Lithuanians, and Belarusians. After World War I, the city experienced conflict between Poland and Lithuania which led to its occupation by Poland in October 1920. It remained part of Poland until its annexation by Lithuania in September 1939 and then by the Soviet Union in June 1940. After that war, Vilnius became the capital of the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic.\nIndependence.\nOn 11 March 1990, the Supreme Council of the Lithuanian SSR announced its secession from the Soviet Union and intention to restore an independent Lithuania. On 9 January 1991, the Soviet Union sent in troops; this culminated in the 13 January attack on the State Radio and Television Building and Vilnius TV Tower which killed 14 civilians. The Soviet Union recognised Lithuanian independence in September 1991. According to the Constitution of Lithuania, \"the capital of the State of Lithuania shall be the city of Vilnius, the long-standing historical capital of Lithuania\".\nVilnius has become a modern European city. Its territory has been expanded with since 1990, incorporating urban areas, villages, hamlets, and the city of Grigi\u0161k\u0117s. Most historic buildings have been renovated and a business and commercial area became the New City Centre, the main administrative and business district on the north side of the river Neris. The area includes modern residential and retail space, with the municipal building and the Europa Tower its most prominent buildings. The construction of Swedbank's headquarters indicates the importance of Scandinavian banks in Vilnius. The Vilnius Business Harbour complex was built and expanded. Over 75,000 flats were built from 1995 to 2018, making the city a Baltic construction leader.\nVilnius was selected as a 2009 European Capital of Culture with Linz, the capital of Upper Austria. The 2008 financial crisis led to a drop in tourism, which prevented many projects from completion; allegations of corruption and incompetence were made; tax increases for cultural activity led to protests, and economic conditions sparked riots. On 28\u201329 November 2013, Vilnius hosted the Eastern Partnership summit at the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania. Many European presidents, prime ministers, and high-ranking officials participated. In 2015, Remigijus \u0160ima\u0161ius became the city's first directly elected mayor. The 2023 NATO summit was held in Vilnius.\nGeography.\nVilnius is at the confluence of the Vilnia and Neris rivers in southeastern Lithuania. Several countries say that the geographical midpoint of Europe is within their territory. The midpoint depends on the definition of European extent, and the \"Guinness Book of World Records\" recognises a point near Vilnius as the continental centre. After a 1989 re-estimation of European boundaries, Jean-George Affholder of the Institut G\u00e9ographique National (French National Geographic Institute) determined that its geographic centre was at . The method used to calculate the point was the centre of gravity of the European geometrical figure, and is near the village of Girija (26 kilometres from Vilnius). A monument by sculptor Gediminas Jok\u016bbonis, a column of white granite surmounted by a crown of stars, was built there in 2004.\nVilnius is from the Baltic Sea and Klaip\u0117da, the main Lithuanian seaport. It is connected by road to other major Lithuanian cities, such as Kaunas ( away), \u0160iauliai ( away) and Panev\u0117\u017eys ( away).\nVilnius has an area of . Buildings cover 29.1 percent of the city; green space covers 68.8 percent, and water covers 2.1 percent. The city has eight nature reserves: Vok\u0117s Sensl\u0117nio Slopes Geomorphological Reserve, Auk\u0161tagiris Geomorphological Reserve, Valakupi\u0173 Klonio Geomorphological Reserve, Ver\u017euva Hydrographic Reserve, Vok\u0117 Hydrographic Reserve, Cedronas Upstream Landscape Reserve, Tapeliai Landscape Reserve, and \u0160e\u0161kin\u0117 Slopes Geomorphological Reserve.\nSeveral lakes, including Bal\u017eis, are located on the north-eastern outskirts of Vilnius.\nClimate.\nVilnius has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfb\"), with temperature records since 1777. The average annual temperature is ; the average January temperature is , and the July average is . Average annual precipitation is . Temperatures in the city have increased significantly during the last 30 years, a change which the Lithuanian Hydrometeorological Service attributes to human-induced global warming.\nSummer days are warm to hot, especially in July and August, with daytime temperatures above during periodic heat waves. Outdoor bars, restaurants and caf\u00e9s are frequented during the day.\nWinters can be very cold, although temperatures above ; still occasionally occur. Temperatures below are recorded every other year. Vilnius's rivers freeze in particularly cold winters, and the lakes surrounding the city are almost always frozen from December to March, and even April, in the most extreme years. The Lithuanian Hydrometeorological Service, headquartered in Vilnius, monitors the country's climate.\nCulture.\nPainting and sculpture.\nVilnius was an artistic centre of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, attracting artists across Europe. The oldest surviving early Gothic artworks (14th century) are paintings dedicated to churches and liturgy, such as frescoes in the crypts of Vilnius Cathedral and decorated hymnbooks. Sixteenth-century wall paintings are in the city's Church of St. Francis and St. Bernard and the Church of Saint Nicholas. Gothic wooden polychrome sculptures decorate church altars. Some Gothic seals from the 14th and 15th centuries still exist, including those of K\u0119stutis, Vytautas the Great and Sigismund II Augustus.\nRenaissance sculpture appeared during the early 16th century, primarily by the Italian sculptors Bernardinus Zanobi da Gianotti, Giovani Cini, and Giovanni Maria Padovano. During the Renaissance, portrait tombstones and medals were valued; examples are the marble tombs of Albertas Go\u0161tautas (1548) and Pawe\u0142 Holsza\u0144ski (1555) by Bernardino de Gianotis in Vilnius Cathedral. Italian sculpture is characterized by its naturalistic treatment of forms and precise proportions. Local sculptors adopted the iconographic scheme of Renaissance tombs; their works, such the tomb of Lew Sapieha (c.\u20091633) in the Church of St. Michael, are stylized. During this period, local and Western European painters created religious and mythological compositions and portraits with late Gothic and Baroque features; illustrated prayerbooks, illustrations, and miniatures have survived.\nDuring the late-16th-century Baroque, wall painting developed. Most palaces and churches were decorated in frescoes with bright colors, sophisticated angles, and drama. Secular painting\u00a0\u2013 representational, imaginative, epitaph portraits, scenes of battles and politically important events in a detailed, realistic style\u00a0\u2013 also spread at this time. Baroque sculptures dominated sacred architecture: tombstones with sculpted portraits and decorative sculptures in wood, marble, and stucco. Italian sculptors such as G. P. Perti, G. M. Galli, and A. S. Capone, key figures in the development of sculpture in the 17th-century grand duchy, were commissioned by Lithuanian nobility. Their works exemplify the mature Baroque, with expressive forms and sensuality. Local sculptors emphasized Baroque decorative features, with less expression and emotion.\nLithuanian painting was influenced by the during the late 18th and 19th centuries, which introduced classical and romantic art. Painters had internships abroad, mainly in Italy. Allegorical, mythological compositions, landscapes, and portraits of representatives of various circles of society began, and historical themes prevailed. The era's best-known classical painters are Franciszek Smaglewicz, Jan Rustem, J\u00f3zef Oleszkiew, Daniel Kondratowicz, J\u00f3zef Peszka, and Wincenty Smokowski. Romantic artists were Jan Rustem, Jan Krzysztof Damel, Wincenty Dmochowski and Kanuty Rusiecki. After the 1832 closure of Vilnius University, the Vilnius Art School continued to influence Lithuanian art.\nThe was established in 1907 by Petras Rim\u0161a, Antanas \u017dmuidzinavi\u010dius and Antanas Jaro\u0161evi\u010dius, and the Vilnius Art Society was founded the following year. Artists included Jonas \u0160ileika, Justinas Vieno\u017einskis, Jonas Mackevi\u010dius (1872), Vytautas Kairi\u016bk\u0161tis, and Vytautas Pranas Bi\u010di\u016bnas, who employed Western European symbolism, realism, Art Nouveau and modernism. Socialist realism was introduced after World War II, with propaganda paintings, historical and household works, still lives, landscapes, portraits, and sculptures. Late 20th- and 21st-century painters are \u017dygimantas Augustinas, Egl\u0117 Ridikait\u0117, Egl\u0117 Gineityt\u0117, Patricija Jurk\u0161aityt\u0117, Jurga Barilait\u0117, and Solomonas Teitelbaumas.\nThe U\u017eupis district near the Old Town, a run-down district during the Soviet era, hosts bohemian artists who operate a number of art galleries and workshops. In its main square, a statue of an angel blowing a trumpet symbolises artistic freedom.\nThe world's first bronze memorial to Frank Zappa was installed in the Naujamiestis district in 1995. In 2015, the Vilnius Talking Statues project was introduced. Eighteen statues around the city interact by smartphone with visitors in several languages.\nMuseums and galleries.\nVilnius has a variety of museums. The National Museum of Lithuania, in the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania, Gediminas' Tower and the arsenals of the Vilnius Castle Complex, has exhibits about the history of Lithuania and Lithuanian culture. The Museum of Applied Arts and Design displays Lithuanian folk and religious art, objects from the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania, and 18th- to 20th-century clothing. Other museums are the Vilnius Museum, the House of Histories, Church Heritage Museum, Museum of Occupations and Freedom Fights, Fight for Freedom Museum in the Vilnius TV Tower, M. K. \u010ciurlionis House, Samuel Bak Museum, Centre for Civil Education, Toy Museum, Vilnil (Museum of Illusions), Energy and Technology Museum, House of Signatories, Tolerance Center, Railway Museum, Money Museum, Kazys Varnelis House-Museum, Liubavas Manor Watermill-Museum, Museum of Vladislovas Sirokoml\u0117, Amber Museum-Gallery, and the Paneriai Memorial visitor information centre.\nVilnius has a number of art galleries. Lithuania's largest art collection is housed in the Lithuanian National Museum of Art. The Vilnius Picture Gallery, in the city's Old Town, houses a collection of Lithuanian art from the 16th to the early 20th centuries. Across the Neris, the National Art Gallery has a number of exhibitions of 20th-century Lithuanian art. The Contemporary Art Centre, the largest contemporary-art venue in the Baltic States, has an exhibition space of . The centre develops international and Lithuanian exhibitions and presents a range of public programs which include lectures, seminars, performances, film and video screenings, and live music. On 10 November 2007, the Jonas Mekas Visual Arts Center was opened by avant-garde filmmaker Jonas Mekas; its premiere exhibition was \"The Avant-Garde: From Futurism to Fluxus\". In 2018, the MO Museum opened as an initiative of Lithuanian scientists and philanthropists Danguol\u0117 and Viktoras Butkus. Its collection of 5,000 modern pieces includes major Lithuanian artworks from the 1950s to the present.\nLiterature.\nAround 1520, Francysk Skaryna (author of the first Ruthenian Bible) established eastern Europe's first printing house in Vilnius. Skaryna prepared and published the \"Little Traveller's Book\" (Ruthenian: \"\u041c\u0430\u043b\u0430\u044f \u043f\u043e\u0434\u043e\u0440\u043e\u0436\u043d\u0430\u044f \u043a\u043d\u0438\u0436\u043a\u0430\"), the first printed book of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, in 1522. Three years later, he printed the \"Acts and Epistles of the Apostles\" (the \"Apostle\").\nThe was established in 1575 by Lithuanian nobleman Miko\u0142aj Krzysztof \"the Orphan\" Radziwi\u0142\u0142 as the Vilnius Academy printing house, delegating its management to the Jesuits. It published its first book, Piotr Skarga's \"Pro Sacratissima Eucharistia contra haeresim Zwinglianam\", in May 1576. The press was funded by the Lithuanian nobility and the church. In 1805, J\u00f3zef Zawadzki bought the press and founded the J\u00f3zef Zawadzki printing shop. Operating continuously until 1939, it published books in a number of languages; Adam Mickiewicz's first poetry book was published in 1822.\nMikalojus Dauk\u0161a translated and published a catechism by Spanish Jesuit theologian Jacobo Ledesma in 1595, the first printed Lithuanian-language book in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. He also translated and published Jakub Wujek's \"Postilla Catholica\" in 1599.\nMany writers were born in Vilnius, lived there, or are alumni of Vilnius University; they include Konstantinas Sirvydas, Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski, Antoni Gorecki, J\u00f3zef Ignacy Kraszewski, Antoni Edward Odyniec, Micha\u0142 J\u00f3zef R\u00f6mer, Adam Mickiewicz, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Syrokomla, J\u00f3zef Mackiewicz, Romain Gary, Juliusz S\u0142owacki, Simonas Daukantas, Mykolas Bir\u017ei\u0161ka, Petras Cvirka, Kazys Brad\u016bnas, Nobel laureate Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz. Vilnius Academy of Arts alumnae have also added to the internationally acclaimed contemporary writers such as Jurga Ivanauskait\u0117, Undin\u0117 Radzevi\u010di\u016bt\u0117 and Kristina Sabaliauskait\u0117. The first consideration of the First Statute of Lithuania took place in 1522 at the Seimas of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The code was drafted under the guidance of Grand Chancellor of Lithuania Albertas Go\u0161tautas in accordance with customary law, legislation, and canon and Roman law. It is Europe's first codification of secular law. Albertas Go\u0161tautas supported the use of Lithuanian in literature and protected Lithuanian authors (including Abraomas Kulvietis and Michael the Lithuanian) who criticised the use of Old Church Slavonic, and called refugees Old Believers in \"De moribus tartarorum, lituanorum et moscorum\".\nSince the 16th century, the Lithuanian Metrica has been kept at the Lower Castle and safeguarded by the State Chancellor. Due to the deterioration of the books, Grand Chancellor Lew Sapieha ordered the Metrica recopied in 1594; the recopying continued until 1607. The recopied books were inventoried, rechecked, and transferred to a separate building in Vilnius; the older books remained in the Castle of Vilnius. According to 1983 data, 665 books remain on microfilm at the Lithuanian State Historical Archives in Vilnius.\nOver 200 tiles and plaques commemorating writers who lived and worked in Vilnius and foreign authors connected to Vilnius and Lithuania adorn walls on Literat\u0173 Street () in the Old Town, outlining the history of Lithuanian literature. The Institute of Lithuanian Literature and Folklore and the Lithuanian Writers' Union are in the city. The Vilnius book fair is held annually at LITEXPO, the Baltics' largest exhibition centre.\nCinema.\nThe first public film session in Vilnius was held in the Botanical Garden (now the Bernardinai Garden) in July 1896. It was held after 1895 film sessions by Auguste and Louis Lumi\u00e8re in Paris. The session in Vilnius showed the Lumi\u00e8re brothers' documentary films. The first films shown were educational, filmed outside Vilnius (in India and Africa), and introduced other cultures. Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s' film, \"A Trip to the Moon\", was first shown at the Luki\u0161k\u0117s Square movie theater in 1902; it was the first feature film shown in Vilnius.\nThe first movie theater in Vilnius, Iliuzija (Illusion), opened in 1905 at 60 Did\u017eioji Street. The first movie theaters, similar to theatres, had boxes with more-expensive seats. Because early films were silent, showings were accompanied by orchestral performances. Cinema screenings were sometimes combined with theatrical performances and illusion shows.\nOn 4 June 1924, the Vilnius magistrate established a 1,200-seat movie theater in the city hall (, City Movie Theater) to provide cultural education for students and adults. In 1926, 502,261 tickets were sold; 24,242 tickets were given to boarding children, 778 to tourists, and 8,385 to soldiers. In 1939, Lithuanian authorities renamed it Milda. The last city government gave it to the People's Commissariat of Education, which established the Lithuanian National Philharmonic Society, the following year.\nIn 1965, Lithuania's most modern movie theater () opened in Vilnius; it had over 1.84\u00a0million visitors per year, and an annual revenue of over 1\u00a0million\u00a0roubles. After reconstruction, it had one of Europe's largest screens: . Closed in 2002, it was demolished in 2017 and replaced by MO Museum. Kino Pavasaris is the city's largest film festival. The Lithuanian Film Centre (), tasked with promoting the development and competitiveness of the Lithuanian film industry, is in Vilnius.\nMusic.\nMusicians performed at the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania as early as the 14th century, since Grand Duke Gediminas' daughter Aldona of Lithuania was known to be enthusiastic about music. Aldona brought court musicians and singers to Krak\u00f3w after marrying King Casimir III the Great. During the 16th century, composers such as Wac\u0142aw of Szamotu\u0142y, Jan Brant, Heinrich Finck, Cyprian Bazylik, Alessandro Pesenti, Luca Marenzio, and Michelagnolo Galilei lived in Vilnius; the city was also home to virtuoso lutist B\u00e1lint Bakfark. One of the first local musicians in written sources was Steponas Vilnietis (Stephanus de Vylna). The first textbook of Lithuanian music, \"The Art and Practice of Music\" (), was published in Vilnius by \u017dygimantas Liauksminas in 1667.\nItalian artists produced Lithuania's first opera on 4 September 1636 at the Palace of the Grand Dukes, commissioned by Grand Duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw IV Vasa. Operas are produced at the Lithuanian National Opera and Ballet Theatre and by the Vilnius City Opera.\nThe Lithuanian National Philharmonic Society, the country's largest and oldest state-owned concert organization, produces live concerts and tours in Lithuania and abroad. The Lithuanian State Symphony Orchestra, founded by Gintaras Rinkevi\u010dius, performs in Vilnius.\nChoral music is popular in Lithuania, and Vilnius has three choir laureates (Brevis, Jauna Muzika, and the Chamber Choir of the Conservatoire) at the European Grand Prix for Choral Singing. The Lithuanian Song and Dance Festival in Vilnius has been presented every four years since 1990 for about 30,000 singers and folk dancers in Vingis Park. In 2008, the festival and its Latvian and Estonian counterparts were designated as a UNESCO Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.\nThe jazz scene is active in Vilnius; in 1970\u201371, the Ganelin/Tarasov/Chekasin trio founded the Vilnius Jazz School. The Vilnius Jazz Festival is held annually.\nThe annual \"Gatv\u0117s muzikos diena\" (Street Music Day) gathers musicians on the city's streets. Vilnius is the birthplace of singers Mariana Korvelyt\u0117 \u2013 Moravskien\u0117, Paulina Rivoli, Danielius Dolskis, Vytautas Kernagis, Algirdas Kau\u0161p\u0117das, Andrius Mamontovas, Nomeda Kazlaus, and Asmik Grigorian); composers C\u00e9sar Cui, Felix Yaniewicz, Maximilian Steinberg, Vytautas Mi\u0161kinis, and Onut\u0117 Narbutait\u0117); conductor Mirga Gra\u017einyt\u0117-Tyla), and musicians Antoni Radziwi\u0142\u0142, Jascha Heifetz, Clara Rockmore, and Romas Lileikis).\nIt was the hometown of 18th-century composers Micha\u0142 Kazimierz Ogi\u0144ski, Johann David Holland (colleague of C. Bach), Maciej Radziwi\u0142\u0142, and Micha\u0142 Kleofas Ogi\u0144ski. Nineteenth-century Vilnius was known for singer Kristina Gerhardi Frank, a close friend of Mozart and Haydn (who starred in the premiere of Haydn's \"Creation\"), mid-19th century guitar virtuoso Marek Konrad Soko\u0142owski and composer Stanis\u0142aw Moniuszko. The wealthiest woman in Vilnius during the early 19th century was singer Maria de Neri. In the early 20th century, Vilnius was the hometown of Mikalojus Konstantinas \u010ciurlionis, Mikas Petrauskas, and Juozas Tallat-Kelp\u0161a. Late-20th- and early 21st-century musicians include Vyacheslav Ganelin, Petras Vy\u0161niauskas, Petras Geniu\u0161as, M\u016bza Rubackyt\u0117, Alanas Cho\u0161nau, and Marijonas Mikutavi\u010dius.\nThe Lithuanian Academy of Music and Theatre, headquartered on Gediminas Avenue, is also located at the Slushko Palace in Antakalnis. Singers who have lectured at the academy include tenors Kipras Petrauskas and Virgilijus Noreika.\nTheatre.\nThe Lithuanian Grand Dukes' entertainment at the castle, rulers' visits abroad and guests' meetings had theatrical elements. During Sigismund III Vasa's residence in Vilnius in the early 17th century, English actors performed at the palace. W\u0142adys\u0142aw IV Vasa established a professional opera theatre in the Lower Castle in 1635, where \"drammas per musica\" were performed by the Italian Virgilio Puccitelli. The performances had basic, luxurious scenography.\nA Jesuit School Theatre existed between the 16th and 18th centuries, with its first performance (\"Hercules\" by S. Tucci) in 1570 in Vilnius. Baroque aesthetics prevailed at the theatre, which also had medieval retrospectives, Renaissance elements, Rococo motifs, and an educational function. Performances were in Latin, but elements of the Lithuanian language were included and some of the works had Lithuanian themes (plays dedicated to Algirdas, Mindaugas, Vytautas and other Lithuanian rulers).\nWojciech Bogus\u0142awski established Vilnius City Theatre, the city's first public theatre, in 1785. The theatre, initially in the Oskierka Palace, moved to the Radziwi\u0142\u0142 Palace and Vilnius Town Hall. Plays were performed in Polish until 1845, from 1845 to 1864 in Polish and Russian, and after 1864 in Russian. After the Lithuanian-language ban was lifted, plays were also performed in Lithuanian. The theatre closed in 1914.\nDuring the interwar period (when the city was part of Poland), Vilnius was known for the modern, experimental Reduta troupe and institute led by Juliusz Osterwa. The Vilnius Lithuanian Stage Amateur Company (), established in 1930 and renamed Vilnius's Lithuanian Theatre, performed in the region. In 1945, it was merged with the Lithuanian National Drama Theatre.\nAfter the Soviet occupation of Lithuania in 1940, theatre became a means of disseminating Soviet ideology. Performances incorporated socialist realism, and a number of revolutionary plays by Russian authors were staged. A Repertory Commission was established under the Ministry of Culture to direct theatres, control repertoire, and permit (or ban) performances.\nTheatre changed after Lithuanian independence. The independent Vilnius City Opera blends classical and contemporary art. The Lithuanian National Drama Theatre, State Small Theatre of Vilnius, State Youth Theatre and a number of private theatre companies (including OKT/Vilnius City Theatre and the An\u017eelika Cholina Dance Theatre) present classical, modern and Lithuanian plays directed by noted Lithuanian and foreign directors. There is also a Russian-language Old Theatre of Vilnius.\nPhotography.\nAccording to the memoirs of architect Boles\u0142aw Podczaszy\u0144ski, published in January 1853 in the , Lithuanian photography began with the daguerreotyping in the summer of 1839 of the reconstructed Verkiai Palace by Fran\u00e7ois Marcillac (governor of the children of Duke Ludwig Wittgenstein). The country's unfavorable political situation hampered the development of new technology and cultural activities. The first known daguerreotype-portrait atelier in Vilnius was opened in 1843 by C. Ziegler, and ateliers operated in Lithuania until 1859. One of the best-known photographers was K. Neupert, from Norway.\nIn the 1860s, with the spread of the collodion process, glass negatives and albumen paper were used instead of daguerreotype plates. Photo portraits in standard formats became widespread, and commercial photography ateliers were established in Vilnius and other Lithuanian cities. The first landscape and architectural photographs were made by Vilnius photographers and Albert Swieykowski, who compiled the 32-image \"Vilnius Album\" (Lithuania's first set of photographs). In 1862, Provisional Censorship Regulations governing the activities of photographic institutions were adopted in 1862, supervised by the Central Press Board of the Ministry of the Interior. Those who photographed the rebels in the January Uprising were punished; A. Korzonas was deported to Siberia. Other prominent 19th-century photographers were (a stereoscopic-photography pioneer), Aleksander W\u0142adys\u0142aw Strauss, and .\nThe world's second photoheliograph was installed in 1865 at the Vilnius University Astronomical Observatory, and photographed sunspots. An unprecedented system of photographing solar dynamics began in 1868 in Vilnius. Jan Bu\u0142hak founded the country's first photography club in Vilnius in 1927. In 1952, \"\u0160vyturys\" magazine organized the city's first photography exhibition.\nCrafts.\nIron tools, weapons, brass, glass and silver jewelry have been produced in present-day Lithuania since the first century. Pottery wood products, and weaving became widespread in the second and fourth centuries. During the feudal era, home crafts were components of a subsistence economy. During the 13th and 14th centuries, crafts became a branch of the economy separate from agriculture. The Grand Dukes of Lithuania promoted the development of crafts in cities, and weaving, shoemaking, fur-making and other crafts predominated. With the early-14th-century introduction of foreign artisans, the development of crafts accelerated; crafts and trade stimulated the growth of Vilnius and other Lithuanian cities. In the 14th and 15th centuries, crafts were specialized (especially the production of tools, household items, fabrics, clothing, weapons, and jewelry); workshops were established which trained and defended the interests of craftspeople. Production of fine glassware began, goldsmithing was developed, and the level of pottery and weaving rose during the 16th century, and the 1529 and 1588 Statutes of Lithuania identify 25 crafts. European goldsmiths worked in the Vilnius Goldsmiths' Workshop (established in 1495), which controlled trade in precious metals and gemstones and served the Daugava and Dnieper regions, the Catholic Church, the Grand Duke, the nobility, and townspeople. The Vilnius Mint, the main mint of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, minted the Lithuanian denarius, shillings, groschen, thalers, ducats, and other coins from 1387 to 1666.\nCrafting declined in the second half of the 17th century due to the Russo-Polish War, and most goods were imported and sold by Lithuanian and Polish nobles. It revived from the second half of the 18th century to the first half of the 19th century, with Vilnius the largest Lithuanian craft center. After the abolition of serfdom, craft schools were established in Lithuanian cities; crafts have prevailed in clothing manufacturing, goldsmithing, woodworking, food processing, and other fields. Under Soviet occupation, craftspeople worked in artels until 1960 and then in combines. After independence, crafts were produced by small and medium-sized businesses.\nLanguage.\nA multicultural city, Vilnius's language changed over the centuries. The predominant spoken language in medieval Lithuania was Lithuanian. It had no literary tradition, however, and was not used in writing except for religious texts such as the Lord's Prayer and the Hail Mary. Vytautas the Great spoke in Lithuanian with Jogaila, whose son Casimir IV Jagiellon also spoke Lithuanian. Saint Casimir, the patron saint of Lithuania, knew Lithuanian, Polish, German and Latin. Fifteenth-century Byzantine historian Laonikos Chalkokondyles reported that the Lithuanians had a distinct language.\nRuthenian was used after the incorporation of Kievan Rus', forming the basis of 19th-century Ukrainian and Belarusian. Written Ruthenian stemmed from the interaction of Church Slavonic and Old East Slavic with Ruthenian dialects, becoming the main language of the chancery of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in the 14th and 15th centuries and maintained its dominance until the mid-17th century.\nLatin and Polish were also widely used in the chancery; Polish replaced Ruthenian in written sources and Lithuanian in public use during the second half of the 17th century. The first state documents in Lithuanian appeared in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania at the end of its existence.\nAt the Vilnius court of Sigismund II Augustus, the last Grand Duke of Lithuania before the Union of Lublin, Polish and Lithuanian were spoken. In 1552, Sigismund ordered that orders from the Magistrate of Vilnius be announced in Lithuanian, Polish, and Ruthenian. Minorities such as Jews, Lipka Tatars, and Crimean Karaites were ruled by the Grand Duke of Lithuania, and their languages were only used among themselves. According to Article 14 of the Lithuanian constitution, Lithuanian is the official language; however, interpreter assistance is sometimes provided.\nFashion.\nAccording to historian Antanas \u010caplinskas, wives of merchants and craftsmen wore rings decorated with gemstones. Sixteenth- and seventeenth-century property inventories list long, wide-sleeved jackets (known as kontusz), \u017cupans decorated with fur, and kontush belts. Buttons, made of pearl, coral, brilliant-cut diamonds and emeralds, were decorated with diamonds and enamel. Delias and dolmans were popular with townspeople and nobles.\nWealthy townspeople in luxurious clothing aroused the envy of Lithuanian nobility, who demanded laws regulating attire. The 1588 Statute of Lithuania limited townspeople to two rings, and Jews could not wear gold chains and brooches. Broader restrictions were imposed by the Sejm of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, which adopted the 1613 Act of Thrift forbidding non-noble townspeople from wearing expensive furs in public. Payment of a fee later removed the limitations.\nDuring the late 18th century, almost all men shaved; their hair was short, and they wore open-front blue, green or black tailcoats and waistcoats with white or light-yellow trousers; women's clothing echoed West European styles. In the early 20th century, clothing followed West European fashion trends. The State Art Institute of Lithuania introduced clothing-design studies, and the Vilnius Model House (popularizing apparel and footwear) was established in 1961.\nThe annual Vilnius spring \"Mados infekcija\" (Fashion Infection), Lithuania's largest fashion show, began in 1999. Lithuanian clothing designer usually presents his shows in the city.\nHolidays and festivals.\nCatholic holidays such as Christmas, Easter, and Saint John's Eve) are widely celebrated. On 16 February (anniversary of the Act of Independence of Lithuania) and 11 March (anniversary of the Act of the Re-Establishment of the State of Lithuania), festive and religious events take place in Vilnius. On the evening of 12 January, bonfires are lit to commemorate the January Events.\nKaziuko mug\u0117 (Saint Casimir's Fair), held annually in the city's markets and streets on the Sunday nearest to 4 March (the feast of Saint Casimir), attracts many visitors and Lithuanian and foreign craftspeople. Easter palms () are symbolic of the fair. Capital Days (), Vilnius's largest festival of music and culture, is held from 30 August to 1 September. The river Vilnia is dyed green every year for Saint Patrick's Day. During the annual Vilnius Culture Night, artists and cultural organisations hold events and performances throughout the city.\nAdministration.\nGovernment.\nBefore Magdeburg rights were granted to Vilnius in 1378, the city was ruled by vicegerents. Government was later granted to a magistrate or a city council, subordinate to the ruler. In wartime, it was led by a voivode. The government headquarters was at Vilnius Town Hall.\nThe magistrate was responsible for the city's economy: collecting taxes, overseeing the treasury, and accumulating stocks of grain to avoid starvation during famine or wars. He was a notary in transactions and testaments, a judge in conflicts involving construction and renovation, and took care of craftspeople; statutes involving workshops were approved by the ruler, but Sigismund II Augustus gave this responsibility to magistrates in 1552. Since a 1522 ruling by Sigismund I the Old, Vilnius magistrates had to protect the city and its residents with 24 armed guards. During wartime, the night watch was conducted by the magistrate, bishop and castle men.\nThe chief city administrator was a Catholic \"vaitas\" (a vicegerent of the Grand Duke of Lithuania), most of whom were beginning their careers in the magistracy, and chaired city-council meetings. He adjudicated criminal cases, with the right to impose capital punishment. Originally examining cases alone, two \"suolininkai\" also began examining important cases in the 16th century. At that time, the city council consisted of 12 burgomasters and 24 councilors; half were Catholics, the other half Orthodox). Members were chosen by wealthy townspeople, merchants, and workshop elders. Burgomasters were lifetime appointments; at death, another member of the council with the same religion was chosen. In 1536, Sigismund I the Old signed an edict prohibiting close relatives on the council and requiring prior agreement by the townspeople of new taxes, obligations and regulations.\nUnder the Russian Empire, the city council was replaced with a city duma. Vilnius was the capital of the Lithuania Governorate from 1797 to 1801, the Vilna Governorate-General from 1794 to 1912, and the Vilna Governorate from 1795 to 1915. After the Soviet occupation of Lithuania, Vilnius was the capital of the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic.\nVilnius City Municipality.\nThe Vilnius City Municipality is the representative self-government organ, one of 60 municipalities of Lithuania. In addition to Vilnius proper, it includes the town of Grigi\u0161k\u0117s, as well as the villages and rural areas of the Grigi\u0161k\u0117s eldership.\nThe Vinius City Municipal Council, established in 1990, is elected to four-year terms, and candidates are nominated by political parties and committees. Beginning with the 2011 elections, independent candidates are permitted. Its executive organ is the Vilnius City Municipality Administration.\nBefore 2015, mayors were appointed by the council. Beginning that year, mayors were elected in a two-round system. Remigijus \u0160ima\u0161ius was the city's first directly elected mayor.\nVilnius District Municipality.\nVilnius District Municipality (), one of the country's largest municipalities, covers and has 23 elderships. There are over 1,000 villages and five towns (Nemen\u010din\u0117, Bezdonys, Mai\u0161iagala, Mick\u016bnai and \u0160umskas) in the district. It borders Belarus and the \u0160ven\u010dionys, Moletai, \u0160irvintos, Elektr\u0117nai, Trakai and \u0160al\u010dininkai districts.\nThe district has a multinational population, of which 52 percent are Poles, 33 percent Lithuanians, and the remainder Russians, Belarusians and other nationalities (including Ukrainians). It has a population of over 100,000; 95 percent live in villages, and five percent live in towns. Vilnius district has Lithuania's highest terrain, with the Auk\u0161tojas, Juozapin\u0117 and Kruopin\u0117 Hills over above sea level.\nPalm Sunday is celebrated in the district, and Vilnian Easter palms (\"verbos\") are made from dried flowers and herbs. Palm-making dates to the time of St. Casimir.\nMedininkai Castle, the Liubavas Manor mill and Bareiki\u0161k\u0117s Manor are the district's best-known historic landmarks. From 1769 to 1795, Vilnius Voivodeship surrounded the independent Republic of Paulava. The microstate, known for its Enlightenment values, had its own president, peasant parliament, army and laws.\nWith its large Polish population, the Vilnius District Municipality Council primarily consists of members of the Electoral Action of Poles in Lithuania party. Its mayor is Robert Duchniewicz of the Lithuanian Social Democratic Union.\nNational government.\nVilnius is the seat of Lithuania's national government. The country's two chief officers have their offices in Vilnius. The president resides at the Presidential Palace in Daukanto Square, and the prime minister's seat is at the Government of Lithuania office in Gediminas Avenue. According to law, the president has a residence in Vilnius's Turni\u0161k\u0117s district near the Neris. The prime minister is also has entitled to a residence in Turni\u0161k\u0117s district during their term in office. Government ministries are located throughout the city, many in the Old Town.\nThe Seimas of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania primarily gathered in Vilnius. The present-day Seimas meets at the Seimas Palace in Gediminas Avenue.\nLithuania's highest courts are in Vilnius. The Supreme Court of Lithuania (), which reviews criminal and civil cases, is in Gyn\u0117j\u0173 Street. The Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania (), which adjudicates litigation against public bodies, is in \u017dygimant\u0173 Street. The Constitutional Court of Lithuania (), an advisory body with authority over the constitutionality of laws, meets in the Constitutional Court Palace in Gediminas Avenue. The Lithuanian Tribunal, the highest appellate court for the nobility of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and established by Stephen B\u00e1thory in 1581, was in Vilnius until the Third Partition of Poland in 1795.\nSpecial services.\nSecurity in Vilnius is primarily the responsibility of the \"Vilniaus apskrities vyriausiasis policijos komisariatas\", the highest police office in the city, and local police offices. Its main responsibilities are ensuring public order and safety, reporting and investigating criminal offenses, and traffic control. In 2016, the city had 1,500 police officers. The Public Security Service is responsible for the prompt restoration of public order in special situations and ensuring the protection of important state objects and escorted subjects.\n\"Vilniaus apskrities prie\u0161gaisrin\u0117 gelb\u0117jimo valdyba\" is the primary governing body of Vilnius's firefighters. There were 1,287 fire incidents in the first nine months of 2018, killing six people and injuring 16.\n\"Vilniaus greitosios medicinos pagalbos stotis\" is responsible for emergency medical services in the city, and the EMS telephone number is 033. Established in 1902, it is one of eastern Europe's oldest EMS institutions. Many doctors and other personnel received medals for their assistance to victims of the 1991 January Events. The common number for contacting emergency services in Vilnius and other parts of Lithuania is 112.\nCityscape.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Scalable image/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPanorama of Vilnius Old Town, seen from Gediminas' Tower at dusk. Vilnius has one of the largest and best-preserved old towns in northern, eastern, and central Europe. Its skyline is dominated by spires of churches dating to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.\nUrbanism and architecture.\nThe Old Town covers about , and its history dates to the Neolithic. The glacial hills were intermittently occupied, and a wooden castle was built at the confluence of the Neris and Vilnia c.\u20091000 AD to fortify Gedimino Hill. The settlement developed into a town in the 13th century, when the pagan Baltic people were invaded by Western Europeans during the Lithuanian Crusade. Around 1323 (the first written sources about Vilnia), it was the capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and had a few brick buildings. By the 15th century, the duchy extended from the Baltic to the Black Sea (primarily present-day Belarus, Ukraine and Russia). The historic centre consists of three castles (Upper, Lower and Curved) and the area previously encircled by the Wall of Vilnius. It is mainly circular, centered on the original castle site. Streets are small and narrow, with large squares later developed. Pilies Street, the main artery, links the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania with Vilnius Town Hall. Other streets are lined with the palaces of feudal lords and landlords, churches, shops and craftspeople's workrooms.\nHistoric buildings feature Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque and classical architecture. The variety of preserved churches and former palaces of the Lithuanian nobility exemplifies Vilnius's multicultural heritage.\nLithuanians and others shaped the development of the capital, with Western and Eastern influences. Lithuania was Christianized in 1387, but Eastern Orthodoxy and the growing importance of Judaism led to construction of the Orthodox Cathedral of the Theotokos and the Great Synagogue of Vilna).\nDisasters resulted in building reconstructions in Vilnian Baroque style, which later influenced the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Artists such as Matteo Castelli and Pietro Perti) from the present-day Canton of Ticino were preferred by the Grand Duke and local nobility, and designed the Chapel of Saint Casimir. The Lithuanian Laurynas Gucevi\u010dius was a noted classical architect in the city.\nThe Old Town was designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1994. The Vilnius Historic Centre is noted for maintaining its medieval street pattern with no significant gaps. Some places were damaged during Lithuania's occupations and wars, including Cathedral Square (demolished in 1795) and a square east of the Church of All Saints where the Convent of the Barefoot Carmelites stood with Vice-Chancellor Stefan Pac's Baroque Church of St. Joseph the Betrothed (both demolished by the tsar. The Great Synagogue and part of the buildings in Vokie\u010di\u0173 Street were demolished after World War II.\nVilnius covers , of which one-fifth is developed; the remainder is greenspace and water. The city is known as one of Europe's \"greenest\" capital cities.\nCrypts.\nNotable Lithuanian Catholics are interred in the crypts of Vilnius Cathedral. Grand Duke Alexander Jagiellon, Queen Elizabeth of Austria, Barbara Radziwi\u0142\u0142, and the heart of Grand Duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw IV Vasa are buried at the Royal Mausoleum. These crypts have one of the country's oldest frescoes, painted in the late 14th or early 15th century after Lithuania was Christianized.\nHousing.\nVilnius Old Town (), with medieval stone-paved streets, and U\u017eupis have prestigious housing, with apartments featuring views of iconic churches and urban landmarks (particularly Gediminas Tower), enclosed inner courtyards, high ceilings, attics, non-standard layouts and luxurious interiors; Flats in these neighbourhoods may cost millions of euros. Traffic jams, expensive parking, air pollution, high maintenance costs and limitations on renovation, however, also encourage wealthy Vilnians to buy or build private houses in outlying parts of the city such as Balsiai, Bajorai, Pavilnys, Kaln\u0117nai and Pilait\u0117 or the nearby Vilnius District Municipality. Around 21,000 residents live in the Old Town, and 7,000 in U\u017eupis.\n and are prestigious neighborhoods, with private houses on large lots surrounded by pine forests which are easily accessible from the city centre. Wealthy people and heads of state (such as the president) live there, and most of the larger private houses costs millions of euros. Part of the \u017dv\u0117rynas neighbourhood has luxurious private houses near Vingis Park, but it also has Soviet-era apartment buildings and wooden houses in poor condition.\nNeighbourhoods around the Old Town (Antakalnis, \u017dirm\u016bnai, Naujamiestis, and \u017dv\u0117rynas) have a variety of flats and green space, and are popular with middle-class residents. Wealthier people live in a new construction or renovated Soviet-era apartments. The government is supportive of renovation, and reimburses 30 percent or more of the cost. Poorer residents and low-income pensioners, however, foster regionalism.\nMore-distant neighbourhoods, such as Lazdynai, Karolini\u0161k\u0117s, Vir\u0161uli\u0161k\u0117s, \u0160e\u0161kin\u0117, Justini\u0161k\u0117s, Pa\u0161ilai\u010diai, Fabijoni\u0161k\u0117s and Naujininkai, have more-affordable housing. Their disadvantages are a longer commute, unrenovated Soviet-era high-rise buildings, traffic congestion and a shortage of parking spaces near older apartments.\nThe \u0160nipi\u0161k\u0117s eldership has received significant investment during the 2010s. The area was first mentioned in 1536, when Grand Duke Sigismund I the Old ordered Ulrich Hosius to build a wooden bridge over the Neris and a suburb developed around the bridge. That century, a building for Muscovite and Tatar messengers was built by the magistrate of Vilnius north of \u0160nipi\u0161k\u0117s. The Jesuit Church of St. Raphael the Archangel and monastery and housing for wealthy and middle-class townspeople were built in \u0160nipi\u0161k\u0117s during the 18th century. Craftspeople lived on the outskirts, where a smoking-pipe factory, sawmills and a small candy factory were built. The Skansenas neighbourhood, west of the Kalvarij\u0173 market, has late-19th-century wooden houses. Nearby Piromontas was built at the same time.\nDuring the 1960s, \u0160nipi\u0161k\u0117s was renamed the New City Centre. It had the city's first pedestrian zone and a number of buildings, including the country's largest shopping centre, a large hotel, a planetarium, a museum and a number of ministries of the Lithuanian SSR, were built before 1990. \u0160nipi\u0161k\u0117s north of Konstitucijos Avenue was underdeveloped until the early 2000s, when the new Vilnius city municipality building spurred construction of Europa Square with a shopping centre, a 33-story office building and a 27-story apartment building. The former Museum of the Revolution became the National Art Gallery in the late 2000s.\nAccording to economists, the number of transactions and the housing affordability index reached record highs in 2019 because of increased city-residents' income and slowing price increases for flats. One-fourth of residents 26 to 35 years old still live in homes owned by their parents or other relatives, however, the highest percentage in the Baltic states.\nDemographics.\nIn the eldership of Vilkp\u0117d\u0117, remnants of a Magdalenian settlement were found which date to c.\u200910000 BC. Kair\u0117nai, P\u016b\u010dkoriai and Naujoji Vilnia had large settlements during the first millennium AD. The most densely populated area was the confluence of the Neris and Vilnia, which had fortified homesteads.\nAccording to some historians, Vilnius could have been a city during the Kingdom of Lithuania times: King Mindaugas did not permanently live there, however, may have built Lithuania's first Catholic church for his coronation there. It is well established, however, that Vilnius existed as a city during the times of Traidenis and Vytenis. The first mention in the historical sources as a capital in 1323 in the letters to the Western cities of Gediminas.\nIt became a multicultural city, with 14th-century sources noting that it consisted of a Great (Lithuanian) city and a Ruthenian one. By the 16th century, German merchants, artisans, Jews and Tatars had also settled in Vilnius. During the 16th\u2013 and 17th-century Reformation and Counter-Reformation, the city's Polish-speaking population began to grow; by the middle of the 17th century, most writing was in Polish. City was inhabited by a large number of Italian and Swiss artisans as well and generally all the European nations were presented to an extent (those included Vilnius university professors and students among whom there were French, Spanish, Swedes and even some Croatians as Toma\u0161 Zdelarius, musicians at the Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania or such military servants as Hungarian G\u00e1sp\u00e1r Bekes). Because of many nations inhabiting the city, in the 16th-18th. centuries it was known and nicknamed in Western sources as Babylon of Europe.\nBy the inter-war period, after the brief Polish\u2013Lithuanian War and the annexation of the so-called Republic of Central Lithuania by Poland, the population became overwhelmingly Polish with very significant Jewish minority. Because of the annexation, the 1931 Polish census recorded only 0.8% Lithuanians. After World War II, the number of ethnic Lithuanians in Vilnius rebounded; however, Lithuanization was soon replaced with Sovietization, and the population became a mix of Lithuanians, Russians and Poles. Following independence in 1990, for the first time in modern history Lithuanians became a clear majority, increasing to 63.2 percent in 2011 and 67.4 percent in 2021.\nEvolution.\nDemographic evolution of Vilnius between 1766 and 2024:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Scalable image/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe skyline at dusk, with the Vilnius Central Business District housing banks, financial services and businesses headquarters\nVilnius is Lithuania's economic centre, with a per-capita GDP in the metropolitan area of almost \u20ac30,000. The city's budget reached \u20ac1.0\u00a0billion in 2022. In the second quarter of 2024, the average monthly salary in Vilnius was \u20ac2,501.1 (gross) and \u20ac1,526.2 (net).\nLithuania's economic growth has been uneven, with GDP per capita at nearly 110 percent of the EU average in Vilnius but from 42 to 77 percent in other regions. The country's convergence is fuelled by two regions (Vilnius and Kaunas County) which produce 42 and 20 percent of the national GDP, respectively. From 2014 to 2016, the Vilnius region grew by 4.6 percent.\nThe supply of new housing in Vilnius and its suburbs has reached post-recession highs, and the stock of unsold apartments in Lithuania's three largest cities has begun to increase since the beginning of 2017. Demand for housing is strong, fuelled by rising wages, benign financial conditions and positive expectations. In the first half of 2018, the number of monthly transactions was the highest since its 2007\u20132008 peak. Most foreign direct investment and productive public investment in Lithuania is concentrated on Vilnius and Kaunas. Vilnius Industrial Park, 18.5 kilometres from the city, is intended for commercial and industrial use.\nScience and research.\nVilnius resident Tito Livio Burattini published \"Misura universale\" in 1675, in which he first suggested the term metre as a unit of length. The Vilnius University Astronomical Observatory, established in 1753 at the initiative of Thomas Zebrowski, was one of Europe's first observatories and the first in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. Marcin Odlanicki Poczobutt led the reconstruction of the observatory, designed by Marcin Knackfus, from 1770 to 1772. Poczobutt began his astronomical observations in 1773, recording them in the journal (), and created the constellation \"Taurus Poniatovii\". Jean-Emmanuel Gilibert established the Botanical Garden of Vilnius University in 1781 with over 2,000 plants, and provided the first herbariums, collections of stuffed animals and birds, fossil plants, animal remains, and a collection of minerals to Vilnius University., The observatory published the Russian Empire's first exact sciences journal, the \"Journal of Mathematical Sciences\" (), after the Third Partition of Poland.\nSunrise Valley Science and Technology Park () is a non-profit organization which was founded in 2003. Over 20,000 students study in the Vilnius University and Vilnius Gediminas Technical University facilities in Sunrise Valley, and 5,000 scientists conduct research in its science centres.\nThe Centre for Physical Sciences and Technology (, FTMC) is the country's largest scientific research institution, specialising in laser technology, optoelectronics, nuclear physics, organic chemistry, bio and nanotechnology, electrochemical materials science, and electronics. The centre was created in 2010 with the merger of the institutes of chemistry, physics and semiconductor physics in Vilnius and the Textile institute in Kaunas. With 250 laboratories (24 open to the public), it can accommodate over 700 researchers and students. The centre has a PhD program and hosts annual conferences of PhD students and young researchers. FTMC is the founder and sole shareholder of the Science and Technology Park of Institute of Physics in Savanori\u0173 Avenue, which assists companies with research and development.\nVilnius University's Laser Research Centre () is one of five departments in the university's Faculty of Physics, which prepares physicists, laser physicists and laser-technology specialists. The department conducts research in laser physics, nonlinear optics, optical-component characterization, biophotonics and laser microtechnology. Lithuania has over 50 percent of the world's market share in ultrashort pulses lasers produced by Vilnius-based companies. A laser system was produced in 2019 for the Extreme Light Infrastructure laboratory in Szeged which produces high-intensity, ultra-short pulses with a peak power up to 1,000 times that of the most powerful nuclear power plant in the United States. Corning Inc. bought a glass-cutting licence from the Vilnius-based laser company Altechna and for manufacturing Gorilla Glass.\nThe Vilnius University Life Sciences Centre () is a scientific research centre which consists of three institutes: the Institute of Biochemistry, Institute of Biosciences, and Institute of Biotechnology. The centre was opened in 2016 and has 800 students, 120 PhD students, 200 teaching staff, and open-access scientific laboratories with advanced equipment. It has a technology business incubator for small and medium businesses in the life sciences or related fields. Vilnius Gediminas Technical University has three research centres at Sunrise Valley: the Civil Engineering Research Centre, Technology Centre for Building Information and Digital Modelling, and Competence Centre of Intermodal Transport and Logistics.\nThe Lithuanian Centre for Social Sciences (), which cooperates with the Lithuanian government, produces and disseminates scientific information in the fields of economics, sociology and law to implement public policy. Santara Valley () is a science and research facility which focuses on medicine, biopharmaceutical and bioinformatics. The Vilnius University Faculty of Medicine Science Centre was scheduled for completion in Santara Valley in 2021.\nVilnius University rector Jonas Kubilius, known for probabilistic number theory, the Kubilius model, the Theorem of Kubilius and Tur\u00e1n\u2013Kubilius inequality, successfully resisted attempts to Russify Vilnius University. Vilnius's Marija Gimbutas was the first to formulate the Kurgan hypothesis. In 1963, Vytautas Strai\u017eys and his colleagues created the Vilnius photometric system used in astronomy. Kavli Prize laureate Virginijus \u0160ik\u0161nys invented CRISPR-Cas9 genetic editing.\nInformation technology.\nVilnius is attractive for foreign companies because of its qualified employees and good infrastructure. Several schools are preparing skilled specialists, including the Vilnius University Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics and Vilnius Gediminas Technical University Faculty of Fundamental Sciences. Information technology jobs are well-paid. The 2018 output of the Lituanian IT sector was \u20ac\u00a0billion, much of which was created in Vilnius.\nVilnius Tech Park in Sapieha Park, the largest IT startup hub in the Baltic and Nordic countries, unites international startups, technology companies, accelerators, and incubators. \"fDi Intelligence\" ranked Vilnius number one city on its 2019 Tech Start-up FDI Attraction Index.\nVilnius had the world's fastest internet speed in 2011 and, despite its fall in the rankings, remains one of the world's fastest. Vilnius Airport has one of Europe's fastest airport Wi-Fi speeds. The National Cyber Security Centre of Lithuania was established in Vilnius to address internet attacks on Lithuanian government organizations.\n, an international informatics and IT contest, has been held annually for pupils in grades three through 12 since 2004. Since 2017, computer programming is taught in primary schools.\nVilnius is a popular fintech hub due to Lithuania's flexible e-money licence regulations. The Bank of Lithuania granted an e-money licence in 2018 to Vilnius-based Google Payment Lithuania. The startup Revolut also has an e-money licence and headquarters in Vilnius, and began moving its clients to the Lithuanian company Revolut Payments in 2019. On 23 January 2019, Europe's first international blockchain centre opened in Vilnius.\nFinance and banking.\nVilnius is Lithuania's financial centre. The Ministry of Finance in Vilnius is responsible for an effective public financial policy to ensure the country's economic growth. The Bank of Lithuania fosters a reliable financial system and ensures sustainable economic growth. The Nasdaq Vilnius stock exchange is in the K29 business centre.\nThe National Audit Office of Lithuania () helps the government manage public funds and property, and the State Tax Inspectorate () is responsible for collecting and refunding taxes.\nIn 2023, 13 banks held a bank or specialised-bank licence; six banks are foreign-bank branches. Most of the Lithuanian financial system consists of capital banks of Nordic countries. The two largest banks registered in Lithuania (SEB bankas and Swedbank) are supervised by the European Central Bank and the Bank of Lithuania.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nPrimary and lower secondary education is mandatory in Lithuania. Children begin pre-primary education at age six, education is compulsory until age 16. Primary and secondary education is free, but there are also private schools in Vilnius. The country's educational system is governed by the Ministry of Education, Science and Sports, headquartered in Vilnius.\nCathedral School of Vilnius, first mentioned in a 1397 source, is the earliest known Lithuanian school. Vilnius Vytautas the Great Gymnasium, established in 1915, is the first Lithuanian gymnasium in eastern Lithuania. In 2018, the city had 120 schools (not including preschools) with 61,123 pupils and 4,955 teachers. Four out of five best rated schools in Lithuania are in Vilnius, and the Vilnius Lyceum is number one.\nEthnic minorities in Lithuania have their own schools. Vilnius has seven elementary schools, eight primary schools, two progymnasiums and 12 gymnasiums for minority children, with lessons in minority languages. In 2017, 4,658 Poles and 9,274 Russians studied in their languages in the city. Vilnius has 11 vocational schools.\nThe National M. K. \u010ciurlionis School of Art is the country's only 12-year art school. The is another art school in Vilnius.\nMost school graduates in Vilnius later study at universities or colleges. According to the OECD, 57.5 percent of 25\u2013 to 34-year-olds in Lithuania had a tertiary education in 2021.\nVilnius has nine international schools, including the International School of Vilnius, Vilnius International French Lyceum, British International School of Vilnius, and American International School of Vilnius.\nTertiary education.\nOn 14 October 1773, the Commission of National Education () was created by the Sejm of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and Grand Duke Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski, who supervised schools and Vilnius University in the Commonwealth. Because of its authority and autonomy, it is considered Europe's first ministry of education and an example of the Enlightenment in the Commonwealth.\nVilnius has a number of universities, the largest and oldest of which is Vilnius University. With its main campus in the Old Town, it has been ranked among the top 500 universities in the world by QS World University Rankings. The university participates in projects with UNESCO and NATO. It has master's programs in English and Russian, and programs in cooperation with other universities throughout Europe. The university has 14 faculties.\nOther universities include Mykolas Romeris University, Vilnius Gediminas Technical University and the Lithuanian University of Educational Sciences, which merged with Vytautas Magnus University in 2018. Specialized tertiary schools with university status include the General Jonas \u017demaitis Military Academy of Lithuania, the Lithuanian Academy of Music and Theatre, and the Vilnius Academy of Arts. The museum associated with the Vilnius Academy of Arts contains about 12,000 artworks.\nLibraries.\nThe Vilnius city municipality central library () operates public libraries in the city. It has 16 branches, one (Saulut\u0117) dedicated to children's literature. Many libraries offer free computer literacy courses. The public libraries require a free LIBIS (integrated information system of Lithuanian libraries) card.\nThe Martynas Ma\u017evydas National Library of Lithuania () in Gediminas Avenue, founded in 1919, collects, organizes and preserves Lithuania's written cultural heritage, collects Lithuanian and foreign documents relevant to research and Lithuania's educational and cultural needs, and provides library services to the public. By 1 January 2025, the library had 6,425,401 physical units of documents.\nThe Wroblewski Library of the Lithuanian Academy of Sciences () is open to all. The library had 3,683,670 physical units of documents by 1 January 2025, and 9,491 registered users.\nEvery Lithuanian university and college has a library for students, professors and alumni. The National Open Access Scientific Communication and Information Center of Vilnius University () in Saul\u0117tekis Valley opened in 2013 and has over 800 workplaces in an area of . Central Vilnius University Library, Vilnius Gediminas Technical University Library, Mykolas Romeris University Library, ISM University of Management and Economics Library, European Humanities University Library, and Kazimieras Simonavi\u010dius University Library are on their respective campuses in Vilnius.\nReligion.\nLithuania's pre-Christian religion, centred on the forces of nature and personified by deities such as Perk\u016bnas (the thunder god), is experiencing increased interest. Romuva established a Vilnius branch in 1991.\nBy the 17th century, Vilnius was known as a city of numerous religions. In 1600, Samuel Lewkenor's book about cities with universities was published in London; According to Lewkenor, Vilnius's population included Catholics, Orthodox, followers of John Calvin and Martin Luther, Jews and Tartar Muslims.\nDuring that century, Vilnius had a reputation as a city unrivaled in Europe for its number and variety of churches. Robert Morden wrote in \"Geography Rectified or a Description of the World\" that no other city in the world could surpass Vilnius in the number of churches and temples except, perhaps, Amsterdam.\nVilnius is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Vilnius, housing major church institutions and the archdiocesan Vilnius Cathedral. A number of Christian beatified people, martyrs, servants of God and saints are associated with the city. They include the Franciscan martyrs of Vilnius, the Orthodox martyrs Anthony, John, and Eustathius, Saint Casimir, Josaphat Kuntsevych, Andrew Bobola, Raphael Kalinowski, Faustina Kowalska, and Jurgis Matulaitis-Matulevi\u010dius. There are a number of Roman Catholic churches in the city, small monasteries, and religious schools. Church architecture includes Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque and neoclassical styles, with examples of each in the Old Town. Eastern Rite Catholicism has also had a presence in Vilnius since the Union of Brest. The Baroque Basilian Gate is part of an Eastern Rite monastery.\nVilnius has had an Eastern Orthodox presence since the 12th century, and the Russian Orthodox Monastery of the Holy Spirit is near the [Gate of Dawn. St. Paraskeva's Orthodox Church in the Old Town was the site of the 1705 baptism of Hannibal, the great-grandfather of Alexander Pushkin, by Tsar Peter the Great. Many Old Believers, who split from the Russian Orthodox Church in 1667, settled in Lithuania; a Supreme Council of Old Believers is based in Vilnius. The Orthodox Church of St. Constantine and St. Michael was built in 1913. A number of Protestant and other Christian denominations are represented in Vilnius, notably Lutheran Evangelicals and Baptists.\nJudaism and Karaism.\nKnown as \"Yerushalayim D'Lita\" (the Jerusalem of Lithuania), Vilnius had been a world centre for Torah study and had a large Jewish population since the 18th century. A major scholar of Judaism and the Kabbalah was Rabbi Eliyahu Kremer, known as the Vilna Gaon, whose writings significantly influence Orthodox Jews. The Vilna Shas, the most widely used version of the Talmud, was published in the city in 1886. Jewish life in Vilnius was destroyed during the Holocaust, and a memorial stone dedicated to victims of Nazi genocide is in the centre of the former Jewish Ghetto on present-day M\u0117sini\u0173 Street. The Vilna Gaon Museum of Jewish History is dedicated to the history of Lithuanian Jewish life. The site of Vilnius's largest synagogue, built in the early 1630s, destroyed by Nazi Germany during its occupation of Lithuania and later demolished by Soviet authorities, was found by ground-penetrating radar in June 2015. Archaeologists began excavating the site in 2016, and that work continues as of July 2024.\nThe Karaites are a Jewish sect who migrated to Lithuania from the Crimea. Small in numbers, they have become more prominent since Lithuanian independence and have restored their kenesas (including the Vilnius Kenesa).\nPilgrimage sites.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is safe to say that I have been in Vilnius all my life, at least since I became conscious. I was in Vilnius with thoughts and heart\u00a0\u2013 one could say [my] whole being. And so it stayed\u00a0\u2013 and in Rome.\u2014\u200a\nSince the 1387 Christianization of Lithuania, Vilnius has become a centre of Christianity in the country and a pilgrimage site. The Vilnius Pilgrimage Centre () coordinates pilgrimages, assists with their preparation, and performs pilgrimage pastoral care. A number of places in Vilnius are associated with miracles or mark events significant to Christians, and the Chapel of the Gate of Dawn is visited by thousands of Christian pilgrims annually. The gates were initially part of the defensive Wall of Vilnius; they were given to the Carmelites in the 16th century, who installed a chapel in the gates with a 17th-century Catholic painting: \"Our Lady of the Gate of Dawn\". The painting was later decorated with gold-plated silver and is associated with miracles and a legend.\nThe Sanctuary of the Divine Mercy is a pilgrimage site which has a Divine Mercy image. Vilnius was the birthplace of the Divine Mercy devotion when Saint Faustina Kowalska began her mission under the guidance of Micha\u0142 Sopo\u0107ko, her spiritual director. The first Divine Mercy image was painted in 1934 by Eugeniusz Kazimirowski under the supervision of Kowalska, and it hangs in the Divine Mercy Sanctuary in Vilnius. Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament takes place in the shrine around the clock. The House of St. Faustina, in Antakalnis' V. Grybo Street, is open to pilgrims.\nThe Church of St. Philip and St. Jacob, near Luki\u0161k\u0117s Square, has the painting of the Mother of God of Luki\u0161k\u0117s which has reportedly attracted miracles. The icon, painted in the 15th or 16th century, is one of the country's oldest examples of easel painting. It was brought by Grand Duchy of Lithuania artillery general Motiejus Korvinas Gosievskis from the Russo-Polish War. Since 1684, miracles have been reported at the Vilnius Dominican monastery related to the image which were published in a 1737 book, \"Mystical Fountain\" (). The icon was restored and returned to the Dominicans in 2012.\nThree Crosses is a monument in the city. According to a legend in the \"Bychowiec Chronicle\", fourteen Franciscan friars were invited to Vilnius from Podolia by . The friars preached the gospel and denigrated pagan Lithuanian gods; angry city residents burned the monastery and killed the fourteen friars. Seven were beheaded on Bleak Hill, and the other seven were crucified and thrown into the Neris or Vilnia.\nVerkiai Calvary (or Vilnius Calvary), Lithuania's second-oldest calvary, is in the neighborhood of Verkiai. The calvary was built from 1662 to 1669 in gratitude for victory in the Second Northern War (1655\u201360). The consecration ceremony of the Stations of the Cross took place for Pentecost on 9 June 1669. The calvary includes 20 brick chapels, seven wooden gates and a brick one, and a bridge with a wood chapel. The path ends at the Church of the Discovery of the Holy Cross. All the chapels except the four closest to the church were destroyed by Soviet authorities overnight with dynamite in 1962. The calvary was reconstructed from 1990 to 2002, and the chapels were consecrated on Pentecost in 2002. Pilgrimages to the calvary are organized regularly with the clergy.\nThe Church Heritage Museum () contains city's the oldest and largest collection of liturgical artefacts in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Vilnius. Vilnius is the only city in the Baltic states with an Apostolic Nunciature, where Pope John Paul II and Pope Francis stayed during their visits to Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.\nParks, squares and cemeteries.\nAlmost half of Vilnius is covered by green space such as parks, public gardens, and nature reserves. The city has a number of lakes where residents and visitors swim and barbecue in the summer. Thirty lakes and 16 rivers cover 2.1 percent of Vilnius's area, some of which have sand beaches.\nVingis Park, the city's largest, hosted several large rallies during Lithuania's drive towards independence in the 1980s. Sections of the annual Vilnius Marathon are on public walkways along the Neris. The green area next to the White Bridge is a popular place to enjoy good weather, and has become a venue for several musical and film events.\nCathedral Square in the Old Town is surrounded by a number of the city's most historic sites. Luki\u0161k\u0117s Square is the largest, bordered by several government buildings: the Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Polish Embassy and the Genocide Victims' Museum, where the KGB tortured and killed opponents of the communist regime. A large statue of Vladimir Lenin in its centre was removed in 1991. Town Hall Square has been a centre of trade fairs, celebrations and events, including the Kaziukas Fair. The city's Christmas tree is displayed there. State ceremonies are often held in Daukanto Square, facing the Presidential Palace.\nTown Hall Square has also been host to the Vilnius Portal since 2021, the first in the world. Visitors can view the following locations for three minutes at a time:\nBernardinai Garden, near Gediminas Tower (previously known as Sereiki\u0161k\u0117s Park), opened on 20 October 2013 after it was restored to its 19th-century Vladislovas \u0160trausas environment. It is a venue for concerts, festivals, and exhibitions. Chiune Sugihara Sakura Park was established in 2001, and a Japanese garden (both in \u0160nipi\u0161k\u0117s) was opened in 2023.\nRasos Cemetery, consecrated in 1801, is the burial site of Jonas Basanavi\u010dius and other signatories of the 1918 Act of Independence and the heart of Polish leader J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski. Two of the city's three Jewish cemeteries were destroyed by communist authorities during the Soviet era, and the remains in the Vilna Gaon were moved to the remaining one. A monument was erected at the site of U\u017eupis Old Jewish Cemetery was. The Bernardine Cemetery, established in 1810, has about 18,000 burials; closed during the 1970s, it is being restored. Antakalnis Cemetery, established in 1809, has memorials to Polish, Lithuanian, German and Russian soldiers and the graves of those who were killed during the January Events.\nTourism.\nAccording to Lithuanian Department of Statistics, 1,200,858 visitors rented rooms in Vilnius in 2018 and spent a total of 2,212,109 nights there; this was a respective increase of 12 percent and 11 percent over the previous year. Eighty-one percent of the visitors were foreigners (970,577), 11 percent more than in 2017. Most foreign visitors (47 percent) came from Belarus (102,915), Germany (101,999), Poland (99,386), Russia (90,388) and Latvia (61,829). Nineteen percent of the guests were Lithuanian, 18 percent more than in 2017.\nA 2018 Vilnius visitor survey reported that 48 percent were visiting the city for the first time, 85 percent of tourists planned the trip by themselves, and 15 percent used a travel agency. Forty percent said that they visited Vilnius to learn about the city's history and heritage, with 23 percent also planning trips to other parts of Lithuania. Many Belarusians (about 200,000 travel visas annually) visit the city's shopping malls and submit half-meter-long receipts to customs officials.\nVilnius's Tourist Information Centres were visited by 119,136 visitors in 2018 (95,932 foreigners and 23,204 Lithuanians), a five-percent increase over 2017. The city's highest-rated tourist services are restaurants (caf\u00e9s), old-town attractions, hotels or other accommodations, trips to Trakai, parks and other green zones, connections to Vilnius Airport, and food in hotels, restaurants and caf\u00e9s. Vilnius is one of a few European capitals which allows hot air ballooning through the city, with nearly 1,000 trips in 2022. In the City Costs Barometer 2019, Vilnius was ranked number one of European capitals for offering the best value to visitors. The controversial Vilnius Palace of Concerts and Sports, built by Soviet authorities on the site of a Jewish graveyard, was scheduled to become the leading convention center in the Baltic states in 2022.\nHotels.\nLithuania is a member of the European Hotelstars Union. Vilnius has six five-star hotels, all in the Old Town, and 27 four-star hotels. The Kempinski Hotel, with a view of Cathedral Square, is considered the city's most luxurious hotel.\nAccording to a 2018 Vilnius visitors' survey, 44 percent stayed in mid-range hotels (three or four stars), 12 percent stayed in standard or economy hotels (one or two stars) and 11 percent stayed in five-star hotels. The city had 82 hotels, eight motels and 40 other accommodation facilities in 2019, with 6,822 rooms and 15,248 beds. The highest hotel-room occupancy was in August, and the lowest was in February.\nSports.\nSeveral basketball teams are based in the city. BC Wolves began competing in the 2022\u201323 season of the Lithuanian Basketball League (LKL). The largest team is BC Rytas, who participates in the international Basketball Champions League (BCL) and the LKL; they won the ULEB Cup (predecessor to the EuroCup) in 2005 and the EuroCup in 2009. Their home arena is the 2,500-seat Jeep Arena; all European matches and important domestic matches are played at the 10,000-seat Twinsbet Arena.\nVilnius also has several football teams; FK \u017dalgiris, the main team, plays at the 5,000-seat LFF Stadium. The multi-use Lithuania National Stadium is under construction. The 28-court SEB Arena is the largest tennis complex in central Europe and home of the Lithuanian tennis and squash teams.\nOlympic swimming champions Lina Ka\u010diu\u0161yt\u0117 and Robertas \u017dulpa are from Vilnius. The city has several public swimming pools, with the Lazdynai Swimming Pool the only Olympic-size swimming pool. Vilnius is home to the Lithuanian Bandy Association, Badminton Federation, Canoeing Sports Federation, Baseball Association, Biathlon Federation, Sailors Union, Football Federation, Fencing Federation, Cycling Sports Federation, Archery Federation, Athletics Federation, Ice Hockey Federation, Basketball Federation, Curling Federation, Rowing Federation, Wrestling Federation, Speed Skating Association, Gymnastics Federation, Equestrian Union, Modern Pentathlon Federation, Shooting Union, Triathlon Federation, Volleyball Federation, Tennis Union, Taekwondo Federation, Weightlifting Federation, Table Tennis Association, Skiing Association, Rugby Federation, and Swimming Federation. The annual international Vilnius Marathon has thousands of participants.\nTransport.\nNavigability of the Neris is limited; no regular water routes exist outside of Vilnius, although it was used for transport in the past. Local transport on the river in Vilnius started in 2025 with electric boats. Vilnius Airport, Lithuania's largest, serves about 50 cities in 25 countries. The airport, from the city centre, has a direct link to the Vilnius railway station. The station is a rail hub with direct passenger service to Minsk, Kaliningrad, Moscow and Saint Petersburg, and is part of the Pan-European Corridor IX's Branch B.\nVilnius is the starting point of the A1 motorway which runs across Lithuania, connecting its three major cities (Vilnius, Kaunas and Klaip\u0117da), and is part of European route E85. The A2, connecting Vilnius and Panev\u0117\u017eys, is part of the E272. Other highways out of the city include the A3, A4, A14, A15, and A16. Vilnius's southern bypass is the A19.\nBus service.\nThe bus and trolleybus networks are operated by Vilniaus vie\u0161asis transportas. There are over 60 bus, 18 trolleybus, six rapid bus and one night bus routes. The trolleybus network is one of Europe's most extensive; over 250 buses and 260 trolleybuses transport about 500,000 passengers every workday. The first bus routes were established in 1926, and the first trolleybuses were introduced in 1956.\nAt the end of 2007, an electronic monthly ticket system was introduced in which passengers could buy an electronic card in shops and newsstands and load it with money; monthly e-ticket cards could also be loaded over the Internet. Paper monthly tickets were in use until August 2008. On 15 August 2012, e-cards were replaced by Vilnius Citizen Cards (Vilnie\u010dio Kortel\u0117) which could be purchased at newsstands and loaded with money and ticket type. In 2014, a mobile app was introduced for public-transport tickets.\nBuses are low-floor Volvo and Mercedes-Benz buses, and trolleybuses are manufactured by Solaris. Older \u0160koda vehicles, built in the Czech Republic and many refurbished, are still in service. In 2004, a contract was signed with Volvo Buses to purchase 90 new 7700 buses over a three-year period.\nIn 2017, Vilnius began the largest upgrade of its bus service by purchasing 250 new low-floor buses. Sixty percent of the city's public buses were new by mid-2018, with free Wi-Fi and chargers for electronic devices. On 5 September 2017, 50 new Isuzu buses were introduced. Vilnius City Municipality accepted bids for 41 new trolleybuses; Solaris contracted to provide the trolleybuses by autumn 2018, with free Wi-Fi and chargers. On 13 November of that year, the municipality signed a contract with Solaris for the remaining 150 fourth-generation Solaris Urbino buses (100 standard and 50 articulated) with free Wi-Fi and USB charging. Five electric Karsan Jest Electric buses were introduced on 20 September 2019 for the number 89 route's narrow streets.\nVilnius Metro and an electric tram have been proposed. In 2018, the Seimas and the president approved a metro project.\nElectric vehicle infrastructure.\nVilnius is the city with the most electric vehicles in Lithuania. The city has tens of public high-power charging stations, provided by a state-owned enterprise Ignitis ON and a municipal enterprise Susisiekimo paslaugos. Vilnius city municipality and the Government of Lithuania encourages the usage of electric vehicles and has granted a number of benefits for such cars users (e.g. six charging stations offers a completely free charging in Vilnius, free parking in the city's public areas, electric vehicles are allowed to drive in a separate \"A\" road lane and significantly benefits in the traffic jams, electric and hybrid vehicles license plates begins with a letter E).\nHealthcare.\nWhen Vilnius was part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the city had public bathhouses; one-fourth the city's houses had individual bathhouses, and almost half had alcohol distilleries. In 1518, doctor and canon Martynas Du\u0161nickis established the first \"\u0161pitol\u0117\" in Vilnius: Lithuania's first hospital-like institution which treated people unable to care for themselves due to health, age, or poverty.\nThe Brotherhood of Saint Roch maintained basic hospitals and shelters for the sick and disabled in Vilnius from 1708 to 1799, although it is unknown if the brothers had any medical education. They hired paramedics, doctors, surgeons, and female nurses for female patients. A significant number of patients had sexually transmitted diseases which other Catholic hospitals refused to treat. The brotherhood sheltered pregnant women, abandoned children and patients with injuries, tuberculosis, rheumatism and arthritis.\nIn 1805, the Vilnius Medical Society was established by Joseph Frank (son of Johann Peter Frank) as the first medical society in eastern Europe. The same year, the society established a teaching hospital (clinic) as part of the Vilnius University Faculty of Medicine. From 1918 to 1941, the Lithuanian Sanitary Aid Society operated in Vilnius.\nThe Ministry of Health, in Vilnius, is responsible for Lithuanian health care. Vilnians pay compulsory health insurance (6.98 percent of their salary), which is governed by the Vilnius Territorial Health Insurance Fund and guarantees free health care to every insured person. Some residents, such as the disabled, children and full-time students, are exempt from the tax.\nVilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos and the Vilnius City Clinical Hospital are the city's primary hospitals. Vilnius also has eight polyclinics, the Medical Centre of the Ministry of the Interior, and a number of private health-care facilities.\nMedia.\nThe first Lithuanian weekly newspaper, \"Kurier Litewski\", was published in Vilnius from 1760 to 1763. Vilnius is home to a number of newspapers, magazines and other publications, including \"Lietuvos rytas\", \"Lietuvos \u017einios\", \"Verslo \u017einios\", \"Respublika\", \"Valstie\u010di\u0173 laikra\u0161tis\", \"Mokes\u010di\u0173 \u017einios\", \"Aktualijos\", \"15min\", \"Vilniaus diena\", \"Vilniaus Kra\u0161tas\", \"Lietuvos aidas\", \"Valstyb\u0117\", \"Veidas\", \"Panel\u0117\", the Franciscan \"Bernardinai.lt\", the Russian \"Litovskij kurjer\" and the Polish \"Tygodnik Wile\u0144szczyzny\".\nThe Vilnius TV Tower in Karolini\u0161k\u0117s broadcasts to the city. The most-viewed networks in Lithuania are headquartered in Vilnius and include LRT televizija, TV3, LNK, BTV, LRT Plius, LRT Lituanica, TV6, Lietuvos rytas TV, TV1, TV8, Sport1, Liuks!, Info TV.\nVilnius's first radio station, \"Rozg\u0142o\u015bnia Wile\u0144ska\", began broadcasting in the \u017dv\u0117rynas microdistrict on 28 November 1927 and was moved to present-day Gediminas Avenue in 1935. M-1, the country's first commercial radio station, began broadcasting from Vilnius in 1989. Other Lithuanian or foreign-language radio stations also broadcast from Vilnius, most from the Vilnius TV Tower or the . The Lithuanian Union of Journalists () and the Lithuanian Society of Journalists () are headquartered in Vilnius.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nVilnius is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin and friendly towns until 2022:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "32598", "revid": "320236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32598", "title": "Vilna", "text": ""}
{"id": "32600", "revid": "26618737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32600", "title": "Viola", "text": "Bowed string instrument\nThe viola ( , () ) is a string instrument of the violin family, and is usually bowed when played. Violas are slightly larger than violins, and have a lower sound. Since the 18th century, it has been the middle or alto voice of the violin family, between the violin (which is tuned a perfect fifth higher) and the cello (which is tuned an octave lower). The strings from low to high are typically tuned to C3, G3, D4, and A4.\nIn the past, the viola varied in size and style, as did its names. The word \"viola\" originates from the Italian language. The Italians often used the term \"viola da braccio\", meaning, literally, 'of the arm'. \"Brazzo\" was another Italian word for the viola, which the Germans adopted as \"Bratsche\". The French had their own names: \"cinquiesme\" was a small viola, \"haute contre\" was a large viola, and \"taile\" was a tenor. Today, the French use the term \"alto\", a reference to its range.\nThe viola was popular in the heyday of five-part harmony, up until the eighteenth century, taking three lines of the harmony and occasionally playing the melody line. Music notation for the viola differs from most other instruments in that it primarily uses the alto clef. When viola music has substantial sections in a higher register, it switches to the treble clef to make it easier to read.\nThe viola often plays the \"inner voices\" in string quartets and symphonic writing, and it is more likely than the first violin to play accompaniment parts. The viola occasionally plays a major, soloistic role in orchestral or chamber music. Examples include the symphonic poem \"Don Quixote\", by Richard Strauss, the 13th Quartet by Dmitri Shostakovich, and a symphony with a main viola line: \"Harold en Italie\", by Hector Berlioz. In the earlier part of the 20th century, more composers began to write for the viola, encouraged by the emergence of specialized soloists such as Lionel Tertis and William Primrose. English composers Arthur Bliss, Edwin York Bowen, Benjamin Dale, Frank Bridge, Benjamin Britten, Rebecca Clarke and Ralph Vaughan Williams all wrote substantial chamber and concert works. Many of these pieces were commissioned by, or written for, Tertis. William Walton, Bohuslav Martin\u016f, T\u014dru Takemitsu, Tibor Serly, Alfred Schnittke, and B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k have written well-known viola concertos. The concerti by Bart\u00f3k, Paul Hindemith, Carl Stamitz, Georg Philipp Telemann, and Walton are considered major works of the viola repertoire. Hindemith, who was a violist, wrote a substantial amount of music for viola, including the concerto \"Der Schwanendreher\".\nForm.\nThe viola is similar in material and construction to the violin. A full-size viola's body is between longer than the body of a full-size violin (i.e., between ), with an average length of . Small violas typically made for children typically start at , which is equivalent to a half-size violin. For a child who needs a smaller size, a fractional-sized violin is often strung with the strings of a viola. Unlike the violin, the viola does not have a standard full size. The body of a viola would need to measure about long to match the acoustics of a violin, however a viola of that size can only be played vertically like a cello, hence the name Vertical viola. For centuries, viola makers have experimented with the size and shape of the viola, often adjusting proportions or shape to make a lighter instrument with shorter string lengths, but with a large enough sound box to retain the viola sound. Prior to the eighteenth century, violas had no uniform size. Large violas (tenors) were designed to play the lower register viola lines or second viola in five part harmony depending on instrumentation. A smaller viola, nearer the size of the violin, was called an \"alto viola\". It was more suited to higher register writing, as in the viola 1 parts, as their sound was usually richer in the upper register. Its size was not as conducive to a full tone in the lower register.\nSeveral experiments have intended to increase the size of the viola to improve its sound and harmony. Hermann Ritter's \"viola alta\", which measured about , was intended for use in Wagner's operas. The Tertis model viola, which has wider bouts and deeper ribs to promote a better tone, is another slightly \"nonstandard\" shape that allows the player to use a larger instrument. Many experiments with the acoustics of a viola, particularly increasing the size of the body, have resulted in a much deeper tone, making it resemble the tone of a cello. Since many composers wrote for a traditional-sized viola, particularly in orchestral music, changes in the tone of a viola can have unintended consequences upon the balance in ensembles.\nOne of the most notable makers of violas of the twentieth century was Englishman A. E. Smith, whose violas are sought after and highly valued. Many of his violas remain in Australia, his country of residence, where during some decades the violists of the Sydney Symphony Orchestra had a dozen of them in their section.\nMore recent (and more radically shaped) innovations have addressed the ergonomic problems associated with playing the viola by making it shorter and lighter, while finding ways to keep the traditional sound. These include the Otto Erdesz \"cutaway\" viola, which has one shoulder cut out to make shifting easier; the \"Oak Leaf\" viola, which has two extra bouts; viol-shaped violas such as Joseph Curtin's \"Evia\" model, which also uses a moveable neck and maple-veneered carbon fibre back, to reduce weight: violas played in the same manner as cellos (see vertical viola); and the eye-catching \"Dal\u00ed-esque\" shapes of both Bernard Sabatier's violas in fractional sizes\u2014which appear to have melted\u2014and David Rivinus' \"Pellegrina\" model violas.\nOther experiments that deal with the \"ergonomics vs. sound\" problem have appeared. The American composer Harry Partch fitted a viola with a cello neck to allow the use of his 43-tone scale, called the \"adapted viola\". Luthiers have also created five-stringed violas, which allow a greater playing range.\nMethod of playing.\nA person who plays the viola is called a \"violist\" or a \"viola player\". The technique required for playing a viola has certain differences compared with that of a violin, partly because of its larger size: the notes are spread out further along the fingerboard and often require different fingerings. The viola's less responsive strings and the heavier bow warrant a somewhat different bowing technique, and a violist has to lean more intensely on the strings.\nThe viola is held in the same manner as the violin; however, due to its larger size, some adjustments must be made to accommodate. The viola, just like the violin, is placed on top of the left shoulder between the shoulder and the left side of the face (chin). Because of the viola's size, violists with short arms tend to use smaller-sized instruments for easier playing. The most immediately noticeable adjustments that a player accustomed to playing the violin has to make are to use wider-spaced fingerings. It is common for some players to use a wider and more intense vibrato in the left hand, facilitated by employing the fleshier pad of the finger rather than the tip, and to hold the bow and right arm further away from the player's body. A violist must bring the left elbow further forward or around, so as to reach the lowest string, which allows the fingers to press firmly and so create a clearer tone. Different positions are often used, including half position.\nThe viola is strung with thicker gauge strings than the violin. This, combined with its larger size and lower pitch range, results in a deeper and mellower tone. However, the thicker strings also mean that the viola responds to changes in bowing more slowly. Practically speaking, if a violist and violinist are playing together, the violist must begin moving the bow a fraction of a second sooner than the violinist. The thicker strings also mean that more weight must be applied with the bow to make them vibrate.\nThe viola's bow has a wider band of horsehair than a violin's bow, which is particularly noticeable near the frog (or \"heel\" in the UK). Viola bows, at , are heavier than violin bows (). The profile of the rectangular outside corner of a viola bow frog generally is more rounded than on violin bows.\nTuning.\nThe viola's four strings are normally tuned in fifths: the lowest string is C (an octave below middle C), with G, D, and A above it. This tuning is exactly one fifth below the violin, so that they have three strings in common\u2014G, D, and A\u2014and is one octave above the cello.\nEach string of a viola is wrapped around a peg near the scroll and is tuned by turning the peg. Tightening the string raises the pitch; loosening the string lowers the pitch. The A string is normally tuned first, to the pitch of the ensemble: generally 400\u2013442\u00a0Hz. The other strings are then tuned to it in intervals of fifths, usually by bowing two strings simultaneously. Most violas also have \"adjusters\"\u2014\"fine tuners\" that make finer pitch adjustments. Some violists will choose to only have one fine tuner on the A string; others choose to have fine tuners on all strings. These adjust the tension of the string via rotating a small knob above the tailpiece. Such tuning is generally easier to learn than using the pegs, and adjusters are usually recommended for younger players and put on smaller violas, though pegs and adjusters are usually used together. Some violists reverse the tuning of the C and G strings, so that the thicker C string does not turn so severe an angle over the nut, although this is rare.\nSmall, temporary tuning adjustments can also be made by stretching a string with the hand. A string may be tuned down by pulling it above the fingerboard, or tuned up by pressing the part of the string in the pegbox. These techniques may be useful in performances such as live concerts, reducing the ill effects of an out-of-tune string or viola until a proper opportunity to tune.\nThe tuning C\u2013G\u2013D\u2013A is used for the great majority of all viola music. However, other tunings are occasionally employed, both in classical music, where the technique is known as \"scordatura\", and in some folk styles. Mozart, in his Sinfonia Concertante for Violin, Viola and Orchestra in E\u266d, wrote the viola part in D major, and specified that the violist raises the strings in pitch by a semitone. He probably intended to give the viola a brighter tone so the rest of the orchestra would not overpower it. Tertis, in his transcription of the Elgar cello concerto, wrote the slow movement with the C string tuned down to B\u266d, enabling the viola to play one passage an octave lower.\nOrganizations and research.\nA renewal of interest in the viola by performers and composers in the twentieth century led to increased research devoted to the instrument. Paul Hindemith and Vadim Borisovsky made an early attempt at an organization, in 1927, with the Violists' World Union. But it was not until 1968, with the creation of the Viola-Forschungsgesellschaft, now the International Viola Society (IVS), that a lasting organization took hold. The IVS now consists of twelve chapters around the world, the largest being the American Viola Society (AVS), which publishes the \"Journal of the American Viola Society\". In addition to the journal, the AVS sponsors the David Dalton Research Competition and the Primrose International Viola Competition.\nThe 1960s also saw the beginning of several research publications devoted to the viola, beginning with Franz Zeyringer's \"Literatur f\u00fcr Viola\", which has appeared in several versions, the most recent being in 1985. In 1980, Maurice Riley produced the first attempt at a comprehensive history of the viola, in his \"History of the Viola\", which was followed with a second volume in 1991. The IVS published the multi-language Viola Yearbook from 1979 to 1994, during which several other national chapters of the IVS published respective newsletters. The Primrose International Viola Archive at Brigham Young University houses the greatest amount of material related to the viola, including scores, recordings, instruments, and archival materials from some of the world's greatest violists.\nMusic.\nReading music.\nMusic that is written for the viola primarily uses the alto clef, which is otherwise rarely used. Viola music employs the treble clef when there are substantial sections of music written in a higher register. The alto clef indicates the placement of C4 on the middle line of the staff.\nAs the viola is tuned exactly one octave above the cello, music that is notated for the cello can be easily transcribed for alto clef without any changes in key. For example, there are numerous editions of Bach's Cello Suites transcribed for viola. The viola also has the advantage of smaller scale-length when compared to the cello. This means that the stretches needed by cellists to play certain notes are easier to achieve on the viola. However, occasional changes must be made due to differences in the ways that the two instruments are played, as well as their differences in range.\nRole in pre-twentieth century works.\nIn early orchestral music, the viola part was usually limited to filling in harmonies, with very little melodic material assigned to it. When the viola was given a melodic part, it was often duplicated (or was in unison with) the melody played by other strings.\nThe \"Brandenburg Concertos\", a set of concerti grossi composed by J. S. Bach, are unusual for their time in their use of viola. The third concerto grosso, scored for three violins, three violas, three cellos, and basso continuo, requires virtuosity from the violists. Indeed, Viola I has a solo in the last movement which is commonly required in orchestral auditions. In the sixth concerto grosso, Brandenburg Concerto No. 6, scored for 2 violas \"concertino\", cello, 2 violas da gamba, and continuo, the two violas play the primary melodic roles. Bach also used this unusual ensemble in his cantatas Gleichwie der Regen und Schnee vom Himmel f\u00e4llt, BWV 18 and Mein Herze schwimmt im Blut, BWV 199, in which the chorale is accompanied by an obbligato viola.\nThere are a few Baroque and Classical concerti, such as those by Georg Philipp Telemann (one for solo viola, being one of the earliest viola concertos known, and one for two violas), Alessandro Rolla, Franz Anton Hoffmeister and Carl Stamitz.\nThe viola plays an important role in chamber music. Mozart used the viola in more creative ways when he wrote his six string quintets. The viola quintets use two violas, which frees them (especially the first viola) for solo passages and increases the variety of writing that is possible for the ensemble. Mozart also wrote for the viola in his Sinfonia Concertante, a set of two duets for violin and viola, and the Kegelstatt Trio for viola, clarinet, and piano. The young Felix Mendelssohn wrote a little-known Viola Sonata in C minor (without opus number, but dating from 1824). Robert Schumann wrote his \"M\u00e4rchenbilder\" for viola and piano. He also wrote a set of four pieces for clarinet, viola, and piano, \"M\u00e4rchenerz\u00e4hlungen\".\nMax Bruch wrote a romance for viola and orchestra, his Op.\u00a085, which explores the emotive capabilities of the viola's timbre. In addition, his Eight pieces for clarinet, viola, and piano, Op.\u00a083, features the viola in a very prominent, solo aspect throughout. His Concerto for Clarinet, Viola, and Orchestra, Op. 88 has been quite prominent in the repertoire and has been recorded by prominent violists throughout the 20th century.\nFrom his earliest works, Brahms wrote music that prominently featured the viola. Among his first published pieces of chamber music, the sextets for strings Op.\u00a018 and Op.\u00a036 contain what amounts to solo parts for both violas. Late in life, he wrote two greatly admired sonatas for clarinet and piano, his Op.\u00a0120 (1894): he later transcribed these works for the viola (the solo part in his Horn Trio is also available in a transcription for viola). Brahms also wrote \"Two Songs for Voice, Viola and Piano\", Op. 91, \"Gestillte Sehnsucht\" (\"Satisfied Longing\") and \"Geistliches Wiegenlied\" (\"Spiritual Lullaby\") as presents for the famous violinist Joseph Joachim and his wife, Amalie. Dvo\u0159\u00e1k played the viola and apparently said that it was his favorite instrument: his chamber music is rich in important parts for the viola. Two Czech composers, Bed\u0159ich Smetana and Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek, included significant viola parts, originally written for viola d'amore, in their quartets \"From My Life\" and \"Intimate Letters\" respectively: the quartets begin with an impassioned statement by the viola. This is similar to Bach, Mozart, and Beethoven all occasionally played the viola part in chamber music.\nThe viola occasionally has a major role in orchestral music, a prominent example being Richard Strauss' tone poem \"Don Quixote\" for solo cello and viola and orchestra. Other examples are the \"Ysobel\" variation of Edward Elgar's \"Enigma Variations\" and the solo in his work, \"In the South (Alassio)\", the \"pas de deux\" scene from act 2 of Adolphe Adam's \"Giselle\" and the \"La Paix\" movement of L\u00e9o Delibes's ballet \"Copp\u00e9lia\", which features a lengthy viola solo.\nGabriel Faur\u00e9's Requiem was originally scored (in 1888) with divided viola sections, lacking the usual violin sections, having only a solo violin for the \"Sanctus\". It was later scored for orchestra with violin sections, and published in 1901. Recordings of the older scoring with violas are available.\nWhile the viola repertoire is quite large, the amount written by well-known pre-20th-century composers is relatively small. There are many transcriptions of works for other instruments for the viola and the large number of 20th-century compositions is very diverse. See \"The Viola Project\" at the San Francisco Conservatory of Music, where Professor of Viola Jodi Levitz has paired a composer with each of her students, resulting in a recital of brand-new works played for the very first time.\nTwentieth century and beyond.\nIn the earlier part of the 20th century, more composers began to write for the viola, encouraged by the emergence of specialized soloists such as Tertis. Englishmen Arthur Bliss, Edwin York Bowen, Benjamin Dale, and Ralph Vaughan Williams all wrote chamber and concert works for Tertis. William Walton, Bohuslav Martin\u016f, and B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k wrote well-known viola concertos. Hindemith wrote a substantial amount of music for the viola; being himself a violist, he often performed his own works. Claude Debussy's Sonata for flute, viola and harp has inspired a significant number of other composers to write for this combination.\nCharles Wuorinen composed his virtuosic \"Viola Variations\" in 2008 for Lois Martin. Elliott Carter also wrote several works for viola including his \"Elegy\" (1943) for viola and piano; it was subsequently transcribed for clarinet. Ernest Bloch, a Swiss-born American composer best known for his compositions inspired by Jewish music, wrote two famous works for viola, the \"Suite 1919\" and the \"Suite H\u00e9bra\u00efque\" for solo viola and orchestra. Rebecca Clarke was a 20th-century composer and violist who also wrote extensively for the viola. Lionel Tertis records that Elgar (whose cello concerto Tertis transcribed for viola, with the slow movement in scordatura), Alexander Glazunov (who wrote an \"Elegy\", Op.\u00a044, for viola and piano), and Maurice Ravel all promised concertos for viola, yet all three died before doing any substantial work on them.\nIn the latter part of the 20th century a substantial repertoire was produced for the viola; many composers including Mikl\u00f3s R\u00f3zsa, Revol Bunin, Alfred Schnittke, Sofia Gubaidulina, Giya Kancheli and Krzysztof Penderecki, have written viola concertos. The American composer Morton Feldman wrote a series of works entitled \"The Viola in My Life\", which feature concertante viola parts. In spectral music, the viola has been sought after because of its lower overtone partials that are more easily heard than on the violin. Spectral composers like G\u00e9rard Grisey, Tristan Murail, and Hora\u021biu R\u0103dulescu have written solo works for viola. Neo-Romantic, post-Modern composers have also written significant works for viola including Robin Holloway Viola Concerto Op. 56 and Sonata Op. 87, Peter Seabourne a large five-movement work with piano, \"Piet\u00e0\", Airat Ichmouratov Viola Concerto No. 1, Op. 7 and Three Romances for Viola, Strings, and Harp, Op. 22.\nContemporary pop music.\nThe viola is sometimes used in contemporary popular music, mostly in the avant-garde. John Cale of The Velvet Underground used the viola, as do some modern groups such as alternative rock band 10,000 Maniacs, Imagine Dragons, folk duo John &amp; Mary, British Sea Power, The Airborne Toxic Event, Marillion, and others often with instruments in a chamber setting. Jazz music has also seen its share of violists, from those used in string sections in the early 1900s to a handful of quartets and soloists emerging from the 1960s onward. It is quite unusual though, to use individual bowed string instruments in contemporary popular music.\nNotable violists.\nThere are few well-known viola virtuoso soloists, perhaps because little virtuoso viola music was written before the twentieth century. Pre-twentieth century viola players of note include Stamitz, Rolla, Antonio Rolla, Chr\u00e9tien Urhan, Casimir Ney, Louis van Waefelghem, and Ritter. Important viola pioneers from the twentieth century were Tertis, William Primrose, Hindemith, Th\u00e9ophile Laforge, Cecil Aronowitz, Maurice Vieux, Borisovsky, Lillian Fuchs, Dino Asciolla, Frederick Riddle, Walter Trampler, Ernst Wallfisch, Csaba Erd\u00e9lyi, the only violist to ever win the Carl Flesch International Violin Competition, and Emanuel Vardi, the first violist to record the 24 Caprices by Paganini on viola. Many noted violinists have publicly performed and recorded on the viola as well, among them Eug\u00e8ne Ysa\u00ffe, Yehudi Menuhin, David Oistrakh, Pinchas Zukerman, Maxim Vengerov, Julian Rachlin, James Ehnes, and Nigel Kennedy.\nAmong the great composers, several preferred the viola to the violin when they were playing in ensembles, the most noted being Ludwig van Beethoven, Bach and Mozart. Other composers also chose to play the viola in ensembles, including Joseph Haydn, Franz Schubert, Mendelssohn, Dvo\u0159\u00e1k, and Benjamin Britten. Among those noted both as violists and as composers are Rebecca Clarke and Hindemith. Contemporary composers and violists Kenji Bunch, Scott Slapin, and Lev Zhurbin have written a number of works for viola.\nElectric violas.\nAmplification of a viola with a pickup, an instrument amplifier (and speaker), and adjusting the tone with a graphic equalizer can make up for the comparatively weaker output of a violin-family instrument string tuned to notes below G3. There are two types of instruments used for electric viola: regular acoustic violas fitted with a piezoelectric pickup and specialized electric violas, which have little or no body. While traditional acoustic violas are typically only available in historically used earth tones (e.g., brown, reddish-brown, blonde), electric violas may be traditional colors or they may use bright colors, such as red, blue or green. Some electric violas are made of materials other than wood.\nMost electric instruments with lower strings are violin-sized, as they use the amp and speaker to create a big sound, so they do not need a large soundbox. Indeed, some electric violas have little or no soundbox, and thus rely entirely on amplification. Fewer electric violas are available than electric violins. It can be hard for violists who prefer a physical size or familiar touch references of a viola-sized instrument, when they must use an electric viola that uses a smaller violin-sized body. Cale, formerly of The Velvet Underground, is one of the more notable users of such an electric viola and he has used them both for melodies in his solo work and for drones in his work with The Velvet Underground (e.g. \"Venus in Furs\"). Other notable players of the electric viola are Geoffrey Richardson of Caravan and Ramsey.\nInstruments may be built with an internal preamplifier, or may put out an unbuffered transducer signal. While such signals may be fed directly to an amplifier or mixing board, they often benefit from an external preamp/equalizer on the end of a short cable, before being fed to the sound system. In rock and other loud styles, the electric viola player may use effects units such as reverb or overdrive.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32601", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32601", "title": "Vegetarian cuisine", "text": "Food not including meat\nVegetarian cuisine, also known as plant-based cuisine, is a style of cooking defined by the inclusion of grains, legumes, nuts, vegetables, fruits, dairy, and sometimes eggs, and by the exclusion of meat and animal tissue products (such as gelatin or animal-derived rennet). Vegetarian cuisine meets vegetarian standards. Vegetarian cuisine differs from vegan cuisine, which excludes all animal products including dairy and eggs.\nCommon vegetarian foods.\nVegetarian cuisine includes consumption of foods containing vegetable protein, vitamin B12, and other nutrients. Food regarded as suitable for all vegetarians (including vegans) typically includes:\nFoods not suitable for vegans, but acceptable for some other types of vegetarians:\nVegetarians by definition cannot consume meat or animal tissue products, with no other universally adopted change in their diet. However, in practice, compared to non-vegetarians, vegetarians on average have an increased consumption of:\nIn comparison to non-vegetarians, practicing vegetarians on average have a decreased consumption of:\nThis difference is observed, but is not required to be vegetarian. Nevertheless, it is relevant when considering research into the health effects of adopting a vegetarian diet. A diet consisting only of sugar candies, for example, while technically also vegetarian, would be expected to have a much different outcome for health compared to what is called \"a vegetarian diet\" culturally and what is most commonly adopted by vegetarians. It is also important to note that overeating occurs because of a misconception of hunger. By changing your perspective on calories verses nutrients, it becomes much easier to adapt to the healthier lifestyle of vegetarianism.\nTraditional vegetarian cuisine.\nThese are some of the most common dishes that vegetarians eat without substitution of ingredients. Such dishes include, from breakfasts to dinnertime desserts:\nDesserts and sweets.\nMost desserts, including pies, cobblers, cakes, brownies, cookies, truffles, Rice Krispie treats (from gelatin-free marshmallows or marshmallow fluff), peanut butter treats, pudding, rice pudding, ice cream, cr\u00e8me brul\u00e9e, etc., are free of meat and fish and are suitable for ovo-lacto vegetarians. Eastern confectionery and desserts, such as halva and Turkish delight, are mostly vegan, while others such as baklava (which often contains butter) are lacto vegetarian. Indian desserts and sweets are mostly vegetarian like peda, barfi, gulab jamun, shrikhand, basundi, kaju katri, rasgulla, cham cham, rajbhog, etc. Indian sweets are mostly made from milk products and are thus lacto vegetarian; dry fruit-based sweets are vegan.\nCommercial products.\nCommercial products marketed towards vegetarians are available in most countries, though their quantity and variety can vary. For example, in Australia, a wide range of vegetarian products are available in most supermarkets. Furthermore, a vegetarian shopping guide is provided by https://. The largest market for vegetarian foods is India, with official governmental laws regulating the \"vegetarian\" and \"non vegetarian\" labels.\nHealth research.\nVegetarian diets are under preliminary research for their possible effects on long-term health. Dietary patterns were evaluated along with their relationship with metabolic risk factors and metabolic syndrome. A cross-sectional analysis of 773 subjects including 35% vegetarians, 16% semi-vegetarians, and 49% non-vegetarians found that a vegetarian dietary pattern is associated significantly with lower means for all metabolic risk factors except HDL, and a lower risk of metabolic syndromes when compared to non-vegetarian diets. Metabolic risk factors include HDL, triglycerides, glucose, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, waist circumference, and body mass index. Adventist Study 2 (AHS-2) compared mean consumption of each food group for vegetarian patterns compared to non-vegetarian patterns.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32603", "revid": "10199389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32603", "title": "Vincent van Gogh", "text": "Dutch painter (1853\u20131890)\nVincent Willem van Gogh (; 30 March 1853\u00a0\u2013 29 July 1890) was a Dutch Post-Impressionist painter who is among the most famous and influential figures in the history of Western art. In just over a decade, he created approximately 2,100 artworks, including around 860 oil paintings, most of them in the last two years of his life. His oeuvre includes landscapes, still lifes, portraits, and self-portraits, most of which are characterised by bold colours and dramatic brushwork that contributed to the rise of expressionism in modern art. Van Gogh's work was only beginning to gain critical attention before his death from suicide at age 37. During his lifetime, only one of Van Gogh's paintings, \"The Red Vineyard\", was sold. \nBorn into an upper-middle-class family, Van Gogh drew as a child and was serious, quiet and thoughtful, but showed signs of mental instability. As a young man, he worked as an art dealer, often travelling, but became depressed after he was transferred to London. He turned to religion and spent time as a missionary in southern Belgium. Later he drifted into ill-health and solitude. He was keenly aware of modernist trends in art and, while back with his parents, took up painting in 1881. His younger brother, Theo, supported him financially, and the two of them maintained a long correspondence.\nVan Gogh's early works consist of mostly still lifes and depictions of peasant labourers. In 1886, he moved to Paris, where he met members of the artistic \"avant-garde\", including \u00c9mile Bernard and Paul Gauguin, who were seeking new paths beyond Impressionism. Frustrated in Paris and inspired by a growing spirit of artistic change and collaboration, in February 1888 Van Gogh moved to Arles in southern France to establish an artistic retreat and commune. Once there, his paintings grew brighter and he turned his attention to the natural world, depicting local olive groves, wheat fields and sunflowers. Van Gogh invited Gauguin to join him in Arles and eagerly anticipated Gauguin's arrival in late 1888.\nVan Gogh suffered from psychotic episodes and delusions. He worried about his mental stability, and often neglected his physical health, did not eat properly and drank heavily. His friendship with Gauguin ended after a confrontation with a razor when, in a rage, he mutilated his left ear. Van Gogh spent time in psychiatric hospitals, including a period at Saint-R\u00e9my. After he discharged himself and moved to the Auberge Ravoux in Auvers-sur-Oise near Paris, he came under the care of the homeopathic doctor Paul Gachet. His depression persisted, and on 29 July 1890 Van Gogh died from his injuries after shooting himself in the chest with a revolver.\nVan Gogh's work began to attract critical artistic attention in the last year of his life. After his death, his art and life story captured public imagination as an emblem of misunderstood genius, due in large part to the efforts of his widowed sister-in-law Johanna van Gogh-Bonger. His bold use of colour, expressive line and thick application of paint inspired avant-garde artistic groups like the Fauves and German Expressionists in the early 20th century. Van Gogh's work gained widespread critical and commercial success in the following decades, and he has become a lasting icon of the romantic ideal of the tortured artist. Today, Van Gogh's works are among the world's most expensive paintings ever sold. His legacy is celebrated by the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam, which holds the world's largest collection of his paintings and drawings.\nLetters.\nThe most comprehensive primary source on Van Gogh is his correspondence with his younger brother, Theo. Their lifelong friendship, and most of what is known of Vincent's thoughts and theories of art, are recorded in the hundreds of letters they exchanged from 1872 until 1890. Theo van Gogh was an art dealer and provided his brother with financial and emotional support as well as access to influential people on the contemporary art scene.\nTheo kept all of Vincent's letters to him, but Vincent kept only a few of the letters he received. After both had died, Theo's widow Jo Bonger-van Gogh arranged for the publication of some of their letters. A few appeared in 1906 and 1913; the majority were published in 1914. Vincent's letters are eloquent and expressive, have been described as having a \"diary-like intimacy\", and read in parts like autobiography. Translator Arnold Pomerans wrote that their publication adds a \"fresh dimension to the understanding of Van Gogh's artistic achievement, an understanding granted to us by virtually no other painter.\"\nThere are more than 600 letters from Vincent to Theo and around 40 from Theo to Vincent. There are 22 to his sister Wil, 58 to the painter Anthon van Rappard, 22 to \u00c9mile Bernard as well as individual letters to Paul Signac, Paul Gauguin, and the critic Albert Aurier. Some are illustrated with sketches. Many are undated, but art historians have been able to place most in chronological order. Problems in transcription and dating remain, mainly with those posted from Arles. While there, Vincent wrote around 200 letters in Dutch, French, and English. There is a gap in the record when he lived in Paris as the brothers lived together and had no need to correspond.\nThe highly paid contemporary artist Jules Breton was frequently mentioned in Vincent's letters. In 1875 letters to Theo, Vincent mentions he saw Breton, discusses the Breton paintings he saw at a Salon, and discusses sending one of Breton's books but only on condition that it be returned. In a March 1884 letter to Rappard he discusses one of Breton's poems that had inspired one of his paintings. In 1885, he describes Breton's famous work \"The Song of the Lark\" as being \"fine\". In March 1880, roughly midway between these letters, Van Gogh set out on an trip on foot to meet Breton in the village of Courri\u00e8res; he was intimidated by Breton's success and the high wall around his estate, and he returned without making his presence known. It appears Breton was unaware of Van Gogh or his attempted visit. There are no known letters between the two artists and Van Gogh is not one of the contemporary artists discussed by Breton in his 1891 autobiography \"Life of an Artist.\"\nLife.\nEarly years.\nVincent Willem van Gogh was born on 30 March 1853 in Groot-Zundert, in the predominantly Catholic province of North Brabant in the Netherlands. He was the oldest surviving child of Theodorus van Gogh (1822\u20131885), a minister of the Dutch Reformed Church, and his wife, Anna Cornelia Carbentus (1819\u20131907). Van Gogh was given the name of his grandfather and of a brother stillborn exactly a year before his birth. His grandfather, Vincent (1789\u20131874), was a prominent art dealer and a theology graduate from the University of Leiden in 1811. This Vincent had six sons, three of whom became art dealers, and may have been named after his great-uncle, a sculptor (1729\u20131802).\nVan Gogh's mother came from a prosperous family in The Hague. His father was the youngest son of a minister. The two met when Anna's younger sister, Cornelia, married Theodorus's older brother Vincent (Cent). Van Gogh's parents married in May 1851 and moved to Zundert. His brother Theo was born on 1 May 1857. There was another brother, Cornelis (known as \"Cor\"), and three sisters: Elisabeth, Anna, and Wil. In later life, Van Gogh remained in touch only with Wil and Theo. Theodorus's salary as a minister was modest, but the Church also supplied the family with a house, a maid, two cooks, a gardener, a carriage and horse; his mother Anna instilled in the children a duty to uphold the family's high social position.\nVan Gogh was a serious and thoughtful child. He was taught at home by his mother and a governess, and in 1860, was sent to the village school. In 1864, he was placed in a boarding school at Zevenbergen, where he felt abandoned, and he campaigned to come home. Instead, in 1866, his parents sent him to the middle school in Tilburg, where he was also deeply unhappy. His interest in art began at a young age. He was encouraged to draw as a child by his mother, and his early drawings are expressive, but do not approach the intensity of his later work. Constant Cornelis Huijsmans, who had been a successful artist in Paris, taught the students at Tilburg. His philosophy was to reject technique in favour of capturing the impressions of things, particularly nature or common objects. Van Gogh's profound unhappiness seems to have overshadowed the lessons, which had little effect. In March 1868, he abruptly returned home. He later wrote that his youth was \"austere and cold, and sterile.\"\nIn July 1869, Van Gogh's uncle Cent obtained a position for him at the art dealers Goupil &amp; Cie in The Hague. After completing his training in 1873, he was transferred to Goupil's London branch on Southampton Street, and took lodgings at 87 Hackford Road, Stockwell. This was a happy time for Van Gogh; he was successful at work and, at 20, was earning more than his father. Theo's wife, Jo van Gogh-Bonger, later remarked that this was the best year of Vincent's life. He became infatuated with his landlady's daughter, Eug\u00e9nie Loyer, but she rejected him after he confessed his feelings; she was secretly engaged to a former lodger. He grew more isolated and religiously fervent. His father and uncle arranged a transfer to Paris in 1875, where he became resentful of issues such as the degree to which the art dealers commodified art, and he was dismissed a year later.\nIn April 1876, he returned to England to take unpaid work as a supply teacher in a small boarding school in Ramsgate. When the proprietor moved to Isleworth in Middlesex, Van Gogh went with him. The arrangement was not successful; he left to become a Methodist minister's assistant. His parents had meanwhile moved to Etten; in 1876 he returned home at Christmas for six months and took work at a bookshop in Dordrecht. He was unhappy in the position, and spent his time doodling or translating passages from the Bible into English, French, and German. He immersed himself in Christianity and became increasingly pious and monastic. According to his flatmate of the time, Paulus van G\u00f6rlitz, Van Gogh ate frugally, avoiding meat.\nTo support his religious conviction and his desire to become a pastor, in 1877, the family sent him to live with his uncle Johannes Stricker, a respected theologian, in Amsterdam. Van Gogh prepared for the University of Amsterdam theology entrance examination; he failed the exam and left his uncle's house in July 1878. He undertook, but also failed, a three-month course at a Protestant missionary school in Laken, near Brussels.\nIn January 1879, he took up a post as a missionary at Petit-Wasmes in the working-class, coal-mining district of Borinage in Belgium. To show support for his impoverished congregation, he gave up his comfortable lodgings at a bakery to a homeless person and moved to a small hut, where he slept on straw. His humble living conditions did not endear him to church authorities, who dismissed him for \"undermining the dignity of the priesthood.\" He then walked the to Brussels before briefly to Cuesmes in the Borinage, but he gave in to pressure from his parents to return home to Etten. He stayed there until around March 1880, which caused concern and frustration for his parents. His father was especially frustrated and advised that his son be committed to the lunatic asylum in Geel.\nVan Gogh returned to Cuesmes in August 1880, where he lodged with a miner until October. He became interested in the people and scenes around him, and he recorded them in drawings after Theo's suggestion that he take up art in earnest. He travelled to Brussels later in the year, to follow Theo's recommendation that he study with the Dutch artist Willem Roelofs, who persuaded him \u2013 in spite of his dislike of formal schools of art \u2013 to attend the . He registered at the Acad\u00e9mie in November 1880, where he studied anatomy and the standard rules of modelling and perspective.\nEtten, Drenthe and The Hague.\nVan Gogh returned to Etten in April 1881 for an extended stay with his parents. He continued to draw, often using his neighbours as subjects. In August 1881, his recently widowed cousin, Cornelia \"Kee\" Vos-Stricker, daughter of his mother's older sister Wil and Johannes Stricker, arrived for a visit. He was thrilled and took long walks with her. Kee was seven years older than he was and had an eight-year-old son. Van Gogh surprised everyone by declaring his love to her and proposing marriage. She refused with the words \"No, nay, never\" (\"nooit, neen, nimmer\"). After Kee returned to Amsterdam, Van Gogh went to The Hague to try to sell paintings and to meet with his second cousin, Anton Mauve. Mauve was the successful artist Van Gogh longed to be. Mauve invited him to return in a few months and suggested he spend the intervening time working in charcoal and pastels; Van Gogh returned to Etten and followed this advice. \nVan Gogh wrote sixteen letters to his brother Theo in which he discusses Charles Bargue\u2019s \"Cours de dessin\" (\"Drawing Course\"), even attributing his newfound ability to draw what he previously could not to this course.\n\"\u201cThe careful study, the constant and repeated drawing of Bargue\u2019s Exercices au fusain has given me more insight into figure drawing. I\u2019ve learned to measure and to see and to attempt the broad outlines, etc. So that what used to seem to me desperately impossible is now gradually becoming possible, thank God.\u201d\" \u2014 Van Gogh, Letter to Theo 172, September 1881.\nLate in November 1881, Van Gogh wrote a letter to Johannes Stricker, one which he described to Theo as an attack. Within days he left for Amsterdam. Kee would not meet him, and her parents wrote that his \"persistence is \"disgusting.\"\" In despair, he held his left hand in the flame of a lamp, with the words: \"Let me see her for as long as I can keep my hand in the flame.\" He did not recall the event well, but later assumed that his uncle had blown out the flame. Kee's father made it clear that her refusal should be heeded and that the two would not marry, largely because of Van Gogh's inability to support himself.\nMauve took Van Gogh on as a student and introduced him to watercolour, which he worked on for the next month before returning home for Christmas. He quarrelled with his father, refusing to attend church, and left for The Hague. In January 1882, Mauve introduced him to painting in oil and lent him money to set up a studio. Within a month Van Gogh and Mauve fell out, possibly over the viability of drawing from plaster casts. Van Gogh could only afford to hire people from the street as models, a practice of which Mauve seems to have disapproved. In June, Van Gogh suffered a bout of gonorrhoea and spent three weeks in hospital. Soon after, he first painted in oils, bought with money borrowed from Theo. He liked the medium, and he spread the paint liberally, scraping from the canvas and working back with the brush. He wrote that he was surprised at how good the results were.\nBy March 1882, Mauve appeared to have gone cold towards Van Gogh, and stopped replying to his letters. He had learned of Van Gogh's new domestic arrangement with an alcoholic prostitute, Clasina Maria \"Sien\" Hoornik (1850\u20131904), and her young daughter. Van Gogh had met Sien towards the end of January 1882, when she had a five-year-old daughter and was pregnant. She had previously borne two children who died, but Van Gogh was unaware of this. On 2 July, she gave birth to a baby boy, Willem. When Van Gogh's father discovered the details of their relationship, he put pressure on his son to abandon Sien and her two children. Vincent at first defied him, and considered moving the family out of the city, but in late 1883, he left Sien and the children.\nPoverty may have pushed Sien back into prostitution; the home became less happy and Van Gogh may have felt family life was irreconcilable with his artistic development. Sien gave her daughter to her mother and baby Willem to her brother. Willem remembered visiting Rotterdam when he was about 12, when an uncle tried to persuade Sien to marry to legitimise the child. He believed Van Gogh was his father, but the timing of his birth makes this unlikely. Sien drowned herself in the River Scheldt in 1904.\nIn September 1883, Van Gogh moved to Drenthe in the northern Netherlands. In December, driven by loneliness, he went to live with his parents, then in Nuenen, North Brabant.\nEmerging artist.\nNuenen and Antwerp (1883\u20131886).\nIn Nuenen, Van Gogh focused on painting and drawing. Working outside and very quickly, he completed sketches and paintings of weavers and their cottages. Van Gogh also completed \"The Parsonage Garden at Nuenen\", which was stolen from the Singer Laren in March 2020. From August 1884, Margot Begemann, a neighbour's daughter ten years his senior, joined him on his forays; she fell in love and he reciprocated, though less enthusiastically. They wanted to marry, but neither side of their families approved. Margot was distraught and took an overdose of strychnine, but survived after Van Gogh rushed her to a nearby hospital. On 26 March 1885, his father died of a heart attack.\nVan Gogh painted several groups of still lifes in 1885. During his two-year stay in Nuenen, he completed numerous drawings and watercolours and nearly 200 oil paintings. His palette consisted mainly of sombre earth tones, particularly dark brown, and showed no sign of the vivid colours that distinguished his later work.\nThere was interest from a dealer in Paris early in 1885. Theo asked Vincent if he had paintings ready to exhibit. In May, Van Gogh responded with his first major work, \"The Potato Eaters\", and a series of \"peasant character studies\" which were the culmination of several years of work. When he complained that Theo was not making enough effort to sell his paintings in Paris, his brother responded that they were too dark and not in keeping with the bright style of Impressionism. In August his work was publicly exhibited for the first time, in the shop windows of the dealer Leurs in The Hague. One of his young peasant sitters became pregnant in September 1885; Van Gogh was accused of forcing himself upon her, and the village priest forbade parishioners to model for him.\nHe moved to Antwerp that November and rented a room above a paint dealer's shop in the rue des Images (\"Lange Beeldekensstraat\"). He lived in poverty and ate poorly, preferring to spend the money Theo sent on painting materials and models. Bread, coffee and tobacco became his staple diet. In February 1886, he wrote to Theo that he could only remember eating six hot meals since the previous May. His teeth became loose and painful. In Antwerp he applied himself to the study of colour theory and spent time in museums\u2014particularly studying the work of Peter Paul Rubens\u2014and broadened his palette to include carmine, cobalt blue and emerald green. Van Gogh bought Japanese ukiyo-e woodcuts in the docklands, later incorporating elements of their style into the background of some of his paintings. He was drinking heavily again, and was hospitalised between February and March 1886, when he was possibly also treated for syphilis.\nAfter his recovery, despite his antipathy towards academic teaching, he took the higher-level admission exams at the Academy of Fine Arts in Antwerp and, in January 1886, matriculated in painting and drawing. He became ill and run down by overwork, poor diet and excessive smoking. He started to attend drawing classes after plaster models at the Antwerp Academy on 18 January 1886. He quickly got into trouble with Charles Verlat, the director of the academy and teacher of a painting class, because of his unconventional painting style. Van Gogh had also clashed with the instructor of the drawing class Franz Vinck. Van Gogh finally started to attend the drawing classes after antique plaster models given by Eug\u00e8ne Siberdt. Soon Siberdt and Van Gogh came into conflict when the latter did not comply with Siberdt's requirement that drawings express the contour and concentrate on the line. When Van Gogh was required to draw the \"Venus de Milo\" during a drawing class, he produced the limbless, naked torso of a Flemish peasant woman. Siberdt regarded this as defiance against his artistic guidance and made corrections to Van Gogh's drawing with his crayon so vigorously that he tore the paper. Van Gogh then flew into a violent rage and shouted at Siberdt: 'You clearly do not know what a young woman is like, \"God damn it!\" A woman must have hips, buttocks, a pelvis in which she can carry a baby!' According to some accounts, this was the last time Van Gogh attended classes at the academy and he left later for Paris. On 31 March 1886, which was about a month after the confrontation with Siberdt, the teachers of the academy decided that 17 students, including Van Gogh, had to repeat a year. The story that Van Gogh was expelled from the academy by Siberdt is therefore unfounded.\nParis (1886\u20131888).\nVan Gogh moved to Paris in March 1886 where he shared Theo's rue Laval apartment in Montmartre and studied at Fernand Cormon's studio. In June the brothers took a larger flat at 54 rue Lepic. In Paris, Vincent painted portraits of friends and acquaintances, still life paintings, views of Le Moulin de la Galette, scenes in Montmartre, Asni\u00e8res and along the Seine. In 1885 in Antwerp he had become interested in Japanese ukiyo-e woodblock prints and had used them to decorate the walls of his studio; while in Paris he collected hundreds of them. He tried his hand at Japonaiserie, tracing a figure from a reproduction on the cover of the magazine \"Paris Illustre,\" \"The Courtesan or Oiran\" (1887), after Keisai Eisen, which he then graphically enlarged in a painting.\nAfter seeing the portrait of Adolphe Monticelli at the Galerie Delareybarette, Van Gogh adopted a brighter palette and a bolder attack, particularly in paintings such as his \"Seascape at Saintes-Maries\" (1888). Two years later, Vincent and Theo paid for the publication of a book on Monticelli paintings, and Vincent bought some of Monticelli's works to add to his collection.\nVan Gogh learned about Fernand Cormon's atelier from Theo. He worked at the studio in April and May 1886, where he frequented the circle of the Australian artist John Russell, who painted his portrait in 1886. Van Gogh also met fellow students \u00c9mile Bernard, Louis Anquetin and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec\u00a0\u2013 who painted a portrait of him in pastel. They met at Julien \"P\u00e8re\" Tanguy's paint shop, (which was, at that time, the only place where Paul C\u00e9zanne's paintings were displayed). In 1886, two large exhibitions were staged there, showing Pointillism and Neo-impressionism for the first time and bringing attention to Georges Seurat and Paul Signac. Theo kept a stock of Impressionist paintings in his gallery on boulevard Montmartre, but Van Gogh was slow to acknowledge the new developments in art.\nConflicts arose between the brothers. At the end of 1886 Theo found living with Vincent to be \"almost unbearable.\" By early 1887, they were again at peace, and Vincent had moved to Asni\u00e8res, a northwestern suburb of Paris, where he got to know Signac. He adopted elements of Pointillism, a technique in which a multitude of small coloured dots are applied to the canvas so that when seen from a distance they create an optical blend of hues. The style stresses the ability of complementary colours \u2013 including blue and orange \u2013 to form vibrant contrasts.\nWhile in Asni\u00e8res Van Gogh painted parks, restaurants and the Seine, including \"Bridges across the Seine at Asni\u00e8res.\" In November 1887, Theo and Vincent befriended Paul Gauguin who had just arrived in Paris. Towards the end of the year, Vincent arranged an exhibition alongside Bernard, Anquetin, and probably Toulouse-Lautrec, at the Grand-Bouillon Restaurant du Chalet, 43 avenue de Clichy, Montmartre. In a contemporary account, Bernard wrote that the exhibition was ahead of anything else in Paris. There, Bernard and Anquetin sold their first paintings, and Van Gogh exchanged work with Gauguin. Discussions on art, artists, and their social situations started during this exhibition, continued and expanded to include visitors to the show, like Camille Pissarro and his son Lucien, Signac and Seurat. In February 1888, feeling worn out from life in Paris, Van Gogh left, having painted more than 200 paintings during his two years there. Hours before his departure, accompanied by Theo, he paid his only visit to Seurat in his studio.\nArtistic breakthrough.\nArles (1888\u201389).\nIll from drink and suffering from smoker's cough, in February 1888, Van Gogh sought refuge in Arles. He seemed to have moved with thoughts of founding an art colony. The Danish artist Christian Mourier-Petersen was his companion for two months and at first, Arles appeared exotic to Van Gogh. In a letter, he described it as a foreign country: \"The Zouaves, the brothels, the adorable little Arl\u00e9sienne going to her First Communion, the priest in his surplice, who looks like a dangerous rhinoceros, the people drinking absinthe, all seem to me creatures from another world.\"\nThe time in Arles was one of Van Gogh's more prolific periods: he completed 200 paintings and more than 100 drawings and watercolours. He was energised by the local countryside and light; his works from this period are rich in yellow, ultramarine and mauve. They include harvests, wheat fields and general rural landmarks from the area, including \"The Old Mill\" (1888), one of seven canvases sent to Pont-Aven on 4 October 1888 in an exchange of works with Paul Gauguin, \u00c9mile Bernard, Charles Laval and others. \nIn March 1888, Van Gogh created landscapes using a gridded \"perspective frame\" and three of those works were shown at the annual exhibition of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Artistes Ind\u00e9pendants. In April, he was visited by the American artist Dodge MacKnight, who was living nearby at Fontvieille. \nOn 1 May 1888, Van Gogh signed a lease for four rooms at 2 Place Lamartine, Arles, which he later painted in \"The Yellow House\". The rooms cost 15 francs per month, unfurnished; they had been uninhabited for months. Because the Yellow House had to be furnished before he could fully move in, Van Gogh moved from the H\u00f4tel Carrel to the Caf\u00e9 de la Gare on 7 May 1888. He had befriended the Yellow House's proprietors, Joseph and Marie Ginoux, and was able to use it as a studio. Van Gogh wanted a gallery to display his work and started a series of paintings that eventually included \"Van Gogh's Chair\" (1888), \"Bedroom in Arles\" (1888), \"The Night Caf\u00e9\" (1888), \"Caf\u00e9 Terrace at Night\" (September 1888), \"Starry Night Over the Rhone\" (1888), and \"Still Life: Vase with Twelve Sunflowers\" (1888), all intended for the decoration for the Yellow House.\nVan Gogh wrote that with \"The Night Caf\u00e9\" he tried \"to express the idea that the caf\u00e9 is a place where one can ruin oneself, go mad, or commit a crime\". When he visited Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer in June, he gave lessons to a Zouave second lieutenant \u2013 \u2013 and painted boats on the sea and the village. MacKnight introduced Van Gogh to Eug\u00e8ne Boch, a Belgian painter who sometimes stayed in Fontvieille, and the two exchanged visits in July.\nGauguin's visit (1888).\nWhen Gauguin agreed to visit Arles in 1888, Van Gogh hoped for friendship and to realise his idea of an artists' collective. Van Gogh prepared for Gauguin's arrival by painting four versions of \"Sunflowers\" in one week. \"In the hope of living in a studio of our own with Gauguin,\" he wrote in a letter to Theo, \"I'd like to do a decoration for the studio. \"Nothing but large Sunflowers\".\" \nWhen Boch visited again, Van Gogh painted a portrait of him, as well as the study \"The Poet Against a Starry Sky\".\nIn preparation for Gauguin's visit, Van Gogh bought two beds on advice from the station's postal supervisor Joseph Roulin, whose portrait he painted. On 17 September, he spent his first night in the still sparsely furnished Yellow House. When Gauguin consented to work and live in Arles with him, Van Gogh started to work on the \"D\u00e9coration for the Yellow House\", probably the most ambitious effort he ever undertook. He completed two chair paintings: \"Van Gogh's Chair\" and \"Gauguin's Chair.\"\nAfter much pleading from Van Gogh, Gauguin arrived in Arles on 23 October and, in November, the two painted together. Gauguin depicted Van Gogh in his \"The Painter of Sunflowers\"; Van Gogh painted pictures from memory, following Gauguin's suggestion. Among these \"imaginative\" paintings is \"Memory of the Garden at Etten\". Their first joint outdoor venture was at the Alyscamps, when they produced the pendants \"Les Alyscamps\". The single painting Gauguin completed during his visit was his portrait of Van Gogh.\nVan Gogh and Gauguin visited Montpellier in December 1888, where they saw works by Courbet and Delacroix in the Mus\u00e9e Fabre. Their relationship began to deteriorate; Van Gogh admired Gauguin and wanted to be treated as his equal, but Gauguin was arrogant and domineering, which frustrated Van Gogh. They often quarrelled; Van Gogh increasingly feared that Gauguin was going to desert him, and the situation, which Van Gogh described as one of \"excessive tension\", rapidly headed towards crisis point.\nHospital in Arles (December 1888).\nThe exact sequence that led to the mutilation of Van Gogh's ear is not known. Gauguin said, fifteen years later, that the night followed several instances of physically threatening behaviour. Their relationship was complex and Theo may have owed money to Gauguin, who suspected the brothers were exploiting him financially. It seems likely that Vincent realised that Gauguin was planning to leave. The following days saw heavy rain, leading to the two men being shut in the Yellow House. Gauguin recalled that Van Gogh followed him after he left for a walk and \"rushed towards me, an open razor in his hand\". This account is uncorroborated; Gauguin was almost certainly absent from the Yellow House that night, most likely staying in a hotel.\nAfter an altercation on the evening of 23 December 1888, Van Gogh returned to his room where he seemingly heard voices and either wholly or in part severed his left ear with a razor causing severe bleeding. He bandaged the wound, wrapped the ear in paper and delivered the package to a woman at a brothel Van Gogh and Gauguin both frequented. Van Gogh was found unconscious the next morning by a policeman and taken to hospital, where he was treated by F\u00e9lix Rey, a young doctor still in training. The ear was brought to the hospital, but Rey did not attempt to reattach it as too much time had passed. Van Gogh researcher and art historian Bernadette Murphy discovered the true identity of the woman named Gabrielle Berlatier, who died in Arles at the age of 80 in 1952, and whose descendants still lived (as of 2020) just outside Arles. Gabrielle, known in her youth as \"Gaby\", was a 17-year-old cleaning girl at the brothel and other local establishments at the time Van Gogh presented her with his ear.\nVan Gogh had no recollection of the event, suggesting that he may have suffered an acute mental breakdown. The hospital diagnosis was \"acute mania with generalised delirium\", and within a few days, the local police ordered that he be placed in hospital care. Gauguin immediately notified Theo, who, on 24 December, had proposed marriage to his old friend Andries Bonger's sister Jo. That evening, Theo rushed to the station to board a night train to Arles. He arrived on Christmas Day and comforted Vincent, who seemed to be semi-lucid. That evening, he left Arles for the return trip to Paris.\nDuring the first days of his treatment, Van Gogh repeatedly and unsuccessfully asked for Gauguin, who asked a policeman attending the case to \"be kind enough, Monsieur, to awaken this man with great care, and if he asks for me tell him I have left for Paris; the sight of me might prove fatal for him.\" Gauguin fled Arles, never to see Van Gogh again. They continued to correspond, and in 1890, Gauguin proposed they form a studio in Antwerp. Meanwhile, other visitors to the hospital included Marie Ginoux and Roulin.\nDespite a pessimistic diagnosis, Van Gogh recovered and returned to the Yellow House on 7 January 1889. He spent the following month between hospital and home, suffering from hallucinations and delusions of poisoning. In March, the police closed his house after a petition by 30 townspeople (including the Ginoux family) who described him as \"le fou roux\" \"the redheaded madman\"; Van Gogh returned to hospital. Paul Signac visited him twice in March; in April, Van Gogh moved into rooms owned by Rey after floods damaged paintings in his own home. Two months later, he left Arles and voluntarily entered an asylum in Saint-R\u00e9my-de-Provence. Around this time, he wrote, \"Sometimes moods of indescribable anguish, sometimes moments when the veil of time and fatality of circumstances seemed to be torn apart for an instant.\"\nVan Gogh gave his 1889 \"Portrait of Doctor Rey\" to Rey. The doctor was not fond of the painting and used it to repair a chicken coop, then gave it away. In 2016, the portrait was housed at the Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts and estimated to be worth over $50\u00a0million.\nSaint-R\u00e9my (May 1889\u00a0\u2013 May 1890).\nVan Gogh entered the Saint-Paul-de-Mausole asylum on 8 May 1889, accompanied by his caregiver, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Salles, a Protestant clergyman. Saint-Paul was a former monastery in Saint-R\u00e9my, located less than from Arles, and it was run by a former naval doctor, Th\u00e9ophile Peyron. Van Gogh had two cells with barred windows, one of which he used as a studio. The clinic and its garden became the main subjects of his paintings. He made several studies of the hospital's interiors, such as \"Vestibule of the Asylum\" and \"Saint-R\u00e9my (September 1889)\", and its gardens, such as \"Lilacs\" (May 1889). Some of his works from this time are characterised by swirls, such as \"The Starry Night\". He was allowed short supervised walks, during which time he painted cypresses and olive trees, including \"Valley with Ploughman Seen from Above\", \"Olive Trees with the Alpilles in the Background 1889\", \"Cypresses 1889\", \"Cornfield with Cypresses\" (1889), \"Country road in Provence by Night\" (1890). In September 1889, he produced two further versions of \"Bedroom in Arles\" and \"The Gardener\".\nLimited access to life outside the clinic resulted in a shortage of subject matter. Van Gogh instead worked on interpretations of other artist's paintings, such as Millet's \"The Sower\" and \"Noonday Rest\", and variations on his own earlier work. Van Gogh was an admirer of the Realism of Jules Breton, Gustave Courbet and Millet, and he compared his copies to a musician's interpreting Beethoven.\nHis \"Prisoners' Round (after Gustave Dor\u00e9)\" (1890) was painted after an engraving by Gustave Dor\u00e9 (1832\u20131883). Tralbaut suggests that the face of the prisoner in the centre of the painting looking towards the viewer is Van Gogh himself; Jan Hulsker discounts this.\nBetween February and April 1890, Van Gogh suffered a severe relapse. Depressed and unable to bring himself to write, he was still able to paint and draw a little during this time, and he later wrote to Theo that he had made a few small canvases \"from memory\u00a0... reminisces of the North\". Among these was \"Two Peasant Women Digging in a Snow-Covered Field at Sunset\". Hulsker believes that this small group of paintings formed the nucleus of many drawings and study sheets depicting landscapes and figures that Van Gogh worked on during this time. He comments that this short period was the only time that Van Gogh's illness had a significant effect on his work. Van Gogh asked his mother and his brother to send him drawings and rough work he had done in the early 1880s so he could work on new paintings from his old sketches. Belonging to this period is \"Sorrowing Old Man (\"At Eternity's Gate\")\", a colour study Hulsker describes as \"another unmistakable remembrance of times long past\". His late paintings show an artist at the height of his abilities, according to the art critic Robert Hughes, \"longing for concision and grace\".\nAfter the birth of his nephew, Van Gogh wrote, \"I started right away to make a picture for him, to hang in their bedroom, branches of white almond blossom against a blue sky.\"\n1890 Exhibitions and recognition.\nAlbert Aurier praised his work in the \"Mercure de France\" in January 1890 and described him as \"a genius\". In February, Van Gogh painted five versions of \"L'Arl\u00e9sienne (Madame Ginoux)\", based on a charcoal sketch Gauguin had produced when she sat for both artists in November 1888. Also in February, Van Gogh was invited by \"Les XX\", a society of avant-garde painters in Brussels, to participate in their annual exhibition. At the opening dinner a \"Les XX\" member, Henry de Groux, insulted Van Gogh's work. Toulouse-Lautrec demanded satisfaction, and Signac declared he would continue to fight for Van Gogh's honour if Lautrec surrendered. De Groux apologised for the slight and left the group.\nFrom 20 March to 27 April 1890, Van Gogh was included in the sixth exhibition of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Artistes Ind\u00e9pendants in the Pavillon de la Ville de Paris on the Champs-Elys\u00e9es. Van Gogh exhibited ten paintings. While the exhibition was on display with the Artistes Ind\u00e9pendants in Paris, Claude Monet said that Van Gogh's work was the best in the show.\nAuvers-sur-Oise (May\u2013July 1890).\nIn May 1890, Van Gogh left the clinic in Saint-R\u00e9my to move nearer to both Dr Paul Gachet in the Paris suburb of Auvers-sur-Oise and to Theo. Gachet was an amateur painter and had treated several other artists \u2013 Camille Pissarro had recommended him. Van Gogh's first impression was that Gachet was \"iller than I am, it seemed to me, or let's say just as much.\"\nThe painter Charles Daubigny moved to Auvers in 1861 and in turn drew other artists there, including Camille Corot and Honor\u00e9 Daumier. In July 1890, Van Gogh completed two paintings of \"Daubigny's Garden\", one of which is likely his final work.\nDuring his last weeks at Saint-R\u00e9my, his thoughts returned to \"memories of the North\", and several of the approximately 70 oils, painted during as many days in Auvers-sur-Oise, are reminiscent of northern scenes. In June 1890, he painted several portraits of his doctor, including \"Portrait of Dr Gachet\", and his only etching. In each the emphasis is on Gachet's melancholic disposition. There are other paintings which are probably unfinished, including \"Thatched Cottages by a Hill.\"\nIn July, Van Gogh wrote that he had become absorbed \"in the immense plain against the hills, boundless as the sea, delicate yellow\". He had first become captivated by the fields in May, when the wheat was young and green. In July, he described to Theo \"vast fields of wheat under turbulent skies\".\nHe wrote that they represented his \"sadness and extreme loneliness\" and that the \"canvases will tell you what I cannot say in words, that is, how healthy and invigorating I find the countryside\". \"Wheatfield with Crows\", although not his last oil work, is from July 1890 and Hulsker discusses it as being associated with \"melancholy and extreme loneliness\". Hulsker identifies seven oil paintings from Auvers that follow the completion of \"Wheatfield with Crows\". Hulsker also expressed concern about the number of paintings attributed to Van Gogh from the period.\nDeath.\nOn 27 July 1890 (Sunday), aged 37, Van Gogh shot himself in the chest with a revolver. The shooting may have taken place in the wheat field in which he had been painting, or in a local barn. The bullet was deflected by a rib and passed through his chest without doing apparent damage to internal organs \u2013 possibly stopped by his spine. He was able to walk back to the Auberge Ravoux, where he was attended to by two doctors. One of them, Dr Gachet, had served as a war surgeon in the 1870 Franco-Prussian War and had extensive knowledge of gunshots. Vincent was possibly attended to during the night by Dr Gachet's son Paul Louis Gachet and the innkeeper, Arthur Ravoux. The following morning, Theo rushed to his brother's side, finding him in good spirits but within hours Vincent's health began to fail, suffering from an infection resulting from the wound. He died in the early hours of Tuesday, 29 July. According to Theo, Vincent's last words were: \"The sadness will last forever\".\nVan Gogh was buried on 30 July, in the municipal cemetery of Auvers-sur-Oise. The funeral was attended by Theo van Gogh, Andries Bonger, Charles Laval, Lucien Pissarro, \u00c9mile Bernard, Julien Tanguy and Paul Gachet, among twenty family members, friends and locals. Theo suffered from syphilis, and his health began to decline further after his brother's death. Filled with grief after losing his brother, Theo only survived Vincent by six months, as he died on 25 January 1891 at Den Dolder and was buried in Utrecht. In 1914, Jo van Gogh-Bonger had Theo's body exhumed and moved from Utrecht to be re-buried alongside Vincent's at Auvers-sur-Oise.\nThere have been numerous debates as to the nature of Van Gogh's illness and its effect on his work, and many retrospective diagnoses have been proposed. The consensus is that Van Gogh had an episodic condition with periods of normal functioning. Perry was the first to suggest bipolar disorder in 1947, and this has been supported by the psychiatrists Hemphill and Blumer. Biochemist Wilfred Arnold has countered that the symptoms are more consistent with acute intermittent porphyria, noting that the popular link between bipolar disorder and creativity might be spurious. Temporal lobe epilepsy with bouts of depression has also been suggested. Whatever the diagnosis, his condition was likely worsened by malnutrition, overwork, insomnia and alcohol.\nStyle and works.\nArtistic development.\nVan Gogh drew and painted with watercolours while at school, but only a few examples survive and the authorship of some has been challenged. When he took up art as an adult, he began at an elementary level. In early 1882, his uncle, Cornelis Marinus, owner of a well-known gallery of contemporary art in Amsterdam, asked for drawings of The Hague. Van Gogh's work did not live up to expectations. Marinus offered a second commission, specifying the subject matter in detail, but was again disappointed with the result. Van Gogh persevered; he experimented with lighting in his studio using variable shutters and different drawing materials. For more than a year he worked on single figures\u00a0\u2013 highly elaborate studies in black and white, which at the time gained him only criticism. Later, they were recognised as early masterpieces.\nIn August 1882, Theo gave Vincent money to buy materials for working \"en plein air\". Vincent wrote that he could now \"go on painting with new vigour\". From early 1883, he worked on multi-figure compositions. He had some of them photographed, but when his brother remarked that they lacked liveliness and freshness, he destroyed them and turned to oil painting. Van Gogh turned to well-known Hague School artists like Weissenbruch and Blommers, and he received technical advice from them as well as from painters like De Bock and van der Weele, both of the Hague School's second generation. He moved to Nuenen after a short period in Drenthe and began work on several large paintings but destroyed most of them. \"The Potato Eaters\" and its companion pieces are the only ones to have survived. Following a visit to the Rijksmuseum Van Gogh wrote of his admiration for the quick, economical brushwork of the Dutch Masters, especially Rembrandt and Frans Hals. He was aware many of his faults were due to lack of experience and technical expertise, so in November 1885 he travelled to Antwerp and later Paris to learn and develop his skills.\nTheo criticised \"The Potato Eaters\" for its dark palette, which he thought unsuitable for a modern style. During Van Gogh's stay in Paris between 1886 and 1887, he tried to master a new, lighter palette. His \"Portrait of P\u00e8re Tanguy\" (1887) shows his success with the brighter palette and is evidence of an evolving personal style. Charles Blanc's treatise on colour interested him greatly and led him to work with complementary colours. Van Gogh came to believe that the effect of colour went beyond the descriptive; he said that \"colour expresses something in itself\". According to Hughes, Van Gogh perceived colour as having a \"psychological and moral weight\", as exemplified in the garish reds and greens of \"The Night Caf\u00e9\", a work he wanted to \"express the terrible passions of humanity\". Yellow meant the most to him, because it symbolised emotional truth. He used yellow as a symbol for sunlight, life, and God.\nVan Gogh strove to be a painter of rural life and nature; during his first summer in Arles he used his new palette to paint landscapes and traditional rural life. His belief that a power existed behind the natural led him to try to capture a sense of that power, or the essence of nature in his art, sometimes through the use of symbols. His renditions of the sower, at first copied from Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet, reflect the influence of Thomas Carlyle and Friedrich Nietzsche's thoughts on the heroism of physical labour, as well as Van Gogh's religious beliefs: the sower as Christ sowing life beneath the hot sun. These were themes and motifs he returned to often to rework and develop. His paintings of flowers are filled with symbolism, but rather than use traditional Christian iconography he made up his own, where life is lived under the sun and work is an allegory of life. In Arles, having gained confidence after painting spring blossoms and learning to capture bright sunlight, he was ready to paint \"The Sower\".\nVan Gogh stayed within what he called the \"guise of reality\" and was critical of overly stylised works. He wrote afterwards that the abstraction of \"Starry Night\" had gone too far and that reality had \"receded too far in the background\". Hughes describes it as a moment of extreme visionary ecstasy: the stars are in a great whirl, reminiscent of Hokusai's \"Great Wave\", the movement in the heaven above is reflected by the movement of the cypress on the earth below, and the painter's vision is \"translated into a thick, emphatic plasma of paint\".\nBetween 1885 and his death in 1890, Van Gogh appears to have been building an \"oeuvre\", a collection that reflected his personal vision and could be commercially successful. He was influenced by Blanc's definition of style, that a true painting required optimal use of colour, perspective and brushstrokes. Van Gogh applied the word \"purposeful\" to paintings he thought he had mastered, as opposed to those he thought of as studies. He painted many series of studies; most of which were still lifes, many executed as colour experiments or as gifts to friends. The work in Arles contributed considerably to his \"oeuvre\": those he thought the most important from that time were \"The Sower\", \"Night Cafe\", \"Memory of the Garden in Etten\" and \"Starry Night\". With their broad brushstrokes, inventive perspectives, colours, contours and designs, these paintings represent the style he sought.\nMajor series.\nVan Gogh's stylistic developments are usually linked to the periods he spent living in different places across Europe. He was inclined to immerse himself in local cultures and lighting conditions, although he maintained a highly individual visual outlook throughout. His evolution as an artist was slow and he was aware of his painterly limitations. Van Gogh moved home often, perhaps to expose himself to new visual stimuli, and through exposure develop his technical skill. Art historian Melissa McQuillan believes the moves also reflect later stylistic changes and that Van Gogh used the moves to avoid conflict, and as a coping mechanism for when the idealistic artist was faced with the realities of his then current situation.\nPortraits.\nVan Gogh said portraiture was his greatest interest. \"What I'm most passionate about, much much more than all the rest in my profession\", he wrote in 1890, \"is the portrait, the modern portrait.\" It is \"the only thing in painting that moves me deeply and that gives me a sense of the infinite.\" He wrote to his sister that he wished to paint portraits that would endure, and that he would use colour to capture their emotions and character rather than aiming for photographic realism. Those closest to Van Gogh are mostly absent from his portraits; he rarely painted Theo, van Rappard or Bernard. The portraits of his mother were from photographs.\nVan Gogh painted Arles' postmaster Joseph Roulin and his family repeatedly. In five versions of \"La Berceuse\" (\"The Lullaby\"), Van Gogh painted Augustine Roulin quietly holding a rope that rocks the unseen cradle of her infant daughter. Van Gogh had planned for it to be the central image of a triptych, flanked by paintings of sunflowers.\nSelf-portraits.\nVan Gogh created more than 43 self-portraits between 1885 and 1889. They were usually completed in series, such as those painted in Paris in mid-1887, and continued until shortly before his death. Generally the portraits were studies, created during periods when he was reluctant to mix with others or when he lacked models and painted himself.\nVan Gogh's self-portraits reflect a high degree of self-scrutiny. Often they were intended to mark important periods in his life; for example, the mid-1887 Paris series were painted at the point where he became aware of Claude Monet, Paul C\u00e9zanne and Signac. In \"Self-Portrait with Grey Felt Hat\", heavy strains of paint spread outwards across the canvas. It is one of his most renowned self-portraits of that period, \"with its highly organised rhythmic brushstrokes, and the novel halo derived from the Neo-impressionist repertoire was what Van Gogh himself called a 'purposeful' canvas\".\nThey contain a wide array of physiognomical representations. Van Gogh's mental and physical condition is usually apparent; he may appear unkempt, unshaven or with a neglected beard, with deeply sunken eyes, a weak jaw, or having lost teeth. Some show him with full lips, a long face or prominent skull, or sharpened, alert features. His hair is sometimes depicted in a vibrant reddish hue and at other times ash coloured.\nVan Gogh's self-portraits vary stylistically. In those painted after December 1888, the strong contrast of vivid colours highlight the haggard pallor of his skin. Some depict the artist with a beard, others without. He can be seen with bandages in portraits executed just after he mutilated his ear. In only a few does he depict himself as a painter. Those painted in Saint-R\u00e9my show the head from the right, the side opposite his damaged ear, as he painted himself reflected in his mirror.\nFlowers.\nVan Gogh painted several landscapes with flowers, including roses, lilacs, irises, and sunflowers. Some reflect his interests in the language of colour, and also in Japanese ukiyo-e. There are two series of dying sunflowers. The first was painted in Paris in 1887 and shows flowers lying on the ground. The second set was completed a year later in Arles and is of bouquets in a vase positioned in early morning light. Both are built from thickly layered paintwork, which, according to the London National Gallery, evokes the \"texture of the seed-heads\".\nIn these series, Van Gogh was not preoccupied by his usual interest in filling his paintings with subjectivity and emotion; rather, the two series are intended to display his technical skill and working methods to Gauguin, who was about to visit. The 1888 paintings were created during a rare period of optimism for the artist. Vincent wrote to Theo in August 1888:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I'm painting with the gusto of a Marseillais eating bouillabaisse, which won't surprise you when it's a question of painting large sunflowers\u00a0... If I carry out this plan there'll be a dozen or so panels. The whole thing will therefore be a symphony in blue and yellow. I work on it all these mornings, from sunrise. Because the flowers wilt quickly and it's a matter of doing the whole thing in one go.\nThe sunflowers were painted to decorate the walls in anticipation of Gauguin's visit, and Van Gogh placed individual works around the \"Yellow House's guest room\" in Arles. Gauguin was deeply impressed and later acquired two of the Paris versions. After Gauguin's departure, Van Gogh imagined the two major versions of the sunflowers as wings of the \"Berceuse Triptych\", and included them in his \"Les XX\" in Brussels exhibit. Today the major pieces of the series are among his best known, celebrated for the sickly connotations of the colour yellow and its tie-in with the Yellow House, the expressionism of the brush strokes, and their contrast against often dark backgrounds.\nCypresses and olives.\nFifteen canvases depict cypresses, a tree he became fascinated with in Arles. He brought life to the trees, which were traditionally seen as emblematic of death. The series of cypresses he began in Arles featured the trees in the distance, as windbreaks in fields; when he was at Saint-R\u00e9my he brought them to the foreground. Vincent wrote to Theo in May 1889: \"Cypresses still preoccupy me, I should like to do something with them like my canvases of sunflowers\"; he went on to say, \"They are beautiful in line and proportion like an Egyptian obelisk.\"\nIn mid-1889, and at his sister Wil's request, Van Gogh painted several smaller versions of \"Wheat Field with Cypresses\". The works are characterised by swirls and densely painted impasto, and include \"The Starry Night\", in which cypresses dominate the foreground. In addition to this, other notable works on cypresses include \"Cypresses\" (1889), \"Cypresses with Two Figures\" (1889\u201390), and \"Road with Cypress and Star\" (1890).\nDuring the last six or seven months of the year 1889, he had also created at least fifteen paintings of olive trees, a subject which he considered as demanding and compelling. Among these works are \"Olive Trees with the Alpilles in the Background\" (1889), about which in a letter to his brother Van Gogh wrote, \"At last I have a landscape with olives\". While in Saint-R\u00e9my, Van Gogh spent time outside the asylum, where he painted trees in the olive groves. In these works, natural life is rendered as gnarled and arthritic as if a personification of the natural world, which are, according to Hughes, filled with \"a continuous field of energy of which nature is a manifestation\".\nOrchards.\nThe \"Flowering Orchards\" (also the \"Orchards in Blossom\") are among the first groups of work completed after Van Gogh's arrival in Arles in February 1888. The 14 paintings are optimistic, joyous and visually expressive of the burgeoning spring. They are delicately sensitive and unpopulated. He painted swiftly, and although he brought to this series a version of Impressionism, a strong sense of personal style began to emerge during this period. The transience of the blossoming trees, and the passing of the season, seemed to align with his sense of impermanence and belief in a new beginning in Arles. During the blossoming of the trees that spring, he found \"a world of motifs that could not have been more Japanese\". Vincent wrote to Theo on 21 April 1888 that he had 10 orchards and \"one big [painting] of a cherry tree, which I've spoiled\".\nDuring this period Van Gogh mastered the use of light by subjugating shadows and painting the trees as if they are the source of light \u2013 almost in a sacred manner. Early the following year he painted another smaller group of orchards, including \"View of Arles, Flowering Orchards\". Van Gogh was enthralled by the landscape and vegetation of the south of France, and often visited the farm gardens near Arles. In the vivid light of the Mediterranean climate his palette significantly brightened.\nWheat fields.\nVan Gogh made several painting excursions during visits to the landscape around Arles. He made paintings of harvests, wheat fields and other rural landmarks of the area, including \"The Old Mill\" (1888); a good example of a picturesque structure bordering the wheat fields beyond. At various points, Van Gogh painted the view from his window \u2013 at The Hague, Antwerp, and Paris. These works culminated in \"The Wheat Field\" series, which depicted the view from his cells in the asylum at Saint-R\u00e9my.\nMany of the late paintings are sombre but essentially optimistic and, right up to the time of Van Gogh's death, reflect his desire to return to lucid mental health. Yet some of his final works reflect his deepening concerns. Writing in July 1890, from Auvers, Van Gogh said that he had become absorbed \"in the immense plain against the hills, boundless as the sea, delicate yellow\".\nVan Gogh was captivated by the fields in May when the wheat was young and green. His \"Wheatfields at Auvers with White House\" shows a more subdued palette of yellows and blues, which creates a sense of idyllic harmony.\nAbout 10 July 1890, Van Gogh wrote to Theo of \"vast fields of wheat under troubled skies\". \"Wheatfield with Crows\" shows the artist's state of mind in his final days; Hulsker describes the work as a \"doom-filled painting with threatening skies and ill-omened crows\". Its dark palette and heavy brushstrokes convey a sense of menace.\nReputation and legacy.\nAfter Van Gogh's first exhibitions in the late 1880s, his reputation grew steadily among artists, art critics, dealers and collectors. In 1887, Andr\u00e9 Antoine hung Van Gogh's alongside works of Georges Seurat and Paul Signac, at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Libre in Paris; some were acquired by Julien Tanguy. In 1889, his work was described in the journal \"Le Moderniste Illustr\u00e9\" by Albert Aurier as characterised by \"fire, intensity, sunshine\". Ten paintings were shown at the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Artistes Ind\u00e9pendants, in Brussels in January 1890. French president Marie Fran\u00e7ois Sadi Carnot was said to have been impressed by Van Gogh's work.\nAfter Van Gogh's death, memorial exhibitions were held in Brussels, Paris, The Hague and Antwerp. His work was shown in several high-profile exhibitions, including six works at \"Les XX\"; in 1891, there was a retrospective exhibition in Brussels. In 1892, Octave Mirbeau wrote that Van Gogh's suicide was an \"infinitely sadder loss for art\u00a0... even though the populace has not crowded to a magnificent funeral, and poor Vincent van Gogh, whose demise means the extinction of a beautiful flame of genius, has gone to his death as obscure and neglected as he lived.\"\nTheo died in January 1891, removing Vincent's most vocal and well-connected champion. Theo's widow Jo van Gogh-Bonger was a Dutchwoman in her twenties who had not known either her husband or her brother-in-law very long and who suddenly had to take care of several hundreds of paintings, letters and drawings, as well as her infant son, Vincent Willem van Gogh. Gauguin was not inclined to offer assistance in promoting Van Gogh's reputation, and Jo's brother Andries Bonger also seemed lukewarm about his work. Aurier, one of Van Gogh's earliest supporters among the critics, died of typhoid fever in 1892 at the age of 27.\nIn 1892, \u00c9mile Bernard organised a small solo show of Van Gogh's paintings in Paris, and Julien Tanguy exhibited his Van Gogh paintings with several consigned from Jo van Gogh-Bonger. In April 1894, the Durand-Ruel Gallery in Paris agreed to take 10 paintings on consignment from Van Gogh's estate. In 1896, the Fauvist painter Henri Matisse, then an unknown art student, visited John Russell on Belle \u00cele off Brittany. Russell had been a close friend of Van Gogh; he introduced Matisse to the Dutchman's work, and gave him a Van Gogh drawing. Influenced by Van Gogh, Matisse abandoned his earth-coloured palette for bright colours.\nIn Paris in 1901, a large Van Gogh retrospective was held at the Bernheim-Jeune Gallery, which excited Andr\u00e9 Derain and Maurice de Vlaminck, and contributed to the emergence of Fauvism. Important group exhibitions took place with the Sonderbund artists in Cologne in 1912, the Armory Show, New York in 1913, and Berlin in 1914. Henk Bremmer was instrumental in teaching and talking about Van Gogh, and introduced Helene Kr\u00f6ller-M\u00fcller to Van Gogh's art; she became an avid collector of his work. The early figures in German Expressionism such as Emil Nolde acknowledged a debt to Van Gogh's work. Bremmer assisted Jacob Baart de\u00a0la\u00a0Faille, whose \"catalogue raisonn\u00e9\" \"L'Oeuvre de Vincent van Gogh\" appeared in 1928. Van Gogh's fame reached its first peak in Austria and Germany before World War I, helped by the publication of his letters in three volumes in 1914. His letters are expressive and literate, and have been described as among the foremost 19th-century writings of their kind. These began a compelling mythology of Van Gogh as an intense and dedicated painter who suffered for his art and died young. In 1934, the novelist Irving Stone wrote a biographical novel of Van Gogh's life titled \"Lust for Life\", based on Van Gogh's letters to Theo. This novel and the 1956 film further enhanced his fame, especially in the United States where Stone surmised only a few hundred people had heard of Van Gogh prior to his surprise best-selling book.\nIn 1957, Francis Bacon based a series of paintings on reproductions of Van Gogh's \"The Painter on the Road to Tarascon\", the original of which was destroyed during the Second World War. Bacon was inspired by an image he described as \"haunting\", and regarded Van Gogh as an alienated outsider, a position which resonated with him. Bacon identified with Van Gogh's theories of art and quoted lines written to Theo: \"[R]eal painters do not paint things as they are\u00a0... [T]hey paint them as \"they themselves\" feel them to be.\"\nDon McLean composed a song, \"Vincent\", about Van Gogh after reading a biography of the artist. The 1971 song is also known by its opening line, \"Starry, Starry Night\".\nVan Gogh's works are among the world's most expensive paintings. Those sold for over US$100\u00a0million (today's equivalent) include \"Portrait of Dr Gachet\",\" \" and \"Irises\". The Metropolitan Museum of Art acquired a copy of \"Wheat Field with Cypresses\" in 1993 for $57\u00a0million by using funds donated by publisher, diplomat and philanthropist Walter Annenberg. In 2015, \"L'All\u00e9e des Alyscamps\" sold for $66.3\u00a0million at Sotheby's, New York, exceeding its reserve of $40\u00a0million.\nMinor planet 4457 Van Gogh is named in his honour.\nIn October 2022, two Just Stop Oil activists protesting against the effects of the fossil fuel industry on climate change threw a can of tomato soup on Van Gogh's \"Sunflowers\" in the National Gallery, London, and then glued their hands to the gallery wall. As the painting was covered by glass it was not damaged.\nOn October 15, 2024, the Netherlands' State Secretary of Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, Food Security and Nature, Jean Rummenie, granted national park status to Van Gogh National Park in North Brabant, the area Vincent van Gogh grew up in.\nVan Gogh Museum.\nVan Gogh's nephew and namesake, Vincent Willem van Gogh (1890\u20131978), inherited the estate after his mother's death in 1925. During the early 1950s he arranged for the publication of a complete edition of the letters presented in four volumes and several languages. He then began negotiations with the Dutch government to subsidise a foundation to purchase and house the entire collection. Theo's son participated in planning the project in the hope that the works would be exhibited under the best possible conditions. The project began in 1963; architect Gerrit Rietveld was commissioned to design it, and after his death in 1964 Kisho Kurokawa took charge. Work progressed throughout the 1960s, with 1972 as the target for its grand opening.\nThe Van Gogh Museum opened in the Museumplein in Amsterdam in 1973. It became the second most popular museum in the Netherlands, after the Rijksmuseum, regularly receiving more than 1.5\u00a0million visitors a year. In 2015 it had a record 1.9\u00a0million. Eighty-five percent of the visitors come from other countries.\nNazi-looted art.\nDuring the Nazi period (1933\u20131945) a great number of artworks by Van Gogh changed hands, many of them looted from Jewish collectors who were forced into exile or murdered. Some of these works have disappeared into private collections. Others have since resurfaced in museums, or at auction, or have been reclaimed, often in high-profile lawsuits, by their former owners. The German Lost Art Foundation still lists dozens of missing Van Goghs and the American Alliance of Museums lists 73 Van Goghs on the Nazi Era Provenance Internet Portal.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32606", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32606", "title": "VI Lenin", "text": ""}
{"id": "32607", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32607", "title": "Verlan language", "text": ""}
{"id": "32608", "revid": "17328627", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32608", "title": "Volks-Deutsche", "text": ""}
{"id": "32609", "revid": "50456128", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32609", "title": "Vocal loading", "text": "Vocal loading is the stress inflicted on the speech organs when speaking for long periods.\nBackground.\nOf the working population, about 13% have professions where their voice is their primary tool. That includes professions such as teachers, sales personnel, actors and singers, and TV and radio reporters. Many of them, especially teachers, suffer from voice-related medical problems. In a larger scope, this involves millions of sick-leave days every year, for example, both in the US and the European Union. Still, research in vocal loading has often been treated as a minor subject.\nVoice organ.\nVoiced speech is produced by air streaming from the lungs through the vocal cords, setting them into an oscillating movement. In every oscillation, the vocal folds are closed for a short period of time. When the folds reopen the pressure under the folds is released. These changes in pressure form the waves called (voiced) speech.\nLoading on tissue in vocal folds.\nThe fundamental frequency of speech for an average male is around 110\u00a0Hz and for an average female around 220\u00a0Hz. That means that for voiced sounds the vocal folds will hit together 110 or 220 times a second, respectively. Suppose then that a female is speaking continuously for an hour. Of this time perhaps five minutes is voiced speech. The folds will then hit together more than 30 thousand times an hour. It is intuitively clear that the vocal fold tissue will experience some tiring due to this large number of hits.\nVocal loading also includes other kinds of strain on the speech organs. These include all kinds of muscular strain in the speech organs, similarly as usage of any other muscles will experience strain if used for an extended period of time. However, researchers' largest interest lies in stress exerted on the vocal folds.\nEffect of speaking environment.\nSeveral studies in vocal loading show that the speaking environment does have a significant impact on vocal loading. Still, the exact details are debated. Most scientists agree on the effect of the following environmental properties:\nIn addition, smoking and other types of air pollution might have a negative effect on voice production organs.\nSymptoms.\nObjective evaluation or measurement of vocal loading is very difficult due to the tight coupling of the experienced psychological and physiological stress. However, there are some typical symptoms that can be objectively measured. Firstly, the pitch range of the voice will decrease. Pitch range indicates the possible pitches that can be spoken. When a voice is loaded, the upper pitch limit will decrease and the lower pitch limit will rise. Similarly, the volume range will decrease.\nSecondly, an increase in the hoarseness and strain of a voice can often be heard. Unfortunately, both properties are difficult to measure objectively, and only perceptual evaluations can be performed.\nVoice care.\nRegularly, the question arises of how one should use one's voice to minimize tiring in the vocal organs. This is encompassed in the study of vocology, the science and practice of voice habilitation. Basically, a normal, relaxed way of speech is the optimal method for voice production, in both speech and singing. Any excess force used when speaking will increase tiring. The speaker should drink enough water and the air humidity level should be normal or higher. No background noise should be present or, if not possible, the voice should be amplified. Smoking is discouraged."}
{"id": "32610", "revid": "50236799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32610", "title": "Vikings", "text": "Norse seafarers, merchants and raiders\nVikings were a seafaring people originally from Scandinavia (present-day Denmark, Norway, and Sweden), who from the late 8th to the late 11th centuries raided, pirated, traded, and settled throughout parts of Europe. They voyaged as far as the Mediterranean, North Africa, the Middle East, Greenland, and Vinland (present-day Newfoundland in Canada, North America). In their countries of origin, and in some of the countries they raided and settled, this period of activity is popularly known as the Viking Age, and the term \"Viking\" also commonly includes the inhabitants of the Scandinavian homelands as a whole during the late 8th to the mid-11th centuries. The Vikings had a profound impact on the early medieval history of northern and Eastern Europe, including the political and social development of England (and the English language) and parts of France, and established the embryo of Russia in Kievan Rus'.\nExpert sailors and navigators of their characteristic longships, Vikings established Norse settlements and governments in the British Isles, the Faroe Islands, Iceland, Greenland, Normandy, and the Baltic coast, as well as along the Dnieper and Volga trade routes across Eastern Europe where they were also known as Varangians. The Normans, Norse-Gaels, Rus, Faroese, and Icelanders emerged from these Norse colonies. At one point, a group of Rus Vikings went so far south that, after briefly being bodyguards for the Byzantine emperor, they attacked the Byzantine city of Constantinople. Vikings also voyaged to the Caspian Sea and Arabia. They were the first Europeans to reach North America, briefly settling in Newfoundland (Vinland). While spreading Norse culture to foreign lands, they simultaneously brought home slaves, concubines, and foreign cultural influences to Scandinavia, influencing the genetic and historical development of both. During the Viking Age, the Norse homelands were gradually consolidated from smaller kingdoms into three larger kingdoms: Denmark, Norway, and Sweden.\nThe Vikings spoke Old Norse and made inscriptions in runes. For most of the Viking Age, they followed the Old Norse religion, but became Christians over the 8th\u201312th centuries. The Vikings had their own laws, art, and architecture. Most Vikings were also farmers, fishermen, craftsmen, and traders. Popular conceptions of the Vikings often strongly differ from the complex, advanced civilisation of the Norsemen that emerges from archaeology and historical sources. A romanticised picture of Vikings as noble savages began to emerge in the 18th century; this developed and became widely propagated during the 19th-century Viking revival. Varying views of the Vikings\u2014as violent, piratical heathens or as intrepid adventurers\u2014reflect conflicting modern Viking myths that took shape by the early 20th century. Current popular representations are typically based on cultural clich\u00e9s and stereotypes and are rarely accurate\u2014for example, there is no evidence that they wore horned helmets, a costume element that first appeared in the 19th century.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the word \"Viking\" has been much debated by academics, with many origin theories being proposed. One theory suggests that the word's origin is from the Old English 'settlement' and the Old Frisian , attested almost 300 years prior. Another less popular theory is that came from the feminine 'creek', 'inlet', 'small bay'. The Old Norse word \"v\u00edkingr\" does not appear in written sources until the 12th century, apart from a few runestones.\nAnother etymology that gained support in the early 21st century derives \"Viking\" from the same root as Old Norse 'sea mile', originally referring to the distance between two shifts of rowers, ultimately from the Proto-Germanic\u00a0*\"w\u00eekan\"\u00a0'to recede'. This is found in the early Nordic verb *wikan 'to turn', similar to Old Icelandic 'to move, to turn', with \"well-attested nautical usages\", according to Bernard Mees. This theory is better attested linguistically, and the term most likely predates the use of the sail by the Germanic peoples of northwestern Europe.\nIn the Middle Ages, \"viking\" came to refer to Scandinavian pirates or raiders. The earliest reference to in English sources is from the \u00c9pinal-Erfurt glossary (c.\u2009700), about 93 years before the first known attack by Viking raiders in England. The glossary lists the Latin translation for as 'pirate'. In Old English, the word appears in the Anglo-Saxon poem \"Widsith\", probably from the 9th century. The word was not regarded as a reference to nationality, with other terms such as and 'Danes' being used for that. In Asser's Latin work \"The Life of King Alfred\", the Danes are referred to as 'pagans'; historian Janet Nelson states that became \"the Vikings\" in standard translations of this work, even though there is \"clear evidence\" that it was used as a synonym, while Eric Christiansen avers that it is a mistranslation made at the insistence of the publisher. The word does not occur in any preserved Middle English texts.\nThe word \"Viking\" was introduced into Modern English during the late 18th-century Viking revival, at which point it acquired romanticised heroic overtones of \"barbarian warrior\" or noble savage. During the 20th century, the meaning of the term was expanded to refer not only to seaborne raiders from Scandinavia and other places settled by them (like Iceland and the Faroe Islands), but also any member of the culture that produced the raiders during the period from the late 8th to the mid-11th centuries, or more loosely from about 700 to as late as about 1100. As an adjective, the word is used to refer to ideas, phenomena, or artefacts connected with those people and their cultural life, producing expressions like \"Viking age\", \"Viking culture\", \"Viking art\", \"Viking religion\", \"Viking ship\" and so on.\nHistory.\nViking Age.\nThe Viking Age in Scandinavian history is taken to have been the period from the earliest recorded raids by Norsemen in 793 until the Norman conquest of England in 1066. Vikings used the Norwegian Sea and Baltic Sea for sea routes to the south.\nThe Normans were descendants of those Vikings who had been given feudal overlordship of areas in northern France, namely the Duchy of Normandy, in the 10th century. In that respect, descendants of the Vikings continued to have an influence in northern Europe. Likewise, King Harold Godwinson, the last Anglo-Saxon king of England, had Danish ancestors. Two Vikings even ascended to the throne of England, with Sweyn Forkbeard claiming the English throne in 1013 until 1014 and his son Cnut the Great being king of England between 1016 and 1035.\nGeographically, the Viking Age covered Scandinavian lands (modern Denmark, Norway and Sweden), as well as territories under North Germanic dominance, mainly the Danelaw, including Scandinavian York, the administrative centre of the remains of the Kingdom of Northumbria, parts of Mercia, and East Anglia. Viking navigators opened the road to new lands to the north, west and east, resulting in the foundation of independent settlements in the Shetland, Orkney, and Faroe Islands; Iceland; Greenland; and L'Anse aux Meadows, a short-lived settlement in Newfoundland, circa 1000. The Greenland settlement was established around 980, during the Medieval Warm Period, and its demise by the mid-15th century may have been partly due to climate change. The semi-legendary Viking Rurik is said to have taken control of Novgorod in 862, while his kinsman Oleg captured Kiev in 882 and made it the capital of the Rus. The Rurik dynasty would rule Russia until 1598.\nAs early as 839, when Swedish emissaries are first known to have visited Byzantium, Scandinavians served as mercenaries in the service of the Byzantine Empire. In the late 10th century, a new unit of the imperial bodyguard formed. Traditionally containing large numbers of Scandinavians, it was known as the Varangian Guard. The word \"Varangian\" may have originated in Old Norse, but in Slavic and Greek it could refer either to Scandinavians or Franks. In these years, Swedish men left to enlist in the Byzantine Varangian Guard in such numbers that a medieval Swedish law, the \"V\u00e4stg\u00f6talagen\", from V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland declared no-one could inherit while staying in \"Greece\"\u2014the then Scandinavian term for the Byzantine Empire\u2014to stop the emigration, especially as two other European courts simultaneously also recruited Scandinavians: Kievan Rus' c.\u2009980\u20131060 and London 1018\u20131066 (the \u00deingali\u00f0).\nThere is archaeological evidence that Vikings reached Baghdad, the centre of the Islamic Empire. The Norse regularly plied the Volga with their trade goods: furs, tusks, seal fat for boat sealant, and slaves. Important trading ports during the period include Birka, Hedeby, Kaupang, Jorvik, Staraya Ladoga, Novgorod, and Kiev.\nScandinavian Norsemen explored Europe by its seas and rivers for trade, raids, colonisation, and conquest. In this period, voyaging from their homelands in Denmark, Norway and Sweden the Norsemen settled in the present-day Faroe Islands, Iceland, Norse Greenland, Newfoundland, the Netherlands, Germany, Normandy, Italy, Scotland, England, Wales, Ireland, the Isle of Man, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Ukraine, Russia and Turkey, as well as initiating the consolidation that resulted in the formation of the present-day Scandinavian countries.\nIn the Viking Age, the present-day nations of Norway, Sweden and Denmark did not exist, but the peoples who lived in what is now those countries were largely homogeneous and similar in culture and language, although somewhat distinct geographically. The names of Scandinavian kings are reliably known for only the later part of the Viking Age. After the end of the Viking Age, the separate kingdoms gradually acquired distinct identities as nations, which went hand-in-hand with their Christianisation. Thus, the end of the Viking Age for the Scandinavians also marks the start of their relatively brief Middle Ages.\nIntermixing with the Slavs.\nSlavic and Viking tribes were \"closely linked, fighting one another, intermixing and trading\". In the Middle Ages, goods were transferred from Slavic areas to Scandinavia, and Denmark could be considered \"a melting pot of Slavic and Scandinavian elements\". Leszek Garde\u0142a, of the Department of Scandinavian Languages and Literatures at the University of Bonn, posits that the presence of Slavs in Scandinavia is \"more significant than previously thought\", while Mats Roslund states that \"the Slavs and their interaction with Scandinavia have not been adequately investigated\".\nA 10th-century grave of a female warrior in Denmark was long thought to belong to a Viking. A 2019 analysis suggested the woman may have been a Slav from present-day Poland. The first king of the Swedes, Eric, was married to Gunhild, of the Polish House of Piast. Likewise, his son, Olof, fell in love with Edla, a Slavic woman, and took her as his \"\" (concubine). They had a son and a daughter: Emund the Old, King of Sweden, and Astrid, Queen of Norway. Cnut the Great, King of Denmark, England and Norway, was the son of a daughter of Mieszko I of Poland, possibly the former Polish queen of Sweden, wife of Eric.\nExpansion.\nColonisation of Iceland by Norwegian Vikings began in the 9th century. The first source mentioning Iceland and Greenland is a papal letter from 1053. Twenty years later, they appear in the \"Gesta\" of Adam of Bremen. It was not until after 1130, when the islands had become Christianised, that accounts of the history of the islands were written from the point of view of the inhabitants in sagas and chronicles. The Vikings explored the northern islands and coasts of the North Atlantic, ventured south to North Africa, and brought slaves from the Baltic coast and European Russia.\nThey raided and pillaged, traded, acted as mercenaries and settled colonies over a wide area. Early Vikings probably returned home after their raids. Later in their history, they began to settle in other lands. Vikings under Leif Erikson, heir to Erik the Red, reached North America and set up short-lived settlements in present-day L'Anse aux Meadows, Newfoundland, Canada. This expansion occurred during the Medieval Warm Period.\nViking expansion into continental Europe was limited. Their realm was bordered by powerful tribes to the south. Early on, it was the Saxons who occupied Old Saxony, located in what is now Northern Germany. The Saxons were a fierce and powerful people and were often in conflict with the Vikings. To counter the Saxon aggression and solidify their own presence, the Danes constructed the huge defence fortification of Danevirke in and around Hedeby.\nThe Vikings witnessed the violent subduing of the Saxons by Charlemagne, in the thirty-year Saxon Wars of 772\u2013804. The Saxon defeat resulted in their forced christening and the absorption of Old Saxony into the Carolingian Empire. Fear of the Franks led the Vikings to further expand Danevirke, and the defence constructions remained in use throughout the Viking Age and even up until 1864.\nThe southern coast of the Baltic Sea was ruled by the Obotrites, a federation of Slavic tribes loyal to the Carolingians and later the Frankish empire. The Vikings\u2014led by King Gudfred\u2014destroyed the Obotrite city of Reric on the southern Baltic coast in 808 AD and transferred the merchants and traders to Hedeby. This secured Viking supremacy in the Baltic Sea, which continued throughout the Viking Age.\nBecause of the expansion of the Vikings across Europe, a comparison of DNA and archeology undertaken by scientists at the University of Cambridge and University of Copenhagen suggested that the term \"Viking\" may have evolved to become \"a job description, not a matter of heredity\", at least in some Viking bands.\nMotives.\nThe motives driving the Viking expansion are a topic of much debate. The concept that Vikings may have originally started sailing and raiding due to a need to seek out women from foreign lands was expressed in the 11th century by historian Dudo of Saint-Quentin in his semi-imaginary \"History of The Normans\". As observed by Adam of Bremen, rich and powerful Viking men tended to have many wives and concubines; and these polygynous relationships may have led to a shortage of women available to the Viking male. Consequently, the average Viking man may have felt compelled to seek wealth and power to have the means to acquire suitable women. Several centuries after Dudo's observations, scholars revived this idea, and over time it became a clich\u00e9 among scholars of the Viking Age. Viking men would often buy or capture women and make them into their wives or concubines; such polygynous marriages increase male-male competition in society because they create a pool of unmarried men who are willing to engage in risky status-elevating and sex-seeking behaviors. The \"Annals of Ulster\" states that in 821 the Vikings plundered an Irish village and \"carried off a great number of women into captivity\".\nOne common theory posits that Charlemagne \"used force and terror to Christianise all pagans\", leading to baptism, conversion or execution, and as a result, Vikings and other pagans resisted and wanted revenge. Professor Rudolf Simek states that \"it is not a coincidence if the early Viking activity occurred during the reign of Charlemagne\". The ascendance of Christianity in Scandinavia led to serious conflict, dividing Norway for almost a century. However, this time period did not commence until the 10th century. Norway was never subject to aggression by Charlemagne and the period of strife was due to successive Norwegian kings embracing Christianity after encountering it overseas.\nAnother explanation is that the Vikings exploited a moment of weakness in the surrounding regions. Contrary to Simek's assertion, Viking raids occurred sporadically long before the reign of Charlemagne; but exploded in frequency and size after his death, when his empire fragmented into multiple much weaker entities. England suffered from internal divisions and was a relatively easy prey given the proximity of many towns to the sea or to navigable rivers. Lack of organised naval opposition throughout Western Europe allowed Viking ships to travel freely, raiding or trading as opportunity permitted. The decline in the profitability of old trade routes could also have played a role. Trade between Western Europe and the rest of Eurasia suffered a severe blow when the Western Roman Empire fell in the 5th century. The expansion of Islam in the 7th century had also affected trade with Western Europe.\nRaids in Europe, including raids and settlements from Scandinavia, were not unprecedented and had occurred long before the Vikings arrived. The Jutes invaded the British Isles three centuries earlier, from Jutland during the Age of Migrations, before the Danes settled there. The Saxons and the Angles did the same, embarking from mainland Europe. The Viking raids were, however, the first to be documented by eyewitnesses, and they were much larger in scale and frequency than in previous times.\nVikings themselves were expanding; although their motives are unclear, historians believe that scarce resources or a lack of mating opportunities were a factor.\nThe slave trade was an important part of the Viking economy, with most slaves destined to Scandinavia, although many others were shipped east where they could be sold for large profits. The \"Highway of Slaves\" was a term for a route that the Vikings found to have a direct pathway from Scandinavia to Constantinople and Baghdad while travelling on the Baltic Sea. With the advancements of their ships during the 9th century, the Vikings were able to sail to Kievan Rus and some northern parts of Europe.\nJomsborg.\nJomsborg was a semi-legendary Viking stronghold at the southern coast of the Baltic Sea (medieval Wendland, modern Pomerania), that existed between the 960s and 1043. Its inhabitants were known as Jomsvikings. Jomsborg's exact location, or its existence, has not yet been established, though it is often maintained that Jomsborg was somewhere on the islands of the Oder estuary.\nEnd of the Viking Age.\nWhile the Vikings were active beyond their Scandinavian homelands, Scandinavia was itself experiencing new influences and undergoing a variety of cultural changes.\nEmergence of nation-states and monetary economies.\nBy the late 11th century, royal dynasties were legitimised by the Catholic Church (which had had little influence in Scandinavia 300 years earlier) which were asserting their power with increasing authority and ambition, with the three kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden taking shape. Towns appeared that functioned as secular and ecclesiastical administrative centres and market sites, and monetary economies began to emerge based on English and German models. By this time the influx of Islamic silver from the East had been absent for more than a century, and the flow of English silver had come to an end in the mid-11th century.\nAssimilation into Christendom.\nChristianity had taken root in Denmark and Norway with the establishment of dioceses in the 11th century, and the new religion was beginning to organise and assert itself more effectively in Sweden. Foreign churchmen and native elites were energetic in furthering the interests of Christianity, which was now no longer operating only on a missionary footing, and old ideologies and lifestyles were transforming. By 1103, the first archbishopric was founded in Scandinavia, at Lund, Scania, then part of Denmark.\nThe assimilation of the nascent Scandinavian kingdoms into the cultural mainstream of European Christendom altered the aspirations of Scandinavian rulers and of Scandinavians able to travel overseas, and changed their relations with their neighbours.\nOne of the primary sources of profit for the Vikings had been slave-taking from other European peoples. The medieval Church held that Christians should not own fellow Christians as slaves, so chattel slavery diminished as a practice throughout northern Europe. This took much of the economic incentive out of raiding, though sporadic slaving activity continued into the 11th century. Scandinavian predation in Christian lands around the North and Irish Seas diminished markedly.\nThe kings of Norway continued to assert power in parts of northern Britain and Ireland, and raids continued into the 12th century, but the military ambitions of Scandinavian rulers were now directed toward new paths. In 1107, Sigurd I of Norway sailed for the eastern Mediterranean with Norwegian crusaders to fight for the newly established Kingdom of Jerusalem; the kings of Denmark and Sweden participated actively in the Baltic Crusades of the 12th and 13th centuries.\nCulture.\nA variety of sources illuminate the culture, activities, and beliefs of the Vikings. Although they were generally a non-literate culture that produced no literary legacy, they had an alphabet and described themselves and their world on runestones. Most contemporary literary and written sources on the Vikings come from other cultures that were in contact with them. Since the mid-20th century, archaeological findings have built a more complete and balanced picture of the lives of the Vikings. The archaeological record is particularly rich and varied, providing knowledge of their rural and urban settlement, crafts and production, ships and military equipment, trading networks, as well as their pagan and Christian religious artefacts and practices.\nLiterature and language.\nThe most important primary sources on the Vikings are contemporary texts from Scandinavia and regions where the Vikings were active. Writing in Latin letters was introduced to Scandinavia with Christianity, so there are few native documentary sources from Scandinavia before the late 11th and early 12th centuries. The Scandinavians did write inscriptions in runes, but these were usually very short and formulaic. Most contemporary documentary sources consist of texts written in Christian and Islamic communities outside Scandinavia, often by authors who had been negatively affected by Viking activity.\nLater writings on the Vikings and the Viking Age can also be important for understanding them and their culture, although they need to be treated cautiously. After the consolidation of the church and the assimilation of Scandinavia and its colonies into mainstream medieval Christian culture in the 11th and 12th centuries, native written sources began to appear in Latin and Old Norse. In the Viking colony of Iceland, extraordinary vernacular literature blossomed in the 12th through 14th centuries, and many traditions connected with the Viking Age were written down for the first time in the Icelandic sagas. A literal interpretation of these medieval prose narratives about the Vikings and the Scandinavian past is doubtful, but many specific elements remain worthy of consideration, such as the great quantity of skaldic poetry attributed to court poets of the 10th and 11th centuries, the exposed family trees, the self-images, and the ethical values that are contained in these literary writings.\nIndirectly, the Vikings have also left a window open onto their language, culture and activities, through many Old Norse place names and words found in their former sphere of influence. Some of these place names and words are still in direct use today, almost unchanged, and shed light on where they settled and what specific places meant to them. Examples include place names like Egilsay (from \"Eigils ey\" meaning Eigil's Island), Ormskirk (from \"Ormr kirkja\" meaning Orms Church or Church of the Worm), Meols (from \"merl\" meaning Sand Dunes), Snaefell (Snow Fell), Ravenscar (Ravens Rock), Vinland (Land of Wine or Land of Winberry), Kaupanger (Market Harbour), T\u00f3rshavn (Thor's Harbour), and the religious centre of Odense, meaning a place where Odin was worshipped. Viking influence is also evident in concepts like the present-day parliamentary body of the Tynwald on the Isle of Man.\nMany common words in everyday English language stem from the Old Norse of the Vikings and give an opportunity to understand their interactions with the people and cultures of the British Isles. In the Northern Isles of Shetland and Orkney, Old Norse completely replaced the local languages and over time evolved into the now extinct Norn language. Some modern words and names only emerge and contribute to our understanding after a more intense research of linguistic sources from medieval or later records, such as York (Horse Bay), Swansea (Sveinn's Isle) or some of the place names in Normandy like Tocqueville (Toki's farm).\nLinguistic and etymological studies continue to provide a vital source of information on the Viking culture, their social structure and history and how they interacted with the people and cultures they met, traded, attacked or lived with in overseas settlements. A lot of Old Norse connections are evident in the modern-day languages of Swedish, Norwegian, Danish, Faroese and Icelandic. Old Norse did not exert any great influence on the Slavic languages in the Viking settlements of Eastern Europe. It has been speculated that the reason for this was the great differences between the two languages, combined with the Rus Vikings' more peaceful businesses in these areas, and the fact that they were outnumbered. The Norse named some of the rapids on the Dnieper, but this can hardly be seen from modern names.\nRunestones.\nThe Norse of the Viking Age could read and write and used a non-standardised alphabet, called \"runor\", built upon sound values. While there are few remains of runic writing on paper from the Viking era, thousands of stones with runic inscriptions have been found where Vikings lived. They are usually in memory of the dead, though not necessarily placed at graves. The use of \"runor\" survived into the 15th century, used in parallel with the Latin alphabet.\nThe runestones are unevenly distributed in Scandinavia: Denmark has 250 runestones, Norway has 50 while Iceland has none. Sweden has as many as between 1,700 and 2,500 depending on the definition. The Swedish district of Uppland has the highest concentration with as many as 1,196 inscriptions in stone, whereas S\u00f6dermanland is second with 391.\nThe majority of runic inscriptions from the Viking period are found in Sweden. Many runestones in Scandinavia record the names of participants in Viking expeditions, such as the Kjula runestone that tells of extensive warfare in Western Europe and the Turinge Runestone, which tells of a war band in Eastern Europe. Swedish runestones are mostly from the 11th century and often contain rich inscriptions, such as the F\u00e4rentuna, Hillersj\u00f6, Snottsta and Vreta stones, which provide extensive detail on the life of one family, Gerl\u00f6g and Inga.\nOther runestones mention men who died on Viking expeditions. Among them are the England runestones (Swedish: \"Englandsstenarna\"), which is a group of about 30 runestones in Sweden which refer to Viking Age voyages to England. They constitute one of the largest groups of runestones that mention voyages to other countries, and they are comparable in number only to the approximately 30 Greece Runestones and the 26 Ingvar Runestones, the latter referring to a Viking expedition to the Middle East. They were engraved in Old Norse with the Younger Futhark. \nThe Jelling stones date from between 960 and 985. The older, smaller stone was raised by King Gorm the Old, the last pagan king of Denmark, as a memorial honouring Queen Thyre. The larger stone was raised by his son, Harald Bluetooth, to celebrate the conquest of Denmark and Norway and the conversion of the Danes to Christianity. It has three sides: one with an animal image; one with an image of the crucified Jesus Christ; and a third bearing the following inscription:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;King Haraldr ordered these monuments made in memory of Gormr, his father, and in memory of \u00deyrv\u00e9 [Thyre], his mother; that Haraldr who won for himself all of Denmark and Norway and made the Danes Christian.\nRunic inscriptions are also found outside Scandinavia, in places as far as Greenland and Istanbul. Runestones attest to voyages to locations such as Bath, Greece (how the Vikings referred to the Byzantium territories generally), Khwaresm, Jerusalem, Italy (as Langobardland), Serkland (i.e. the Muslim world), England (including London), and various places in Eastern Europe. Viking Age inscriptions have also been discovered on the Manx runestones on the Isle of Man. Not all runestones are from the Viking Age, such as the Kingittorsuaq Runestone in Greenland, which dates to the early 14th century.\nRunic alphabet usage in modern times.\nThe last known people to use the Runic alphabet were an isolated group of people known as the Elfdalians, that lived in the locality of \u00c4lvdalen in the Swedish province of Dalarna. They spoke the language of Elfdalian, the language unique to \u00c4lvdalen. The Elfdalian language differentiates itself from the other Scandinavian languages as it evolved much closer to Old Norse. The people of \u00c4lvdalen stopped using runes as late as the 1920s. Usage of runes therefore survived longer in \u00c4lvdalen than anywhere else in the world. The last known record of the Elfdalian Runes is from 1929; they are a variant of the Dalecarlian runes, runic inscriptions that were also found in Dalarna.\nTraditionally regarded as a Swedish dialect, but by several criteria closer related to West Scandinavian dialects, Elfdalian is a separate language by the standard of mutual intelligibility. Although there is no mutual intelligibility, due to schools and public administration in \u00c4lvdalen being conducted in Swedish, native speakers are bilingual and speak Swedish at a native level. Residents in the area who speak only Swedish as their sole native language, neither speaking nor understanding Elfdalian, are also common. \u00c4lvdalen can be said to have had its own alphabet during the 17th and 18th century. Today there are about 2,000\u20133,000 native speakers of Elfdalian.\nBurial sites.\nThere are numerous burial sites associated with Vikings throughout Europe and their sphere of influence\u2014in Scandinavia, the British Isles, Ireland, Greenland, Iceland, Faeroe Islands, Germany, Latvia, Estonia, Finland, Russia, etc. The burial practices of the Vikings were quite varied, from dug graves in the ground, to tumuli, sometimes including so-called ship burials.\nAccording to written sources, most of the funerals took place at sea. Funerals involved either burial or cremation, depending on local customs. In the area that is now Sweden, cremations were predominant; in Denmark burial was more common; and in Norway both were common. Viking barrows are one of the primary sources of evidence for circumstances in the Viking Age. The items buried with the dead give some indication as to what was considered important to possess in the afterlife. It is unknown what mortuary services were given to dead children by the Vikings. Some of the most important burial sites for understanding the Vikings include:\nShips.\nThere have been several archaeological finds of Viking ships of all sizes, providing knowledge of the craftsmanship that went into building them. There were many types of Viking ships, built for various uses; the best-known type is probably the longship. Longships were intended for warfare and exploration, designed for speed and agility, and were equipped with oars to complement the sail, making navigation possible independently of the wind. The longship had a long, narrow hull and shallow draught to facilitate landings and troop deployments in shallow water. Longships were used extensively by the Leidang, the Scandinavian defence fleets. The longship allowed the Norse to \"go Viking\", which might explain why this type of ship has become almost synonymous with the concept of Vikings.\nThe Vikings built many unique types of watercraft, often used for more peaceful tasks. The \"knarr\" was a dedicated merchant vessel designed to carry cargo in bulk. It had a broader hull, a deeper draught, and a small number of oars (used primarily to manoeuvre in harbours and similar situations). One Viking innovation was the 'beitass', a spar mounted to the sail that allowed their ships to sail effectively against the wind. It was common for seafaring Viking ships to tow or carry a smaller boat to transfer crew and cargo from the ship to shore.\nShips were an integral part of Viking culture. They facilitated everyday transportation across seas and waterways, exploration of new lands, raids, conquests, and trade with neighbouring cultures. They also held a major religious importance. People with high status were sometimes buried in a ship along with animal sacrifices, weapons, provisions and other items, as evidenced by the buried vessels at Gokstad and Oseberg in Norway and the excavated ship burial at Ladby in Denmark. Ship burials were also practised by Vikings overseas, as evidenced by the excavations of the Salme ships on the Estonian island of Saaremaa.\nWell-preserved remains of five Viking ships were excavated from Roskilde Fjord in the late 1960s, representing both the longship and the \"knarr\". The ships were scuttled there in the 11th century to block a navigation channel and thus protect Roskilde, then the Danish capital, from a seaborne assault. The remains of these ships are on display at the Viking Ship Museum in Roskilde.\nIn 2019, archaeologists uncovered two Viking boat graves in Gamla Uppsala. They also discovered that one of the boats still holds the remains of a man, a dog, and a horse, along with other items. This has shed light on the death rituals of Viking communities in the region.\nSocial structure.\nViking society was divided into the three socio-economic classes: \"thralls\", \"karls\" and \"jarls\". This is described vividly in the Eddic poem of \"R\u00edgs\u00feula\", which also explains that it was the god R\u00edg\u2014father of mankind also known as Heimdallr\u2014who created the three classes. Archaeology has confirmed this social structure.\nIn daily life, there were many intermediate positions in the overall social structure and it appears that there was some social mobility between them. These details are unclear, but titles and positions like \"hauldr\", \"thegn\", and \"landmand\", show mobility between the \"karls\" and the \"jarls\".\nOther social structures included the communities of \"f\u00e9lag\" in both the civil and the military spheres, to which its members (called \"f\u00e9lagi\") were obliged. A f\u00e9lag could be centred around certain trades, a common ownership of a sea vessel or a military obligation under a specific leader. Members of the latter were referred to as \"drenge\", one of the words for warrior. There were also official communities within towns and villages, the overall defence, religion, the legal system and the \"Things\".\nStatus of women.\nLike elsewhere in medieval Europe, most women in Viking society were subordinate to their husbands and fathers and had little political power. However, written sources portray free Viking women as having independence and rights. Viking women generally appear to have had more freedom than women elsewhere, as illustrated in the Icelandic Gr\u00e1g\u00e1s and the Norwegian Frostating laws and Gulating laws.\nMost free Viking women were housewives, and a woman's standing in society was linked to that of her husband. Marriage gave a woman a degree of economic security and social standing encapsulated in the title \"h\u00fasfreyja\" (lady of the house). Norse laws assert the housewife's authority over the 'indoor household'. She had the important roles of managing the farm's resources, conducting business, as well as child-rearing, although some of this would be shared with her husband.\nAfter the age of 20, an unmarried woman, referred to as \"maer\" and \"mey\", reached legal majority and had the right to decide her place of residence and was regarded as her own person before the law. An exception to her independence was the right to choose a husband, as marriages were normally arranged by the family. The groom would pay a bride-price (\"mundr\") to the bride's family, and the bride brought assets into the marriage, as a dowry. A married woman could divorce her husband and remarry.\nConcubinage was also part of Viking society, whereby a woman could live with a man and have children with him without marrying; such a woman was called a \"frilla\". Usually she would be the mistress of a wealthy and powerful man who also had a wife. The wife had authority over the mistresses if they lived in her household. Through her relationship to a man of higher social standing, a concubine and her family could advance socially; although her position was less secure than that of a wife. There was little distinction made between children born inside or outside marriage: both had the right to inherit property from their parents, and there were no \"legitimate\" or \"illegitimate\" children. However, children born in wedlock had more inheritance rights than those born out of wedlock.\nA woman had the right to inherit part of her husband's property upon his death, and widows enjoyed the same independent status as unmarried women. The paternal aunt, paternal niece and paternal granddaughter, referred to as \"odalkvinna\", all had the right to inherit property from a deceased man. A woman with no husband, sons or male relatives could inherit not only property but also the position as head of the family when her father or brother died. Such a woman was referred to as \"Baugrygr\", and she exercised all the rights afforded to the head of a family clan, until she married, by which her rights were transferred to her new husband.\nWomen had religious authority and were active as priestesses (\"gydja\") and oracles (\"sejdkvinna\"). They were active within art as poets (\"skalder\") and rune masters, and as merchants and medicine women. There may also have been female entrepreneurs, who worked in textile production. Women may also have been active within military offices: the tales about shieldmaidens are unconfirmed, but some archaeological finds such as the Birka female Viking warrior may indicate that at least some women in military authority existed.\nThese liberties of the Viking women gradually disappeared after the introduction of Christianity, and from the late 13th century, they are no longer mentioned.\nExamination of Viking Age burials suggests that women lived longer, and nearly all well past the age of 35, as compared to earlier times. Female graves from before the Viking Age in Scandinavia hold a proportionally large number of remains from women aged 20 to 35, presumably due to complications of childbirth.\nExamination of skeletal remains also allows the relative health and nutritional status of boys and girls in the past to be reconstructed, using anthropometric techniques. Burials from Scandinavia and other European countries suggest that, in comparison with other societies at the time, female equality was remarkably high in rural Scandinavia. Females in the rural periphery of Nordic countries during the Viking period and the later Middle Ages had relatively high status, resulting in substantial nutritional and health resources being allocated to girls, enabling them to grow stronger and healthier.\nAppearance.\nScandinavian Vikings were similar in appearance to modern Scandinavians: \"their skin was fair and the hair color varied between blond, dark and reddish\". Genetic studies suggest that people were mostly blond in what is now eastern Sweden, while red hair was mostly found in western Scandinavia. Most Viking men had shoulder-length hair and beards, and slaves (thralls) were usually the only men with short hair. The length varied according to personal preference and occupation. Men involved in warfare, for example, may have had slightly shorter hair and beards for practical reasons. Men in some regions bleached their hair a golden saffron colour. Females also had long hair, with girls often wearing it loose or braided, and married women often wearing it in a bun. The average height is estimated to have been for men and for women.\nThe three classes were easily recognisable by their appearance. Men and women of the Jarls were well groomed with neat hairstyles and expressed their wealth and status by wearing expensive clothes (often silk) and well-crafted jewellery like brooches, belt buckles, necklaces and arm rings. Almost all of the jewellery was crafted in specific designs unique to the Norse (see Viking art). Finger rings were seldom used and earrings were not used at all, as they were seen as a Slavic phenomenon. Most \"karls\" expressed similar tastes and hygiene, but in a more relaxed and inexpensive way.\nArchaeological finds from Scandinavia and Viking settlements in the British Isles support the idea of the well-groomed and hygienic Viking. Burial with grave goods was a common practice in the Scandinavian world, through the Viking Age and well past the Christianisation of the Norse peoples. Within these burial sites and homesteads, combs, often made from antler, are a common find. The manufacturing of such antler combs was common, as at the Viking settlement at Dublin hundreds of examples of combs from the tenth-century have survived, suggesting that grooming was a common practice. The manufacture of such combs was also widespread throughout the Viking world, as examples of similar combs have been found at Viking settlements in Ireland, England, and Scotland. The combs share a common visual appearance as well, with the extant examples often decorated with linear, interlacing, and geometric motifs, or other forms of ornamentation depending on the comb's period and type, but stylistically similar to Viking Age art. All levels of Viking age society appear to have groomed their hair, as hair combs have been found in common graves as well as in aristocratic ones.\nFarming and cuisine.\nThe sagas tell about the diet and cuisine of the Vikings, but first-hand evidence, like cesspits, kitchen middens and garbage dumps have proved to be of great value and importance. Undigested remains of plants from cesspits at Coppergate in York have provided much information in this respect. Overall, archaeo-botanical investigations have been undertaken increasingly in recent decades, as a collaboration between archaeologists and palaeoethno-botanists. This new approach sheds light on the agricultural and horticultural practices of the Vikings and their cuisine.\nThe combined information from various sources suggests a diverse cuisine and ingredients. Meat products of all kinds, such as cured, smoked and whey-preserved meat, sausages, and boiled or fried fresh meat cuts, were prepared and consumed. There were plenty of seafood, bread, porridges, dairy products, vegetables, fruits, berries and nuts. Alcoholic drinks like beer, mead, bj\u00f3rr (a strong fruit wine) and, for the rich, imported wine, were served.\nCertain livestock were typical and unique to the Vikings, including the Icelandic horse, Icelandic cattle, a plethora of sheep breeds, the Danish hen and the Danish goose. The Vikings in York mostly ate beef, mutton, and pork with small amounts of horse meat. Most of the beef and horse leg bones were found split lengthways, to extract the marrow. The mutton and swine were cut into leg and shoulder joints and chops. The frequent remains of pig skull and foot bones found on house floors indicate that brawn and trotters were also popular. Hens were kept for both their meat and eggs, and the bones of game birds such as black grouse, golden plover, wild ducks, and geese have also been found.\nSeafood was important, in some places even more so than meat. Whales and walrus were hunted for food in Norway and the northwestern parts of the North Atlantic region, and seals were hunted nearly everywhere. Oysters, mussels and shrimp were eaten in large quantities and cod and salmon were popular fish. In the southern regions, herring was also important.\nMilk and buttermilk were popular, both as cooking ingredients and drinks, but were not always available, even at farms. Milk came from cows, goats and sheep, with priorities varying from location to location, and fermented milk products like skyr or surmj\u00f6lk were produced as well as butter and cheese.\nFood was often salted and enhanced with spices, some of which were imported like black pepper, while others were cultivated in herb gardens or harvested in the wild. Home grown spices included caraway, mustard and horseradish as evidenced from the Oseberg ship burial or dill, coriander, and wild celery, as found in cesspits at Coppergate in York. Thyme, juniper berry, sweet gale, yarrow, rue and peppercress were also used and cultivated in herb gardens.\nVikings collected and ate fruits, berries and nuts. Apple (wild crab apples), plums and cherries were part of the diet, as were rose hips and raspberry, wild strawberry, blackberry, elderberry, rowan, hawthorn and various wild berries, specific to the locations. Hazelnuts were an important part of the diet in general and large amounts of walnut shells have been found in cities like Hedeby. The shells were used for dyeing, and it is assumed that the nuts were consumed.\nThe invention and introduction of the mouldboard plough revolutionised agriculture in Scandinavia in the early Viking Age and made it possible to farm even poor soils. In Ribe, grains of rye, barley, oat and wheat dated to the 8th century have been found and examined, and are believed to have been cultivated locally. Grains and flour were used for making porridges, some cooked with milk, some cooked with fruit and sweetened with honey, and also various forms of bread. Remains of bread from primarily Birka in Sweden were made of barley and wheat. It is unclear if the Norse leavened their breads, but their ovens and baking utensils suggest that they did. Flax was a very important crop for the Vikings: it was used for oil extraction, food consumption, and most importantly, the production of linen. More than 40% of all known textile recoveries from the Viking Age can be traced as linen. This suggests a much higher actual percentage, as linen is poorly preserved compared to wool, for example.\nThe quality of food for common people was not always particularly high. The research at Coppergate shows that the Vikings in York made bread from wholemeal flour\u2014probably both wheat and rye\u2014but with the seeds of cornfield weeds included. Corncockle (Agrostemma), would have made the bread dark-coloured, but the seeds are poisonous, and people who ate the bread might have become ill. Seeds of carrots, parsnip, and brassicas were also discovered, but they were poor specimens and tend to come from white carrots and bitter tasting cabbages. The rotary querns often used in the Viking Age left tiny stone fragments (often from basalt rock) in the flour, which when eaten wore down the teeth. The effects of this can be seen on skeletal remains from that period.\nSports.\nSports were widely practised and encouraged by the Vikings. Sports that involved weapons training and developing combat skills were popular. These included spear and stone throwing, building and testing physical strength through wrestling (see glima), fist fighting, and stone lifting. In areas with mountains, mountain climbing was practised as a sport. Agility and balance were built and tested by running and jumping for sport, and there is mention of a sport that involved jumping from oar to oar on the outside of a ship's railing as it was being rowed. Swimming was a popular sport \u2013 Snorri Sturluson describes three types: diving, long-distance swimming, and a contest in which two swimmers try to dunk one another. Children often participated in some of the sport disciplines, and women have also been mentioned as swimmers, although it is unclear if they took part in competitions. King Olaf Tryggvason was acclaimed for his skill in both mountain climbing and oar-jumping, and reputedly excelled in the art of knife juggling as well. Skiing and ice skating were the principal winter sports, and also provided transport on snow and ice for adults.\nHorse fighting was practised for sport, although the rules are unclear. It appears to have involved two stallions pitted against each other, within smell and sight of fenced-off mares. Whatever the rules were, the fights often resulted in the death of one of the stallions.\nIcelandic sources often mention \"knattleik\", a ball game similar to hockey, played with a bat and a small hard ball, usually on a smooth surface of ice. Popular with both adults and children, it was a rugged game that often led to injuries. Knattleik appears to have been played only in Iceland, where it attracted many spectators, as did horse fighting.\nHunting was practised as a sport only in Denmark, where it was not an essential food source. Deer and hares were hunted for meat, along with partridges and sea birds, while foxes were hunted to stop their killing of farm animals and for their furs. Spears, bows, and later crossbows, were the weapons used; stalking was the most common method, although game was also chased with dogs. Numerous kinds of snares and traps were used as well.\nGames and entertainment.\nArchaeological finds and written sources indicate that the Vikings participated in social gatherings and festivities. Board games and dice games were a popular pastime. Game boards were made of ornately carved wood, with gaming pieces fashioned mostly from wood, bone, or stone. Pieces were also made of glass, amber, and antler, along with materials such as walrus tusk and ivory from foreign sources. The Vikings played several types of \"tafl\" games; \"hnefatafl\", \"nitavl\" (nine men's morris) and the less common \"kvatrutafl\".\n\"Hnefatafl\" was probably the oldest type of board game played in medieval Scandinavia. The archaeological record indicates that \"hnefatafl\" was popular by the early medieval period, with the Vikings introducing it to England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. The Ockelbo Runestone shows two men possibly playing \"hnefatafl\", and one saga suggests that dice games involved gambling.\nBeer and mead were served on festive occasions, where music was played, poetry was recited, and stories were told. Music was considered an art form and musical skill was viewed as suitable for a cultivated man. The Vikings are known to have played instruments including harps, lutes, lyres and fiddles.\nCultural assimilation.\nElements of a Scandinavian identity and practices were maintained in settler societies, but they could be quite distinct as the groups assimilated into neighbouring societies. Assimilation to the Frankish culture in Normandy for example was rapid. Links to a Viking identity remained longer in the remote islands of Iceland and the Faroes.\nWeapons and warfare.\nKnowledge about the arms and armour of the Viking age is based on archaeological finds, pictorial representation, and to some extent on the accounts in the Norse sagas and Norse laws recorded in the 13th century. According to custom, all free Norse men were required to own weapons and were permitted to carry them at all times. These arms indicated a Viking's social status: a wealthy Viking had a complete ensemble of a helmet, shield, mail shirt, and sword. However, swords were rarely used in battle; they were probably not sturdy enough for combat and most likely only used as symbolic or decorative items.\nA typical \"b\u00f3ndi\" (freeman) was more likely to fight with a spear and shield, and most also carried a seax as a utility knife and side-arm. Bows were used in the opening stages of land battles and at sea, but they tended to be considered less \"honourable\" than melee weapons. Vikings were relatively unusual for the time in their use of axes as a main battle weapon. The H\u00fascarls, the elite guard of King Cnut (and later of King Harold II) were armed with two-handed axes that could split shields or metal helmets with ease.\nThe warfare and violence of the Vikings were often motivated and fuelled by their beliefs in Norse religion, focusing on Thor and Odin, the gods of war and death.\nViolence was common in Viking Age Norway. An examination of Norwegian human remains from the Viking Age found that 72% of the examined males and 42% of the examined females had suffered weapon-related injuries. Violence was less common in Viking Age Denmark, where society was more centralized and complex than the clan-based Norwegian society.\nThe Viking warrior is often associated with violent fits of rage and frenzied fighting in modern popular culture, as reflected in meanings attached to the words \"berserkergang\" and \"berserker\" that would not have been the meanings understood by medieval Norse society. Such a fighting style may have been deployed intentionally by shock troops, and it has been proposed that the berserk-state may have been induced by consuming large amounts of alcohol, or through ingestion of materials with psychoactive properties, such as the solanaceous plant Hyoscyamus niger, as speculated by Karsten Fatur or by consumption of the hallucinogenic mushroom \"Amanita muscaria\", as first hypothesised by the Swedish theologian Samuel \u00d8dman in 1784 and later by the botanist F.C. Sch\u00fcbeler in 1885. The Norwegian battlefield archaeologist Are Skarstein Kolberg asserts that \"...\u00d6dman's hypothesis is not supported by the saga literature or by the archaeological record\", and according to Roderick Dale, there is no evidence for it from the Viking Age or from Old Norse literature.\nTrade.\nThe Vikings established and engaged in extensive trading networks throughout the known world and had a profound influence on the economic development of Europe and Scandinavia.\nOther than in such trading centres as Ribe Hedeby in Denmark, Scandinavia was unfamiliar with the use of coinage. Therefore, its economy was based on bullion; that is, the purity and weight of precious metals used in exchange. Silver was the precious metal most commonly used, although gold was also used. Traders carried small portable scales, enabling them to measure weight precisely, which allowed an accurate medium of exchange, even lacking a regular coinage.\nGoods.\nOrganised trade covered everything from ordinary items in bulk to exotic luxury products. The Viking ship designs, like that of the \"knarr\", were an important factor in their success as merchants. Imported goods from other cultures included:\nTo counter these valuable imports, the Vikings exported a large variety of goods. These goods included:\nOther exports included weapons, walrus ivory, wax, salt and cod. As one of the more exotic exports, hunting birds were sometimes provided from Norway to the European aristocracy, from the 10th century.\nMany of these goods were also traded within the Viking world itself, as well as goods such as soapstone and whetstone. Soapstone was traded with the Norse on Iceland and in Jutland, who used it for pottery. Whetstones were traded and used for sharpening weapons, tools and knives. There are indications from Ribe and surrounding areas, that the extensive medieval trade with oxen and cattle from Jutland (see Ox Road), reach as far back as c. 720 AD. This trade satisfied the Vikings' need for leather and meat to some extent, and perhaps hides for parchment production on the European mainland. Wool was also very important as a domestic product for the Vikings, to produce warm clothing for the cold Scandinavian and Nordic climate, and for sails. Sails for Viking ships required large amounts of wool, as evidenced by experimental archaeology. There are archaeological signs of organised textile productions in Scandinavia, reaching as far back as the early Iron Ages. Artisans and craftsmen in the larger towns were supplied with antlers from organised hunting with large-scale reindeer traps in the far north. They were used as raw material for making everyday utensils like combs.\nLegacy.\nEnglish language.\nThe Vikings heavily influenced Old English to contribute to Modern English. Nouns lost their grammatical gender and grammatical conjugation was reduced to a simple \"-s\" added to the third person verb. Preposition stranding also entered English, which is permitted in Old Norse.\nMedieval perceptions.\nIn England the Viking Age began dramatically on 8 June 793 when Norsemen destroyed the abbey on the island of Lindisfarne. The devastation of Northumbria's Holy Island shocked and alerted the royal courts of Europe to the Viking presence. \"Never before has such an atrocity been seen\", declared the Northumbrian scholar Alcuin of York. Medieval Christians in Europe were totally unprepared for the Viking incursions and could find no explanation for their arrival and the accompanying suffering they experienced at their hands save the \"Wrath of God\". More than any other single event, the attack on Lindisfarne demonised perception of the Vikings for the next twelve centuries. Not until the 1890s did scholars outside Scandinavia begin to seriously reassess the achievements of the Vikings, recognising their artistry, technological skills, and seamanship.\nNorse Mythology, sagas, and literature tell of Scandinavian culture and religion through tales of heroic and mythological heroes. Early transmission of this information was primarily oral, and later texts relied on the writings and transcriptions of Christian scholars, including the Icelanders Snorri Sturluson and S\u00e6mundur fr\u00f3\u00f0i. Many of these sagas were written in Iceland, and most of them, even if they had no Icelandic provenance, were preserved there after the Middle Ages due to the continued interest of Icelanders in Norse literature and legal codes.\nThe 200-year Viking influence on European history is filled with tales of plunder and colonisation, and the majority of these chronicles came from western European witnesses and their descendants. Less common, although equally relevant, are references to Vikings in chronicles that originated in the east, including the Nestor chronicles, Novgorod chronicles, Ibn Fadlan chronicles, Ibn Rusta chronicles, and brief mentions by Photius, patriarch of Constantinople, regarding the first Viking attack on the Byzantine Empire. Other chroniclers of Viking history include Adam of Bremen, who wrote, in the fourth volume of his \"Gesta Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontificum\", \"[t]here is much gold here (in Zealand), accumulated by piracy. These pirates, which are called \"wichingi\" by their own people, and \"Ascomanni\" by our own people, pay tribute to the Danish king.\" In 991, the Battle of Maldon between Viking raiders and the inhabitants of Maldon in Essex was commemorated with a poem of the same name.\nPost-medieval perceptions.\nEarly modern publications, dealing with what is now called Viking culture, appeared in the 16th century, e.g. \"Historia de gentibus septentrionalibus\" (\"History of the northern people\") of Olaus Magnus (1555), and the first edition of the 13th-century \"Gesta Danorum\" (\"Deeds of the Danes\"), by Saxo Grammaticus, in 1514. The pace of publication increased during the 17th century with Latin translations of the Edda (notably Peder Resen's \"Edda Islandorum\" of 1665).\nIn Scandinavia, the 17th-century Danish scholars Thomas Bartholin and Ole Worm and the Swede Olaus Rudbeck used runic inscriptions and Icelandic sagas as historical sources. An important early British contributor to the study of the Vikings was George Hickes, who published his \"Linguarum vett. septentrionalium thesaurus\" (\"Dictionary of the Old Northern Languages\") in 1703\u201305. During the 18th century, British interest and enthusiasm for Iceland and early Scandinavian culture grew dramatically, expressed in English translations of Old Norse texts and in original poems that extolled the supposed Viking virtues.\nThe word \"viking\" was first popularised at the beginning of the 19th century by Erik Gustaf Geijer in his poem, \"The Viking\". Geijer's poem did much to propagate the new romanticised ideal of the Viking, which had little basis in historical fact. The renewed interest of Romanticism in the Old North had contemporary political implications. The Geatish Society, of which Geijer was a member, popularised this myth to a great extent. Another Swedish author who had great influence on the perception of the Vikings was Esaias Tegn\u00e9r, a member of the Geatish Society, who wrote a modern version of \"Fri\u00f0\u00fej\u00f3fs saga hins fr\u0153kna\", which became widely popular in the Nordic countries, the United Kingdom, and Germany.\nFascination with the Vikings reached a peak during the so-called Viking revival in the late 18th and 19th centuries as a form of Romantic nationalism. In Britain this was called Septentrionalism, in Germany \"Wagnerian\" pathos, and in the Scandinavian countries Scandinavism. Pioneering 19th-century scholarly editions of the Viking Age began to reach a small readership in Britain. Archaeologists began to dig up Britain's Viking past, and linguistic enthusiasts started to identify the Viking-Age origins of rural idioms and proverbs. The new dictionaries of the Old Norse language enabled the Victorians to grapple with the primary Icelandic sagas.\nUntil recently, the history of the Viking Age was largely based on Icelandic sagas, the history of the Danes written by Saxo Grammaticus, the \"Primary Chronicle\", and \"Cogad G\u00e1edel re Gallaib\". Few scholars still accept these texts as reliable sources, as historians now rely more on archaeology and numismatics, disciplines that have made valuable contributions toward understanding the period.\nIn 20th-century politics.\nThe romanticised idea of the Vikings constructed in scholarly and popular circles in northwestern Europe in the 19th and early 20th centuries was a potent one, and the figure of the Viking became a familiar and malleable symbol in different contexts in the politics and political ideologies of 20th-century Europe. In Normandy, which had been settled by Vikings, the Viking ship became an uncontroversial regional symbol. In Germany, awareness of Viking history in the 19th century had been stimulated by the border dispute with Denmark over Schleswig-Holstein and the use of Scandinavian mythology by Richard Wagner. The idealised view of the Vikings appealed to Germanic supremacists who transformed the figure of the Viking in accordance with the ideology of a Germanic master race. Building on the linguistic and cultural connections between Norse-speaking Scandinavians and other Germanic groups in the distant past, Scandinavian Vikings were portrayed in Nazi Germany as a pure Germanic type. The cultural phenomenon of Viking expansion was re-interpreted for use as propaganda to support the extreme militant nationalism of the Third Reich, and ideologically informed interpretations of Viking paganism and the Scandinavian use of runes were employed in the construction of Nazi mysticism. Other political organisations of the same ilk, such as the former Norwegian fascist party Nasjonal Samling, similarly appropriated elements of the modern Viking cultural myth in their symbolism and propaganda.\nSoviet and earlier Slavophile historians emphasised a Slavic rooted foundation in contrast to the Normanist theory of the Vikings conquering the Slavs and founding the Kievan Rus'. They accused Normanist theory proponents of distorting history by depicting the Slavs as undeveloped primitives. In contrast, Soviet historians stated that the Slavs laid the foundations of their statehood long before the Norman/Viking raids, while the Norman/Viking invasions only served to hinder the historical development of the Slavs. They argued that Rus' composition was Slavic and that Rurik and Oleg's success was rooted in their support from within the local Slavic aristocracy.. After the dissolution of the USSR, Novgorod acknowledged its Viking history by incorporating a Viking ship into its logo.\nIn modern popular culture.\nLed by the operas of German composer Richard Wagner, such as \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\", Vikings and the Romanticist Viking Revival have inspired many creative works. These have included novels directly based on historical events, such as Frans Gunnar Bengtsson's \"The Long Ships\" (which was also released as a 1963 film), and historical fantasies such as the film \"The Vikings\", Michael Crichton's \"Eaters of the Dead\" (movie version called \"The 13th Warrior\"), and the comedy film \"Erik the Viking\". The vampire Eric Northman, in the HBO TV series \"True Blood\", was a Viking prince before being turned into a vampire. Vikings appear in several books by the Danish American writer Poul Anderson, while British explorer, historian, and writer Tim Severin authored a trilogy of novels in 2005 about a young Viking adventurer Thorgils Leifsson, who travels around the world.\nIn 1962, American comic book writer Stan Lee and his brother Larry Lieber, together with Jack Kirby, created the Marvel Comics superhero Thor, which they based on the Norse god of the same name. The character is featured in the 2011 Marvel Studios film \"Thor\" and its sequels. The character also appears in the 2012 film \"The Avengers\" and its associated animated series.\nThe appearance of Vikings within popular media and television has seen a resurgence in recent decades, especially with the History Channel's series \"Vikings\" (2013), directed by Michael Hirst. The show has a loose grounding in historical facts and sources, but bases itself more so on literary sources, such as fornaldarsaga Ragnars saga lo\u00f0br\u00f3kar, itself more legend than fact, and Old Norse Eddic and Skaldic poetry. The events of the show frequently make references to the \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", an Eddic poem describing the creation of the world, often directly referencing specific lines of the poem in the dialogue. The show portrays some of the social realities of the medieval Scandinavian world, such as slavery and the greater role of women within Viking society. The show also addresses the topics of gender equity in Viking society with the inclusion of shield maidens through the character Lagertha, also based on a legendary figure. Recent archaeological interpretations and osteological analyses of previous excavations of Viking burials have given support to the idea of the Viking woman warrior, namely the excavation and DNA study of the Birka female Viking warrior, within recent years. However, the conclusions remain contentious.\nVikings have served as an inspiration for numerous video games, such as \"The Lost Vikings\" (1993), \"Age of Mythology\" (2002), and \"For Honor\" (2017). All three Vikings from \"The Lost Vikings\" series\u2014Erik the Swift, Baleog the Fierce, and Olaf the Stout\u2014appeared as a playable hero in the crossover title \"Heroes of the Storm\" (2015). \"\" (2011) is an action role-playing video game heavily inspired by Viking culture. Vikings are the lead focus of the 2020 video game \"Assassin's Creed Valhalla\", which is set in 873 AD, and recounts an alternative history of the Viking invasion of Britain.\nModern reconstructions of Viking mythology have shown a persistent influence in late 20th- and early 21st-century popular culture in some countries, inspiring comics, movies, television series, role-playing games, computer games, and music, including Viking metal, a subgenre of heavy metal music.\nSince the 1960s, there has been rising enthusiasm for historical reenactment. While the earliest groups had little claim for historical accuracy, the seriousness and accuracy of reenactors has increased. The largest such groups include The Vikings and Regia Anglorum, though many smaller groups exist in Europe, North America, New Zealand, and Australia. Many reenactor groups participate in live-steel combat, and a few have Viking-style ships or boats.\nThe Minnesota Vikings of the National Football League are so-named owing to the large Scandinavian population in the US state of Minnesota.\nDuring the banking boom of the first decade of the twenty-first century, Icelandic financiers came to be styled as \"\u00fatr\u00e1sarv\u00edkingar\" (roughly 'raiding Vikings').\nExperimental archaeology.\nExperimental archaeology of the Viking Age is a flourishing branch and several places have been dedicated to this technique, such as Jorvik Viking Centre in the United Kingdom, Sagnlandet Lejre and Ribe Viking Center in Denmark, Foteviken Museum in Sweden or Lofotr Viking Museum in Norway. Viking-age reenactors have undertaken experimental activities such as iron smelting and forging using Norse techniques at Norstead in Newfoundland for example.\nOn 1 July 2007, the reconstructed Viking ship \"Skuldelev 2\", renamed \"Sea Stallion\", began a journey from Roskilde to Dublin. The remains of that ship and four others were discovered during a 1962 excavation in the Roskilde Fjord. Tree-ring analysis has shown the ship was built of oak in the vicinity of Dublin in about 1042. Seventy multinational crew members sailed the ship back to its home, and \"Sea Stallion\" arrived outside Dublin's Custom House on 14 August 2007. The purpose of the voyage was to test and document the seaworthiness, speed, and manoeuvrability of the ship on the rough open sea and in coastal waters with treacherous currents. The crew tested how the long, narrow, flexible hull withstood the tough ocean waves. The expedition also provided valuable new information on Viking longships and society. The ship was built using Viking tools, materials, and much of the same methods as the original ship.\nOther vessels, often replicas of the Gokstad ship (full- or half-scale) or Skuldelev have been built and tested as well. The \"Snorri\" (a Skuldelev I Knarr), was sailed from Greenland to Newfoundland in 1998.\nCommon misconceptions.\nHorned helmets.\nApart from two or three representations of (ritual) helmets\u2014with protrusions that may be either stylised ravens, snakes, or horns\u2014no depiction of the helmets of Viking warriors, and no preserved helmet, has horns. The formal, close-quarters style of Viking combat (either in shield walls or aboard \"ship islands\") would have made horned helmets cumbersome and hazardous to the warrior's own side.\nHistorians therefore believe that Viking warriors did not wear horned helmets; whether such helmets were used in Scandinavian culture for other, ritual purposes, remains unproven. The general misconception that Viking warriors wore horned helmets was partly promulgated by the 19th-century enthusiasts of \"G\u00f6tiska F\u00f6rbundet\", founded in 1811 in Stockholm. They promoted the use of Norse mythology as the subject of high art and other ethnological and moral aims.\nThe Vikings were often depicted with winged helmets and in other clothing taken from Classical antiquity, especially in depictions of Norse gods. This was done to legitimise the Vikings and their mythology by associating it with the Classical world, which had long been idealised in European culture.\nThe latter-day \"mythos\" created by national romantic ideas blended the Viking Age with aspects of the Nordic Bronze Age some 2,000 years earlier. Horned helmets from the Bronze Age were shown in petroglyphs and appeared in archaeological finds (see Bohusl\u00e4n and Vikso helmets). They were probably used for ceremonial purposes.\nCartoons like \"H\u00e4gar the Horrible\" and \"Vicky the Viking\", and sports kits such as those of the Minnesota Vikings and Canberra Raiders have perpetuated the myth of the horned helmet.\nViking helmets were conical, made from hard leather with wood and metallic reinforcements for regular troops. The iron helmet with mask and mail was for the chieftains, based on the previous Vendel-age helmets from central Sweden. The only original Viking helmet discovered is the Gjermundbu helmet, found in Norway. This helmet is made of iron and has been dated to the 10th century.\nBarbarity.\nThe image of wild-haired, dirty savages sometimes associated with the Vikings in popular culture is a distorted picture of reality. Viking tendencies were often misreported, and the work of Adam of Bremen, among others, told largely disputable tales of Viking savagery and uncleanliness.\nUse of skulls as drinking vessels.\nThere is no evidence that Vikings drank out of the skulls of vanquished enemies. This was a misconception based on a passage in the skaldic poem Kr\u00e1kum\u00e1l speaking of heroes drinking from \"\u00f3r bj\u00fagvi\u00f0um hausa\" (branches of skulls). This was a reference to drinking horns, but was mistranslated in the 17th century as referring to the skulls of the slain.\nGenetic legacy.\nMargaryan et al. 2020 analysed 442 Viking world individuals from various archaeological sites in Europe. They were found to be closely related to modern Scandinavians. The Y-DNA composition of the individuals in the study was also similar to that of modern Scandinavians. The most common Y-DNA haplogroup was I1 (95 samples), followed by R1b (84 samples) and R1a, especially (but not exclusively) of the Scandinavian R1a-Z284 subclade (61 samples). The study showed what many historians have hypothesised: that it was common for Norseman settlers to marry foreign women. Some individuals from the study, such as those found in Foggia, displayed typical Scandinavian Y-DNA haplogroups but also southern European autosomal ancestry, suggesting that they were the descendants of Viking settler males and local women. The five individual samples from Foggia were likely Normans. The same pattern of a combination of Scandinavian Y-DNA and local autosomal ancestry is seen in other samples from the study, for example Varangians buried near lake Ladoga and Vikings in England, suggesting that Viking men had married into local families in those places too.\nThe study found evidence of a Swedish influx into Estonia and Finland; and Norwegian influx into Ireland, Iceland and Greenland during the Viking Age. However, the authors commented \"Viking Age Danish-like ancestry in the British Isles cannot be distinguished from that of the Angles and Saxons, who migrated in the fifth to sixth centuries AD from Jutland and northern Germany\".\nMargaryan et al. 2020 examined the skeletal remains of 42 individuals from the Salme ship burials in Estonia. The skeletal remains belonged to warriors killed in battle who were later buried together with numerous valuable weapons and armour. DNA testing and isotope analysis revealed that the men came from central Sweden.\nFemale descent studies show evidence of Norse descent in areas closest to Scandinavia, such as the Shetland and Orkney islands. Inhabitants of lands farther away show most Norse descent in the male Y-chromosome lines.\nA specialised genetic and surname study in Liverpool showed marked Norse heritage: up to 50% of males of families that lived there before the years of industrialisation and population expansion. High percentages of Norse inheritance\u2014tracked through the R-M420 haplotype\u2014were also found among males in the Wirral and West Lancashire. This was similar to the percentage of Norse inheritance found among males in the Orkney Islands.\nRecent research suggests that the Celtic warrior Somerled, who drove the Vikings out of western Scotland and was the progenitor of Clan Donald, may have been of Viking descent, a member of haplogroup R-M420.\nMargaryan et al. 2020 examined an elite warrior burial from Bodzia (Poland) dated to 1010\u20131020 AD. The cemetery in Bodzia is exceptional in terms of Scandinavian and Kievian Rus links.\u00a0The Bodzia man (sample VK157, or burial E864/I) was not a simple warrior from the princely retinue, but he belonged to the princely family himself. His burial is the richest one in the whole cemetery. Moreover, strontium analysis of his teeth enamel shows he was not local.\u00a0 It is assumed that he came to Poland with the Prince of Kiev, Sviatopolk the Accursed, and met a violent death in combat. This corresponds to the events of 1018 AD when Sviatopolk himself disappeared after having retreated from Kiev to Poland. It cannot be excluded that the Bodzia man was Sviatopolk himself, as the genealogy of the Rurikids at this period is extremely sketchy and the dates of birth of many princes of this dynasty may be quite approximative. The Bodzia man carried haplogroup I1-S2077 and had both Scandinavian ancestry and Russian admixture.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32611", "revid": "50156125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32611", "title": "Vietnam War", "text": "War in Southeast Asia from 1955 to 1975\nThe Vietnam War (1 November 1955 \u2013 30 April 1975) was an armed conflict in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia fought between North Vietnam (Democratic Republic of Vietnam) and South Vietnam (Republic of Vietnam) and their allies. North Vietnam was supported by the Soviet Union and China, while South Vietnam was supported by the United States and other anti-communist nations. The conflict was the second of the Indochina wars and a proxy war of the Cold War between the Soviet Union and US. The Vietnam War was one of the postcolonial wars of national liberation, a theater in the Cold War, and a civil war, with civil warfare a defining feature from the outset. Direct US military involvement escalated from 1965 until its withdrawal in 1973. The fighting spilled into the Laotian and Cambodian Civil Wars, which ended with all three countries becoming communist in 1975.\nAfter the defeat of the French Union in the First Indochina War that began in 1946, Vietnam gained independence in the 1954 Geneva Conference but was divided in two at the 17th parallel: the Viet Minh, led by Ho Chi Minh, took control of North Vietnam, while the US assumed financial and military support for South Vietnam, led by Ngo Dinh Diem. The North Vietnamese supplied and directed the Viet Cong (VC), a common front of dissidents in the south which intensified a guerrilla war from 1957. In 1958, North Vietnam invaded Laos, establishing the Ho Chi Minh trail to supply the VC. By 1963, the north had covertly sent 40,000 soldiers of its People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN), armed with Soviet and Chinese weapons, to fight in the insurgency in the south. President John F. Kennedy increased US involvement from 900 military advisors in 1960 to 16,000 in 1963 and sent more aid to the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN), which failed to produce results. In 1963, Diem was killed in a US-backed military coup, which added to the south's instability.\nFollowing the Gulf of Tonkin incident in 1964, the US Congress passed a resolution that gave President Lyndon B. Johnson authority to increase military presence without declaring war. Johnson launched a bombing campaign of the north and sent combat troops, dramatically increasing deployment to 184,000 by 1966, and 536,000 by 1969. US forces relied on air supremacy and overwhelming firepower to conduct search and destroy operations in rural areas. In 1968, North Vietnam launched the Tet Offensive, which was a tactical defeat but convinced many Americans the war could not be won. Johnson's successor, Richard Nixon, began \"Vietnamization\" from 1969, which saw the conflict fought by an expanded ARVN while US forces withdrew. The 1970 Cambodian coup d'\u00e9tat resulted in a PAVN invasion and US\u2013ARVN counter-invasion, escalating its civil war. US troops had mostly withdrawn from Vietnam by 1972, and the 1973 Paris Peace Accords saw the rest leave. The accords were broken and fighting continued until the 1975 spring offensive and fall of Saigon to the PAVN, marking the war's end. North and South Vietnam were reunified in 1976.\nThe war exacted an enormous cost: estimates of Vietnamese soldiers and civilians killed range from 970,000 to 3 million. Some 275,000\u2013310,000 Cambodians, 20,000\u201362,000 Laotians, and 58,220 US service members died. Its end would precipitate the Vietnamese boat people and the larger Indochina refugee crisis, which saw millions leave Indochina, of which about 250,000 perished at sea. 20% of South Vietnam's jungle was sprayed with toxic herbicides, which led to significant health problems. The Khmer Rouge carried out the Cambodian genocide, and the Cambodian\u2013Vietnamese War began in 1978. In response, China invaded Vietnam, with border conflicts lasting until 1991. Within the US, the war gave rise to Vietnam syndrome, an aversion to American overseas military involvement, which, with the Watergate scandal, contributed to the crisis of confidence that affected the United States throughout the 1970s.\nNames.\nVarious names have been applied and shifted over time, though \"Vietnam War\" is the most commonly used in English. It has been called the \"Second Indochina War\" since it spread to Laos and Cambodia, the \"Vietnam Conflict\", and colloquially . In Vietnam it is known as (lit.\u2009'Resistance War against America'). The Government of Vietnam officially refers to it as the \"Resistance War against America to save the nation.\"\nBackground.\nVietnam had been under French control as part of French Indochina since the 1880s. During this period, Vietnamese independence movements, such as the Vietnamese Nationalist Party, faced suppression despite growing public support for diverse reformist and revolutionary nationalist causes. Following the 1917 Russian Revolution and subsequent establishment of the Communist International, fissures began to emerge within the Vietnamese independence movement, with nationalists supporting republicanism and communists embracing proletarian internationalism. Nguyen Sinh Cung established the Indochinese Communist Party (ICP) in 1930; the Marxist\u2013Leninist party aimed to overthrow French rule and establish a communist state. The communists\u2019 radical push for centralized control led to a prolonged civil conflict marked by the suppression of rival nationalists, with the ICP largely responsible for initiating systemic Vietnamese-on-Vietnamese violence.\nJapanese occupation of Indochina.\nIn September 1940, Japan invaded French Indochina, following France's capitulation to Nazi Germany three months prior. By 1941, Japan had gained full military access across Indochina and established a dual colonial rule that preserved Vichy French administration while facilitating Japanese military operations. Cung, now known as Ho Chi Minh, returned from exile to establish the anti-Japanese Viet Minh movement. While ultimately communist-led, the Viet Minh was an umbrella group containing both communist and nationalist members. From 1944, the US Office of Strategic Services (O.S.S.) provided the Viet Minh with weapons and training to fight the occupying Japanese. US President Franklin D. Roosevelt supported Vietnamese resistance, and proposed Vietnam's independence be granted under an international trusteeship after the war. The Viet Minh secured their advantage by relocating their operations from southern China into Vietnam and leveraging Allied support.\nIn March 1945, Japan, losing the war, overthrew the French government in Indochina, established the Empire of Vietnam, and maintained Emperor B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i as a figurehead. The nationalist sentiment that had intensified during World War II paradoxically laid the groundwork for the communist-led Viet Minh, themselves cloaked in nationalism. Following the surrender of Japan, they launched the August Revolution, overthrowing the Japanese-backed state and seizing weapons from surrendering Japanese forces. On 2 September, Ho Chi Minh declared the independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV). However, British and French forces arrived in Indochina to oversee the Japanese surrender south of the 16th parallel, while Chinese Nationalist troops did so in the north. On September 23, the British supported a French coup that overthrew the DRV government in Saigon and reinstated French control. O.S.S. forces withdrew as the French sought to reassert control in southern Indochina.\nFirst Indochina War.\nBeginning in August 1945, the Viet Minh sought to consolidate power by terrorizing and purging rival Vietnamese nationalist groups and Trotskyist activists. In 1946, the Franco-Chinese and Ho\u2013Sainteny Agreements facilitated a coexistence between the DRV and French that strengthened the Viet Minh while undermining the nationalists. That summer, the Viet Minh colluded with French forces to eliminate nationalists, targeted for their ardent anti-colonialism.\nWith most of the nationalist partisans defeated, and negotiations broken down, tensions between the Viet Minh and French authorities erupted into full-scale war in December 1946, a conflict that would later become entangled with the Cold War. Surviving nationalist partisans and politico-religious groups rallied behind the exiled B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i to reopen negotiations with France in opposition to communist domination. While the State of Vietnam, under B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i as Chief of State, aligned with the anticommunist Western Bloc, the French exploited it to extend their colonial presence and to bolster their standing within NATO. By adhering to Marxist\u2013Leninist principles, Vietnamese communists monopolized power through a series of radical campaigns.\nThe anticommunist Truman Doctrine, first announced by president Harry S. Truman in March 1947, pledged United States support to nations resisting \"attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures\". In Indochina, this policy was first put into practice when in February 1950 the US recognized the French-backed State of Vietnam, based in Saigon, as the legitimate government, after communist China and the Soviet Union recognized the Democratic Republic of Vietnam the month prior. The outbreak of the Korean War in June convinced Washington policymakers that the war in Indochina was another example of communist expansionism, directed by the Soviet Union. Within the United States, the Red Scare and rise of McCarthyism turned public opinion against communism and convinced Americans that communist ideology needed to be quelled wherever possible.\nMilitary advisors from China began assisting the Viet Minh in July 1950. Chinese weapons, expertise, and laborers transformed the Viet Minh from a guerrilla force into an army. In September 1950, the US created the Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) to screen French aid requests, advise on strategy, and train Vietnamese soldiers. By 1954, the US had spent $1\u00a0billion in support of the French effort, shouldering 80% of the war costs.\nBattle of Dien Bien Phu.\nDuring the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954, US carriers sailed to the Gulf of Tonkin and the US conducted reconnaissance flights. France and the US discussed the use of tactical nuclear weapons, though how seriously this was considered, and by whom, is unclear. According to then-Vice President Richard Nixon, the Joint Chiefs of Staff drew up plans to use nuclear weapons to support the French. Nixon, a so-called \"hawk\", suggested the US might have to \"put American boys in\". President Dwight D. Eisenhower made American participation contingent on British support, but they were opposed. Eisenhower, wary of involving the US in an Asian land war, decided against intervention. US intelligence estimates remained skeptical of France's chance of success.\nIn May 1954, the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu surrendered. This marked the end of French military involvement in Indochina. At the Geneva Conference, they negotiated a ceasefire with the Viet Minh, and the independence of Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam was affirmed, with Vietnam placed under a temporary North\u2013South division.\nTransition period.\nAt the 1954 Geneva Conference, Vietnam was temporarily partitioned at the 17th parallel. Ho Chi Minh wished to continue war in the south, but was restrained by Chinese allies, who convinced him he could win control by electoral means. Civilians were allowed to move freely between the two states for 300 days. Elections were to be held in 1956 to establish a unified government. However, the US, represented at the conference by Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, objected to the resolution; Dulles' objection was supported only by the representative of B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i. John Foster's brother, Allen Dulles, who was director of the Central Intelligence Agency, then initiated a psychological warfare campaign which exaggerated anti-Catholic sentiment among the Viet Minh and distributed propaganda attributed to Viet Minh threatening an American attack on Hanoi with atomic bombs. The CIA's efforts played a minimal role, as Catholic migrants were driven primarily by their own convictions and circumstances rather than external psychological operations.\nDuring 300 days, up to one million northerners, fearing persecution by the communists, moved south, including at least 500,000 Catholics, approximately 200,000 Buddhists, and tens of thousands from ethnic minority communities. The exodus was coordinated by a U.S.-funded $93\u00a0million relocation program, which involved the French Navy and US Seventh Fleet to ferry refugees. The refugees gave the later Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m regime a strong anti-communist constituency. Over 100,000 Viet Minh fighters went north for \"regroupment\", expecting to return south within two years. The Viet Minh left roughly 5,000 to 10,000 cadres in the south as a base for insurgency. The last French soldiers left South Vietnam in 1956, and China withdrew from North Vietnam.\nBetween 1953 and 1956, the Northern government instituted agrarian reforms, including rent reduction and land reform, which resulted in political oppression. During land reform, North Vietnamese witnesses suggested a ratio of one execution for every 160 village residents, about 100,000 executions. As the campaign was mainly in the Red River Delta, 50,000 executions became accepted by scholars. However, documents from Vietnamese and Hungarian archives indicate executions were much lower, though likely greater than 14,000. In 1956, leaders in Hanoi admitted to \"excesses\" and restored much of the land to the original owners.\nThe South, meanwhile, constituted the State of Vietnam, with B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i as Emperor, and Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m as prime minister. Neither the US, nor Di\u1ec7m's State of Vietnam, signed anything at the Geneva Conference. The non-communist Vietnamese delegation objected to any division of Vietnam, but lost when the French accepted the proposal of Viet Minh delegate Ph\u1ea1m V\u0103n \u0110\u1ed3ng, who proposed Vietnam be united by elections under the supervision of \"local commissions\". The US countered with the \"American Plan\", with the support of South Vietnam and the UK. It provided for unification elections under UN supervision, but was rejected by the Soviets. The US said: \"With respect to the statement made by the representative of the State of Vietnam, the United States reiterates its traditional position that peoples are entitled to determine their own future and that it will not join in any arrangement which would hinder this\".\nEisenhower wrote in 1954:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have never talked or corresponded with a person knowledgeable in Indochinese affairs who did not agree that had elections been held as of the time of the fighting, possibly 80% of the population would have voted for the Communist Ho Chi Minh as their leader rather than Chief of State B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i. Indeed, the lack of leadership and drive on the part of B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i was a factor in the feeling prevalent among Vietnamese that they had nothing to fight for.\nAccording to the \"Pentagon Papers\", Di\u1ec7m would have been a more popular candidate than B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i against H\u1ed3, stating: \"It is almost certain that by 1956 the proportion which might have voted for Ho \u2013 in a free election against Diem \u2013 would have been much smaller than 80%.\" In 1957, independent observers from India, Poland, and Canada representing the International Control Commission (ICC) stated that fair elections were impossible, reporting that neither South nor North had honored the armistice agreement.\nFrom April to June 1955, Di\u1ec7m eliminated political opposition in the south by launching operations against religious groups: the Cao \u0110\u00e0i and H\u00f2a H\u1ea3o of Ba C\u1ee5t. The campaign attacked the B\u00ecnh Xuy\u00ean organized crime group, which was allied with members of the communist party secret police and had military elements. The group was defeated in April following a battle in Saigon. As broad opposition to his harsh tactics mounted, Di\u1ec7m sought to blame the communists.\nIn a referendum on the future of the State of Vietnam in October 1955, Di\u1ec7m rigged the poll supervised by his brother Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Nhu and was credited with 98%, including 133% in Saigon. His American advisors had recommended a more modest winning margin of 60\u201370%. Di\u1ec7m, however, viewed the election as a test of authority. He declared South Vietnam to be an independent state under the name Republic of Vietnam (ROV), with him as president. Likewise, Ho Chi Minh and other communists won 99% of the vote in North Vietnamese elections.\nThe domino theory, which argued that if a country fell to communism, surrounding countries would follow, was first proposed by the Eisenhower administration. John F. Kennedy, then a senator, said: \"Burma, Thailand, India, Japan, the Philippines and obviously Laos and Cambodia are among those whose security would be threatened if the Red Tide of Communism overflowed into Vietnam.\"\nDi\u1ec7m era, 1954\u201363.\nRule.\nA devout Catholic, Di\u1ec7m was fervently anti-communist, nationalist, and socially conservative. \"Di\u1ec7m represented narrow and extremist nationalism coupled with autocracy and nepotism.\" Most Vietnamese were Buddhist, and alarmed by Di\u1ec7m's actions, like his dedication of the country to the Virgin Mary.\nIn 1955, Di\u1ec7m launched the \"Denounce the Communists\" campaign, during which suspected communists and other anti-government elements were imprisoned, tortured, or executed. He instituted the death penalty in 1956 against activity deemed communist. The North Vietnamese government claimed that, by November 1957, over 65,000 were imprisoned and 2,148 killed. 40,000 political prisoners were jailed by 1959. In October 1956, Di\u1ec7m launched a land reform program limiting the size of rice farms per owner. 1.8m acres of farm land became available for purchase by landless people. By 1960, the process had stalled because many of Diem's biggest supporters were large landowners.\nIn May 1957, Di\u1ec7m undertook a 10-day state visit to the US. Eisenhower pledged his continued support, and a parade was held in Di\u1ec7m's honor. But Secretary of State Dulles privately conceded Di\u1ec7m had to be backed because they could find no better alternative.\nInsurgency in the South, 1954\u201360.\nBetween 1954 and 1957, the Di\u1ec7m government succeeded in preventing large-scale unrest in the countryside. In April 1957, insurgents launched an assassination campaign, referred to as \"extermination of traitors\". 17 people were killed in the Ch\u00e2u \u0110\u1ed1c massacre at a bar in July. By early 1959, Di\u1ec7m had come to regard the violence as an organized campaign and implemented Law 10/59, which made political violence punishable by death. There had been division among former Viet Minh, whose main goal was to hold elections promised in the Geneva Accords, leading to activities separate from the other communists and anti-GVN (Government of the Republic of Vietnam) activists. Douglas Pike estimated that insurgents carried out 2,000 abductions, and 1,700 assassinations of officials, village chiefs, hospital workers and teachers from 1957 to 1960. Violence between insurgents and government forces increased from 180 clashes in January 1960, to 545 in September.\nIn September 1960, COSVN, North Vietnam's southern headquarters, ordered a coordinated uprising in South Vietnam and a third of the population was soon living in areas of communist control. In December, North Vietnam formally created the Viet Cong (VC) with the intent of uniting all anti-GVN insurgents, including non-communists. It was formed in Memot, Cambodia, and directed through COSVN. The VC placed \"emphasis on the withdrawal of American advisors and influence, on land reform and liberalization of the GVN, on coalition government and the neutralization of Vietnam.\" Identities of the leaders were often kept secret.\nSupport for the VC was driven by resentment of Diem's reversal of Viet Minh land reforms. The Viet Minh had confiscated large private landholdings, reduced rents and debts, and leased communal lands to poorer peasants. Diem brought the landlords back, and people who had been farming land for years had to return it and pay years of back rent. \"The divisions within villages reproduced those that had existed against the French: 75% support for the NLF, 20% trying to remain neutral and 5% firmly pro-government\".\nNorth Vietnamese involvement.\nIn March 1956, southern communist leader L\u00ea Du\u1ea9n presented a plan to revive the insurgency entitled \"The Road to the South\", to the Politburo in Hanoi. However, as China and the Soviets opposed confrontation, his plan was rejected. Despite this, the North Vietnamese leadership approved tentative measures to revive southern insurgency in December. Communist forces were under a single command structure set up in 1958. In May 1958, North Vietnamese forces seized the transportation hub at Tchepone in Southern Laos near the demilitarized zone, between North and South Vietnam.\nThe North Vietnamese Communist Party approved a \"people's war\" on the South in January 1959, and, in May, Group 559 was established to upgrade the Ho Chi Minh trail, then a six-month mountain trek through Laos. On 28 July, North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces invaded Laos, fighting the Royal Lao Army along the border. About 500 of the \"regroupees\" of 1954 were sent south on the trail during its first year of operation. The first arms delivery was completed in August 1959. In April 1960, North Vietnam imposed military conscription for men. About 40,000 communist soldiers infiltrated the south between 1961 and 1963.\nKennedy's escalation, 1961\u201363.\nIn the 1960 U.S. presidential election, John F. Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon. Although Eisenhower warned Kennedy about Laos and Vietnam, Europe and Latin America \"loomed larger than Asia on his sights.\"\nKennedy remained committed to the Cold War foreign policy inherited from the Truman and Eisenhower administrations. In 1961, the US had 50,000 troops based in South Korea, and Kennedy faced four crisis situations: the failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion he had approved in April, settlement negotiations between the pro-Western government of Laos and the Pathet Lao communist movement in May, construction of the Berlin Wall in August, and the Cuban Missile Crisis in October. Kennedy believed another failure to stop communist expansion would irreparably damage US credibility. He was determined to \"draw a line in the sand\" and prevent a communist victory in Vietnam. He told \"The New York Times\" after the Vienna summit with Khrushchev, \"Now we have a problem making our power credible and Vietnam looks like the place.\"\nKennedy's policy toward South Vietnam assumed Di\u1ec7m and his forces had to defeat the guerrillas on their own. He was against the deployment of American combat troops and observed \"to introduce U.S. forces in large numbers there today, while it might have an initially favorable military impact, would almost certainly lead to adverse political and, in the long run, adverse military consequences.\" The quality of the South Vietnamese military, however, remained poor. Poor leadership, corruption, and political promotions weakened the ARVN. The frequency of guerrilla attacks rose as the insurgency gathered steam. While Hanoi's support for the VC played a role, South Vietnamese governmental incompetence was at the core of the crisis.\nA major issue Kennedy raised was whether the Soviet space and missile programs had surpassed those of the US. Although Kennedy stressed long-range missile parity with the Soviets, he was interested in using special forces for counterinsurgency warfare in Third World countries threatened by communist insurgencies. Although they were intended for use behind front lines after a conventional Soviet invasion of Europe, Kennedy believed guerrilla tactics employed by special forces, would be effective in a \"brush fire\" war in Vietnam.\nKennedy advisors Maxwell Taylor and Walt Rostow recommended US troops be sent to South Vietnam disguised as flood relief workers. Kennedy rejected the idea but increased military assistance. In April 1962, John Kenneth Galbraith warned Kennedy of the \"danger we shall replace the French as a colonial force...and bleed as the French did.\" Eisenhower put 900 advisors in Vietnam, and by November 1963, Kennedy had put 16,000.\nThe Strategic Hamlet Program was initiated in late 1961. This joint U.S.\u2013South Vietnamese program attempted to resettle the rural population into fortified villages. It was implemented in early 1962 and involved forced relocation and segregation of rural South Vietnamese, into new communities where the peasantry would be isolated from the VC. It was hoped these new communities would provide security for the peasants and strengthen the tie between them and central government. However, by November 1963 the program had waned, and it ended in 1964. In July 1962, 14 nations, including China, South Vietnam, the Soviet Union, North Vietnam, and the US, signed the International Agreement on the Neutrality of Laos.\nOusting and assassination of Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m.\nThe inept performance of the ARVN was exemplified by failed actions such as the Battle of Ap Bac in January 1963, in which the VC won a battle against a much larger and better-equipped South Vietnamese force, many of whose officers seemed reluctant to engage. The ARVN lost 83 soldiers and 5 US helicopters, serving to ferry troops shot down by VC forces, while the VC lost only 18 soldiers. The ARVN forces were led by Di\u1ec7m's most trusted general, Hu\u1ef3nh V\u0103n Cao. Cao was a Catholic, promoted due to religion and fidelity rather than skill, and his main role was to preserve his forces to stave off coups. Washington policymaker concluded Di\u1ec7m was incapable of defeating the communists and might even make a deal with Ho Chi Minh. He seemed concerned only with fending off coups and had become paranoid after attempts in 1960 and 1962, which he partly attributed to US encouragement. Robert F. Kennedy noted, \"Di\u1ec7m wouldn't make even the slightest concessions. He was difficult to reason with...\" Historian James Gibson summed up the situation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDiscontent with Di\u1ec7m's policies exploded in May 1963, following the Hu\u1ebf Ph\u1eadt \u0110\u1ea3n shootings of 9 Buddhists protesting the ban on displaying the Buddhist flag on Vesak. This resulted in mass protests\u2014the Buddhist crisis\u2014against discriminatory policies that gave privileges to Catholics over the Buddhist majority. Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Th\u1ee5c, Di\u1ec7m's elder brother and the Archbishop of Hu\u1ebf, held his anniversary celebrations shortly before Vesak; they were bankrolled by the government, and Catholic flags were prominently displayed. Di\u1ec7m refused to make concessions to the Buddhists or take responsibility for the deaths. In August 1963, the ARVN Special Forces of Colonel L\u00ea Quang Tung, loyal to Di\u1ec7m's brother Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Nhu, raided pagodas, causing destruction and hundreds of deaths. The Republic of Vietnam sought to harness religious nationalism by promoting spiritual values in opposition to communism's atheism; this approach amplified religious consciousness that challenged the state's authority.\nUS officials began discussing regime change during 1963. The United States Department of State wanted to encourage a coup, while the Pentagon favored Di\u1ec7m. Chief among the proposed changes was removal of Di\u1ec7m's brother Nhu, who controlled the secret police and special forces, and was seen as being behind Buddhist repression and the Ng\u00f4 family's rule. This proposal was conveyed to the US embassy in Saigon in Cable 243. The CIA contacted generals planning to remove Di\u1ec7m, and told them the US would not oppose this, nor punish them by cutting off aid. Di\u1ec7m was overthrown and executed, along with his brother, on 2 November 1963. When Kennedy was informed, Maxwell Taylor remembered he \"rushed from the room with a look of shock and dismay on his face.\" Kennedy had not anticipated Di\u1ec7m's murder. The U.S. ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge, invited coup leaders to the embassy and congratulated them. Lodge informed Kennedy that \"the prospects now are for a shorter war\". Kennedy wrote to Lodge congratulating him for \"a fine job\".\nFollowing the coup, chaos ensued. Hanoi took advantage and increased its support for the VC. South Vietnam entered political instability, as one military government toppled another. Each new regime was viewed by the communists as a puppet of the Americans; whatever the failings of Di\u1ec7m, his credentials as a nationalist had been impeccable. US advisors were embedded in the South Vietnamese armed forces. They were criticized for ignoring the political nature of the insurgency. The Kennedy administration sought to refocus US efforts on pacification \u2013 which in this case was defined as countering the insurgency \u2013 and \"winning the hearts and minds\" of the population. Military leadership in Washington, however, was hostile to any role for U.S. advisors other than troop training. General Paul Harkins, the commander of U.S. forces in South Vietnam, confidently predicted victory by Christmas 1963. The CIA was less optimistic, warning that \"the Viet Cong by and large retain de facto control of much of the countryside and have steadily increased the overall intensity of the effort\".\nParamilitary officers from the CIA's Special Activities Division trained and led Hmong tribesmen in Laos and into Vietnam. The indigenous forces were in the tens of thousands and conducted direct action missions, led by paramilitary officers, against the Communist Pathet Lao forces and their North Vietnamese supporters. The CIA ran the Phoenix Program and participated in the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam \u2013 Studies and Observations Group (MAC-V SOG).\nGulf of Tonkin and Johnson's escalation, 1963\u201369.\nKennedy was assassinated on 22 November 1963. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson had not been heavily involved with policy toward Vietnam; however he immediately focused on it. On 24 November, he said, \"the battle against communism... must be joined... with strength and determination.\" Johnson knew he had inherited a deteriorating situation, but adhered to the widely accepted domino argument for defending the South: Should they retreat or appease, either action would imperil other nations. Findings from RAND's Viet Cong Motivation and Morale Project bolstered his confidence that an air war would weaken the insurgency. Some argue the policy of North Vietnam was not to topple other non-communist governments in South East Asia.\nThe military revolutionary council, meeting in lieu of a strong South Vietnamese leader, had 12 members. It was headed by General D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n Minh, whom journalist Stanley Karnow, recalled as \"a model of lethargy\". Lodge cabled home about Minh: \"Will he be strong enough to get on top of things?\" Minh's regime was overthrown in January 1964 by General Nguy\u1ec5n Kh\u00e1nh. There was persistent instability in the military: several coups\u2014not all successful\u2014occurred in a short period of time.\nGulf of Tonkin incident.\nOn 2 August 1964, , on an intelligence mission along North Vietnam's coast, fired upon and damaged torpedo boats approaching it in the Gulf of Tonkin. A second attack was reported two days later on and \"Maddox\". The circumstances were murky. Johnson commented to Undersecretary of State George Ball that \"those sailors out there may have been shooting at flying fish.\" An NSA publication declassified in 2005 revealed there was no attack on 4 August.\nThe second \"attack\" led to retaliatory airstrikes, and prompted Congress to approve the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution on 7 August. This granted the president power \"to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression\" and Johnson relied on this as giving him authority to expand the war. Johnson pledged he was not \"committing American boys to fighting a war that I think ought to be fought by the boys of Asia to help protect their own land\".\nThe National Security Council recommended an escalation of the bombing of North Vietnam. Following an attack on a U.S. Army base in February 1965, airstrikes were initiated, while Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin was on a state visit to North Vietnam. Operation Rolling Thunder and Operation Arc Light expanded aerial bombardment and ground support operations. The bombing campaign, which lasted three years, was intended to force North Vietnam to cease support for the VC by threatening to destroy North Vietnamese air defenses and infrastructure. It was additionally aimed at bolstering South Vietnamese morale. Between 1965 and 1968, \"Rolling Thunder\" deluged the north with a million tons of missiles, rockets and bombs.\nBombing of Laos.\nBombing was not restricted to North Vietnam. Aerial campaigns targeted different parts of the VC and PAVN infrastructure. These included the Ho Chi Minh Trail through Laos and Cambodia. The ostensibly neutral Laos had become the scene of a civil war, pitting the Laotian government backed by the US, against the Pathet Lao and its North Vietnamese allies.\nAerial bombardment against the Pathet Lao and PAVN forces was undertaken by the US to prevent the collapse of the government, and deny use of the Ho Chi Minh Trail. Between 1964 and 1973, the US dropped two million tons of bombs on Laos, similar to the 2.1\u00a0million tons of bombs it dropped on Europe and Asia during World War II, making Laos the most heavily bombed country in history.\nThe objective of stopping North Vietnam and the VC was never reached. The Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Curtis LeMay, however, had long advocated saturation bombing in Vietnam and wrote of the communists that \"we're going to bomb them back into the Stone Age\".\nThe 1964 offensive.\nFollowing the Tonkin Resolution, Hanoi anticipated the arrival of US troops and expanded the VC, as well as sending PAVN personnel southwards. They were outfitting the VC forces and standardizing their equipment with AK-47 rifles and other supplies, as well as forming the 9th Division. \"From a strength of approximately 5,000 at the start of 1959 the Viet Cong's ranks grew to about 100,000 at the end of 1964... Between 1961-64 the Army's strength rose from about 850,000 to nearly a million men.\" US troop numbers deployed were much lower: 2,000 in 1961, rising to 16,500 in 1964. The use of captured equipment decreased, while more ammunition and supplies were required to maintain regular units. Group 559 was tasked with expanding the Ho Chi Minh Trail, in light of US bombardment. The war had shifted into the final, conventional phase of Hanoi's three-stage protracted warfare model. The VC was tasked with destroying the ARVN, and capturing and holding areas; however, it was not yet strong enough to assault towns and cities.\nIn December 1964, ARVN forces suffered losses at the Battle of B\u00ecnh Gi\u00e3, in a battle both sides viewed as a watershed. Previously, the VC had utilized hit-and-run guerrilla tactics. At Binh Gia, they defeated a strong ARVN force in a conventional battle and remained in the field for four days. Tellingly, South Vietnamese forces were again defeated in June 1965 at the Battle of \u0110\u1ed3ng Xo\u00e0i.\nAmerican ground war.\nOn 8 March 1965, 3,500 U.S. Marines were landed near Da Nang, South Vietnam. This marked the beginning of America's ground war. US public opinion overwhelmingly supported the deployment. The Marines' initial assignment was defense of Da Nang Air Base. The first deployment was increased to nearly 200,000 by December. US military had been schooled in offensive warfare. Regardless of policy, US commanders were institutionally and psychologically unsuited to defensive missions.\nGeneral William Westmoreland informed Admiral U. S. Grant Sharp Jr., commander of US Pacific forces, that the situation was critical, \"I am convinced that U.S. troops with their energy, mobility, and firepower can successfully take the fight to the NLF (Viet Cong)\". With this recommendation, Westmoreland advocated an aggressive departure from America's defensive posture and sidelining of the South Vietnamese. By ignoring ARVN units, the US commitment became open-ended. Westmoreland outlined a three-point plan to win:\nThe plan was approved by Johnson and marked a profound departure from the insistence that South Vietnam was responsible for defeating the VC. Westmoreland predicted victory by December 1967. Johnson did not communicate this change to the media, instead he emphasized continuity. The change in policy depended on matching the North Vietnamese and VC in a contest of attrition and morale. The opponents were locked in an escalation cycle. However Johnson ruled out invasion of North Vietnam due to fears of Chinese or Soviet intervention. Westmoreland and McNamara touted the body count system for gauging victory, a metric that proved flawed.\nThe American buildup transformed the South Vietnamese economy and profoundly effected society. South Vietnam was inundated with manufactured goods. Washington encouraged its SEATO allies to contribute troops; Australia, New Zealand, Thailand and the Philippines agreed. South Korea asked to join the Many Flags program in return for economic compensation. Major allies, however, notably Canada and the UK, declined troop requests.\nThe US and allies mounted complex search and destroy operations. In November 1965, the US engaged in its first major battle with the PAVN, the Battle of Ia Drang. The operation was the first large scale helicopter air assault by the US, and first to employ Boeing B-52 Stratofortress bombers. These tactics continued in 1966\u201367, however, the PAVN/VC insurgents remained elusive and demonstrated tactical flexibility. By 1967, the war had generated large-scale internal refugees, 2\u00a0million in South Vietnam, with 125,000 people evacuated and rendered homeless during Operation Masher alone, the largest search and destroy operation to that point. Operation Masher had negligible impact however, as the PAVN/VC returned to the province just four months afterwards. Despite major operations, which the VC and PAVN would evade, the war was characterized by smaller-unit engagements. The VC and PAVN would initiate 90% of large firefights, and thus the PAVN/VC would retain strategic initiative despite overwhelming US force and firepower deployment. The PAVN and Viet Cong had developed strategies capable of countering US doctrines and tactics: see NLF and PAVN battle tactics.\nMeanwhile, South Vietnamese politics began to stabilize with the arrival of prime minister Air Marshal Nguy\u1ec5n Cao K\u1ef3 and figurehead chief of state, General Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Thi\u1ec7u, in mid-1965. In 1967, Thieu became president with Ky as his deputy, after rigged elections. Though nominally a civilian government, K\u1ef3 was supposed to maintain real power through a behind-the-scenes military body. However, Thi\u1ec7u outmanoeuvred and sidelined K\u1ef3. Thi\u1ec7u was accused of murdering K\u1ef3 loyalists through contrived military accidents. Thi\u1ec7u remained president until 1975, having won a one-candidate election in 1971.\nJohnson employed a \"policy of minimum candor\" with the media. Military information officers sought to manage coverage by emphasizing stories that portrayed progress. This damaged public trust in official pronouncements. As coverage of the war and the Pentagon diverged, a credibility gap developed. Despite Johnson and Westmoreland proclaiming victory and Westmoreland stating the \"end is coming into view\", internal reports in the \"Pentagon Papers\" indicate VC forces retained strategic initiative and controlled their losses. VC attacks against static US positions accounted for 30% of engagements, VC/PAVN ambushes and encirclements for 23%, American ambushes against VC/PAVN forces for 9%, and American forces attacking VC emplacements only 5%.\nTet Offensive and its aftermath.\nIn late 1967, the PAVN lured American forces into the hinterlands at \u0110\u1eafk T\u00f4 and at the Marine Khe Sanh combat base, where the US fought The Hill Fights. These were part of a diversionary strategy to draw US forces towards the Central Highlands. Preparations were underway for the Tet Offensive, with the intention of V\u0103n Ti\u1ebfn D\u0169ng forces to launch \"direct attacks on the American and puppet nerve centers\u2014Saigon, Hu\u1ebf, Danang, all the cities, towns and main bases [...]\". Le Duan sought to placate critics of the stalemate by a decisive victory. He reasoned this could be achieved through sparking an uprising in the towns and cities, along with defections among ARVN units, who were on leave during the truce period.\nThe Tet Offensive began in January 1968, as over 100 cities were attacked by over 85,000 VC/PAVN troops, including assaults on military installations, headquarters, and government buildings, including the US Embassy in Saigon. US and South Vietnamese forces were shocked by the scale, intensity and deliberative planning, as infiltration of personnel and weapons into the cities was accomplished covertly; the offensive constituted an intelligence failure on the scale of Pearl Harbor. Most cities were recaptured within weeks, except the former imperial capital Hu\u1ebf, which PAVN/VC troops held on for 26 days. They executed approximately 2,800 unarmed Hu\u1ebf civilians and foreigners they considered spies. In the Battle of Hu\u1ebf American forces employed massive firepower that left 80% of the city in ruins. At Qu\u1ea3ng Tr\u1ecb City, the ARVN Airborne Division, the 1st Division and a US 1st Cavalry Division regiment held out and overcame an assault intended to capture the city. In Saigon, VC/PAVN fighters had captured areas in and around the city, attacking key installations before US and ARVN forces dislodged them. Peter Arnett reported an infantry commander saying of the Battle of B\u1ebfn Tre that \"it became necessary to destroy the village in order to save it\".\nDuring the first month of Tet, 1,100 American and allied troops, 2,100 ARVN and 14,000 civilians were killed. After two months, 5,000 ARVN and 4,000 US forces had been killed and 46,000 wounded. The US claimed 17,000 PAVN/VC had been killed and 15,000 wounded. A month later the May Offensive was launched; it demonstrated the VC were still capable of orchestrating nationwide offensives. Two months later the Phase III offensive was launched. PAVN losses across the offensives was 45,267 killed and 111,179 total casualties. It had become the bloodiest year up to then. The failure to spark a general uprising and lack of defections among the ARVN units meant Hanoi's goals had failed at enormous cost.\nPrior to Tet, in November 1967, Westmoreland had spearheaded a public relations drive for the Johnson administration to bolster flagging public support. In a speech to the National Press Club he said \"the end comes into view\". Thus, the public was shocked and confused by the Tet Offensive. Public approval of his performance dropped from 48% to 36%, and endorsement for the war fell from 40% to 26%. The public turned against Johnson as the offensives contradicted claims of progress.\nDuring 1968, Westmoreland considered the use of nuclear weapons in a contingency plan codenamed Fracture Jaw, which was abandoned when it became known to the White House. Westmoreland and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Earle Wheeler requested more than 200,000 additional troops. This quickly leaked to the media, and the fallout combined with intelligence failures caused Westmoreland to be removed in March 1968, succeeded by his deputy Creighton Abrams.\nOn 10 May 1968, peace talks began between the US and North Vietnam in Paris. Negotiations stagnated for five months, until Johnson halted the bombing of North Vietnam. Hanoi realized it could not achieve a \"total victory\" and employed a strategy known as \"talking while fighting, fighting while talking\", in which offensives occurred concurrently with negotiations.\nJohnson declined to run for re-election as his approval rating slumped from 48% to 36%. His escalation of the war divided Americans, cost 30,000 American lives by that point and is regarded as having destroyed his presidency. Robert McNamara later said \"the dangerous illusion of victory by the United States was therefore dead\", but this was an exaggeration. There continued to be important Americans who hoped for victory, and Johnson was among them. In the speech of March 31, 1968, in which he announced he would not run for re-election, he offered to begin peace negotiations with Hanoi. He said that in an effort to get negotiations started, he was \"reducing\u2014substantially reducing\u2014the present level of hostilities.\" This was misleading. He was increasing the military pressure on enemy forces, trying to ensure that if the negotiations produced an agreement, it would be one representing a defeat for Hanoi.\nJohnson did not make the huge increase in US troop strength that Generals Westmoreland and Wheeler had requested a few weeks earlier, but he did send significant reinforcements. There were about 515,000 US military personnel in Vietnam at the time of his speech. There were 536,000 two months later. He narrowed the area of North Vietnam on which US bombs fell, but in April 1968, the first month in which bombing was limited to the southern part of North Vietnam, the United States dropped almost twice as many tons of bombs there as had been dropped on the whole of North Vietnam in March. More importantly, US bombing of Indochina as a whole was increasing. The most the US had dropped in Indochina in any month before Johnson's speech had been about 98,000 tons. In April 1968, the month after his speech, the figure rose to almost 113,000 tons.\nVietnam was a major issue during the United States presidential election in 1968. The election was won by Republican Richard Nixon who claimed to have a secret plan to end the war.\nVietnamization, 1969\u201372.\nNuclear threats and diplomacy.\nNixon began troop withdrawals in 1969. His plan to build up the ARVN so it could take over defense of South Vietnam became known as \"Vietnamization\". As the PAVN/VC recovered from their 1968 losses and avoided contact, Abrams conducted operations aimed at disrupting logistics, with better use of firepower and more cooperation with the ARVN. In October 1969, Nixon had ordered B-52s with nuclear weapons to race to the border of Soviet airspace to convince the Soviets, in accordance with the madman theory, he was capable of anything to end the war. Nixon had sought \"d\u00e9tente\" with the Soviet Union and rapprochement with China, which decreased tensions and led to nuclear arms reductions. However, the Soviets continued to supply North Vietnam.\nHanoi's war strategy.\nOn 2 September 1969, Ho Chi Minh died. The failure of the Tet Offensive to spark an uprising in the south caused a shift in Hanoi's war strategy, and the Gi\u00e1p-Chinh \"Northern-First\" faction regained control over military affairs from the L\u00ea Du\u1ea9n-Ho\u00e0ng V\u0103n Th\u00e1i \"Southern-First\" faction. An unconventional victory was sidelined in favor of conventional through conquest. Large-scale offensives were rolled back in favor of small-unit and sapper attacks as well as targeting the pacification and Vietnamization strategy. Following Tet, the PAVN had transformed from a light-infantry, limited mobility force into high-mobility and mechanized combined arms.\nU.S. domestic controversies.\nThe anti-war movement was gaining strength in the US. Nixon appealed to the \"silent majority\" who he said supported the war. But revelations of the 1968 My Lai massacre, in which a US Army unit raped and killed civilians, and the 1969 \"Green Beret Affair\", where Special Forces soldiers, were arrested for the murder of a suspected double agent, provoked outrage.\nIn 1971, the \"Pentagon Papers\" were leaked to \"The New York Times\". The secret history of US involvement, commissioned by the Department of Defense, detailed public deceptions by the government. The Supreme Court ruled publication legal.\nCollapsing U.S. morale.\nFollowing Tet and decreasing public support, US forces began a period of morale collapse, and disobedience. At home, desertion rates quadrupled from 1966 levels. Among the enlisted, only 2.5% chose infantry between 1969 and 1970. ROTC enrollment decreased from 191,749 in 1966 to 72,459 by 1971, and a low of 33,220 in 1974, depriving the US of much-needed military leadership.\nRefusal to engage in patrols or carry out orders emerged, with a case of an entire company refusing orders. Unit cohesion began to dissipate and focused on minimizing contact with the PAVN/VC. A practice known as \"sand-bagging\" started, where units ordered to patrol would go into the country-side, find a site out of view from superiors and radio in false coordinates and reports. Drug usage increased, 30% regularly used marijuana, while a House subcommittee found 10% used heroin. From 1969, search-and-destroy operations became referred to as \"search and avoid\", falsifying battle reports while avoiding guerrillas. 900 fragging (killing a fellow office, usually superior) and suspected fragging incidents were investigated, most occurring between 1969 and 1971. In 1969, field-performance was characterized by low morale and poor leadership. The decline in morale was demonstrated by the Battle of FSB Mary Ann in 1971, in which a sapper attack inflicted serious losses on US defenders. Westmoreland, no longer in command but tasked with investigation of the failure, cited dereliction of duty, lax defensive postures and lack of officers in charge.\nOn the collapse of morale, Shelby Stanton wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the last years of the Army's retreat, its remaining forces were relegated to static security. The American Army's decline was readily apparent...Racial incidents, drug abuse, combat disobedience, and crime reflected growing idleness, resentment... the fatal handicaps of faulty campaign strategy, incomplete wartime preparation, and the tardy, superficial attempts at Vietnamization. An entire American army was sacrificed on the battlefield of Vietnam.\nARVN taking the lead and U.S. ground force withdrawal.\nBeginning in 1969, American troops were withdrawn from border areas where most of the fighting took place and redeployed along the coast and interior. US casualties in 1970 were less than half of 1969, after being relegated to less active combat. While US forces were redeployed, the ARVN took over combat operations, with casualties double US ones in 1969, and triple in 1970. Post-Tet, membership in the South Vietnamese Regional Forces and Popular Force militias grew, and they could now provide village security, which the Americans had not accomplished.\nIn 1970, Nixon announced the withdrawal of an additional 150,000 American troops, reducing US numbers to 265,500. By 1970, VC forces were no longer southern-majority, nearly 70% were northerners. Between 1969 and 1971 the VC and some PAVN units had reverted to small unit tactics, instead of nationwide offensives. In 1971, Australia and New Zealand withdrew their soldiers and US troops were reduced to 196,700, with a deadline to remove another 45,000 troops by February 1972. The US reduced support troops, and in March 1971 the 5th Special Forces Group, the first American unit deployed, withdrew.\nCambodia.\nPrince Norodom Sihanouk had proclaimed Cambodia neutral since 1955, but permitted the PAVN/VC to use the port of Sihanoukville and Sihanouk Trail. In March 1969 Nixon launched a secret bombing campaign, called Operation Menu, against communist sanctuaries along the Cambodia/Vietnam border. Only five congressional officials were informed.\nIn March 1970, Sihanouk was deposed by his pro-American prime minister Lon Nol, who demanded North Vietnamese troops leave Cambodia or face military action. Nol began rounding up Vietnamese civilians in Cambodia and massacring them, provoking reactions from the North and South Vietnamese governments. In April\u2013May 1970, North Vietnam invaded Cambodia at the request of the Khmer Rouge, following negotiations with deputy leader Nuon Chea. Nguyen Co Thach recalls: \"Nuon Chea has asked for help and we have liberated five provinces of Cambodia in ten days.\" US and ARVN forces launched the Cambodian campaign in May to attack PAVN/VC bases. A counter-offensive in 1971, as part of Operation Chenla II by the PAVN, recaptured most border areas and decimated Nol's forces.\nThe US incursion into Cambodia sparked U.S. protests as Nixon had promised to deescalate involvement. Students were killed by National Guardsmen in May 1970 at a Kent State University protest, which provoked further outrage. The administration's reaction was seen as callous, reinvigorating the anti-war movement. The US continued to bomb Cambodia as part of Operation Freedom Deal.\nLaos.\nBuilding on the success of ARVN units in Cambodia, and further testing the Vietnamization program, the ARVN was tasked with Operation Lam Son 719 in February 1971, the first major ground operation to attack the Ho Chi Minh Trail. This was the first time the PAVN would field-test its combined arms force. The first few days were a success, but momentum slowed after fierce resistance. Thi\u1ec7u had halted the general advance, leaving PAVN armored divisions able to surround them.\nThieu ordered air assault troops to capture the Tchepone crossroad and withdraw, despite facing four-times larger numbers. During the withdrawal, the PAVN counterattack had forced a panicked rout. Half of the ARVN troops were either captured or killed, half the ARVN/US support helicopters were downed and the operation was a fiasco, demonstrating operational deficiencies within the ARVN. Nixon and Thieu had sought a showcase victory simply by capturing Tchepone, and it was spun off as an \"operational success\".\nEaster Offensive and Paris Peace Accords, 1972.\nVietnamization was again tested by the Easter Offensive of 1972, a conventional PAVN invasion of South Vietnam. The PAVN overran the northern provinces and attacked from Cambodia, threatening to cut the country in half. US troop withdrawals continued, but American airpower responded, beginning Operation Linebacker, and the offensive was halted. The US Navy initiated Operation Pocket Money in May, an aerial mining campaign in Haiphong Harbor that prevented North Vietnam's allies from resupplying it with weapons.\nThe war was central to the 1972 U.S. presidential election as Nixon's opponent, George McGovern, campaigned on immediate withdrawal. Nixon's Security Advisor, Henry Kissinger, had continued secret negotiations with North Vietnam's L\u00ea \u0110\u1ee9c Th\u1ecd and in October 1972 reached an agreement. Thi\u1ec7u demanded changes to the peace accord upon its discovery, and when North Vietnam went public with the details, the Nixon administration claimed they were attempting to embarrass the president. The negotiations became deadlocked when Hanoi demanded changes. To show his support for South Vietnam and force Hanoi back to the negotiating table, Nixon ordered Operation Linebacker II, a bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong in December. Nixon pressured Thi\u1ec7u to accept the agreement or face military action.\nOn 15 January 1973, all US combat activities were suspended. L\u00ea \u0110\u1ee9c Th\u1ecd and Henry Kissinger, along with the PRG Foreign Minister Nguy\u1ec5n Th\u1ecb B\u00ecnh and a reluctant Thi\u1ec7u, signed the Paris Peace Accords on 27 January. This ended direct U.S. involvement in the war, created a ceasefire between North Vietnam/PRG and South Vietnam, guaranteed the territorial integrity of Vietnam under the Geneva Conference, called for elections or a political settlement between the PRG and South Vietnam, allowed 200,000 communist troops to remain in the south, and agreed to a POW exchange. There was a 60-day period for the withdrawal of US forces. \"This article proved... to be the only one...which was fully carried out.\" All US forces personnel were withdrawn by March.\nU.S. exit and final campaigns, 1973\u201375.\nIn the lead-up to the ceasefire on 28 January, both sides attempted to maximize land and population under their control in a campaign known as the War of the Flags. Fighting continued after the ceasefire, without US participation, and throughout the year. North Vietnam was allowed to continue supplying troops in the South, but only to replace expended material. The Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Kissinger and Th\u1ecd, but Th\u1ecd declined saying peace did not yet exist.\nOn 15 March 1973, Nixon implied the US would intervene militarily if the North launched a full offensive, and Defense Secretary Schlesinger re-affirmed this during his confirmation hearings. Public and congressional reaction was unfavorable, prompting the Senate to pass the Case\u2013Church Amendment to prohibit intervention.\nNorthern leaders expected the ceasefire terms would favor their side, but Saigon, bolstered by a surge of US aid just before the ceasefire, began to roll them back. The North responded with a new strategy developed in March 1973, according to Tr\u1ea7n V\u0103n Tr\u00e0. With US bombings suspended, work on the Ho Chi Minh Trail and other logistical structures could proceed. Logistics would be upgraded until the North was in a position to launch a massive invasion of the South, projected for the 1975\u201376 dry season. Tr\u00e0 calculated this would be Hanoi's last opportunity to strike, before Saigon's army could be fully trained. The PAVN resumed offensive operations when the dry season began in 1973, and by January 1974 had recaptured territory lost during the previous dry season.\nIn South Vietnam, the US departure, and recession after the 1973 oil crisis, hurt an economy dependent on US support and troop presence. After clashes that left 55 ARVN soldiers dead, Thi\u1ec7u announced in January 1974, that the war had restarted and the Peace Accords were no longer in effect. There were over 25,000 South Vietnamese casualties during the ceasefire period. Gerald Ford took over as US president in August 1974, and Congress cut financial aid to South Vietnam from $1\u00a0billion a year to $700\u00a0million. Congress voted funding restrictions to be phased in through 1975 and total cutoff in 1976.\nThe success of the 1973\u201374 dry season offensive inspired Tr\u00e0 to return to Hanoi in October 1974 and plead for a larger offensive the next dry season. This time, Tr\u00e0 could travel on a drivable highway with fueling stops, a vast change from when the Ho Chi Minh Trail was a dangerous mountain trek. Gi\u00e1p, the North Vietnamese defense minister, was reluctant to approve Tr\u00e0's plan since a large offensive might provoke US reaction and interfere with the big push planned for 1976. Tr\u00e0 appealed to Gi\u00e1p's superior, L\u00ea Du\u1ea9n, who approved it. Tr\u00e0's plan called for a limited offensive from Cambodia into Ph\u01b0\u1edbc Long province. The strike was designed to solve logistical problems, gauge the reaction of South Vietnamese forces, and determine whether the US would return. On 13 December 1974, PAVN forces attacked Ph\u01b0\u1edbc Long. Phuoc Binh fell on 6 January 1975. Ford desperately asked Congress for funds to assist and re-supply the South before it was overrun. Congress refused. The fall of Phuoc Binh and lack of American response left the South Vietnamese elite demoralized.\nThe speed of this success led the Politburo to reassess. It decided operations in the Central Highlands would be turned over to General V\u0103n Ti\u1ebfn D\u0169ng and Pleiku should be seized, if possible. D\u0169ng said to L\u00ea Du\u1ea9n: \"Never have we had military and political conditions so perfect or a strategic advantage as great as we have now.\" At the start of 1975, the South Vietnamese had three times as much artillery and twice as many tanks and armored vehicles as the PAVN. However, heightened oil prices meant many assets could not be used. Moreover, the rushed nature of Vietnamization, intended to cover US retreat, resulted in lack of spare parts, ground-crew, and maintenance personnel, which rendered most of it inoperable.\nCampaign 275.\nOn 10 March 1975, D\u0169ng launched Campaign 275, a limited offensive into the Central Highlands, supported by tanks and heavy artillery. The target was Ban Ma Thu\u1ed9t; if the town could be taken, the provincial capital Pleiku and the road to the coast, would be exposed for a campaign in 1976. The ARVN proved incapable of resisting, its forces collapsed. Again, Hanoi was surprised by the speed of its success. Dung urged the Politburo to allow him to seize Pleiku immediately and turn his attention to Kon Tum. He argued that with two months of good weather until the monsoon, it would be irresponsible not to take advantage.\nThi\u1ec7u ordered the abandonment of the Central Highlands and less defensible positions in a rushed policy described as \"light at the top, heavy at the bottom\". While most ARVN forces attempted to flee, isolated units fought desperately. ARVN general Phu abandoned Pleiku and Kon Tum and retreated toward the coast, in the \"convoy of tears\". On 20 March, Thi\u1ec7u reversed himself and ordered Hu\u1ebf, Vietnam's third-largest city, held at all costs, and then changed policy several times. As the PAVN attacked, panic set in, and ARVN resistance withered. On 22 March, the PAVN attacked Hu\u1ebf. Civilians flooded the airport and docks hoping to escape. As resistance in Hu\u1ebf collapsed, PAVN rockets rained down on Da Nang and its airport. By 28 March 35,000 PAVN troops were poised to attack the suburbs. By 30 March 100,000 leaderless ARVN troops surrendered as the PAVN marched through Da Nang. With the fall of the city, the defense of the Central Highlands and Northern provinces ended.\nFinal North Vietnamese offensive.\nWith the north half of the country under their control, the Politburo ordered D\u0169ng to launch the final offensive. The operational plan for the Ho Chi Minh Campaign called for Saigon's capture before 1 May. Hanoi wished to avoid the monsoon and prevent redeployment of ARVN forces defending the capital. PAVN forces, their morale boosted by recent victories, rolled on, taking Nha Trang, Cam Ranh and Da Lat.\nOn 7 April, three PAVN divisions attacked Xu\u00e2n L\u1ed9c, northeast of Saigon. Fighting raged as the ARVN defenders made a last stand to block PAVN advance. On 21 April however, the exhausted garrison was ordered to withdraw towards Saigon. An embittered and tearful Thi\u1ec7u resigned, declaring that the US had betrayed South Vietnam. He suggested Kissinger had tricked him into signing the Paris Accords, promising military aid that failed to materialize. Having transferred power to Tr\u1ea7n V\u0103n H\u01b0\u01a1ng on 21 April, he left for Taiwan. After having appealed unsuccessfully to Congress for $722 million in emergency aid for South Vietnam, Ford gave a televised speech on 23 April, declaring an end to the war and US aid.\nBy the end of April, the ARVN had collapsed except in the Mekong Delta. Refugees streamed southward, ahead of the PAVN onslaught. By 27 April, 100,000 PAVN troops encircled Saigon. The city was defended by about 30,000 ARVN troops. To hasten a collapse and foment panic, the PAVN shelled Tan Son Nhut Airport and forced its closure. Large numbers of civilians had no way out.\nFall of Saigon.\nChaos and panic broke out as South Vietnamese officials and civilians scrambled to leave. Martial law was declared. American helicopters began evacuating South Vietnamese, US and foreign nationals from Tan Son Nhut and the embassy compound. Operation Frequent Wind had been delayed until the last possible moment, because of Ambassador Graham Martin's belief Saigon could be held and a political settlement reached. Frequent Wind was the largest helicopter evacuation in history. It began on 29 April, in an atmosphere of desperation, as hysterical crowds of Vietnamese vied for limited space. Frequent Wind continued round the clock, as PAVN tanks breached defenses near Saigon. In the morning of 30 April, the last US Marines evacuated the embassy by helicopter, as civilians swamped the perimeter and poured into the grounds.\nPAVN troops entered Saigon and overcame all resistance, capturing key buildings and installations. Tanks from the 2nd Corps crashed through the gates of the Independence Palace and the VC flag was raised above it. President D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n Minh, who had succeeded Huong two days earlier, surrendered to Lieutenant colonel B\u00f9i V\u0103n T\u00f9ng, political commissar of the 203rd Tank Brigade. Minh was escorted to Radio Saigon to announce the surrender. The statement was on air at 2:30\u00a0pm.\nOpposition to US involvement.\nDuring the war a large segment of Americans became opposed to US involvement. In January 1967, 32% of Americans thought the US had made a mistake in sending troops. Opinion steadily turned following 1967 and by 1970 60% believed the US had made a mistake.\nEarly opposition drew its inspiration from the Geneva Conference. American support of Di\u1ec7m in refusing elections was seen as thwarting the democracy that the United States claimed to support. Kennedy, while senator, opposed involvement. Many young people protested because they were being drafted, others because the anti-war movement grew popular among the counterculture. Some within the peace movement advocated unilateral withdrawal. Opposition to the war tended to unite groups opposed to US anti-communism and imperialism, and for those involved with the New Left. Others, such as Stephen Spiro, opposed the war based on the theory of Just War. Some wanted to show solidarity with the Vietnamese, such as Norman Morrison emulating Th\u00edch Qu\u1ea3ng \u0110\u1ee9c.\nHigh-profile opposition increasingly turned to mass protests to shift opinion. Riots broke out at the 1968 Democratic National Convention. After reports of American military abuses brought attention and support to the anti-war movement, some veterans joined Vietnam Veterans Against the War. In October 1969, the Vietnam Moratorium attracted millions. The fatal shooting of students at Kent State University in 1970 led to nationwide university protests. Anti-war protests declined after the Paris Peace Accords and the end of the draft in 1973, and the withdrawal of troops.\nInvolvement of other countries.\nPro-Hanoi.\nChina.\nChina provided significant support for North Vietnam when the US started to intervene, including finance and hundreds of thousands of military support personnel. China said its military and economic aid to North Vietnam totaled $160\u00a0billion (adjusted for 2022 prices); included were 5\u00a0million tons of food (equivalent to a year's production), accounting for 10\u201315% of the North's food supply by the 1970s.\nIn summer 1962, Mao Zedong agreed to supply Hanoi with 90,000 rifles and guns free of charge, and starting in 1965, China began sending anti-aircraft units and engineering battalions, to repair damage caused by American bombing. They helped man anti-aircraft batteries, rebuild roads and railroads, transport supplies, and perform other engineering works. This freed PAVN units for combat. China sent 320,000 troops and annual arms shipments worth $180\u00a0million. China claims to have caused 38% of American air losses. China began financing the Khmer Rouge as a counterweight to North Vietnam. China \"armed and trained\" the Khmer Rouge during the civil war, and continued to aid them afterward.\nSoviet Union.\nThe Soviet Union supplied North Vietnam with medical supplies, arms, tanks, planes, helicopters, artillery, anti-aircraft missiles and other military equipment. Soviet crews fired Soviet-made surface-to-air missiles at US aircraft in 1965. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia acknowledged that the USSR had stationed up to 3,000 troops in Vietnam. 16 Soviet military personnel were killed in action during the war.\nBetween 1953 and 1991, the hardware donated by the Soviet Union included: 2,000 tanks; 1,700 APCs; 7,000 artillery guns; over 5,000 anti-aircraft guns; 158 surface-to-air missile launchers; and 120 helicopters. The Soviets sent North Vietnam annual arms shipments worth $450\u00a0million. From 1965 to 1974, fighting in Vietnam was observed by 11,000 military personnel of the Soviet Armed Forces. The KGB helped develop the signals intelligence capabilities of the North Vietnamese.\nPro-Saigon.\nAs South Vietnam was formally part of a military alliance with the US, Australia, New Zealand, France, the UK, Pakistan, Thailand and the Philippines, the alliance was invoked during the war. The UK, France and Pakistan declined to participate, and South Korea, Taiwan, and Spain were non-treaty participants.\nUnited Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races.\nThe ethnic minorities of South Vietnam, like the Montagnards in the Central Highlands, the Hindu and Muslim Cham, and the Buddhist Khmer Krom, were actively recruited in the war. There was a strategy of recruitment and favorable treatment of Montagnard tribes by the VC, as they were pivotal for control of infiltration routes. Some groups split off and formed the \"United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races\" (FULRO) to fight for autonomy or independence. FULRO fought against the South Vietnamese and VC, later fighting against the unified Socialist Republic of Vietnam, after the fall of South Vietnam.\nSouth Vietnam president Diem began a program to settle ethnic Vietnamese Kinh on Montagnard lands in the Central Highlands region. This provoked a backlash from the Montagnards, with some joining the VC. The Cambodians under pro-China Sihanouk and pro-American Lon Nol, supported their fellow Khmer Krom in South Vietnam, following an anti-ethnic Vietnamese policy. Following Vietnamization, many Montagnard groups and fighters were incorporated into the Vietnamese Rangers as border sentries.\nWar crimes.\nWar crimes took place, by both sides, including: rape, massacres of civilians, bombings of civilian targets, terrorism, torture, and murder of prisoners of war. Common crimes included theft, arson, and the destruction of property not warranted by military necessity.\nSouth Vietnamese, Korean and American.\nIn 1966, the Russell Tribunal was organized by public figures opposed to the war led by Bertrand Russell, to apply the precepts of international law. The tribunal found the US and allies guilty of acts of aggression, use of weapons forbidden by the laws of war, bombardment of targets of a purely civilian character, mistreatment of prisoners, and genocide. Though the tribunal's lack of juridical authority meant findings were ignored by the US and other governments, the hearings contributed to growing evidence which established the factual basis for a counter-narrative to US justifications for the war and inspired hearings, tribunals and legal investigations.\nIn 1968, the Vietnam War Crimes Working Group (VWCWG) was established by the Pentagon task force set up in the wake of the My Lai massacre, to ascertain the veracity of claims of US war crimes. Of the crimes reported to military authorities, sworn statements by witnesses and status reports indicated 320 incidents had a factual basis. The substantiated cases included seven massacres between 1967 and 1971 in which at least 137 civilians were killed; 78 further attacks targeting non-combatants resulting in at 57 deaths and 15 sexually assaulted; and 141 cases of US soldiers torturing civilian detainees, or prisoners of war, with fists, sticks, bats, water or electric shock. Journalists have documented uninvestigated war crimes, involving every active army division, including atrocities committed by Tiger Force. R. J. Rummel estimated that American forces committed around 5,500 democidal killings between 1960 and 1972.\nUS forces established free-fire zones to prevent VC fighters from sheltering in South Vietnamese villages. Such practice, which involved the assumption that anyone appearing in the designated zones was an enemy that could be freely targeted, was regarded as \"a severe violation of the laws of war\". Nick Turse argues that a drive toward higher body counts, widespread use of free-fire zones, rules of engagement where civilians who ran from soldiers or helicopters could be viewed as VC and disdain for civilians, led to massive civilian casualties and war crimes. An example cited by Turse is Operation Speedy Express, described by John Paul Vann as \"many M\u1ef9 Lais\". A report by \"Newsweek\" suggested at least 5,000 civilians may have been killed during the operation, and an official US military body count of 10,889 enemy combatants killed.\nRummel estimated 39,000 were killed by South Vietnam during the Diem-era in democide; for 1964\u201375, Rummel estimated 50,000 people were killed in democide. Thus, the total for 1954-75 is about 80,000 deaths caused by South Vietnam. Benjamin Valentino estimates 110,000\u2013310,000 deaths as a \"possible case\" of \"counter-guerrilla mass killings\" by US and South Vietnamese forces. The Phoenix Program, coordinated by the CIA, was aimed at destroying the political infrastructure of the VC. The program killed 26,000-41,000 people, an unknown number were innocent civilians.\nTorture and ill-treatment were frequently applied by the South Vietnamese to POWs, as well as civilian prisoners. During their visit to the Con Son Prison in 1970, congressmen Augustus Hawkins and William R. Anderson witnessed detainees either confined in minute \"tiger cages\" or chained to their cells, and provided with poor-quality food. American doctors found inmates suffering symptoms resulting from torture. During their visits to US detention facilities, the International Red Cross recorded many cases of torture and inhumane treatment. Torture was conducted by the South Vietnamese in collusion with the CIA. Unlike massacres such as My Lai, media reports of torture of POWs by South Vietnamese and US forces did not generate significant public outcry in the US.\nSouth Korean forces were accused of war crimes. One event was the 1968 Phong Nh\u1ecb and Phong Nh\u1ea5t massacre where the 2nd Marine Brigade reportedly killed about 70 civilians. South Korean forces are accused of perpetrating the B\u00ecnh H\u00f2a massacre, Binh Tai massacre and H\u00e0 My massacre.\nNorth Vietnamese and Viet Cong.\n\"The overall volume and lethality of Viet Cong terrorism rivals or exceeds all but a handful of terrorist campaigns waged over the last third of the twentieth century\", based on the definition of terrorists as a non-state actor, and examining targeted killings and civilian deaths which are estimated at over 18,000 from 1966 to 1969. The Pentagon estimates the VC/PAVN conducted 36,000 murders and 58,000 kidnappings from 1967 to 1972, c.\u20091973. Benjamin Valentino attributes 45,000\u201380,000 \"terrorist mass killings\" to the VC. Statistics for 1968\u201372 suggest \"about 80 percent of the terrorist victims were ordinary civilians and only about 20 percent were government officials, policemen, members of the self-defence forces or pacification cadres.\" VC tactics included frequent mortaring of civilians in refugee camps, and placing of mines on highways frequented by villagers taking goods to urban markets. Some mines were set only to go off after heavy vehicle passage, causing slaughter aboard packed buses.\nNotable VC atrocities include the massacre of over 3,000 unarmed civilians at Hu\u1ebf and killing 252 civilians during the \u0110\u1eafk S\u01a1n massacre. 155,000 refugees fleeing the North Vietnamese Spring Offensive were reported to have been killed, or abducted, on the road to Tuy H\u00f2a in 1975. PAVN/VC troops killed 164,000 civilians in democide between 1954 and 1975 in South Vietnam. North Vietnam was known for its abusive treatment of American POWs, most notably in H\u1ecfa L\u00f2 Prison (the \"Hanoi Hilton\"), where torture was employed to extract confessions.\nWomen.\nWomen were active in a variety of roles, making significant impacts and the war having significant impacts on them. Several million Vietnamese women served in the military and militias, particularly in the VC, with the slogan \"when war comes, even the women must fight\" widely used. These women made vital contributions on the Ho Chi Minh Trail, espionage, medical care, logistical and administrative work, and direct combat. Women took on more roles in the economy and Vietnam saw an increase in women's rights. Women emerged as leaders of anti-war campaigns and made significant contributions to war journalism.\nWomen still faced discrimination, and were targets of sexual violence and . Post-war, Vietnamese women veterans faced difficulty reintegrating into society and having their contributions recognised, as well as advances in rights failing to be sustained. Portrayals of the war have been criticised for their depictions of women, for overlooking the role women played and reducing Vietnamese women to racist stereotypes. Women are at the forefront of campaigns to deal with the war's aftermath, such as the effect of Agent Orange use and the Lai \u0110\u1ea1i H\u00e0n.\nBlack servicemen.\nThe experience of African-American military personnel has received significant attention. Wallace Terry's work includes observations about the impacts on black servicemen. He notes the higher proportion of combat casualties among African-American servicemen, the shift toward and different attitudes of black military volunteers and conscripts, the discrimination encountered \"on the battlefield, in decorations, promotion and duty assignments\", as well as having to endure \"the racial insults, cross-burnings and Confederate flags of their white comrades\"\u2014and the experiences faced by black soldiers stateside, during the war and afterwards.\nCivil rights leaders protested the disproportionate casualties and overrepresentation in hazardous duty experienced by black servicemen, prompting reforms implemented from 1967. As a result, by the war's completion, black casualties had declined to 13% of combat deaths, about equal to the share of draft-eligible black men, though slightly higher than the 10% who served.\nWeapons.\nNearly all US-allied forces were armed with US weapons including the M1 Garand, M1 carbine, M14 rifle, and M16 rifle. The Australian and New Zealand forces employed the 7.62\u00a0mm L1A1 Self-Loading Rifle, with occasional use of the M16 rifle.\nThe PAVN/VC, although having inherited US, French, and Japanese weapons from World War II and the First Indochina War, were largely armed and supplied by China, the Soviet Union, and its Warsaw Pact allies. Some weapons\u2014notably anti-personnel explosives, the K-50M, and \"home-made\" versions of the RPG-2\u2014were manufactured in North Vietnam. By 1969 the US Army had identified 40 rifle/carbine types, 22 machine gun types, 17 types of mortar, 20 recoilless rifle or rocket launcher types, nine types of antitank weapons, and 14 anti-aircraft artillery weapons used by ground troops on all sides. Also in use, mostly by anti-communist forces, were 24 types of armored vehicles and self-propelled artillery, and 26 types of field artillery and rocket launchers.\nCasualties.\nCasualty estimates vary, with one source suggesting up to 3.8\u00a0million violent war deaths in Vietnam between 1955 and 2002. A demographic study calculated 791,000\u20131,141,000 war-related deaths for all Vietnam, military and civilians. Between 195,000 and 430,000 South Vietnamese civilians died. Guenter Lewy estimated 65,000 North Vietnamese civilians died. Estimates of civilian deaths caused by American bombing of North Vietnam range from 30,000 to 182,000. A 1975 US Senate subcommittee estimated 1.4\u00a0million South Vietnamese civilians casualties, including 415,000 deaths. The military of South Vietnam suffered an estimated 254,000 killed between 1960 and 1974, and additional deaths between 1954 and 1959, and in 1975. Other estimates point to higher figures of 313,000 casualties.\nThe US Department of Defense figure for PAVN/VC killed from 1965 to 1974 was 950,765. Officials believed these need to be deflated by 30 percent. Lewy asserts that one-third of the reported \"enemy\" killed may have been civilians, concluding the figure was closer to 440,000.\nAccording to Vietnamese government figures, there were 849,018 confirmed military deaths on the PAVN/VC side, for the more lengthy period of 1955\u201375. This includes battle deaths of Vietnamese soldiers in the Laotian and Cambodian Civil Wars, in which the PAVN was a participant. Non-combat deaths account for 30-40%. However, the figures exclude deaths of South Vietnamese and allied soldiers, and the estimated 300,000\u2013500,000 PAVN/VC missing in action. Vietnamese government figures estimate 1.1 million dead and 300,000 missing from 1945 to 1979, with approximately 849,000 dead and 232,000 missing from 1960 to 1975.\nUS reports of \"enemy KIA\", referred to as body count, were subject to \"falsification and glorification\", and a true estimate of PAVN/VC combat deaths is difficult to assess, as US victories were assessed by having a \"greater kill ratio\". It was difficult to distinguish between civilians and military personnel in the VC, as many were part-time guerrillas or impressed laborers who did not wear uniforms and civilians killed were sometimes written off as enemy killed, because high enemy casualties was directly tied to promotions and commendation.\nBetween 275,000-310,000 Cambodians died, including 50,000\u2013150,000 combatants and civilians from US bombings. 20,000\u201362,000 Laotians died, and 58,281 U.S. military personnel were killed, of which 1,584 are still listed missing as of 2021[ [update]].\nAftermath.\nIn Southeast Asia.\nIn Vietnam.\nIn July 1976, North and South Vietnam were merged to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Despite speculation the victorious North Vietnamese would, in Nixon's words, \"massacre the civilians there [South Vietnam] by the millions,\" no mass executions happened.\nHowever many South Vietnamese were sent to re-education camps where they endured torture, starvation, and disease while forced to perform hard labor. The number involved varied depending on different observers: \"...\"50,000 to 80,000\" (\"Le Monde\", 1978), \"150,000 to 200,000\" (\"The Washington Post\", 1978), and \"300,000\" (Agence France Presse from Hanoi, 1978).\" Such variations are because \"Some estimates may include not only detainees but also people sent from the cities to the countryside.\" According to a native observer, 443,360 people had to register for a period in re-education camps in Saigon alone, and while some were released after a few days, others stayed for more than a decade. Between 1975 and 1980, more than 1 million northerners migrated south, to regions formerly in the Republic of Vietnam, while, as part of the New Economic Zones program, around 750,000 to over 1 million southerners were moved to mountainous forested areas. Gabriel Garc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez described South Vietnam as a \"False paradise\" when he visited in 1980:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The cost of this delirium was stupefying: 360,000 people mutilated, a million widows, 500,000 prostitutes, 500,000 drug addicts, a million tuberculous and more than a million soldiers of the old regime, impossible to rehabilitate into a new society. Ten percent of the population of Ho Chi Minh City was suffering from serious venereal diseases when the war ended, and there were 4 million illiterates throughout the South.\nThe US used its security council veto to block Vietnam's UN recognition three times, an obstacle to it receiving aid.\nLaos and Cambodia.\nBy 1975, the North Vietnamese had lost influence over the Khmer Rouge. Phnom Penh, Cambodia's capital, fell to the Khmer Rouge. Under Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge would kill 1\u20133 million Cambodians from a population of 8\u00a0million.\nThe relationship between Vietnam and Democratic Kampuchea (Cambodia) deteriorated. In response to the Khmer Rouge taking Phu Quoc and Tho Chu, and the belief they were responsible for the disappearance of 500 Vietnamese natives on Tho Chu, Vietnam launched a counterattack to recover the islands. After failed attempts to negotiate, Vietnam invaded Democratic Kampuchea in 1978 and ousted the Khmer Rouge, in the Cambodian\u2013Vietnamese War. In response, China invaded Vietnam in 1979. The two countries fought the Sino-Vietnamese War. From 1978 to 1979, some 450,000 ethnic Chinese left Vietnam by boat as refugees, or were deported.\nThe Pathet Lao overthrew the monarchy of Laos in 1975, establishing the Lao People's Democratic Republic. The change in regime was \"quite peaceful, a sort of Asiatic 'velvet revolution'\"\u2014although 30,000 former officials were sent to reeducation camps, often enduring harsh conditions.\nUnexploded ordnance.\nThe US dropped over 7\u00a0million tons of bombs on Indochina during the war, more than triple the 2.1\u00a0million tons it dropped on Europe and Asia during World War II, and ten times the amount during the Korean War. 500 thousand tons were dropped on Cambodia, 1\u00a0million tons on North Vietnam, and 4\u00a0million tons on South Vietnam. On a per person basis, the 2\u00a0million tons dropped on Laos make it the most heavily bombed country in history, \"nearly a ton for every person in Laos.\" Due to the particularly heavy impact of cluster bombs, Laos was a strong advocate of the Convention on Cluster Munitions to ban them, and host to its first meeting in 2010.\nFormer US Air Force official Earl Tilford recounted \"repeated bombing runs of a lake in central Cambodia. The B-52s literally dropped their payloads in the lake.\" The Air Force ran many missions like this to secure additional funding during budget negotiations, so the tonnage expended does not directly correlate with the resulting damage.\nUnexploded ordnance, mostly from US bombing, continues to kill, and has rendered much land hazardous and impossible to cultivate. Ordnance has killed 42,000 people since the war. In Laos, 80\u00a0million unexploded bombs remain. Unexploded ordnance has killed or injured over 20,000 Laotians and about 50 people are killed or maimed annually. It is estimated the explosives will not be removed entirely for centuries.\nRefugee crisis.\nOver 3\u00a0million people left Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia in the Indochina refugee crisis after 1975. Most Asian countries were unwilling to accept them, many led by boat and were known as boat people. Between 1975 and 1998, an estimated 1.2\u00a0million refugees from Vietnam and other Southeast Asian countries resettled in the US, while Canada, Australia, and France resettled over 500,000, China accepted 250,000. Laos experienced the largest flight proportionally, 300,000 out of a population of 3\u00a0million crossed the border into Thailand. Included among them were \"about 90%\" of Laos' \"intellectuals, technicians, and officials.\" According to author Nghia M. Vo and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), between 200,000 and 250,000 boat people died at sea.\nIn the United States.\nFailure of US goals is placed at different institutions and levels. Some have suggested it was due to failure of leadership. Others point to military doctrine. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara stated that \"the achievement of a military victory by U.S. forces...was indeed a dangerous illusion.\" The inability to bring Hanoi to the bargaining table by bombing illustrated another US miscalculation, and the limitations of military abilities in achieving political goals. Army Chief of Staff Harold Keith Johnson noted, \"if anything came out of Vietnam, it was that air power couldn't do the job.\" General William Westmoreland admitted bombing had been ineffective, saying he doubted \"that the North Vietnamese would have relented.\" Kissinger wrote to President Ford that \"in terms of military tactics ... our armed forces are not suited to this kind of war. Even the Special Forces who had been designed for it could not prevail.\" Hanoi persistently sought unification, and the effects of US bombing had negligible impact on North Vietnam's goals. US bombing mobilized people throughout North Vietnam and internationally, due to a superpower attempting to bomb a society into submission.\nAmericans struggled to absorb the lessons of the military intervention. President Ronald Reagan coined the term \"Vietnam syndrome\" to describe the reluctance of the public and politicians to support military interventions abroad. US polling in 1978 revealed nearly 72% of Americans believed the war was \"fundamentally wrong and immoral.\" Six months after the beginning of Operation Rolling Thunder, Gallup, Inc. found 60% did not believe sending troops was a mistake in September 1965, and only 24% believed it was. Polling did not find a plurality believed it was a mistake until October 1967, and did not find a majority believing it was until August 1968, during the third phase of the Tet Offensive. Thereafter, Gallup found majorities believing it was a mistake through the signing of the Peace Accords in 1973, when 60% believed it was a mistake, and polls between 1990 and 2000, found 70% of Americans believed it was a mistake. The Vietnam War POW/MIA issue, concerning the fate of US service personnel missing in action, persisted. The costs loom large in American consciousness; a 1990 poll showed the public incorrectly believed more Americans died in Vietnam than World War II.\nFinancial cost.\nBetween 1953 and 1975, the US was estimated to have spent $168\u00a0billion on the war (equivalent to $ trillion in 2024). This resulted in a large budget deficit. Other figures point to $139\u00a0billion from 1965 to 1974 (not inflation-adjusted), 10 times education spending, and 50 times more than housing and community development. It was stated that war-spending could have paid every mortgage in the US, with money leftover. As of 2013[ [update]], the US government pays Vietnam veterans and their families more than $22\u00a0billion annually in war-related claims.\nImpact on the U.S. military.\nMore than 3\u00a0million Americans served, 1.5\u00a0million saw combat. \"At the height of American involvement in 1968, for example, 543,400 American military personnel were stationed in Vietnam, but only 80,000 were...combat troops.\" Conscription existed since World War II, but ended in 1973.\n58,220 American soldiers were killed, 150,000 wounded, and at least 21,000 permanently disabled. The average age of troops killed was 23. Approximately 830,000 veterans, 15%, suffered posttraumatic stress disorder. Drug use, racial tensions, and fragging\u2014attempts to kill officers\u2014created problems for the military and impacted its capability. 125,000 Americans left for Canada to avoid the draft, and approximately 50,000 servicemen deserted. In 1977, President Jimmy Carter granted an unconditional pardon to Vietnam draft evaders with Proclamation 4483.\nThe war called into question army doctrine. Marine general Victor H. Krulak criticized Westmoreland's attrition strategy, calling it \"wasteful of American lives... with small likelihood of a successful outcome.\" Doubts surfaced about the military's ability to train foreign forces. There was found to be considerable flaws and dishonesty by commanders, due to promotions being tied to the body count system touted by Westmoreland and McNamara. Secretary of Defense McNamara wrote to President Johnson: \"The picture of the world's greatest superpower killing or seriously injuring 1,000 noncombatants a week, while trying to pound a tiny backward nation into submission on an issue whose merits are hotly disputed, is not a pretty one.\"\nEffects of U.S. chemical defoliation.\nAnother controversial aspect of the US effort, was use of chemical defoliants between 1961 and 1971. 20 million gallons of toxic herbicides, like Agent Orange, were sprayed on 6 million acres of forests and crops. They were used to parts of the countryside to prevent the VC from hiding weaponry and encampments, and deprive them of food. Defoliation was used to clear sensitive areas, including base perimeters and ambush sites along roads and canals. The chemicals used continue to change the landscape, cause diseases and birth defects, and poison the foodchain, including suppressing the growth of some plants and crops and proceeding into the sediment, affecting fish and other species. US records have listed figures including the destruction of 20% of the jungles of South Vietnam and 20-36% of the mangrove forests. The environmental destruction caused was described by Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme, lawyers, and academics as an ecocide.\nThe chemicals in Agent Orange pose health hazards, such as immune system disorders, developmental abnormalities, and issues with the reproductive system. Agent Orange and similar substances have caused many health issues for Vietnamese people and the US crews that handled them. Reports concluded that refugees exposed to sprays continued to experience pain in the eyes, skin and gastrointestinal upsets. In one study, 92% of participants suffered incessant fatigue; others reported monstrous births. Analysis has found significant correlation between having a parent who was exposed to Agent Orange with the likelihood of possessing or acting as a carrier of birth defects. The most common deformity appears to be spina bifida. There is substantial evidence defects carry on for three generations or more. In 2012, the US and Vietnam cooperated in cleaning toxic chemicals on Da Nang International Airport, marking the first time Washington has been involved in cleaning up Agent Orange in Vietnam. In 2018, Vietnam treated 150,000 cubic meters of contaminated soil.\nVietnamese victims attempted a class action lawsuit against Dow Chemical and other US chemical manufacturers, but a US District Court dismissed their case. As of 2006[ [update]], the Vietnamese government estimated there were over 4,000,000 victims of dioxin poisoning in Vietnam, while the Vietnamese Red Cross estimates up to one million people have health problems or disabilities as a result of Agent Orange. The US has described these figures as unreliable, and denied conclusive scientific links between Agent Orange and Vietnamese victims of dioxin poisoning. In parts of southern Vietnam, dioxin levels remain at over 100 times the accepted international standard.\nThe US Veterans Administration has listed prostate cancer, respiratory cancers, multiple myeloma, type 2 diabetes, B-cell lymphomas, soft-tissue sarcoma, chloracne, porphyria cutanea tarda, peripheral neuropathy as, \"presumptive diseases associated with exposure to Agent Orange or other herbicides during military service.\" Spina bifida is the sole birth defect in children of veterans recognized as caused by exposure to Agent Orange.\nIn popular culture.\nThe war has featured extensively in television, film, video games, music and literature. In Vietnam, the \"Girl from Hanoi\" (1974) was a film set during Operation Linebacker II, depicting wartime life. Another notable work was the diary of \u0110\u1eb7ng Th\u00f9y Tr\u00e2m, a doctor who enlisted in the Southern battlefield, and was killed aged 27 by US forces. Her diaries were published in Vietnam as \"\u0110\u1eb7ng Th\u00f9y Tr\u00e2m's Diary\" (\"Last Night I Dreamed of Peace\"), where it became a bestseller and was made into a film \"Don't Burn\". The diary has been compared to \"The Diary of Anne Frank\", and used in education.\nThe first major film on the war was John Wayne's pro-war \"The Green Berets\" (1968). Further films were released, the most noteworthy examples being Michael Cimino's \"The Deer Hunter\" (1978), Francis Ford Coppola's \"Apocalypse Now\" (1979), Oliver Stone's \"Platoon\" (1986) and Stanley Kubrick's \"Full Metal Jacket\" (1987). Other films include \"Good Morning, Vietnam\" (1987), \"Casualties of War\" (1989), and \"Born on the Fourth of July\" (1989).\nThe war influenced a generation of musicians and songwriters, pro/anti-war and pro/anti-communist. The Vietnam War Song Project has identified 5,000+ songs referencing the conflict. Country Joe and the Fish recorded \"The \"Fish\" Cheer/I-Feel-Like-I'm-Fixin'-to-Die Rag\" in 1965, and it became one of the most influential protest anthems.\nMyths.\nMyths play a role in the historiography of the war, and have become part of the culture of the United States. Discussion of myth has focused on US experiences, but changing myths have played a role in Vietnamese and Australian historiography. Scholarship has focused on \"myth-busting\", attacking orthodox and revisionist schools of historiography, and challenging myths about American society and soldiery in the war.\nKuzmarov in \"The Myth of the Addicted Army: Vietnam and the Modern War on Drugs\" challenges the popular and Hollywood narrative that US soldiers were heavy drug users, in particular the notion that the My Lai massacre was caused by drug use. According to Kuzmarov, Nixon is primarily responsible for creating the drug myth. Michael Allen accuses Nixon of mythmaking, by exploiting the plight of the National League of POW/MIA Families to allow the government to appear caring, as the war was increasingly considered lost. Allen's analysis ties the position of potential missing Americans, or prisoners into post-war politics and presidential elections, including the Swift boat controversy.\nAnnotations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32612", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32612", "title": "Virtual reality", "text": "Computer-simulated experience\nVirtual reality (VR) is a simulated experience that employs 3D near-eye displays and pose tracking to give the user an immersive feel of a virtual world. Applications of virtual reality include entertainment (particularly video games), education (such as medical, safety, or military training), research and business (such as virtual meetings). VR is one of the key technologies in the reality-virtuality continuum. As such, it is different from other digital visualization solutions, such as augmented virtuality and augmented reality.\nCurrently, standard virtual reality systems use either virtual reality headsets or multi-projected environments to generate some realistic images, sounds, and other sensations that simulate a user's physical presence in a virtual environment. A person using virtual reality equipment is able to look around the artificial world, move around in it, and interact with virtual features or items. The effect is commonly created by VR headsets consisting of a head-mounted display with a small screen in front of the eyes but can also be created through specially designed rooms with multiple large screens. Virtual reality typically incorporates auditory and video feedback but may also allow other types of sensory and force feedback through haptic technology.\nEtymology.\n\"Virtual\" has had the meaning of \"being something in essence or effect, though not actually or in fact\" since the mid-1400s. The term \"virtual\" has been used in the computer sense of \"not physically existing but made to appear by software\" since 1959.\nIn 1938, French avant-garde playwright Antonin Artaud described the illusory nature of characters and objects in the theatre as in a collection of essays, \"Le Th\u00e9\u00e2tre et son double\". The English translation of this book, published in 1958 as \"The Theater and its Double\", is the earliest published use of the term \"virtual reality\". The term \"artificial reality\", coined by Myron Krueger, has been in use since the 1970s. The term \"virtual reality\" was first used in a science fiction context in \"The Judas Mandala\", a 1982 novel by Damien Broderick.\nWidespread adoption of the term \"virtual reality\" in the popular media is attributed to Jaron Lanier, who in the late 1980s designed some of the first business-grade virtual reality hardware under his firm VPL Research, and the 1992 film \"Lawnmower Man\", which features use of virtual reality systems.\nForms and methods.\nOne method of realizing virtual reality is through simulation-based virtual reality. For example, driving simulators give the driver the impression of actually driving a vehicle by predicting vehicular motion based on the driver's input and providing corresponding visual, motion, and audio cues.\nWith avatar image-based virtual reality, people can join the virtual environment in the form of real video as well as an avatar. One can participate in the 3D distributed virtual environment in the form of either a conventional avatar or a real video. Users can select their own type of participation based on the system capability.\nIn projector-based virtual reality, modeling of the real environment plays a vital role in various virtual reality applications, including robot navigation, construction modeling, and airplane simulation. Image-based virtual reality systems have been gaining popularity in computer graphics and computer vision communities. In generating realistic models, it is essential to accurately register acquired 3D data; usually, a camera is used for modeling small objects at a short distance.\nDesktop-based virtual reality involves displaying a 3D virtual world on a regular desktop display without use of any specialized VR positional tracking equipment. Many modern first-person video games can be used as an example, using various triggers, responsive characters, and other such interactive devices to make the user feel as though they are in a virtual world. A common criticism of this form of immersion is that there is no sense of peripheral vision, limiting the user's ability to know what is happening around them.\nA head-mounted display (HMD) more fully immerses the user in a virtual world. A virtual reality headset typically includes two small high resolution OLED or LCD monitors which provide separate images for each eye for stereoscopic graphics rendering a 3D virtual world, a binaural audio system, positional and rotational real-time head tracking for six degrees of movement. Options include motion controls with haptic feedback for physically interacting within the virtual world in an intuitive way with little to no abstraction and an omnidirectional treadmill for more freedom of physical movement allowing the user to perform locomotive motion in any direction.\nAugmented reality (AR) is a type of virtual reality technology that blends what the user sees in their real surroundings with digital content generated by computer software. The additional software-generated images with the virtual scene typically enhance how the real surroundings look in some way. AR systems layer virtual information over a camera live feed into a headset or smartglasses or through a mobile device giving the user the ability to view three-dimensional images.\nMixed reality (MR) is the merging of the real world and virtual worlds to produce new environments and visualizations where physical and digital objects co-exist and interact in real time.\nA cyberspace is sometimes defined as a networked virtual reality.\nSimulated reality is a hypothetical virtual reality as truly immersive as the actual reality, enabling an advanced lifelike experience or even virtual eternity.\nHistory.\nThe development of perspective in Renaissance European art and the stereoscope invented by Sir Charles Wheatstone were both precursors to virtual reality. The first references to the more modern-day concept of virtual reality came from science fiction.\n20th century.\nMorton Heilig wrote in the 1950s of an \"Experience Theatre\" that could encompass all the senses in an effective manner, thus drawing the viewer into the onscreen activity. He built a prototype of his vision dubbed the Sensorama in 1962, along with five short films to be displayed in it while engaging multiple senses (sight, sound, smell, and touch). Predating digital computing, the Sensorama was a mechanical device. Heilig also developed what he referred to as the \"Telesphere Mask\" (patented in 1960). The patent application described the device as \"a telescopic television apparatus for individual use... The spectator is given a complete sensation of reality, i.e., moving three-dimensional images that may be in color, with 100% peripheral vision, binaural sound, scents, and air breezes.\"\nIn 1968, Harvard Professor Ivan Sutherland, with the help of his students, including Bob Sproull, created what was widely considered to be the first head-mounted display system for use in immersive simulation applications, called The Sword of Damocles. It was primitive both in terms of user interface and visual realism, and the HMD to be worn by the user was so heavy that it had to be suspended from the ceiling, which gave the device a formidable appearance and inspired its name. Technically, the device was an augmented reality device due to optical passthrough. The graphics comprising the virtual environment were simple wire-frame model rooms.\n1970\u20131990.\nThe virtual reality industry mainly provided VR devices for medical, flight simulation, automobile industry design, and military training purposes from 1970 to 1990.\nDavid Em became the first artist to produce navigable virtual worlds at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) from 1977 to 1984. The Aspen Movie Map, a crude virtual tour in which users could wander the streets of Aspen in one of the three modes (summer, winter, and polygons), was created at MIT in 1978.\nIn 1979, Eric Howlett developed the Large Expanse, Extra Perspective (LEEP) optical system. The combined system created a stereoscopic image with a field-of-view wide enough to create a convincing sense of space. The users of the system have been impressed by the sensation of depth (field of view) in the scene and the corresponding realism. The original LEEP system was redesigned for NASA's Ames Research Center in 1985 for their first virtual reality installation, the VIEW (Virtual Interactive Environment Workstation) by Scott Fisher. The LEEP system provided the basis for most of the early virtual reality headsets.\nBy the late 1980s, the term \"virtual reality\" was popularized by Jaron Lanier, one of the modern pioneers of the field. Lanier had founded the company VPL Research in 1984. VPL Research has developed several VR devices like the DataGlove, the EyePhone, the Reality Built For Two (RB2), and the AudioSphere. VPL licensed the DataGlove technology to Mattel, which used it to make the Power Glove, an early affordable VR device, released in 1989. That same year Broderbund's U-Force was released.\nAtari, Inc. founded a research lab for virtual reality in 1982, but the lab was closed after two years due to the video game crash of 1983. However, its hired employees, such as Scott Fisher, Michael Naimark, and Brenda Laurel, kept their research and development on VR-related technologies.\nIn 1988, the Cyberspace Project at Autodesk was the first to implement VR on a low-cost personal computer. The project leader Eric Gullichsen left in 1990 to found Sense8 Corporation and develop the WorldToolKit virtual reality SDK, which offered the first real time graphics with Texture mapping on a PC, and was widely used throughout industry and academia.\n1990\u20132000.\nThe 1990s saw the first widespread commercial releases of consumer headsets. In 1992, for instance, \"Computer Gaming World\" predicted \"affordable VR by 1994\".\nIn 1991, Sega announced the Sega VR headset for the Mega Drive home console. It used LCD screens in the visor, stereo headphones, and inertial sensors that allowed the system to track and react to the movements of the user's head. In the same year, Virtuality launched and went on to become the first mass-produced, networked, multiplayer VR entertainment system that was released in many countries, including a dedicated VR arcade at Embarcadero Center. Costing up to $73,000 per multi-pod Virtuality system, they featured headsets and exoskeleton gloves that gave one of the first \"immersive\" VR experiences.\nThat same year, Carolina Cruz-Neira, Daniel J. Sandin, and Thomas A. DeFanti from the Electronic Visualization Laboratory created the first cubic immersive room, the Cave automatic virtual environment (CAVE). Developed as Cruz-Neira's PhD thesis, it involved a multi-projected environment, similar to the holodeck, allowing people to see their own bodies in relation to others in the room. Antonio Medina, an MIT graduate and NASA scientist, designed a virtual reality system to \"drive\" Mars rovers from Earth in apparent real time despite the substantial delay of Mars-Earth-Mars signals.\nIn 1992, Nicole Stenger created \"Angels\", the first real-time interactive immersive movie where the interaction was facilitated with a dataglove and high-resolution goggles. That same year, Louis Rosenberg created the virtual fixtures system at the U.S. Air Force's Armstrong Labs using a full upper-body exoskeleton, enabling a physically realistic mixed reality in 3D. The system enabled the overlay of physically real 3D virtual objects registered with a user's direct view of the real world, producing the first true augmented reality experience enabling sight, sound, and touch.\nBy July 1994, Sega had released the VR-1 motion simulator ride attraction in Joypolis indoor theme parks, as well as the \"Dennou Senki Net Merc\" arcade game. Both used an advanced head-mounted display dubbed the \"Mega Visor Display\" developed in conjunction with Virtuality; it was able to track head movement in a 360-degree stereoscopic 3D environment, and in its \"Net Merc\" incarnation was powered by the Sega Model 1 arcade system board. Apple released QuickTime VR, which, despite using the term \"VR\", was unable to represent virtual reality, and instead displayed 360-degree interactive panoramas.\nNintendo's Virtual Boy console was released in 1995. A group in Seattle created public demonstrations of a \"CAVE-like\" 270 degree immersive projection room called the Virtual Environment Theater, produced by entrepreneurs Chet Dagit and Bob Jacobson. Forte released the VFX1, a PC-powered virtual reality headset that same year.\nIn 1999, entrepreneur Philip Rosedale formed Linden Lab with an initial focus on the development of VR hardware. In its earliest form, the company struggled to produce a commercial version of \"The Rig\", which was realized in prototype form as a clunky steel contraption with several computer monitors that users could wear on their shoulders. The concept was later adapted into the personal computer-based, 3D virtual world program \"Second Life\".\n21st century.\n2000\u20132010.\nThe 2000s decade was a period of relative public and investment indifference to commercially available VR technologies.\nIn 2001, SAS Cube (SAS3) became the first PC-based cubic room, developed by Z-A Production (Maurice Benayoun, David Nahon), Barco, and Clart\u00e9. It was installed in Laval, France. The SAS library gave birth to Virtools VRPack. In 2007, Google introduced Street View, a service that shows panoramic views of an increasing number of worldwide positions such as roads, indoor buildings and rural areas. It also features a stereoscopic 3D mode, introduced in 2010.\n2010\u2013present.\nIn 2010, Palmer Luckey designed the first prototype of the Oculus Rift. This prototype, built on a shell of another virtual reality headset, was only capable of rotational tracking. However, it boasted a 90-degree field of vision that was previously unseen in the consumer market at the time. Luckey eliminated distortion issues arising from the type of lens used to create the wide field of vision using software that pre-distorted the rendered image in real-time. This initial design would later serve as a basis from which the later designs came. In 2012, the Rift is presented for the first time at the E3 video game trade show by John Carmack. In 2014, Facebook (later Meta) purchased Oculus VR for what at the time was stated as $2 billion but later revealed that the more accurate figure was $3 billion. This purchase occurred after the first development kits ordered through Oculus' 2012 Kickstarter had shipped in 2013 but before the shipping of their second development kits in 2014. ZeniMax, Carmack's former employer, sued Oculus and Facebook for taking company secrets to Facebook; the verdict was in favour of ZeniMax, settled out of court later.\nIn 2013, Valve discovered and freely shared the breakthrough of low-persistence displays which make lag-free and smear-free display of VR content possible. This was adopted by Oculus and was used in all their future headsets. In early 2014, Valve showed off their SteamSight prototype, the precursor to both consumer headsets released in 2016. It shared major features with the consumer headsets including separate 1K displays per eye, low persistence, positional tracking over a large area, and Fresnel lenses. HTC and Valve announced the virtual reality headset HTC Vive and controllers in 2015. The set included tracking technology called Lighthouse, which utilized wall-mounted \"base stations\" for positional tracking using infrared light.\nIn 2014, Sony announced Project Morpheus (its code name for the PlayStation VR), a virtual reality headset for the PlayStation 4 video game console. The Chinese headset AntVR was released in late 2014; it was briefly competitive in the Chinese market but ultimately unable to compete with the larger technology companies. In 2015, Google announced Cardboard, a do-it-yourself stereoscopic viewer: the user places their smartphone in the cardboard holder, which they wear on their head. Michael Naimark was appointed Google's first-ever 'resident artist' in their new VR division. The Kickstarter campaign for Gloveone, a pair of gloves providing motion tracking and haptic feedback, was successfully funded, with over $150,000 in contributions. Also in 2015, Razer unveiled its open source project OSVR.\nBy 2016, there were at least 230 companies developing VR-related products. Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Sony and Samsung all had dedicated AR and VR groups. Dynamic binaural audio was common to most headsets released that year. However, haptic interfaces were not well developed, and most hardware packages incorporated button-operated handsets for touch-based interactivity. Visually, displays were still of a low-enough resolution and frame rate that images were still identifiable as virtual.\nIn 2016, HTC shipped its first units of the HTC Vive SteamVR headset. This marked the first major commercial release of sensor-based tracking, allowing for free movement of users within a defined space. A patent filed by Sony in 2017 showed they were developing a similar location tracking technology to the Vive for PlayStation VR, with the potential for the development of a wireless headset.\nIn 2019, Oculus released the Oculus Rift S and a standalone headset, the Oculus Quest. These headsets utilized inside-out tracking compared to external outside-in tracking seen in previous generations of headsets.\nLater in 2019, Valve released the Valve Index. Notable features include a 130\u00b0 field of view, off-ear headphones for immersion and comfort, open-handed controllers which allow for individual finger tracking, front facing cameras, and a front expansion slot meant for extensibility.\nIn 2020, Oculus released the Oculus Quest 2, later renamed the Meta Quest 2. Some new features include a sharper screen, reduced price, and increased performance. Facebook (which became Meta a year later) initially required users to log in with a Facebook account in order to use the new headset. In 2021 the Oculus Quest 2 accounted for 80% of all VR headsets sold.\nIn 2021, EASA approved the first Virtual Reality-based Flight Simulation Training Device. The device, made by Loft Dynamics for rotorcraft pilots, enhances safety by opening up the possibility of practicing risky maneuvers in a virtual environment. This addresses a key risk area in rotorcraft operations, where statistics show that around 20% of accidents occur during training flights.\nIn 2022, Meta released the Meta Quest Pro. This device utilised a thinner, visor-like design that was not fully enclosed, and was the first headset by Meta to target mixed reality applications using high-resolution colour video passthrough. It also included integrated face and eye tracking, pancake lenses, and updated Touch Pro controllers with on-board motion tracking.\nIn 2023, Sony released the PlayStation VR2, a follow-up to their 2016 headset. The device includes inside-out tracking, eye-tracked foveated rendering, higher-resolution OLED displays, controllers with adaptive triggers and haptic feedback, 3D audio, and a wider field of view. While initially exclusive for use with the PlayStation 5 console, a PC adapter was released in August 2024.\nLater in 2023, Meta released the Meta Quest 3, the successor to the Quest 2. It features the pancake lenses and mixed reality features of the Quest Pro, as well as an increased field of view and resolution compared to Quest 2. In October 2024 Meta released a lower cost entry headset the Meta Quest 3S with the same fresnel lenses as the Quest 2 and a lower resolution of 1832x1920 as compared to 2064x2208 on the Quest 3.\nIn 2024, Apple released the Apple Vision Pro. The device is a fully enclosed mixed reality headset that strongly utilises video passthrough. While some VR experiences are available on the device, it lacks standard VR headset features such as external controllers or support for OpenXR and is instead branded as a \"spatial computer\".\nIn 2024, the Federal Aviation Administration approved its first virtual reality flight simulation training device: Loft Dynamics' virtual reality Airbus Helicopters H125 FSTD\u2014the same device EASA qualified. As of September 2024, Loft Dynamics remains the only VR FSTD qualified by EASA and the FAA.\nTechnology.\nHardware.\nModern virtual reality headset displays are based on technology developed for smartphones including: gyroscopes and motion sensors for tracking head, body, and hand positions; small HD screens for stereoscopic displays; and small, lightweight and fast computer processors. These components led to relative affordability for independent VR developers, and led to the 2012 Oculus Rift Kickstarter offering the first independently developed VR headset.\nIndependent production of VR images and video has increased alongside the development of affordable omnidirectional cameras, also known as 360-degree cameras or VR cameras, that have the ability to record 360 interactive photography, although at relatively low resolutions or in highly compressed formats for online streaming of 360 video. In contrast, photogrammetry is increasingly used to combine several high-resolution photographs for the creation of detailed 3D objects and environments in VR applications.\nTo create a feeling of immersion, special output devices are needed to display virtual worlds. Well-known formats include head-mounted displays or the CAVE. In order to convey a spatial impression, two images are generated and displayed from different perspectives (stereo projection). There are different technologies available to bring the respective image to the right eye. A distinction is made between active (e.g., shutter glasses) and passive technologies (e.g. polarizing filters or Infitec).\nIn order to improve the feeling of immersion, wearable multi-string cables offer haptics to complex geometries in virtual reality. These strings offer fine control of each finger joint to simulate the haptics involved in touching these virtual geometries.\nSpecial input devices are required for interaction with the virtual world. Some of the most common input devices are motion controllers and optical tracking sensors. In some cases, wired gloves are used. Controllers typically use optical tracking systems (primarily infrared cameras) for location and navigation so that the user can move freely without wiring. Some input devices provide the user with force feedback to the hands or other parts of the body so that the user can orientate themselves in the three-dimensional world through haptics and sensor technology as a further sensory sensation and carry out realistic simulations. This allows the viewer to have a sense of direction in the artificial landscape. Additional haptic feedback can be obtained from omnidirectional treadmills (with which walking in virtual space is controlled by real walking movements) and vibration gloves and suits.\nVirtual reality cameras can be used to create VR photography using 360-degree panorama videos. VR cameras are available in various formats, with varying numbers of lenses installed in the camera.\nSoftware.\nThe Virtual Reality Modelling Language (VRML), first introduced in 1994, was intended for the development of \"virtual worlds\" without dependency on headsets. The Web3D consortium was subsequently founded in 1997 for the development of industry standards for web-based 3D graphics. The consortium subsequently developed X3D from the VRML framework as an archival, open-source standard for web-based distribution of VR content. WebVR is an experimental JavaScript application programming interface (API) that provides support for various virtual reality devices, such as the HTC Vive, Oculus Rift, Google Cardboard or OSVR, in a web browser.\nVisual immersion experience.\nDisplay resolution.\nMinimal Angle of Resolution (MAR) refers to the minimum distance between two display pixels. At a distance, a viewer can clearly distinguish the independent pixels. Often measured in arc-seconds, MAR between two pixels has to do with the viewing distance. For the general public, resolution is about 30\u201365 arc-seconds, which is referred to as the spatial resolution when combined with distance. Given the viewing distance of 1m and 2m respectively, regular viewers won't be able to perceive two pixels as separate if they are less than 0.29mm apart at 1m and less than 0.58mm apart at 2m.\nImage latency and display refresh frequency.\nMost small-size displays have a refresh rate of 60\u00a0Hz, which adds about 15ms of additional latency. The number is reduced to less than 7ms if the refresh rate is increased to 120\u00a0Hz or even 240\u00a0Hz and more. Participants generally feel that the experience is more immersive with higher refresh rates as a result. However, higher refresh rates require a more powerful graphics processing unit.\nRelationship between display and field of view.\nIn assessing the achieved immersion by a VR device, we need to consider our field of view (FOV) in addition to image quality. Our eyes have a horizontal FOV from about 107 or 110 degrees to the temporal side to about 60 or 70 degrees toward the nose and a vertical FOV from about 95 degrees downward to 85 degrees upward, and eye movements are estimated as roughly 30 deg to either side horizontally and 20 vertically. Binocular vision is limited to the 120 or 140 degrees where the right and the left visual fields overlap. With eye movements, we have an FOV of roughly 300 degrees x 175 degrees with two eyes, i.e., approximately one third of the full 360-deg sphere.\nApplications.\nVirtual reality is most commonly used in entertainment applications such as video games, 3D cinema, amusement park rides including dark rides and social virtual worlds. Consumer virtual reality headsets were first released by video game companies in the early-mid 1990s. Beginning in the 2010s, next-generation commercial tethered headsets were released by Oculus (Rift), HTC (Vive) and Sony (PlayStation VR), setting off a new wave of application development. 3D cinema has been used for sporting events, pornography, fine art, music videos and short films. Since 2015, roller coasters and theme parks have incorporated virtual reality to match visual effects with haptic feedback. VR not only fits the trend of the digital industry but also enhances the film's visual effect. The film gives the audience more ways to interact through VR technology.\nIn social sciences and psychology, virtual reality offers a cost-effective tool to study and replicate interactions in a controlled environment. It can be used as a form of therapeutic intervention. For instance, there is the case of the virtual reality exposure therapy (VRET), a form of exposure therapy for treating anxiety disorders such as post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and phobias.\nA VR therapy has been designed to help people with psychosis and agoraphobia manage their avoidance of outside environments. In the therapy, the user wears a headset and a virtual character provides psychological advice and guides them as they explore simulated environments (such as a cafe or a busy street). NICE is assessing the therapy to see if it should be recommended on the NHS.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, social VR has also been used as a mental-health tool in a form of self-administered, non-traditional cognitive behavioural therapy.\nVirtual reality programs are being used in the rehabilitation processes with elderly individuals that have been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease. This gives these elderly patients the opportunity to simulate real experiences that they would not otherwise be able to experience due to their current state. 17 recent studies with randomized controlled trials have shown that virtual reality applications are effective in treating cognitive deficits with neurological diagnoses. Loss of mobility in elderly patients can lead to a sense of loneliness and depression. Virtual reality is able to assist in making aging in place a lifeline to an outside world that they cannot easily navigate. Virtual reality allows exposure therapy to take place in a safe environment.\nIn medicine, simulated VR surgical environments were first developed in the 1990s. Under the supervision of experts, VR can provide effective and repeatable training at a low cost, allowing trainees to recognize and amend errors as they occur.\nVirtual reality has been used in physical rehabilitation since the 2000s. Despite numerous studies conducted, good quality evidence of its efficacy compared to other rehabilitation methods without sophisticated and expensive equipment is lacking for the treatment of Parkinson's disease. A 2018 review on the effectiveness of mirror therapy by virtual reality and robotics for any type of pathology concluded in a similar way. Another study was conducted that showed the potential for VR to promote mimicry and revealed the difference between non-autistic and autistic individuals in their response to a two-dimensional avatar.\nImmersive virtual reality technology with myoelectric and motion tracking control may represent a possible therapy option for treatment-resistant phantom limb pain. Pain scale measurements were taken into account and an interactive 3-D kitchen environment was developed based on the principles of mirror therapy to allow for control of virtual hands while wearing a motion-tracked VR headset. A systematic search in Pubmed and Embase was performed to determine results that were pooled in two meta-analysis. Meta-analysis showed a significant result in favor of VRT for balance.\nIn the fast-paced and globalised business world, meetings in VR are used to create an environment in which interactions with other people (e.g. colleagues, customers, partners) can feel more natural than a phone call or video chat. In the customisable meeting rooms all parties can join using the VR headset and interact as if they are in the same physical room. Presentations, videos or 3D models (of e.g. products or prototypes) can be uploaded and interacted with. Compared to traditional text-based CMC, Avatar-based interactions in 3D virtual environment lead to higher levels of consensus, satisfaction, and cohesion among group members. \nVR can simulate real workspaces for workplace occupational safety and health purposes, educational purposes, and training purposes. It can be used to provide learners with a virtual environment where they can develop their skills without the real-world consequences of failing. It has been used and studied in primary education, anatomy teaching, military, astronaut training, flight simulators, mining and metallurgical operations training, medical education, geography education, architectural design, driver training, and bridge inspection. Immersive VR engineering systems enable engineers to see virtual prototypes prior to the availability of any physical prototypes. Supplementing training with virtual training environments has been claimed to offer avenues of realism in military and healthcare training while minimizing cost. It also has been claimed to reduce military training costs by minimizing the amounts of ammunition expended during training periods. VR can be used for the healthcare training and education for medical practitioners. Further, several application have been developed for multiple types of safety training. The latest results indicates that virtual reality safety training is more effective than traditional training in terms of knowledge acquisition and knowledge retention.\nIn the engineering field, VR has proved very useful for both engineering educators and the students. A previously expensive cost in the educational department now being much more accessible due to lowered overall costs, has proven to be a very useful tool in educating future engineers. The most significant element lies in the ability for the students to be able to interact with 3-D models that accurately respond based on real world possibilities. This added tool of education provides many the immersion needed to grasp complex topics and be able to apply them. As noted, the future architects and engineers benefit greatly by being able to form understandings between spatial relationships and providing solutions based on real-world future applications.\nThe first fine art virtual world was created in the 1970s. As the technology developed, more artistic programs were produced throughout the 1990s, including feature films. When commercially available technology became more widespread, VR festivals began to emerge in the mid-2010s. The first uses of VR in museum settings began in the 1990s, seeing a significant increase in the mid-2010s. Additionally, museums have begun making some of their content virtual reality accessible.\nVirtual reality's growing market presents an opportunity and an alternative channel for digital marketing. It is also seen as a new platform for e-commerce, particularly in the bid to challenge traditional \"brick and mortar\" retailers. However, a 2018 study revealed that the majority of goods are still purchased in physical stores.\nIn the case of education, the uses of virtual reality have demonstrated being capable of promoting higher order thinking, promoting the interest and commitment of students, the acquisition of knowledge, promoting mental habits and understanding that are generally useful within an academic context.\nA case has also been made for including virtual reality technology in the context of public libraries. This would give library users access to cutting-edge technology and unique educational experiences. This could include giving users access to virtual, interactive copies of rare texts and artifacts and to tours of famous landmarks and archeological digs (as in the case with the Virtual Ganjali Khan Project).\nStarting in the early 2020s, virtual reality has also been discussed as a technological setting that may support people's grieving process, based on digital recreations of deceased individuals. In 2021, this practice received substantial media attention following a South Korean TV documentary, which invited a grieving mother to interact with a virtual replica of her deceased daughter. Subsequently, scientists have summarized several potential implications of such endeavours, including its potential to facilitate adaptive mourning, but also many ethical challenges.\nGrowing interest in the metaverse has resulted in organizational efforts to incorporate the many diverse applications of virtual reality into ecosystems like VIVERSE, reportedly offering connectivity between platforms for a wide range of uses.\nMedical uses of VR.\nVirtual reality (VR) technology has emerged as a significant tool in medical training and education. Specifically, there has been a major leap in innovation in surgical simulation and surgical real-time enhancement. Studies done at North Carolina medical institutions have demonstrated improvement in technical performance and skills among medical students and active surgeons using VR training as compared to traditional training, especially in procedures such as total hip arthroplasty. Alongside this, other VR simulation programs such as LapSim, improve basic coordination, instrument handling, and procedure-based skills. These simulations aim to have high ratings for feedback and haptic touch, which provides a more realistic surgical feel. \nStudies show significant improvement in task completion time and scores after 4-week training sessions of LapSim. This simulation environment also allows surgeons to practice without risk to real patients, promoting patient safety.\nBased on data from research conducted from the University Hospitals Schleswig-Holstein and collaborators from other institutions, medical students and surgeons with years of experience, show marked performance boosts after practicing with LapSim VR technology.\nAnother recent study at North Carolina University of Chapel Hill has shown that developing VR and Augmented Reality (AR) systems have allowed surgeons to keep their eyes on a patient while accessing CT scans. This VR system allows for laparoscopic imaging integration, real-time skin layer visualization, and enhanced surgical precision capabilities.\nThese are both examples of how studies have shown surgeons can take advantage of additional virtual reality simulation practices, which can create incredible experiences, provide customized scenarios, and provide independent learning with haptic feedback. These VR systems need to be realistic enough for education tools alongside being able to measure performance of a surgeon.\nSome potential future challenges of this technology would be enhancing complex scenarios alongside the realism aspects. These technologies would need to incorporate stress-inducing factors along with other realistic simulation ideas. Furthermore, there would be a need to have better AR integration to help the surgeon have better eyes-on precision guidance. Lastly, there would be a strong need to keep things cost-effective with an abundance of availability.\nConcerts.\nIn June of 2020, Jean Michel Jarre performed in VRChat. In July, Brendan Bradley released the free FutureStages web-based virtual reality venue for live events and concerts throughout the 2020 shutdown, Justin Bieber performed on November 18, 2021 in WaveXR. On December 2, 2021, non-player characters performed at the Mugar Omni Theater with audiences interacting with a live performer in both virtual reality and projected on the IMAX dome screen. Meta's Foo Fighters Super Bowl VR concert performed on Venues. Post Malone performed in Venues starting July 15, 2022. Megan Thee Stallion performed on AMAZE at AMC Theaters throughout 2022.\nOn October 24, 2021, Billie Eilish performed on Oculus Venues. Pop group Imagine Dragons performed on June 15, 2022.\nConcerns and challenges.\nHealth and safety.\nThere are many health and safety considerations of virtual reality. A number of unwanted symptoms have been caused by prolonged use of virtual reality, and these may have slowed the proliferation of the technology. Most virtual reality systems come with consumer warnings, including seizures; developmental issues in children; trip-and-fall and collision warnings; discomfort; repetitive stress injury; and interference with medical devices. Some users may experience twitches, seizures, or blackouts while using VR headsets, even if they do not have a history of epilepsy and have never had blackouts or seizures before. One in 4,000 people, or .025%, may experience these symptoms. Motion sickness, eyestrain, headaches, and discomfort are the most prevalent short-term adverse effects. In addition, because of the virtual reality headsets' heavy weight, discomfort may be more likely among children. Therefore, children are advised against using VR headsets. Other problems may occur in physical interactions with one's environment. While wearing VR headsets, people quickly lose awareness of their real-world surroundings and may injure themselves by tripping over or colliding with real-world objects.\nVR headsets may regularly cause eye fatigue, as does all screened technology, because people tend to blink less when watching screens, causing their eyes to become more dried out. There have been some concerns about VR headsets contributing to myopia, but although VR headsets sit close to the eyes, they may not necessarily contribute to nearsightedness if the focal length of the image being displayed is sufficiently far away.\nVirtual reality sickness (also known as cybersickness) occurs when a person's exposure to a virtual environment causes symptoms that are similar to motion sickness symptoms. Women are significantly more affected than men by headset-induced symptoms, at rates of around 77% and 33% respectively. The most common symptoms are general discomfort, headache, stomach awareness, nausea, vomiting, pallor, sweating, fatigue, drowsiness, disorientation, and apathy. For example, Nintendo's Virtual Boy received much criticism for its negative physical effects, including \"dizziness, nausea, and headaches\". These motion sickness symptoms are caused by a disconnect between what is being seen and what the rest of the body perceives. When the vestibular system, the body's internal balancing system, does not experience the motion that it expects from visual input through the eyes, the user may experience VR sickness. This can also happen if the VR system does not have a high enough frame rate, or if there is a lag between the body's movement and the onscreen visual reaction to it. Because approximately 25\u201340% of people experience some kind of VR sickness when using VR machines, companies are actively looking for ways to reduce VR sickness.\nVergence-accommodation conflict (VAC) is one of the main causes of virtual reality sickness.\nIn January 2022 \"The Wall Street Journal\" found that VR usage could lead to physical injuries including leg, hand, arm and shoulder injuries. VR usage has also been tied to incidents that resulted in neck injuries (especially injures to the cervical vertebrae).\nChildren and teenagers in virtual reality.\nChildren are becoming increasingly aware of VR, with the number in the USA having never heard of it dropping by half from Autumn 2016 (40%) to Spring 2017 (19%).\nA 2022 research report by Piper Sandler revealed that only 26% of U.S. teens own a VR device, 5% use it daily, while 48% of teen headset owners \"seldom\" use it. Of the teens who don't own a VR headset, 9% plan to buy one. 50% of surveyed teens are unsure about the metaverse or don't have any interest, and don't have any plans to purchase a VR headset.\nStudies show that young children, compared to adults, may respond cognitively and behaviorally to immersive VR in ways that differ from adults. VR places users directly into the media content, potentially making the experience very vivid and real for children. For example, children of 6\u201318 years of age reported higher levels of presence and \"realness\" of a virtual environment compared with adults 19\u201365 years of age.\nStudies on VR consumer behavior or its effect on children and a code of ethical conduct involving underage users are especially needed, given the availability of VR porn and violent content. Related research on violence in video games suggests that exposure to media violence may affect attitudes, behavior, and even self-concept. Self-concept is a key indicator of core attitudes and coping abilities, particularly in adolescents. Early studies conducted on observing versus participating in violent VR games suggest that physiological arousal and aggressive thoughts, but not hostile feelings, are higher for participants than for observers of the virtual reality game.\nExperiencing VR by children may further involve simultaneously holding the idea of the virtual world in mind while experiencing the physical world. Excessive usage of immersive technology that has very salient sensory features may compromise children's ability to maintain the rules of the physical world, particularly when wearing a VR headset that blocks out the location of objects in the physical world. Immersive VR can provide users with multisensory experiences that replicate reality or create scenarios that are impossible or dangerous in the physical world. Observations of 10 children experiencing VR for the first time suggested that 8-12-years-old kids were more confident to explore VR content when it was in a familiar situation, e.g. the children enjoyed playing in the kitchen context of Job Simulator, and enjoyed breaking rules by engaging in activities they are not allowed to do in reality, such as setting things on fire.\nPrivacy.\nDigital privacy concerns have been associated with VR platforms; the persistent tracking required by all VR systems makes the technology particularly useful for, and vulnerable to, mass surveillance, including information gathering of personal actions, movements and responses. Data from eye tracking sensors, which are projected to become a standard feature in virtual reality headsets, may indirectly reveal information about a user's ethnicity, personality traits, fears, emotions, interests, skills, and physical and mental health conditions.\nThe nature of VR technology means that it can gather a wide range of data about its users. This can include obvious information such as usernames and account information, but also extends to more personal data like physical movements, interaction habits, and responses to virtual environments. In addition, advanced VR systems can capture biometric data like voice patterns, eye movements, and physiological responses to VR experiences. Virtual reality technology has grown substantially since its inception, moving from a niche technology to a mainstream consumer product. As the user base has grown, so too has the amount of personal data collected by these systems. This data can be used to improve VR systems, to provide personalized experiences, or to collect demographic information for marketing purposes. However, it also raises significant privacy concerns, especially when this data is stored, shared, or sold without the user's explicit consent.\nExisting data protection and privacy laws like the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the EU, and the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) in the United States, can be applied to VR. These regulations require companies to disclose how they collect and use data, and give users a degree of control over their personal information. Despite these regulations, enforcing privacy laws in VR can be challenging due to the global nature of the technology and the vast amounts of data collected. \nDue to its history of privacy issues, the involvement of Meta Platforms (formerly Facebook, Inc.) in the VR market has led to privacy concerns specific to its platforms. In August 2020, Facebook announced that Oculus products would become subject to the terms of use and privacy policy of the Facebook social network, and that a Facebook account would be required to use future Oculus headset models, and all existing models (via deprecation of the separate Oculus account system) beginning January 2023. The announcement was criticized for the mandatory integration of Oculus headsets with Facebook data collection and policies (including the Facebook real-name policy), and preventing use of the hardware if the user's account is suspended. The following month, Facebook halted the sale of Oculus products in Germany due to concerns from regulators that the new policy was a violation of GDPR. In 2022, the company would later establish a separate \"Meta account\" system.\nIn 2024, researchers from the University of Chicago demonstrated a security vulnerability in Meta Quest's Android-based system software (leveraging \"Developer Mode\" to inject an infected app), allowing them to obtain users' login credentials and inject false details during online banking sessions. This attack was considered to be difficult to execute outside of research settings but would make its target vulnerable to risks such as phishing, Internet fraud, and grooming.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32615", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32615", "title": "Vladislas II", "text": ""}
{"id": "32616", "revid": "51055334", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32616", "title": "Venice", "text": "City in Veneto, Italy\nVenice is a city in northeastern Italy and the capital of the region of Veneto. It is built on a group of 118 islands that are separated by expanses of open water and by canals; portions of the city are linked by 438 bridges. \nThe islands are in the shallow Venetian Lagoon, an enclosed bay lying between the mouths of the Po and the Piave rivers (more exactly between the Brenta and the Sile). As of 2025, the city proper (comune of Venice) has 249,466 inhabitants, nearly 50,000 of whom live in the historical island city of Venice (\"centro storico\"), while most of the population resides on the mainland (\"terraferma\"), and about 25,000 live on other islands in the lagoon (\"estuario\").\nTogether with the cities of Padua and Treviso, Venice is included in the Padua-Treviso-Venice Metropolitan Area (PATREVE), which is considered a statistical metropolitan area, with a total population of 2.6\u00a0million.\nThe name is derived from the ancient Veneti people who inhabited the region by the 10th\u00a0century\u00a0BC. The city was the capital of the Republic of Venice for almost a millennium, from 810 to 1797. It was a major financial and maritime power during the Middle Ages and Renaissance, and a staging area for the Crusades and the Battle of Lepanto, as well as an important centre of commerce\u2014especially silk, grain, and spice, and of art from the 13th century to the end of the 17th. The then-city-state is considered to have been the first real international financial centre, emerging in the 9th century and reaching its greatest prominence in the 14th\u00a0century. This made Venice a wealthy city throughout most of its history. \nFor centuries, Venice possessed numerous territories along the Adriatic Sea and within the Italian peninsula, leaving a significant impact on the architecture and culture that can still be seen today. The Venetian Arsenal is considered by several historians to be the first factory in history and was the base of Venice's naval power. The sovereignty of Venice came to an end in 1797, at the hands of Napoleon. Subsequently, in 1866, the city became part of the Kingdom of Italy.\nVenice has been known as \"La Dominante\" (\"The Dominant\" or \"The Ruler\"), \"La Serenissima\" (\"The Most Serene\"), \"Queen of the Adriatic\", \"City of Water\", \"City of Masks\", \"City of Bridges\", \"The Floating City\", and \"City of Canals\". The lagoon and the city within the lagoon were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987, covering an area of . Venice is known for several important artistic movements \u2013 especially during the Italian Renaissance \u2013 and has played an important role in the history of instrumental and operatic music; it is the birthplace of Baroque music composers Tomaso Albinoni and Antonio Vivaldi.\nIn the 21st century, Venice remains a very popular tourist destination, a major cultural centre, and has often been ranked one of the most beautiful cities in the world. It has been described by \"The Times\" as one of Europe's most romantic cities and by \"The New York Times\" as \"undoubtedly the most beautiful city built by man\". However, the city faces challenges, including overtourism, pollution, tide peaks, and cruise ships sailing too close to buildings. Because Venice and its lagoon are under constant threat, Venice's UNESCO listing has been under constant examination.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nAlthough no surviving historical records deal directly with the founding or building of Venice, tradition and the available evidence have led several historians to agree that the original population of Venice consisted of refugees \u2013 from nearby Roman cities such as Patavium (Padua), Aquileia, Tarvisium (Treviso), Altinum, and Concordia (modern Portogruaro), as well as from the undefended countryside \u2013 who were fleeing successive waves of Germanic and Hun invasions. This is further supported by the documentation on the so-called \"apostolic families\", the twelve founding families of Venice who elected the first doge, who in most cases trace their lineage back to Roman families. Some late Roman sources reveal the existence of fishermen, on the islands in the original marshy lagoons, who were referred to as \"incolae lacunae\" (\"lagoon dwellers\"). The traditional founding is identified with the dedication of the first church, that of San Giacomo on the islet of Rialto (\"Rivoalto\", \"High Shore\")\u2014said to have taken place at the stroke of noon on 25 March 421 (the Feast of the Annunciation).\nBeginning as early as AD\u00a0166\u2013168, the Quadi and Marcomanni destroyed the main Roman town in the area, present-day Oderzo. This part of Roman Italy was again overrun in the early 5th century by the Visigoths and, some 50\u00a0years later, by the Huns led by Attila. The last and most enduring immigration into the north of the Italian peninsula, that of the Lombards in 568, left the Eastern Roman Empire only a small strip of coastline in the current Veneto, including Venice. The Roman/Byzantine territory was organized as the Exarchate of Ravenna, administered from that ancient port and overseen by a viceroy (the Exarch) appointed by the Emperor in Constantinople. Ravenna and Venice were connected by just sea routes, and with the Venetians' isolation came increasing autonomy. New ports were built, including those at Malamocco and Torcello in the Venetian lagoon. The \"tribuni maiores\" formed the earliest central standing governing committee of the islands in the lagoon, dating from c.\u2009568.\nThe traditional first doge of Venice, Paolo Lucio Anafesto (Anafestus Paulicius), was elected in 697, as written in the oldest chronicle by John, deacon of Venice c.\u20091008. Some modern historians claim Paolo Lucio Anafesto was actually the Exarch Paul, and Paul's successor, Marcello Tegalliano, was Paul's \"magister militum\" (or \"general\"), literally \"master of soldiers\". In 726 the soldiers and citizens of the exarchate rose in a rebellion over the iconoclastic controversy, at the urging of Pope Gregory II. The exarch, held responsible for the acts of his master, Byzantine Emperor Leo III, was murdered, and many officials were put to flight in the chaos. At about this time, the people of the lagoon elected their own independent leader for the first time, although the relationship of this to the uprisings is not clear. Ursus was the first of 117 \"doges\" (\"doge\" is the Venetian dialectal equivalent of the Latin \"dux\" (\"leader\"); the corresponding word in English is duke, in standard Italian \"duca\" (see also \"duce\".) Whatever his original views, Ursus supported Emperor Leo III's successful military expedition to recover Ravenna, sending both men and ships. In recognition of this, Venice was \"granted numerous privileges and concessions\" and Ursus, who had personally taken the field, was confirmed by Leo as \"dux\" and given the added title of \"hypatus\" (from the Greek for \"consul\").\nIn 751, the Lombard King Aistulf conquered most of the Exarchate of Ravenna, leaving Venice a lonely and increasingly autonomous Byzantine outpost. During this period, the seat of the local Byzantine governor (the \"duke/dux\", later \"doge\"), was at Malamocco. Settlement on the islands in the lagoon probably increased with the Lombard conquest of other Byzantine territories, as refugees sought asylum in the area. In 775/6, the episcopal seat of Olivolo (San Pietro di Castello) was created. During the reign of duke Agnello Particiaco (811\u2013827) the ducal seat moved from Malamocco to the more protected Rialto, within present-day Venice. The monastery of St Zachary and the first ducal palace and basilica of St. Mark, as well as a walled defense (\"civitatis murus\") between Olivolo and Rialto, were subsequently built here.\nCharlemagne sought to subdue the city to his rule. He ordered the pope to expel the Venetians from the Pentapolis along the Adriatic coast; Charlemagne's own son Pepin of Italy, king of the Lombards, under the authority of his father, embarked on a siege of Venice itself. This, however, proved a costly failure. The siege lasted six months, with Pepin's army ravaged by the diseases of the local swamps and eventually forced to withdraw in 810. A few months later, Pepin himself died, apparently as a result of a disease contracted there. In the aftermath, an agreement between Charlemagne and the Byzantine Emperor Nicephorus in 814 recognized Venice as Byzantine territory, and granted the city trading rights along the Adriatic coast.\nIn 828 the new city's prestige increased with the acquisition, from Alexandria, of relics claimed to be of St Mark the Evangelist; these were placed in the new basilica. Winged lions \u2013 visible throughout Venice \u2013 are the emblem of St Mark. The patriarchal seat was also moved to Rialto. As the community continued to develop, and as Byzantine power waned, its own autonomy grew, leading to eventual independence.\nExpansion.\nFrom the 9th to the 12th centuries, Venice developed into a powerful maritime empire (an Italian thalassocracy known also as \"repubblica marinara\"). In addition to Venice there were seven others: the most important ones were Genoa, Pisa, and Amalfi; and the lesser known were Ragusa, Ancona, Gaeta and Noli. Its own strategic position at the head of the Adriatic made Venetian naval and commercial power almost invulnerable. The Republic's embrace of sound monetary policies, especially its reliable gold ducat, underpinned growing confidence in Venetian trade and finance, further strengthening its position in international commerce. With the elimination of pirates along the Dalmatian coast, the city became a flourishing trade centre between Western Europe and the rest of the world, especially with the Byzantine Empire and Asia, where its navy protected sea routes against piracy.\nThe Republic of Venice seized a number of places on the eastern shores of the Adriatic before 1200, mostly for commercial reasons, because pirates based there were a menace to trade. The doge already possessed the titles of Duke of Dalmatia and Duke of Istria. Later mainland possessions, which extended across Lake Garda as far west as the Adda River, were known as the \"Terraferma\"; they were acquired partly as a buffer against belligerent neighbours, partly to guarantee Alpine trade routes, and partly to ensure the supply of mainland wheat (on which the city depended). In building its maritime commercial empire, Venice dominated the trade in salt, acquired control of most of the islands in the Aegean, including Crete, and Cyprus in the Mediterranean, and became a major power-broker in the Near East. By the standards of the time, Venice's stewardship of its mainland territories was relatively enlightened and the citizens of such towns as Bergamo, Brescia, and Verona rallied to the defence of Venetian sovereignty when it was threatened by invaders.\nVenice remained closely associated with Constantinople, being twice granted trading privileges in the Eastern Roman Empire, through the so-called golden bulls or \"chrysobulls\", in return for aiding the Eastern Empire to resist Norman and Turkish incursions. In the first chrysobull, Venice acknowledged its homage to the empire; but not in the second, reflecting the decline of Byzantium and the rise of Venice's power.\nVenice became an imperial power following the Fourth Crusade, which, having veered off course, culminated in 1204 by capturing and sacking Constantinople and establishing the Latin Empire. As a result of this conquest, considerable Byzantine plunder was brought back to Venice. This plunder included the gilt bronze horses from the Hippodrome of Constantinople, which were originally placed above the entrance to the cathedral of Venice, St Mark's Basilica (The originals have been replaced with replicas, and are now stored within the basilica.) After the fall of Constantinople, the former Eastern Roman Empire was partitioned among the Latin crusaders and the Venetians. Venice subsequently carved out a sphere of influence in the Mediterranean known as the Duchy of the Archipelago, and captured Crete.\nThe seizure of Constantinople proved as decisive a factor in ending the Byzantine Empire as the loss of the Anatolian themes, after Manzikert. Although the Byzantines recovered control of the ravaged city a half-century later, the Byzantine Empire was terminally weakened, and existed as a ghost of its old self, until Sultan Mehmet The Conqueror took the city in 1453.\nSituated on the Adriatic Sea, Venice had always traded extensively with the Byzantine Empire and the Middle East. By the late 13th century, Venice was the most prosperous city in all of Europe. At the peak of its power and wealth, it had 36,000 sailors operating 3,300 ships, dominating Mediterranean commerce. Venice's leading families vied with each other to build the grandest palaces and to support the work of the greatest and most talented artists. The city was governed by the Great Council, which was made up of members of the noble families of Venice. The Great Council appointed all public officials, and elected a Senate of 200 to 300 individuals. Since this group was too large for efficient administration, a Council of Ten (also called the Ducal Council, or the Signoria), controlled much of the administration of the city. One member of the great council was elected \"doge\", or duke, to be the chief executive; he would usually hold the title until his death, although several Doges were forced, by pressure from their oligarchical peers, to resign and retire into monastic seclusion, when they were felt to have been discredited by political failure.\nThe Venetian governmental structure was similar in some ways to the republican system of ancient Rome, with an elected chief executive (the doge), a senate-like assembly of nobles, and the general citizenry with limited political power who originally had the power to grant or withhold their approval of each newly elected doge. Church and various private property were tied to military service, although there was no knight tenure within the city itself. The \"Cavalieri di San Marco\" was the only order of chivalry ever instituted in Venice, and no citizen could accept or join a foreign order without the government's consent. Venice remained a republic throughout its independent period, and politics and the military were kept separate, except when on occasion the Doge personally headed the military. War was regarded as a continuation of commerce by other means. Therefore the city's early employment of large numbers of mercenaries for service elsewhere, and later its reliance on foreign mercenaries when the ruling class was preoccupied with commerce.\nAlthough the people of Venice generally remained orthodox Roman Catholics, the state of Venice was notable for its freedom from religious fanaticism, and executed nobody for religious heresy during the Counter-Reformation. This apparent lack of zeal contributed to Venice's frequent conflicts with the papacy. In this context, the writings of the Anglican divine William Bedell are particularly illuminating. Venice was threatened with the interdict on a number of occasions and twice suffered its imposition. The second, most noted, occasion was in 1606, by order of Pope Paul V.\nThe newly invented German printing press spread rapidly throughout Europe in the 15th century, and Venice was quick to adopt it. By 1482, Venice was the printing capital of the world; the leading printer was Aldus Manutius, who invented paperback books that could be carried in a saddlebag. His \"Aldine Editions\" included translations of nearly all the known Greek manuscripts of the era.\nDecline.\nVenice's long decline started in the 15th century. Venice confronted the Ottoman Empire in the Siege of Thessalonica (1422\u20131430) and sent ships to help defend Constantinople against the besieging Turks in 1453. After the Fall of Constantinople, Sultan Mehmed II declared the first of a series of Ottoman-Venetian wars that cost Venice many of its eastern Mediterranean possessions. Vasco da Gama's 1497\u20131499 voyage, which opened a sea route to India around the Cape of Good Hope, destroyed Venice's monopoly. Venice's oared vessels were at a disadvantage when it came to traversing oceans; therefore, Venice was left behind in the race for colonies.\nThe Black Death devastated Venice in 1348 and struck again between 1575 and 1577. In three years, the plague killed some 50,000 people. In 1630, the Italian plague of 1629\u201331 killed a third of Venice's 150,000 citizens.\nVenice began to lose its position as a centre of international trade during the later part of the Renaissance as Portugal became Europe's principal intermediary in the trade with the East, striking at the very foundation of Venice's great wealth. France and Spain fought for hegemony over Italy in the Italian Wars, marginalising its political influence. However, Venice remained a major exporter of agricultural products and, until the mid-18th century, a significant manufacturing centre.\nModern age.\nThe Republic of Venice lost its independence when Napoleon Bonaparte conquered Venice on 12 May 1797 during the War of the First Coalition. Napoleon was seen as something of a liberator by the city's Jewish population. He removed the gates of the Ghetto and ended the restrictions on when and where Jews could live and travel in the city.\nVenice became Austrian territory when Napoleon signed the Treaty of Campo Formio on 12 October 1797. The Austrians took control of the city on 18 January 1798. Venice was taken from Austria by the Treaty of Pressburg in 1805 and became part of Napoleon's Kingdom of Italy. It was returned to Austria following Napoleon's defeat in 1814, when it became part of the Austrian-held Kingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia. In 1848 a revolt briefly re-established the Venetian republic under Daniele Manin, but this was crushed in 1849. In 1866, after the Third Italian War of Independence, Venice, along with the rest of the Veneto, became part of the newly created Kingdom of Italy.\nFrom the middle of the 18th century, Trieste and papal Ancona, both of which became free ports, competed with Venice more and more economically. Habsburg Trieste in particular boomed and increasingly served trade via the Suez Canal, which opened in 1869, between Asia and Central Europe, while Venice very quickly lost its competitive edge and commercial strength.\nDuring World War II, the historic city was largely free from attack, the only aggressive effort of note being Operation Bowler, a successful Royal Air Force precision strike on the German naval operations in the city in March 1945. The targets were destroyed with virtually no architectural damage inflicted on the city itself. However, the industrial areas in Mestre and Marghera and the railway lines to Padua, Trieste, and Trento were repeatedly bombed. On 29 April 1945, a force of British and New Zealand troops of the British Eighth Army, under Lieutenant General Freyberg, liberated Venice, which had been a hotbed of anti-Mussolini Italian partisan activity.\nVenice was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987, inscribing it as \"Venice and its Lagoon\".\nGeography.\nVenice is located in northeastern Italy, in the Veneto region. The city is situated on a group of 118 small islands that are separated by canals and linked by 438 bridges. The historic center of Venice is divided into six districts, or sestieri, which are named Cannaregio, Castello, Dorsoduro, San Marco, San Polo, and Santa Croce.\nVenice sits atop alluvial silt washed into the sea by the rivers flowing eastward from the Alps across the Veneto plain, with the silt being stretched into long banks, or \"lidi\", by the action of the current flowing around the head of the Adriatic Sea from east to west.\nSubsidence.\nSubsidence, the gradual lowering of the surface of Venice, has contributed \u2013 along with other factors \u2013 to the seasonal \"Acqua alta\" (\"high water\") when the city's lowest lying surfaces may be covered at high tide.\nBuilding foundations.\nThose fleeing barbarian invasions who found refuge on the sandy islands of Torcello, Iesolo, and Malamocco, in this coastal lagoon, learned to build by driving closely spaced piles consisting of the trunks of alder trees, a wood noted for its water resistance, into the mud and sand, until they reached a much harder layer of compressed clay. Building foundations rested on plates of Istrian limestone placed on top of the piles.\nFlooding and sea level rise.\nBetween autumn and early spring, the city is often threatened by flood tides pushing in from the Adriatic. Six hundred years ago, Venetians protected themselves from land-based attacks by diverting all the major rivers flowing into the lagoon and thus preventing sediment from filling the area around the city. This created an ever-deeper lagoon environment. Additionally, the lowest part of Venice, St Mark's Basilica, is only above sea level, and one of the most flood-prone parts of the city.\nIn 1604, to defray the cost of flood relief, Venice introduced what could be considered the first example of a stamp tax. When the revenue fell short of expectations in 1608, Venice introduced paper, with the superscription \"AQ\" and imprinted instructions, which was to be used for \"letters to officials\". At first, this was to be a temporary tax, but it remained in effect until the fall of the Republic in 1797. Shortly after the introduction of the tax, Spain produced similar paper for general taxation purposes, and the practice spread to other countries.\nDuring the 20th century, when many artesian wells were sunk into the periphery of the lagoon to draw water for local industry, Venice began to subside. It was realized that extraction of water from the aquifer was the cause. The sinking has slowed markedly since artesian wells were banned in the 1960s. However, the city is still threatened by more frequent low-level floods \u2013 the \"Acqua alta\", that rise to a height of several centimetres over its quays \u2013 regularly following certain tides. In many old houses, staircases once used to unload goods are now flooded, rendering the former ground floor uninhabitable.\nStudies indicate that the city continues sinking at a relatively slow rate of 1\u20132mm per year; therefore, the state of alert has not been revoked.\nIn May 2003, Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi inaugurated the MOSE Project (), an experimental model for evaluating the performance of hollow floatable gates, expected to be completed by the end of 2025; the idea is to fix a series of 78 hollow pontoons to the sea bed across the three entrances to the lagoon. When tides are predicted to rise above , the pontoons will be filled with air, causing them to float on lagoon side while hinged at sea floor on seaside, thus blocking the incoming water from the Adriatic Sea. This engineering work was due to be completed by 2018. A Reuters report stated that the MOSE Project attributed the delay to \"corruption scandals\". The project is not guaranteed to be successful and the cost has been very high, with as much as approximately \u20ac2\u00a0billion of the cost lost to corruption.\nAccording to a spokesman for the National Trust of Italy (Fondo Ambiente Italiano):\nMose is a pharaonic project that should have cost \u20ac800m [\u00a3675m] but will cost at least \u20ac7bn [\u00a36bn]. If the barriers are closed at only 90 cm of high water, most of St Mark's will be flooded anyway; but if closed at very high levels only, then people will wonder at the logic of spending such sums on something that didn't solve the problem. And pressure will come from the cruise ships to keep the gates open.\nOn 13 November 2019, Venice was flooded when waters peaked at , the highest tide since 1966 (1.94 m). More than 80% of the city was covered by water, which damaged cultural heritage sites, including more than 50 churches, leading to tourists cancelling their visits. The planned flood barrier would have prevented this incident according to various sources, including Marco Piana, the head of conservation at St Mark's Basilica. The mayor promised that work on the flood barrier would continue, and the Prime Minister announced that the government would be accelerating the project.\nThe city's mayor, Luigi Brugnaro, blamed the floods on climate change. The chambers of the Regional Council of Veneto began to be flooded around 10 pm, two minutes after the council rejected a plan to combat global warming. One of the effects of climate change is sea level rise which causes an increase in frequency and magnitude of floodings in the city. A \"Washington Post\" report provided a more thorough analysis:\"The sea level has been rising even more rapidly in Venice than in other parts of the world. At the same time, the city is sinking, the result of tectonic plates shifting below the Italian coast. Those factors together, along with the more frequent extreme weather events associated with climate change, contribute to floods.\"\nHenk Ovink, an expert on flooding, told CNN that, while environmental factors are part of the problem, \"historic floods in Venice are not only a result of the climate crisis but poor infrastructure and mismanagement\".\nThe government of Italy committed to providing 20\u00a0million euros in funding to help the city repair the most urgent aspects although Brugnaro's estimate of the total damage was \"hundreds of millions\" to at least 1\u00a0billion euros.\nOn 3 October 2020, the MOSE was activated for the first time in response to a predicted high tide event, preventing some of the low-lying parts of the city (in particular the Piazza San Marco) from being flooded.\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Venice has a mid-latitude, four season humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\"), with cool, damp winters and warm, humid summers. The 24-hour average temperature in January is , and for July this figure is . Precipitation is spread relatively evenly throughout the year, and averages ; snow is not uncommon between late November and early March. During the most severe winters, the canals and parts of the lagoon can freeze, but with the warming trend of the past 30\u201340 years, the occurrence has become rarer.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;The city was one of the largest in Europe in the High Middle Ages, with a population of 60,000 in AD 1000; 80,000 in 1200; and rising up to 110,000\u2013180,000 in 1300. In the mid-1500s the city's population was 170,000, and by 1600 it approached 200,000.\nIn 2021, there were 254,850 people residing in the Comune of Venice (the population figure includes 50,434 in the historic city of Venice (Centro storico), 177,621 in Terraferma (the mainland); and 26,795 on other islands in the lagoon). 47.8% of the population in 2021 were male and 52.2% were female; minors (ages 18 and younger) were 14.7% of the population compared to elderly people (ages 65 and older) who numbered 27.9%. This compared with the Italian average of 16.7% and 23.5%, respectively. The average age of Venice residents was 48.6 compared to the Italian average of 45.9. In the five years between 2016 and 2021, the population of Venice declined by 2.7%, while Italy as a whole declined by 2.2%. The population in the historic old city declined much faster: from about 120,000 in 1980 to about 60,000 in 2009, and to 50,000 in 2021. As of 2021[ [update]], 84.2% of the population was Italian. The largest immigrant groups include: 7,814 (3.1%) Bangladeshis, 6,258 (2.5%) Romanians, 4,054 (1.6%) Moldovans, 4,014 (1.6%) Chinese, and 2,514 (1%) Ukrainians.\nVenice is predominantly Roman Catholic (85.0% of the resident population in the area of the Patriarchate of Venice in 2022), but because of the long-standing relationship with Constantinople, there is also a noticeable Orthodox presence; and as a result of immigration, there is now a large Muslim community (about 25,000 or 9.5% of city population in 2018) and some Hindu, and Buddhist inhabitants.\nSince 1991, the Church of San Giorgio dei Greci in Venice has become the see of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Italy and Malta and Exarchate of Southern Europe, a Byzantine-rite diocese under the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.\nThere is also a historic Jewish community in Venice. The Venetian Ghetto was the area in which Jews were compelled to live under the Venetian Republic. The word \"ghetto\" (\"gh\u00e8to\"), originally Venetian, is now found in many languages. Shakespeare's play \"The Merchant of Venice\", written in the late 16th century, features Shylock, a Venetian Jew. The first complete and uncensored printed edition of the Talmud was printed in Venice by Daniel Bomberg in 1523. During World War II, Jews were rounded up in Venice and deported to extermination camps. Since the end of the war, the Jewish population of Venice has declined from 1500 to about 500. Only around 30 Jews live in the former ghetto, which houses the city's major Jewish institutions. In modern times, Venice has an eruv, used by the Jewish community.\nMany locals are leaving the historic centre due to rapidly increasing rents. The declining native population affects the character of the city, as an October 2016 \"National Geographic\" article pointed out in its subtitle: \"Residents are abandoning the city, which is in danger of becoming an overpriced theme park\". The city is also facing other challenges, including erosion, pollution, subsidence, an excessive number of tourists in peak periods, and problems caused by oversized cruise ships sailing close to the banks of the historical city.\nGovernment.\nLocal and regional government.\nThe legislative body of the Comune is the City Council (\"Consiglio Comunale\"), which is composed of 36 councillors elected every five years with a proportional system, contextually to the mayoral elections. The executive body is the City Administration (\"Giunta Comunale\"), composed of 12 assessors nominated and presided over by a directly elected Mayor.\nVenice was governed by centre-left parties from the early 1990s until the 2010s, when the Mayor started to be elected directly. Its region, Veneto, has long been a conservative stronghold, with the coalition between the regionalist Lega Nord and the centre-right Forza Italia winning absolute majorities of the electorate in many elections at local, national, and regional levels.\nThe current mayor of Venice is Luigi Brugnaro, a centre-right independent businessman who is currently serving his second term in office.\nThe municipality of Venice is subdivided into six administrative boroughs (\"municipalit\u00e0\"). Each borough is governed by a council (\"Consiglio\") and a president, elected every five years. The urban organization is dictated by Article 114 of the Italian Constitution. The boroughs have the power to advise the Mayor with nonbinding opinions on a large spectrum of topics (environment, construction, public health, local markets) and exercise the functions delegated to them by the City Council; in addition, they are supplied with autonomous funding to finance local activities.\n\"Sestieri\".\nThe historic city of Venice has historically been divided into six \"sestieri\", and is made up of a total of 127 individual islands, most of which are separated from their neighbors by narrow channels only.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nEach \"sestiere\" is now a statistical and historical area without any degree of autonomy.\nThe six fingers or phalanges of the \"ferro\" on the bow of a gondola represent the six \"sestieri\".\nThe \"sestieri\" are divided into parishes\u2014initially 70 in 1033, but reduced under Napoleon, and now numbering just 38. These parishes predate the \"sestieri\", which were created in about 1170. Each parish exhibited unique characteristics but also belonged to an integrated network. Each community chose its own patron saint, staged its own festivals, congregated around its own market centre, constructed its own bell towers, and developed its own customs.\nOther islands of the Venetian Lagoon do not form part of any of the \"sestieri\", having historically enjoyed a considerable degree of autonomy.\nEach \"sestiere\" has its own house numbering system. Each house has a unique number in the district, from one to several thousand, generally numbered from one corner of the area to another, but not usually in a readily understandable manner.\nEconomy.\nVenice's economy has changed throughout history. Although there is little specific information about the earliest years, it is likely that an important source of the city's prosperity was the trade in slaves, captured in central Europe and sold to North Africa and the Levant. Venice's location at the head of the Adriatic, and directly south of the terminus of the Brenner Pass over the Alps, would have given it a distinct advantage as a middleman in this important trade. In the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, Venice was a major centre for commerce and trade, as it controlled a vast sea-empire, and became an extremely wealthy European city and a leader in political and economic affairs. From the 11th century until the 15th century, pilgrimages to the Holy Land were offered in Venice. Other ports such as Genoa, Pisa, Marseille, Ancona, and Dubrovnik were hardly able to compete with the well organized transportation of pilgrims from Venice.\nArmenian merchants from Julfa were the leading traders in Venice, especially the Sceriman family in the 17th century. They were specialized in the gems and diamonds business. The trade volume reached millions of tons, which was exceptional for 17th century. This all changed by the 17th century, when Venice's trade empire was taken over by countries such as Portugal, and its importance as a naval power was reduced. In the 18th century, it became a major agricultural and industrial exporter. The 18th century's biggest industrial complex was the Venice Arsenal, and the Italian Army still uses it today (even though some space has been used for major theatrical and cultural productions, and as spaces for art). Since World War II, many Venetians have moved to the neighboring cities of Mestre and Porto Marghera, seeking employment as well as affordable housing.\nToday, Venice's economy has strengths in tourism, shipbuilding, services, trade, and industrial exports. Murano glass production in Murano and lace production in Burano are also highly important to the economy. Major companies in Venice include ACTV, Acqua Minerale San Benedetto, Banca IFIS, Gruppo PAM, OVS, SAVE S.p.A and UMANA S.p.A.\nTourism.\nVenice is an important destination for tourists who want to see its celebrated art and architecture. The city hosts up to 60,000 tourists per day (2017 estimate). Estimates of the annual number of tourists vary from 22\u00a0million to 30\u00a0million. This \"overtourism\" creates overcrowding and environmental problems for Venice's ecosystem. By 2017, UNESCO was considering the addition of Venice to its \"In-Danger\" list, which includes historical ruins in war-torn countries. To reduce the number of visitors, who are causing irreversible changes in Venice, the agency supports limiting the number of cruise ships as well as implementing a strategy for more sustainable tourism.\nTourism has been a major part of the Venetian economy since the 18th century, when Venice \u2013 with its beautiful cityscape, uniqueness, and rich musical and artistic cultural heritage \u2013 was a stop on the Grand Tour. In the 19th century, Venice became a fashionable centre for the \"rich and famous\", who often stayed and dined at luxury establishments such as the Danieli Hotel and the Caff\u00e8 Florian, and continued to be a fashionable city into the early 20th century. In the 1980s, the Carnival of Venice was revived; and the city has become a major centre of international conferences and festivals, such as the prestigious Venice Biennale and the Venice Film Festival, which attract visitors from all over the world for their theatrical, cultural, cinematic, artistic, and musical productions.\nToday, there are numerous attractions in Venice, such as St Mark's Basilica, the Doge's Palace, the Grand Canal, and the Piazza San Marco. The Lido di Venezia is also a popular international luxury destination, attracting thousands of actors, critics, celebrities, and others in the cinematic industry. The city also relies heavily on the cruise business. The Cruise Venice Committee has estimated that cruise ship passengers spend more than 150\u00a0million euros (US$193\u00a0million) annually in the city, according to a 2015 report. Other reports, however, point out that such day-trippers spend relatively little in the few hours of their visits to the city.\nVenice is regarded by some as a tourist trap, and by others as a \"living museum\".\nDiverting cruise ships.\nThe need to protect the city's historic environment and fragile canals, in the face of a possible loss of jobs produced by cruise tourism, has seen the Italian Transport Ministry attempt to introduce a ban on large cruise ships visiting the city. A 2013 ban would have allowed only cruise ships smaller than 40,000-gross tons to enter the Giudecca Canal and St Mark's basin. In January 2015, a regional court scrapped the ban, but some global cruise lines indicated that they would continue to respect it until a long-term solution for the protection of Venice is found.\nP&amp;O Cruises removed Venice from its summer schedule; Holland America moved one of its ships from this area to Alaska; and Cunard reduced (in 2017 and further in 2018) the number of visits by its ships. As a result, the Venice Port Authority estimated an 11.4 per cent drop in cruise ships arriving in 2017 versus 2016, leading to a similar reduction in income for Venice.\nHaving failed in its 2013 bid to ban oversized cruise ships from the Giudecca Canal, the Italian inter-ministerial \"Comitatone\" overseeing Venice's lagoon released an official directive in November 2017 to keep the largest cruise ships away from the Piazza San Marco and the entrance to the Grand Canal. Ships over 55,000 tons will be required to follow a specific route through the Vittorio Emmanuele III Canal to reach Marghera, an industrial area of the mainland, where a passenger terminal would be built.\nIn 2014, the United Nations warned the city that it may be placed on UNESCO's List of World Heritage in Danger sites unless cruise ships are banned from the canals near the historic centre.\nAccording to the officials, the plan to create an alternative route for ships would require extensive dredging of the canal and the building of a new port, which would take four years, in total, to complete. However, the activist group \"No Grandi Navi\" (No big Ships), argued that the effects of pollution caused by the ships would not be diminished by the re-routing plan.\nSome locals continued to aggressively lobby for new methods that would reduce the number of cruise ship passengers; their estimate indicated that there are up to 30,000 such sightseers per day at peak periods, while others concentrate their effort on promoting a more responsible way of visiting the city. An unofficial referendum to ban large cruise ships was held in June 2017. More than 18,000 people voted at 60 polling booths set up by activists, and 17,874 favored banning large ships from the lagoon. The population of Venice at the time was about 50,000. The organizers of the referendum backed a plan to build a new cruise ship terminal at one of the three entrances to the Venetian Lagoon. Passengers would be transferred to the historic area in smaller boats.\nOn 2 June 2019, the cruise ship \"MSC Opera\" rammed a tourist riverboat, the \"River Countess\", which was docked on the Giudecca Canal, injuring five people, in addition to causing property damage. The incident immediately led to renewed demands to ban large cruise ships from the Giudecca Canal, including a Twitter message to that effect posted by the environment minister. The city's mayor urged authorities to accelerate the steps required for cruise ships to begin using the alternate Vittorio Emanuele canal. Italy's transport minister spoke of a \"solution to protect both the lagoon and tourism ... after many years of inertia\" but specifics were not reported. As of \u00a02019[ [update]], the 2017 plan to establish an alternative route for large ships, preventing them from coming near the historic area of the city, has not yet been approved.\nNonetheless, the Italian government released an announcement on 7 August 2019 that it would begin rerouting cruise ships larger than 1000 tonnes away from the historic city's Giudecca Canal. For the last four months of 2019, all heavy vessels would dock at the Fusina and Lombardia terminals which are still on the lagoon but away from the central islands. By 2020, one-third of all cruise ships would be rerouted, according to Danilo Toninelli, the minister for Venice. Preparation work for the Vittorio Emanuele Canal needed to begin soon for a long-term solution, according to the Cruise Lines International Association. In the long-term, space for ships would be provided at new terminals, perhaps at Chioggia or Lido San Nicolo. That plan was not imminent however, since public consultations had not yet begun. Over 1.5\u00a0million people per year arrive in Venice on cruise ships. The Italian government decided to divert large cruise ships beginning August 2021.\nOther tourism mitigation efforts.\nHaving failed in its 2013 bid to ban oversized cruise ships from the Giudecca Canal, the city switched to a new strategy in mid-2017, banning the creation of any additional hotels. Currently, there are over 24,000 hotel rooms. The ban does not affect short-term rentals in the historic centre which are causing an increase in the cost of living for the native residents of Venice. The city had already banned any additional fast food \"take-away\" outlets, to retain the historic character of the city, which was another reason for freezing the number of hotel rooms. Fewer than half of the millions of annual visitors stay overnight, however.\nThe city also considered a ban on wheeled suitcases, but settled for banning hard plastic wheels for transporting cargo from May 2015.\nIn addition to accelerating erosion of the ancient city's foundations and creating some pollution in the lagoon, cruise ships dropping an excessive number of day trippers can make St. Marks Square and other popular attractions too crowded to walk through during the peak season. Government officials see little value to the economy from the \"eat and flee\" tourists who stay for less than a day, which is typical of those from cruise ships.\nOn 28 February 2019, the Venice City Council voted in favour of a new municipal regulation requiring day-trippers visiting the historic centre, and the islands in the lagoon, to pay a new access fee. The extra revenue from the fee would be used for cleaning, maintaining security, reducing the financial burden on residents of Venice, and to \"allow Venetians to live with more decorum\". The new tax would be between \u20ac3 and \u20ac10 per person, depending on the expected tourist flow into the old city. The fee could be waived for certain types of travelers: including students, children under the age of 6, voluntary workers, residents of the Veneto region, and participants in sporting events. Overnight visitors, who already pay a \"stay\" tax and account for around 40% of Venice's yearly total of 28\u00a0million visitors, would also be exempted. The access fee was expected to come into effect in September 2019; but it was postponed, firstly, until 1 January 2020, and then, again, due to the coronavirus pandemic. The new charge of \u20ac5 started to be imposed on those tourists who are not staying overnight and came into force on 25 April 2024. It is only charged on peak visitor days, and several classes of people are exempt, including Veneto residents, hotel guests (including mainland boroughs of Venice), local workers, and students. Cell phone data showed more tourists came on fee-charged days in 2024, generating more money than expected, and leaving the city to decide whether to raise the fee for the next tourist season or try other approaches. \nOne heavily criticized aspect of the access fee is that it \"reinforces the perception that Venice is a theme park\". After the access fee went into effect, \"astonished locals\" have reported that bewildered tourists have asked them questions like \"Where is the exit?\" and, \"What time does it close?\"\nA regulation taking effect on 1 June 2024 limits tour groups to 25 people and bans loudspeakers.\nTransport.\nIn the historic centre.\nVenice is built on an archipelago of 118 islands in a shallow, lagoon, connected by 400 bridges over 177 canals. In the 19th century, a causeway to the mainland brought the railroad to Venice. The adjoining Ponte della Libert\u00e0 road causeway and terminal parking facilities in Tronchetto island and Piazzale Roma were built during the 20th century. Beyond these rail and road terminals on the northern edge of the city, transportation within the city's historic centre remains, as it was in centuries past, entirely on water or on foot. Venice is Europe's largest urban car-free area and is unique in Europe in having remained a sizable functioning city in the 21st century entirely without motorcars or trucks.\nThe classic Venetian boat is the \"gondola\", (plural: \"gondole\") although it is now mostly used for tourists, or for weddings, funerals, or other ceremonies, or as \"traghetti\" (sing.: traghetto) to cross the Grand Canal in lieu of a nearby bridge. The traghetti are operated by two oarsmen.\nThere are approximately 400 licensed gondoliers in Venice, in their distinctive livery, and a similar number of boats, down from 10,000 two centuries ago. Many gondolas are lushly appointed with crushed velvet seats and Persian rugs. At the front of each gondola that works in the city, there is a large piece of metal called the \"f\u00e8ro\" (iron). Its shape has evolved through the centuries, as documented in many well-known paintings. Its form, topped by a likeness of the Doge's hat, became gradually standardized, and was then fixed by local law. It consists of six bars pointing forward representing the sestieri of the city, and one that points backwards representing the Giudecca. A lesser-known boat is the smaller, simpler, but similar, sandolo.\nWaterways.\nVenice's small islands were enhanced during the Middle Ages by the dredging of soil to raise the marshy ground above the tides. The resulting canals encouraged the flourishing of a nautical culture which proved central to the economy of the city. Today those canals still provide the means for transport of goods and people within the city.\nThe maze of canals threading through the city requires more than 400 bridges to permit the flow of foot traffic. In 2011, the city opened the Ponte della Costituzione, the fourth bridge across the Grand Canal, which connects the Piazzale Roma bus-terminal area with the Venezia Santa Lucia railway station. The other bridges are the original Ponte di Rialto, the Ponte dell'Accademia, and the Ponte degli Scalzi.\nPublic transport.\nAzienda del Consorzio Trasporti Veneziano (ACTV) is a public company responsible for public transportation in Venice.\nLagoon area.\nThe main means of public transportation consists of motorised waterbuses (\"vaporetti\") which ply regular routes along the Grand Canal and between the city's islands. Private motorised water taxis are also active. The only gondole still in common use by Venetians are the \"traghetti\", foot passenger ferries crossing the Grand Canal at certain points where there are no convenient bridges. Other gondole are rented by tourists on an hourly basis.\nThe Venice People Mover is an elevated shuttle train public transit system connecting Tronchetto island with its car parking facility with Piazzale Roma where visitors arrive in the city by bus, taxi, or automobile. The train makes a stop at the Marittima cruise terminal at the Port of Venice.\nLido and Pellestrina islands.\nLido and Pellestrina are two islands forming a barrier between the southern Venetian Lagoon and the Adriatic Sea. On those islands, road traffic, including bus service, is allowed. Vaporetti link them with other islands (Venice, Murano, Burano) and with the peninsula of Cavallino-Treporti.\nMainland.\nThe mainland of Venice is composed of 4 boroughs: Mestre-Carpenedo, Marghera, Chirignago-Zelarino, and Favaro Veneto. Mestre is the centre and the most populous urban area of the mainland. There are several bus routes and two Translohr tramway lines. Several bus routes and one of the tramway lines link the mainland with \"Piazzale Roma\", the main bus station in Venice, via Ponte della Libert\u00e0, the road bridge connecting the mainland with the group of islands that comprise the historic centre of Venice.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Venice, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 52 min. Only 12.2% of public transit riders ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 10 min, while 17.6% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is , while 12% travel for over in a single direction.\nRail.\nVenice is served by regional and national trains, including trains to Florence (1h53), Milan (2h13), Turin (3h10), Rome (3h33), and Naples (4h50). \nThere are international day trains to Zurich, Innsbruck, Munich, and Vienna, plus overnight sleeper services, to Paris and Dijon on Thello trains, and to Munich and Vienna via Austrian Federal Railways.\nEuropean Sleeper operates a sleeper train between Brussels and Venice, stopping in Utrecht.\nBoth stations are managed by Grandi Stazioni; they are linked by the \"Ponte della Libert\u00e0\" (Liberty Bridge) between the mainland and the city centre.\nOther stations in the municipality are Venezia Porto Marghera, Venezia Carpenedo, Venezia Mestre Ospedale, and Venezia Mestre Porta Ovest.\nPorts.\nThe Port of Venice () is the eighth-busiest commercial port in Italy and was a major hub for the cruise sector in the Mediterranean, as since August 2021 ships of more 25,000 tons are forbidden to pass the Giudecca Canal. It is one of the major Italian ports and is included in the list of the leading European ports which are located on the strategic nodes of trans-European networks. In 2002, the port handled 262,337 containers. In 2006, 30,936,931 tonnes passed through the port, of which 14,541,961 was commercial traffic, and saw 1,453,513 passengers.\nAviation.\nMarco Polo International Airport (\"Aeroporto di Venezia Marco Polo\") is named in honor of Marco Polo. The airport is on the mainland and was rebuilt away from the coast. Public transport from the airport takes one to:\nVenice-Treviso Airport, about from Venice, is used mainly by low-cost airlines. There are public buses from this airport to Venice.\nVenezia-Lido \"Giovanni Nicelli\", a public airport suitable for smaller aircraft, is at the northeast end of Lido di Venezia. It has a grass runway.\nSport.\nThe most famous Venetian sport is probably \"Voga alla Veneta\" (\"Venetian-style rowing\"), also commonly called \"voga veneta\". A technique invented in the Venetian Lagoon, Venetian rowing is unusual in that the rower(s), one or more, row standing, looking forward. Today, \"Voga alla Veneta\" is not only the way the gondoliers row tourists around Venice but also the way Venetians row for pleasure and sport. Many races called \"regata(e)\" happen throughout the year. The culminating event of the rowing season is the day of the \"Regata Storica\", which occurs on the first Sunday of September each year.\nThe main football club in the city is Venezia FC, founded in 1907, which currently plays in the Serie B. Their ground, the Stadio Pier Luigi Penzo, situated in Sant'Elena, is the second-oldest continually used stadium in Italy.\nThe local basketball club is Reyer Venezia, founded in 1872 as the gymnastics club \"Societ\u00e0 Sportiva Costantino Reyer\", and in 1907 as the basketball club. Reyer currently plays in the Lega Basket Serie A. The men's team were the Italian champions in 1942, 1943, and 2018. Their arena is the Palasport Giuseppe Taliercio, situated in Mestre. Luigi Brugnaro is both the president of the club and the mayor of the city.\nEducation.\nVenice is a major international centre for higher education. The city hosts the Ca' Foscari University of Venice, founded in 1868; the , founded in 1926; the Venice International University, founded in 1995 and located on the island of San Servolo and the EIUC-European Inter-University Centre for Human Rights and Democratisation, located on the island of Lido di Venezia.\nOther Venetian institutions of higher education are: the \"Accademia di Belle Arti\" (Academy of Fine Arts), established in 1750, whose first chairman was Giovanni Battista Piazzetta, and the Benedetto Marcello Conservatory of Music, which was first established in 1876 as a high school and musical society, later (1915) became \"Liceo Musicale\", and then, when its director was Gian Francesco Malipiero, the State Conservatory of Music (1940).\nCulture.\nLiterature.\nVenice has long been a source of inspiration for authors, playwrights, and poets, and at the forefront of the technological development of printing and publishing.\nTwo of the most noted Venetian writers were Marco Polo in the Middle Ages and, later, Giacomo Casanova. Polo (1254\u20131324) was a merchant who voyaged to the Orient. His series of books, co-written with Rustichello da Pisa and titled \"Il Milione\" provided important knowledge of the lands east of Europe, from the Middle East to China, Japan, and Russia. Giacomo Casanova (1725\u20131798) was a prolific writer and adventurer best remembered for his autobiography, \"Histoire De Ma Vie\" (\"Story of My Life\"), which links his colourful lifestyle to the city of Venice.\nVenetian playwrights followed the old Italian theatre tradition of \"commedia dell'arte\". Ruzante (1502\u20131542), Carlo Goldoni (1707\u20131793), and Carlo Gozzi (1720\u20131806) used the Venetian dialect extensively in their comedies.\nVenice has also inspired writers from abroad. Shakespeare set \"Othello\" and \"The Merchant of Venice\" in the city, as did Thomas Mann his novel, \"Death in Venice\" (1912). The French writer Philippe Sollers spent most of his life in Venice and published \"A Dictionary For Lovers of Venice\" in 2004.\nThe city features prominently in Henry James's \"The Aspern Papers\" and \"The Wings of the Dove\". It is also visited in Evelyn Waugh's \"Brideshead Revisited\" and Marcel Proust's \"In Search of Lost Time\". Perhaps the best-known children's book set in Venice is \"The Thief Lord\", written by the German author Cornelia Funke.\nVenice is described in Goethe's \"Italian Journey\", 1786\u20131788. He describes the architecture, including a church by Palladio and also attends the opera. He visits the shipbuilding yards at the Arsenal. He is fascinated by the street life of Venice, which he describes as a kind of performance.\nThe poet Ugo Foscolo (1778\u20131827), born in Zante, an island that at the time belonged to the Republic of Venice, was also a revolutionary who wanted to see a free republic established in Venice following its fall to Napoleon.\nVenice also inspired the poetry of Ezra Pound, who wrote his first literary work in the city. Pound died in 1972, and his remains are buried in Venice's of San Michele.\nVenice is also linked to the technological aspects of writing. The city was the location of one of Italy's earliest printing presses called Aldine Press, established by Aldus Manutius in 1494. From this beginning Venice developed as an important typographic centre. Around fifteen percent of all printing of the fifteenth century came from Venice, and even as late as the 18th century was responsible for printing half of Italy's published books.\nIn literature and adapted works.\nThe city is a particularly popular setting for essays, novels, and other works of fictional or non-fictional literature. Examples of these include:\nForeign words of Venetian origin.\nSome English words with a Venetian etymology include arsenal, ciao, ghetto, gondola, imbroglio, lagoon, lazaret, lido, Montenegro, and regatta.\nPrinting.\nBy the end of the 15th century, Venice had become the European capital of printing, having 417 printers by 1500, and being one of the first cities in Italy (after Subiaco and Rome) to have a printing press, after those established in Germany. The most important printing office was the Aldine Press of Aldus Manutius; which in 1497 issued the first printed work of Aristotle; in 1499 printed the \"Hypnerotomachia Poliphili\", considered the most beautiful book of the Renaissance; and established modern punctuation, page format, and italic type.\nPainting.\nVenice, especially during the Renaissance, and Baroque periods, was a major centre of art and developed a unique style known as the Venetian painting. In the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, Venice, along with Florence and Rome, became one of the most important centres of art in Europe, and numerous wealthy Venetians became patrons of the arts. Venice at the time was a rich and prosperous Maritime Republic, which controlled a vast sea and trade empire.\nIn the 16th century, Venetian painting was developed through influences from the Paduan School and Antonello da Messina, who introduced the oil painting technique of the Van Eyck brothers. It is signified by a warm colour scale and a picturesque use of colour. Early masters were the Bellini and Vivarini families, followed by Giorgione and Titian, then Tintoretto and Veronese. In the early 16th century, there was rivalry in Venetian painting between the \"disegno\" and \"colorito\" techniques.\nCanvases (the common painting surface) originated in Venice during the early Renaissance. In the 18th century, Venetian painting had a revival with Tiepolo's decorative painting and Canaletto's and Guardi's panoramic views.\nVenetian architecture.\nVenice is built on unstable mud-banks, and had a very crowded city centre by the Middle Ages. On the other hand, the city was largely safe from riot, civil feuds, and invasion much earlier than most European cities. These factors, with the canals and the great wealth of the city, made for unique building styles.\nVenice has a rich and diverse architectural style, the most prominent of which is the Gothic style. Venetian Gothic architecture is a term given to a Venetian building style combining the use of the Gothic lancet arch with the curved ogee arch, due to Byzantine and Ottoman influences. The style originated in 14th-century Venice, with a confluence of Byzantine style from Constantinople, Islamic influences from Spain and Venice's eastern trading partners, and early Gothic forms from mainland Italy. Chief examples of the style are the Doge's Palace and the Ca' d'Oro in the city. The city also has several Renaissance and Baroque buildings, including the Ca' Pesaro and the Ca' Rezzonico.\nVenetian taste was conservative and Renaissance architecture only really became popular in buildings from about the 1470s. More than in the rest of Italy, it kept much of the typical form of the Gothic \"palazzi\", which had evolved to suit Venetian conditions. In turn the transition to Baroque architecture was also fairly gentle. This gives the crowded buildings on the Grand Canal and elsewhere an essential harmony, even where buildings from very different periods sit together. For example, round-topped arches are far more common in Renaissance buildings than elsewhere.\nRococo style.\nIt can be argued that Venice produced the best and most refined Rococo designs. At the time, the Venetian economy was in decline. It had lost most of its maritime power, was lagging behind its rivals in political importance, and its society had become decadent, with tourism increasingly the mainstay of the economy. But Venice remained a centre of fashion. Venetian rococo was well known as rich and luxurious, with usually very extravagant designs. Unique Venetian furniture types included the \"divani da portego\", and long rococo couches and \"pozzetti\", objects meant to be placed against the wall. Bedrooms of rich Venetians were usually sumptuous and grand, with rich damask, velvet, and silk drapery and curtains, and beautifully carved rococo beds with statues of putti, flowers, and angels. Venice was especially known for its girandole mirrors, which remained among, if not the, finest in Europe. Chandeliers were usually very colourful, using Murano glass to make them look more vibrant and stand out from others; and precious stones and materials from abroad were used, since Venice still held a vast trade empire. Lacquer was very common, and many items of furniture were covered with it, the most noted being \"lacca povera\" (poor lacquer), in which allegories and images of social life were painted. Lacquerwork and Chinoiserie were particularly common in bureau cabinets.\nGlass.\nVenice is known for its ornate glass-work, known as Venetian glass, which is world-renowned for being colourful, elaborate, and skillfully made. Many of the important characteristics of these objects had been developed by the 13th century. Toward the end of that century, the centre of the Venetian glass industry moved to Murano, an offshore island in Venice. The glass made there is known as Murano glass.\nByzantine craftsmen played an important role in the development of Venetian glass. When Constantinople was sacked in the Fourth Crusade in 1204, some fleeing artisans came to Venice; when the Ottomans took Constantinople in 1453, still more glassworkers arrived. By the 16th century, Venetian artisans had gained even greater control over the colour and transparency of their glass, and had mastered a variety of decorative techniques. Despite efforts to keep Venetian glassmaking techniques within Venice, they became known elsewhere, and Venetian-style glassware was produced in other Italian cities and other countries of Europe.\nSome of the most important brands of glass in the world today are still produced in the historical glass factories on Murano. They are: Venini, Barovier &amp; Toso, Pauly, Millevetri, and Seguso. Barovier &amp; Toso is considered one of the 100 oldest companies in the world, formed in 1295.\nIn February 2021, the world learned that Venetian glass trade beads had been found at three prehistoric Inuit sites in Alaska, including Punyik Point. Uninhabited today, and located from the Continental Divide in the Brooks Range, the area was on ancient trade routes from the Bering Sea to the Arctic Ocean. From their creation in Venice, researchers believe the likely route these artifacts traveled was across Europe, then Eurasia and finally over the Bering Strait, making this discovery \"the first documented instance of the presence of indubitable European materials in prehistoric sites in the western hemisphere as the result of overland transport across the Eurasian continent.\" After radiocarbon dating materials found near the beads, archaeologists estimated their arrival on the continent to sometime between 1440 and 1480, predating Christopher Columbus. The dating and provenance has been challenged by other researchers who point out that such beads were not made in Venice until the mid-16th century and that an early 17th century French origin is possible.\nFestivals.\nThe Carnival of Venice is held annually in the city, It lasts for around two weeks and ends on Shrove Tuesday. Venetian masks are worn.\nThe Venice Biennale is one of the most important events in the arts calendar. In 1895 an \"Esposizione biennale artistica nazionale\" (biennial exhibition of Italian art) was inaugurated. In September 1942, the activities of the Biennale were interrupted by the war, but resumed in 1948.\nThe Festa del Redentore is held in mid-July. It began as a feast to give thanks for the end of the plague of 1576. A bridge of barges is built connecting Giudecca to the rest of Venice, and fireworks play an important role.\nThe Venice Film Festival () is the oldest film festival in the world. Founded by Count Giuseppe Volpi di Misurata in 1932 as the \"Esposizione Internazionale d'Arte Cinematografica\", the festival has since taken place every year in late August or early September on the island of the Lido. Screenings take place in the historic Palazzo del Cinema on the Lungomare Marconi. It is one of the world's most prestigious film festivals and is part of the Venice Biennale.\nMusic.\nVenice has played an important role in the development of Italian music. The medieval Republic of Venice was often popularly called the \"Republic of Music\", and an anonymous Frenchman of the 17th century is said to have remarked that \"In every [Venetian] home, someone is playing a musical instrument or singing. There is music everywhere.\"\nDuring the 16th century, Venice became one of the most important musical centres of Europe, marked by a characteristic style of composition (the Venetian school) and the development of the Venetian polychoral style under composers such as Adrian Willaert, who worked at St Mark's Basilica. Venice was the early centre of music printing; Ottaviano Petrucci began publishing music almost as soon as this technology was available, and his publishing enterprise helped to attract composers from all over Europe, especially from France and Flanders. By the end of the century, Venice was known for the splendor of its music, as exemplified in the \"colossal style\" of Andrea and Giovanni Gabrieli, which used multiple choruses and instrumental groups. Venice was also the home of many noted composers during the baroque period, such as Antonio Vivaldi, Tomaso Albinoni, Ippolito Ciera, Giovanni Picchi, and Girolamo Dalla Casa, to name but a few.\nOrchestras.\nVenice is the home of numerous orchestras such as, the Orchestra della Fenice, Rond\u00f2 Veneziano, Interpreti Veneziani, and Venice Baroque Orchestra.\nCinema, media, and popular culture.\n The city has been the setting or chosen location of numerous films, games, works of fine art and literature (including essays, fiction, non-fiction, and poems), music videos, television shows, and other cultural references. Notable examples of this are the films \"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\" and \"Casino Royale\", the second part of the Japanese manga series \"JoJo's Bizarre Adventure\" and the video game \"\".\nPhotography.\nFulvio Roiter was the pioneer in artistic photography in Venice, followed by a number of photographers whose works are often reproduced on postcards, thus reaching a widest international popular exposure. Luca Zordan, a New York City based photographer was born in Venice.\nCuisine.\nVenetian cuisine is characterized by seafood, but also includes garden products from Sant'Erasmo island, rice from the mainland, game, and polenta. Venice is not known for a particular cuisine of its own: it combines local traditions with influences stemming from age-old contacts with distant countries. These include \"sarde in sa\u00f3r\" (sardines marinated to preserve them for long voyages); \"bacal\u00e0 mantecato\" (a recipe based on Norwegian stockfish and extra-virgin olive oil); \"bis\u00e0to\" (marinated eel); \"risi e bisi\" \u2013 rice, peas and (unsmoked) bacon; \"fegato alla veneziana\", Venetian-style veal liver; \"risi e bisi\" (rice and beans); \"ris\u00f2to col n\u00e9ro de s\u00e9pe\" (risotto with cuttlefish, blackened by their own ink); \"cich\u00e9ti\", refined and delicious tidbits (akin to \"tapas\"); \"antipasti\" (appetizers); and \"prosecco\", sparkling light -body white wine.\nIn addition, Venice is known for the golden, oval-shaped cookies called \"ba\u00eccoli\", and for other types of sweets, such as: \"pan del pesca\u00f3r\" (bread of the fisherman); cookies with almonds and pistachio nuts; cookies with fried Venetian cream, or the \"bussol\u00e0i\" (butter biscuits and shortbread made in the shape of a ring or an \"S\") from the island of Burano; the \"gal\u00e0ni\" or \"cr\u00f3stoli\" (angel wings); the \"fr\u00ectole\" (fried spherical doughnuts); the \"fregol\u00f2tta\" (a crumbly cake with almonds); a milk pudding called \"ros\u00e0da\"; and cookies called \"zal\u00e9ti\", whose ingredients include yellow maize flour.\nThe dessert tiramis\u00f9 is generally thought to have been invented in Treviso in the 1970s, and is popular in the Veneto area.\nFashion and shopping.\nIn the 14th century, many young Venetian men began wearing tight-fitting multicoloured hose, the designs on which indicated the \"Compagnie della Calza\" (\"Trouser Club\") to which they belonged. The Venetian Senate passed sumptuary laws, but these merely resulted in changes in fashion in order to circumvent the law. Dull garments were worn over colourful ones, which then were cut to show the hidden colours resulting in the spread of men's \"slashed\" fashions in the 15th century.\nToday, Venice is a major fashion and shopping centre; not as important as Milan, Florence, and Rome, but on a par with Verona, Turin, Vicenza, Naples, and Genoa. Roberta di Camerino is the only major Italian fashion brand to be based in Venice. Founded in 1945, it is renowned for its innovative handbags made by Venetian artisans and often covered in locally woven velvet.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nVenice is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2013, Venice announced that it wants to end the sister city relationship with St. Petersburg in opposition to laws Russia had passed against homosexuals and those who support gay rights.\nCooperation agreements.\nIn January 2000, the City of Venice and the Central Association of Cities and Communities of Greece (KEDKE) established, in pursuance to EC Regulation No. 2137/85, the Marco Polo System European Economic Interest Grouping (E.E.I.G.), to promote and realise European projects within transnational cultural and tourist fields, particularly in reference to the preservation and safeguarding of artistic and architectural heritage.\nIn April 2001, the city signed an agreement with the office of cultural promotion and cooperation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to coordinate efforts at promoting Italian culture abroad.\nVenice also has cooperation agreements with:\nPlaces named after Venice.\nThe name \"Venezuela\" is a Spanish diminutive of Venice (\"Veneziola\").Many additional places around the world are named after Venice, such as:\nPeople.\nOthers closely associated with the city include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAcademic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPopular.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32617", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32617", "title": "Victoria Bitter", "text": "Australian beer brand\nVictoria Bitter (VB) is a lager produced by Carlton &amp; United Breweries, a subsidiary of Asahi, in Melbourne, Victoria. It was first brewed by Thomas Aitken at Victoria Brewery in 1854 and is one of the best selling beers in Australia.\nHistory.\nThe origins of Victoria Bitter (VB) date back to the Victoria Brewery founder and head brewer Thomas Aitken, who developed the recipe in 1854. Like most Australian lagers, VB is made using a wortstream brewing process, and uses a portion of cane sugar to thin out the body of the beer.\nIt is available in 750 mL bottles (commonly referred to as a \"Longneck\", \"Longie\", \"Seven-Fifty\", \"Bomber\", \"King Brown\", or a \"Tallie\"), 500 mL cans (\"Lunch greens\", \"The Big Cold Can\"), 375 mL bottles (\"Stubbies\", a \"Pint\" or \"Short-neck\"), 375 mL cans (\"Tinnies\", \"Boonies\", \"Green Cans\" or \"Gweens\"), and 250 mL bottles (\"Grenades\", \"Twisties\" or \"Throwies\"). For a limited time only, VB was available in the Northern Territory in a 1-litre can nicknamed a 'Killer can' (Kilo can). As with all packaged beer sold in Australia it was for many years only available in 750 mL or 26 2/3 fl oz (1/6 imperial gallon) bottles, until the introduction of \"stubbies\" and smaller cans. In a testament to its long history and popularity, VB has acquired a number of nicknames, ranging from the abbreviated \"Vic Bitter\", \"Veebs\", polite \"Very Best\", \"Vitamin B\", \"Very Bad\" and \"Victory Beer\", for after a win in the footy. At Australian gatherings (for example, backyard barbeques) it is referred to as \"The Staple\" as being the default brand of beer consumed.\nThe beer began to gain wide popularity in the mid 1960s with an innovative television advertising campaign featuring a very similar recording to the theme from the film \"The Magnificent Seven\", images of working-class Australians at work and play, and a voice-over by notable Australian actor John Meillon used the slogan; \"For A Hard Earned Thirst.\" The campaign was used until quite recently and was reinvented in 2018 with the launch of the 'New Knock Off Times' Campaign. In 2004, VB commanded more than a 25 per cent market share, meaning that one in four beers sold in Australia was a VB.\nIn July 2007, Foster's announced it would cut the alcohol content of VB from 4.9% to 4.8% in a bid to save millions of dollars in tax payments. The brewer cut the alcohol percentage of VB further in 2009, reducing it to 4.6% in an effort to make further savings. On 3 September 2012, CUB announced VB would be going back to its original 4.9% alcohol recipe and its original packaging. CUB had received many complaints since it was changed to 4.6% in 2009, and the beer had lost a large amount of market share. The updated VBs began rolling out in late October 2012. As of 2013, VB was the most popular beer in Australia with 12.2 per cent market share.\nSales availability.\nAccording to ACNielsen in 2009, Victoria Bitter was claimed to be Australia's only billion dollar retail beer brand, selling the equivalent of one slab (24 x 375ml cans or bottles) every second. At one time, it sold twice as much as any other full strength beer and was the only Australian beer brand that was in the top 3 sellers in every state. Victoria Bitter held the highest market share of all beer sold in Australia for more than two decades, yet in 2012, it lost this position to XXXX Gold.\nIn April 2011, VB held 13.7% volume share and XXXX Gold had 11.7%. Just one year on in April 2012, VB had dropped to 12.3%, while XXXX Gold took the lead with 12.4%.\nIn addition to being sold in Australia, Victoria Bitter is also available in New Zealand, Bali, Indonesia, the UK, and, to a limited extent, other countries abroad. When the joint venture Angkor Brewing Co. was established in Cambodia in 1992, VB was briefly brewed in Sihanoukville, and later imported; it held a significant share of the premium beer market until 1994.\nDespite its name, Victoria Bitter is a standard commercial lager rather than a bitter. Since late 2012, Victoria Bitter has been sold at a strength of 4.9% ABV after an interim period of producing the same product at an ABV of 4.6% (equal to virtually every other major Australian lager). The VB sold commercially in New Zealand is both 4.9% and 4.6% available in 375ml quantities in either bottles or cans.\nVB Gold.\nIn 2007, Foster's launched a new, midstrength version of VB called VB Midstrength Lager with an alcohol volume of 3.5% in order to capitalize on the growing market for midstrength beers, currently dominated by XXXX Gold. In May 2007, the launch was Foster's first ever mainstream variation of the VB brand. In 2009, Carlton &amp; United Breweries re-branded VB Midstrength to the new name VB Gold, and in 2017, it reduced the alcohol content to 3%.\nTV builder Scott Cam, a self-confessed VB fan, is the appointed VB Mid Ambassador.\nOn 24 July 2007, \"The Australian\" reported that within three months of Fosters launching VB Midstrength, market share for the full strength VB and mid VB had increased. Foster's regional marketing director Anthony Heraghty hinted at further VB brand extensions, saying Foster's was \"trying to see past the big green giant\".\nDuring the 2008 Rugby League World Cup, VB Gold was advertised on TV by Australian Rugby League legends Wally Lewis and Gorden Tallis.\nVB RAW.\nIn September 2009, CUB released VB RAW to compete in the low carb market. The alcohol volume was 4.5%. VB Raw was discontinued in late 2010 due to poor sales.\nMarketing and promotion.\nIn 2009, Foster's replaced the slogan from the '60s \"A hard earned thirst needs a big cold beer, and the best cold beer is Vic, Victoria Bitter\" with \"VB\u00a0\u2013\u00a0The Drinking Beer\" as part of a marketing strategy to reposition VB to a broader range of drinkers. The new slogan, as part of a campaign called \"The Regulars\" included a brand website for the first time, including a production line live webcam. Advertising ran on TV and radio, in print, outdoor, online, and at point of sale. In 2015, Carlton and United Breweries revived the \"hard earned thirst\" campaign.\nIn 2018, Victoria Bitter revisited the idea of knock off with the launch of a new campaign called new knock off times expanding its brand positioning to celebrate Australia's changing workforce.\nMarking its 50th anniversary of TV advertising, the ad celebrates the change in Australia's workforce that's taken place over the half century. These days, there's no one time that people knock off. 4.00pm might still be the end of the day for some, but for others, it might very well be the beginning of their day.\nIn 2005, VB had started a promotion where David Boon became the face of Victoria Bitter beer for its 2005/06 summer advertising campaign called \"Boonanza\". Part of the promotion was the sale of a talking David Boon figurine with purchases of cartons of beer, which would make comments when prompted by Channel Nine commentary. In late 2006, the \"Boonanza\" promotion returned as \"Boonanza II\" for the 2006\u201307 Ashes series. The promotion included former England cricket captain Ian Botham as a talking figure, who would interact alongside an updated David Boon figure.\nFor the 2007\u201308 Australian cricket series, Shane Warne took over as VB spokesperson from David Boon. Warne also had a talking figurine as part of a \"Warnie\" promotion, taking over from the highly successful \"Talking Boony\" dolls from the two previous \"Boonanza\" promotions.\nOn 6 July 2011, Foster's released VB packaged in limited edition 1958 heritage cans. The packaging had the original artwork of the 1958 VB product, but it also included a standard ring pull on each can, something which was lacking on the original.\nVB has invested heavily in sponsorships of Australian rugby league. It is currently the official beer of the NRL, the naming rights sponsor for NRL Friday Night Football and the main sponsor of the Australian national rugby league team, the Kangaroos.\nVictoria Bitter was also the main sponsor of the Australian Tri-Series for five years between 2001\u201302 and 2005\u201306. During this time the series was renamed \"The VB Series\".\nVictoria Bitter were sponsors of the away Test, ODI, and Twenty20 teams for the Australia national cricket team from 2008 to 2014. In 2013, Cricket Australia agreed to remove the logo of Muslim cricketer Fawad Ahmed's uniform due to his faith's ban on alcohol.\nThe previous advertising campaign was called the Stubby Symphony, where 100 members of the Melbourne and Victorian orchestras play the theme from \"The Magnificent Seven\" only using VB beer bottles. The campaign was created by George Patterson Y&amp;R in Melbourne.\nVB launched a new advertising campaign in Australia in July 2009 to coincide with the SBS television broadcast of the 2009 The Ashes cricket series. They will drop the famous tag \"For a hard earned thirst..\" for \"VB \u2013 The Drinking Beer\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32618", "revid": "1312862350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32618", "title": "Vern Clark", "text": "United States Navy admiral\nVernon Eugene Clark (born September 7, 1944) is a retired admiral who served as the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) of the United States Navy. He retired on July 22, 2005, making his tenure of five years the second-longest serving CNO behind Arleigh Burke. He currently sits on the board of directors of Raytheon and SRI International. In November 2009, he was selected along with former Secretary of Veterans Affairs Togo West by Defense Secretary Robert Gates to lead the military investigation into the Fort Hood massacre.\nEarly life and education.\nClark was born in Sioux City, Iowa, and grew up in the states of Nebraska, Missouri and Illinois. Clark graduated from Evangel College and earned a Master of Business Administration degree from the University of Arkansas. He attended Officer Candidate School and received his commission in August 1968.\nCareer.\nClark served aboard the destroyers and . As a lieutenant, he commanded . He subsequently commanded , , the Atlantic Fleet's Anti-Submarine Warfare Training Center, Destroyer Squadron 17, and Destroyer Squadron 5. After being selected for flag rank, Clark commanded \"Carl Vinson\" Battle Group/Cruiser-Destroyer Group 3, Second Fleet, and United States Atlantic Fleet.\nAshore, Clark first served as special assistant to the director of the Systems Analysis Division in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations. He later completed assignments as the administrative assistant to the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Surface Warfare) and as the administrative aide to the Vice Chief of Naval Operations. He served as head of the Cruiser-Destroyer Combat Systems Requirements Section and force anti-submarine warfare officer for the commander of Naval Surface Force, Atlantic Fleet, and he directed the Joint Staff's Crisis Action Team for Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm.\nClark's first flag assignment was at the United States Transportation Command (TRANSCOM), where he was director of plans and policy (J5) and financial management and analysis (J8). While commanding the \"Carl Vinson\" Battle Group, he deployed to the Persian Gulf and later served as the Deputy Commander, Joint Task Force Southwest Asia. Clark has also served as the Deputy and Chief of Staff, United States Atlantic Fleet; the Director of Operations (J3) and subsequently Director, of the Joint Staff. Clark became the 27th Chief of Naval Operations on July 21, 2000, relieving Jay L. Johnson. Since his retirement, Clark has been honored with the Eisenhower Award from the Business Executives for National Security and the Distinguished Sea Service Award from the Naval Order of the United States.\nClark was elected to the board of directors of Raytheon in December 2005 and the board of directors of SRI International in March 2007.\nClark now serves on the board of directors of Raytheon Company, Rolls-Royce North America, SRI International, Horizon Lines, the Armed Forces YMCA, and is on the world board of governors of the USO. He serves as a senior advisor with Booz Allen Hamilton, the Defense Policy Board, the advisory boards of Fleishman-Hillard, Computer Science Corporation, the Comptroller General's advisory board of the GAO, and the executive committee of Military Ministry. In addition, he is currently a distinguished professor at Regent University in Virginia Beach, Virginia. Clark teaches in the Robertson School of Government and the School of Business &amp; Leadership and is a member of the Regent's board of trustees. He was also a member of the Board of Visitors at Air University.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"This article incorporates text in the public domain from the U.S. Department of Defense.\""}
{"id": "32620", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32620", "title": "Vidiadhar Surajprasad Naipaul", "text": ""}
{"id": "32622", "revid": "50731584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32622", "title": "Video art", "text": "Art form using video technology\nVideo art is an art form which relies on using video technology as a visual and audio medium. Video art emerged during the late 1960s as new consumer video technology such as video tape recorders became available outside corporate broadcasting. Video art can take many forms: recordings that are broadcast; installations viewed in galleries or museums; works either streamed online, or distributed as video tapes, or on DVDs; and performances which may incorporate one or more television sets, video monitors, and projections, displaying live or recorded images and sounds. \nVideo art is named for the original analog video tape, which was the most commonly used recording technology in much of the form's history into the 1990s. With the advent of digital recording equipment, many artists began to explore digital technology as a new way of expression. Video art does not necessarily rely on the conventions that define theatrical cinema. It may not use actors, may contain no dialogue, and may have no discernible narrative or plot. Video art also differs from cinema subcategories such as avant garde cinema, short films, and experimental film.\nEarly history.\nNam June Paik, a Korean-American artist who studied in Germany, is widely regarded as a pioneer in video art. In March 1963 Paik showed at the Galerie Parnass in Wuppertal the \"Exposition of Music \u2013 Electronic Television\". In May 1963 Wolf Vostell showed the installation \"6 TV D\u00e9-coll/age\" at the Smolin Gallery in New York and created the video \"Sun in your head\" in Cologne. Originally \"Sun in your head\" was made on 16mm film and transferred 1967 to videotape.\nVideo art is often said to have begun when Paik used his new Sony Portapak to shoot footage of Pope Paul VI's procession through New York City in the autumn of 1965 Later that same day, across town in a Greenwich Village cafe, Paik played the tapes and video art was born.\nPrior to the introduction of consumer video equipment, moving image production was only available non-commercially via 8mm film and 16mm film. After the Portapak's introduction and its subsequent update every few years, many artists began exploring the new technology.\nMany of the early prominent video artists were those involved with concurrent movements in conceptual art, performance, and experimental film. These include Americans Vito Acconci, Valie Export, John Baldessari, Peter Campus, Doris Totten Chase, Maureen Connor, Norman Cowie, Dimitri Devyatkin, Frank Gillette, Dan Graham, Gary Hill, Joan Jonas, Bruce Nauman, Nam June Paik, Bill Viola, Shigeko Kubota, Martha Rosler, William Wegman, and many others. There were also those such as Steina and Woody Vasulka who were interested in the formal qualities of video and employed video synthesizers to create abstract works. Kate Craig, Vera Frenkel and Michael Snow were important to the development of video art in Canada.\nIn the 1970s.\nMuch video art in the medium's heyday experimented formally with the limitations of the video format. For example, American artist Peter Campus' \"Double Vision\" combined the video signals from two Sony Portapaks through an electronic mixer, resulting in a distorted and radically dissonant image. Another representative piece, Joan Jonas' \"Vertical Roll\", involved recording previously recorded material of Jonas dancing while playing the videos back on a television, resulting in a layered and complex representation of mediation.\nMuch video art in the United States was produced in New York City, with The Kitchen, founded in 1972 by Steina and Woody Vasulka (and assisted by video director Dimitri Devyatkin and Shridhar Bapat), serving as a nexus for many young artists. An early multi-channel video artwork (using several monitors or screens) was \"Wipe Cycle\" by Ira Schneider and Frank Gillette. \"Wipe Cycle\" was first exhibited at the Howard Wise Gallery in New York in 1969 as part of an exhibition titled \"TV as a Creative Medium\". An installation of nine television screens, \"Wipe Cycle\" combined live images of gallery visitors, found footage from commercial television, and shots from pre-recorded tapes. The material was alternated from one monitor to the next in an elaborate choreography.\nOn the West coast, the San Jose State television studios in 1970, Willoughby Sharp began the \"Videoviews\" series of videotaped dialogues with artists. The \"Videoviews\" series consists of Sharps' dialogues with Bruce Nauman (1970), Joseph Beuys (1972), Vito Acconci (1973), Chris Burden (1973), Lowell Darling (1974), and Dennis Oppenheim (1974). Also in 1970, Sharp curated \"Body Works\", an exhibition of video works by Vito Acconci, Terry Fox, Richard Serra, Keith Sonnier, Dennis Oppenheim and William Wegman which was presented at Tom Marioni's Museum of Conceptual Art, San Francisco, California.\nIn Europe, Valie Export's groundbreaking video piece, \"Facing a Family\" (1971) was one of the first instances of television intervention and broadcasting video art. The video, originally broadcast on the Austrian television program \"Kontakte\" February 2, 1971,[11] shows a bourgeois Austrian family watching TV while eating dinner, creating a mirroring effect for many members of the audience who were doing the same thing. Export believed the television could complicate the relationship between subject, spectator, and television. In the United Kingdom David Hall's \"TV Interruptions\" (1971) were transmitted intentionally unannounced and uncredited on Scottish TV, the first artist interventions on British television.\n1980s\u20131990s.\nAs the prices of editing software decreased, the access the general public had to utilize these technologies increased. Video editing software became so readily available that it changed the way artists worked with the medium. Simulteanously, with the arrival of independent televisions in Europe and the emergence of video clips, artists also used the potential of special effects, high quality images and sophisticated editing (Gary Hill, Bill Viola). Festivals dedicated to video art such as the World Wide Video festival in The Hague, the Biennale de l'Image in Geneva or Ars Electronica in Linz developed and underlined the importance of creation in this field.\nFrom the beginning of the 90's, contemporary art exhibitions integrate artists' videos among other works and installations. This is the case of the Venice Biennale (Aperto 93) and of NowHere at the Louisiana Museum, but also of art galleries where a new generation of artists for whom the arrival of lighter equipment such as Handycams favored a more direct expression. Artists such as Pipilotti Rist, Tony Oursler, Carsten H\u00f6ller, Cheryl Donegan, Nelson Sullivan were able, as others in the 1960s, to leave their studios easily to film by hand without sophistication, sometimes mixing found images with their own (Douglas Gordon, Pierre Bismuth, Sylvie Fleury, Johan Grimonprez, Claude Closky) and using a present but simple post-production. \nThe presentation of the works was also simplified with the arrival of monitors in the exhibition rooms and distribution in VHS. The arrival of this younger generation announced the feminist and gender issues to come, but also the increasingly hybrid use of different media (transferred super 8 films, 16mm, digital editing, TV show excerpts, sounds from different sources, etc).\nAt the same time, museums and institutions more specialized in video art were integrating digital technology, such as the ZKM in Karlsruhe, directed by Peter Weibel, with numerous thematic exhibitions, or the Centre pour l'Image Contemporaine with its biennial Version (1994-2004) directed by Simon Lamuni\u00e8re.\nWith the arrival of digital technology and the Internet, some museums have federated their databases such as New Media Art produced by the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris, the Museum Ludwig in Cologne and the Centre pour l'Image Contemporaine (Center for Contemporary Images) in Geneva.\nBy the end of the century, institutions and artists worked on the expanding spectrum of the media, 3d imagery, interactivity, cd-roms, Internet, digital post production etc. Different themes emerged such as interactivity and nonlinearity. Some artists combined physical and digital techniques, such as Jeffrey Shaw's \"Legible City\" (1988\u201391). Others by using Low-Tech interactivity such as Claude Closky's online \"+1\" or \"Do you want Love or Lust\" in 1996 coproduced by the Dia Art Foundation. But these steps start to move away from the so called video art towards the New media art and Internet art.\n2000s\u20132010s.\nAs the available amount of footage and the editing techniques evolved, some artists have also produced complex narrative videos without using any of their own footage: Marco Brambilla's \"Civilization\" (2008) is a collage, or a \"video mural\" that portrays heaven and hell. Johan Grimonprez's Dial H-I-S-T-O-R-Y is a 68 minute long interpretation of the cold war and the role of terrorists, made almost exclusively with original television and film excerpts on hijacking.\nMore generally, during the first decade, one of the most significant steps in the video art domain, was achieved with its strong presence in contemporary art exhibitions at the international level. During this period, it was common to see artist videos in group shows, on monitors or as projections. More than a third of the works presented at Art Unlimited (the section of Art Basel dedicated to large-scale works) were video installations between 2000 and 2015. The same is true for most biennials. A new generation of artists such as Pipilotti Rist, Francis Alys, Kim Sooja, Apichatpong Weerasethakul, Omer Fast, David Claerbout, Sarah Morris, Matthew Barney, were presented alongside the previous generations (Roman Signer, Bruce Nauman, Bill Viola, Joan Jonas, John Baldessari).\nSome artists have also widened their audience by making movies (Apichatpong Weerasethakul, who won the 2010 Cannes Film Festival \"Palm d'or\") or by curating large public events (Pipilotti Rist's Swiss National Expo02).\nIn 2003, Kalup Linzy created \"Conversations Wit De Churen II: All My Churen\", a soap opera satire that has been credited as creating the video and performance sub-genre Although Linzy's work is genre defying his work has been a major contribution to the medium. Ryan Trecartin, an experimental young video-artist, uses color, editing techniques and bizarre acting to portray what The New Yorker calls \"a cultural watershed\".\nPerformance art and video art.\nVideo art as a medium can also be combined with other forms of artistic expression such as Performance art. This combination can also be referred to as \"media and performance art\" when artists \"break the mold of video and film and broaden the boundaries of art\". With increased ability for artists to obtain video cameras, performance art started being documented and shared across large amounts of audiences. Artists such as Marina Abramovic and Ulay experimented with video taping their performances in the 1970s and the 1980s. In a piece titled \u201cRest energy\u201d (1980) both Ulay and Marina suspended their weight so that they pulled back a bow and arrow aimed at her heart, Ulay held the arrow, and Marina the bow. The piece was 4:10 which Marina described as being \u201ca performance about complete and total trust\u201d.\nOther artists who combined Video art with Performance art used the camera as the audience. Kate Gilmore experimented with the positioning of the camera. In her video https:// she films her performance piece as she is constantly trying the reach the camera which is staring down at her. As the 13-minute video goes on, she continues to tie together pieces of furniture while constantly attempting to reach the camera. Gilmore added an element of struggle to her art which is sometimes self-imposed, in her video \u201cMy love is an anchor\u201d (2004) she lets her foot dry in cement before attempting to break free on camera. Gilmore has said to have mimicked expression styles from the 1960s and 1970s with inspirations like Marina Abramovic as she adds extremism and struggle to her work.\nSome artists experimented with space when combining Video art and Performance art. Ragnar Kjartannson, an Icelandic artist, filmed an entire music video with 9 different artists, including himself, being filmed in different rooms. All the artists could hear each other through a pair of headphones so that they could play the song together, the piece was titled \"The visitors\" (2012).\nSome artists, such as Jaki Irvine and Victoria Fu have experimented with combining 16 mm film, 8 mm film and video to make use of the potential discontinuity between moving image, musical score and narrator to undermine any sense of linear narrative.\nAs an academic discipline.\nSince 2000, video arts programs have begun to emerge among colleges and universities as a standalone discipline typically situated in relation to film and older broadcast curricula. Current models found in universities like Northeastern and Syracuse show video arts offering baseline competencies in lighting, editing and camera operation. While these fundamentals can feed into and support existing film or TV production areas, recent growth of entertainment media through CGI and other special effects situate skills like animation, motion graphics and computer aided design as upper level courses in this emerging area.\nAs the industry continues to evolve, video arts programs are also incorporating elements of interactive media, virtual production, and immersive technologies such as augmented and virtual reality. Many institutions are expanding their curricula to include courses on real-time rendering, AI-assisted content creation, and multi-platform storytelling, reflecting the growing demand for versatile digital artists. Additionally, collaborations with game design, digital marketing, and media studies departments are fostering interdisciplinary approaches that prepare students for diverse career opportunities beyond traditional film and television.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32623", "revid": "11104410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32623", "title": "Vanilla", "text": "Spice extracted from orchids of the genus Vanilla\nVanilla is a spice derived from orchids of the genus \"Vanilla\", primarily obtained from pods of the flat-leaved vanilla (\"V.\u00a0planifolia\").\n\"Vanilla\" is not autogamous, so pollination is required to make the plants produce the fruit from which the vanilla spice is obtained. In 1837, Belgian botanist Charles Fran\u00e7ois Antoine Morren discovered this fact and pioneered a method of artificially pollinating the plant. The method proved financially unworkable and was not deployed commercially. In 1841, Edmond Albius, a 12-year-old slave who lived on the French island of R\u00e9union in the Indian Ocean, discovered that the plant could be hand-pollinated. Hand-pollination allowed global cultivation of the plant. Noted French botanist and plant collector Jean Michel Claude Richard falsely claimed to have discovered the technique three or four years earlier. By the end of the 20th century, Albius was considered the true discoverer.\nThree major species of vanilla currently are grown globally, all derived from a species originally found in Mesoamerica, including parts of modern-day Mexico. They are \"V. planifolia\" (syn. \"V. fragrans\"), grown on Madagascar, R\u00e9union, and other tropical areas along the Indian Ocean; \"V. \u00d7 tahitensis\", grown in the South Pacific; and \"V. pompona\", found in the West Indies, Central America, and South America. The majority of the world's vanilla is the \"V. planifolia\" species, more commonly known as \"Bourbon vanilla\" (after the former name of R\u00e9union, \u00cele Bourbon) or \"Madagascar vanilla\", which is produced in Madagascar and neighboring islands in the southwestern Indian Ocean, and in Indonesia. Madagascar's and Indonesia's cultivations produce two-thirds of the world's supply of vanilla.\nMeasured by weight, vanilla is the world's second-most expensive spice after saffron, because growing the vanilla seed pods is labor-intensive. Nevertheless, vanilla is widely used in both commercial and domestic baking, perfume production, and aromatherapy, as only small amounts are needed to impart its signature flavor and aroma.\nHistory.\n\"Vanilla planifolia\" traditionally grew wild around the Gulf of Mexico from Tampico around to the northeast tip of South America, and from Colima to Ecuador on the Pacific side, as well as throughout the Caribbean. The Totonac people, who live along the eastern coast of Mexico in the present-day state of Veracruz, were among the first people to domesticate vanilla, cultivated on farms since at least 1185. The Totonac used vanilla as a fragrance in temples and as a good-luck charm in amulets, as well as flavoring for food and beverages. The cultivation of vanilla was a low-profile affair, as few people from outside these regions knew of it.\nAlthough the Totonacs are the most famously associated with human use of vanilla, it is speculated that the Olmecs, who also lived in the regions of wild vanilla growth thousands of years earlier, were one of the first people to use wild vanilla in cuisine.\nAztecs from the central highlands of Mexico invaded the Totonacs in 1427, developed a taste for the vanilla pods, and began using vanilla to flavor their foods and drinks, often mixing it with cocoa in a drink called \"xocolatl\" that later inspired modern hot chocolate. The fruit was named \"tlilxochitl\", wrongly interpreted as \"black flower\" instead of the more probable \"black pod\" because the matured fruit shrivels and turns a dark color shortly after being picked. For the Aztecs, much like earlier Mesoamerican peoples before them, it is probable that vanilla was used to tame the otherwise bitter taste of cacao, as sugarcane was not harvested in these regions at the time and there were no other sweeteners available.\nHern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s is credited with introducing both vanilla and chocolate to Europe in the 1520s. In Europe, vanilla was seen mostly as an additive to chocolate until the early 17th century when Hugh Morgan, a creative apothecary in the employ of Queen Elizabeth I, created chocolate-free, vanilla-flavored \"sweetmeats\". By the 18th century, the French were using vanilla to flavor ice cream.\nUntil the mid-19th century, Mexico was the chief producer of vanilla. One of Mexico's top producing regions was Veracruz, especially in the town of Papantla. By 1889, Mexican exports of vanilla exceeded 70,000 kilograms making the region one of the world leaders in vanilla production at the time. While vanilla trade was surging throughout Papantla, many farmers who owned land on which this commodity was growing would soon be subject to political shifts that led to those farmers having to pay rent. Protests of these shifts in policy led many to fight and die against the four tier hierarchy made up of Totonac caciques, ranchero clans, a hefty class of landowning labradores, and a bulging stratum of tenants, jornaleros, and ranch hands. In 1819, French entrepreneurs shipped vanilla fruits to the islands of R\u00e9union and Mauritius in hopes of producing vanilla there. After 1841, when Edmond Albius discovered how to pollinate the flowers quickly by hand, the pods began to thrive. Soon, the tropical orchids were sent from R\u00e9union to the Comoros Islands, Seychelles, and Madagascar, along with instructions for pollinating them. By 1898, Madagascar, R\u00e9union, and the Comoros Islands produced 200 metric tons of vanilla beans, about 80% of world production in that year. According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization 2019 data, Madagascar, followed by Indonesia, were the largest producers of vanilla in 2018.\nAfter a tropical cyclone ravaged key croplands, the market price of vanilla rose sharply in the late 1970s and remained high through the early 1980s despite the introduction of Indonesian vanilla. In the mid-1980s, the cartel that had controlled vanilla prices and distribution since its creation in 1930 disbanded. Prices dropped 70% over the next few years, to nearly US$20 per kilogram; prices rose sharply again after tropical cyclone Hudah struck Madagascar in April 2000. The cyclone, political instability, and poor weather in the third year drove vanilla prices to US$500/kg in 2004, bringing new countries into the vanilla industry. A good crop, coupled with decreased demand caused by the production of imitation vanilla, pushed the market price down to the $40/kg range in the middle of 2005. By 2010, prices were down to $20/kg. Cyclone Enawo caused a similar spike to $500/kg in 2017.\nAn estimated 95% of \"vanilla\" products are artificially flavored with vanillin derived from lignin instead of vanilla fruits.\nAlthough vanilla was domesticated in Mesoamerica and subsequently spread to the Old World, the use of an unidentified, Old World-endemic \"Vanilla\" species is attested in Canaan/Israel during the Middle Bronze Age and later. Traces of vanillin were found in wine jars in Jerusalem, which were used by the Judahite elite before the city was destroyed in 586 BCE.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"vanilla\" is derived from the Spanish word meaning \"little pod\", the diminutive of \"vaina\" derived from the Latin \"vagina\" (sheath) describing the shape of the pods. The word \"vanilla\" entered the English language in 1754, when the botanist Philip Miller wrote about the genus in his \"Gardener's Dictionary\".\nBiology.\nVanilla orchid.\nThe main species of vanilla cultivated is \"V. planifolia\". Although it is native to Mesoamerica and South America, it is now widely grown throughout the tropics. Indonesia and Madagascar are the world's largest producers. Additional sources include \"V. pompona\" and \"V. tahitiensis\" (grown in Niue and Tahiti), although the vanillin content of these species is much less than \"V. planifolia\".\nVanilla grows as a vine, climbing up an existing tree (also called a tutor), pole, or other support. It can be grown in a wood (on trees), in a plantation (on trees or poles), or in a \"shader\", in increasing orders of productivity. Its growth environment is referred to as its \"terroir\", and includes not only the adjacent plants, but also the climate, geography, and local geology. Left alone, it will grow as high as possible on the support, with few flowers. Every year, growers fold the higher parts of the plant downward so the plant stays at heights accessible by a standing human. This also greatly stimulates flowering.\nThe distinctively flavored compounds are found in the fruit, which results from the pollination of the flower. These seed pods are roughly by , and brownish red to black when ripe. Inside of these pods is an oily liquid full of tiny seeds. One flower produces one fruit. \"V. planifolia\" flowers are hermaphroditic: they carry both male (anther) and female (stigma) organs. However, self-pollination is blocked by a membrane which separates those organs.\nDespite various claims otherwise, the only pollinators definitively documented to date are orchid bees in the genus \"Eulaema\" and the Western honey bee. All commercial vanilla production takes place via hand pollination by humans.\nThe first vanilla orchid to flower in Europe was in the London collection of the Honourable Charles Greville in 1806. Cuttings from that plant went to Netherlands and Paris, from which the French first transplanted the vines to their overseas colonies. The vines grew, but would not fruit outside Mexico. The only known way to produce fruits is artificial pollination. Today, even in Mexico, hand pollination is used extensively. In 1837, botanist Charles Fran\u00e7ois Antoine Morren began experimenting with hand pollination of \"Vanilla\" orchids in cultivation in Europe. The method proved financially unworkable and was not deployed commercially. A few years later in 1841, a simple and efficient artificial hand-pollination method was developed by a 12-year-old slave named Edmond Albius on R\u00e9union, a method still used today. Using a beveled sliver of bamboo, an agricultural worker lifts the membrane separating the anther and the stigma, then, using the thumb, transfers the pollinia from the anther to the stigma. The flower, self-pollinated, will then produce a fruit. The vanilla flower lasts about one day, sometimes less, so growers have to inspect their plantations every day for open flowers, a labor-intensive task.\nThe fruit, a seed capsule, if left on the plant, ripens and opens at the end; as it dries, the phenolic compounds crystallize, giving the fruits a diamond-dusted appearance, which the French call \"givre\" (hoarfrost). It then releases the distinctive vanilla smell. The fruit contains tiny, black seeds. In dishes prepared with whole natural vanilla, these seeds are recognizable as black specks. Both the pod and the seeds are used in cooking.\nLike other orchids' seeds, vanilla seeds will not germinate without the presence of certain mycorrhizal fungi. Instead, growers reproduce the plant by cutting: they remove sections of the vine with six or more leaf nodes, a root opposite each leaf. The two lower leaves are removed, and this area is buried in loose soil at the base of support. The remaining upper roots cling to the support, and often grow down into the soil. Growth is rapid under good conditions.\nCultivars.\nThe term \"French vanilla\" is often used to designate particular preparations with a strong vanilla aroma, containing vanilla grains and sometimes also containing eggs (especially egg yolks). The appellation originates from the French style of making vanilla ice cream with a custard base, using vanilla pods, cream, and egg yolks. Inclusion of vanilla varietals from any of the former French dependencies or overseas France may be a part of the flavoring. Alternatively, French vanilla is taken to refer to a vanilla-custard flavor.\nChemistry.\nVanilla essence occurs in two forms. Real seedpod extract is a complex mixture of several hundred different compounds, including vanillin, acetaldehyde, acetic acid, furfural, hexanoic acid, 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde, eugenol, methyl cinnamate, and isobutyric acid. Synthetic essence consists of a solution of synthetic vanillin in ethanol. The chemical compound vanillin (4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzaldehyde) is a major contributor to the characteristic flavor and aroma of real vanilla and is the main flavor component of cured vanilla beans. Vanillin was first isolated from vanilla pods by Gobley in 1858. By 1874, it had been obtained from glycosides of pine tree sap, temporarily causing a depression in the natural vanilla industry. Vanillin can be easily synthesized from various raw materials, but the majority of food-grade (&gt; 99% pure) vanillin is made from guaiacol.\nCultivation.\nIn general, quality vanilla only comes from good vines and through careful production methods. Commercial vanilla production can be performed under open field and \"greenhouse\" operations. The two production systems share these similarities:\nVanilla grows best in a hot, humid climate from sea level to an elevation of 1,500\u00a0m. The ideal climate has moderate rainfall, 1,500\u20133,000\u00a0mm, evenly distributed through 10 months of the year. Optimum temperatures for cultivation are during the day and during the night. Ideal humidity is around 80%, and under normal greenhouse conditions, it can be achieved by an evaporative cooler. However, since greenhouse vanilla is grown near the equator and under polymer (HDPE) netting (shading of 50%), this humidity can be achieved by the environment. Most successful vanilla growing and processing is done in the region within 10 to 20\u00b0 of the equator.\nSoils for vanilla cultivation should be loose, with high organic matter content and loamy texture. They must be well drained, and a slight slope helps in this condition. Soil pH has not been well documented, but some researchers have indicated an optimum soil pH around 5.3. Mulch is very important for proper growth of the vine, and a considerable portion of mulch should be placed in the base of the vine. Fertilization varies with soil conditions, but general recommendations are: 40 to 60 g of N, 20 to 30 g of P2O5 and 60 to 100 g of K2O should be applied to each plant per year besides organic manures, such as vermicompost, oil cakes, poultry manure, and wood ash. Foliar applications are also good for vanilla, and a solution of 1% NPK (17:17:17) can be sprayed on the plant once a month. Vanilla requires organic matter, so three or four applications of mulch a year are adequate for the plant.\nPropagation, preparation and type of stock.\nDissemination of vanilla can be achieved either by stem cutting or by tissue culture. For stem cutting, a progeny garden needs to be established. All plants need to grow under 50% shade, as well as the rest of the crop. Mulching the trenches with coconut husk and micro irrigation provide an ideal microclimate for vegetative growth. Cuttings between should be selected for planting in the field or greenhouse. Cuttings below need to be rooted and raised in a separate nursery before planting. Planting material should always come from unflowered portions of the vine. Wilting of the cuttings before planting provides better conditions for root initiation and establishment.\nBefore planting the cuttings, trees to support the vine must be planted at least three months before sowing the cuttings. Pits of 30 \u00d7 30 \u00d7 30\u00a0cm are dug away from the tree and filled with farm yard manure (vermicompost), sand and top soil mixed well. An average of 2000 cuttings can be planted per hectare (2.5 acres). One important consideration is that when planting the cuttings from the base, four leaves should be pruned and the pruned basal point must be pressed into the soil in a way such that the nodes are in close contact with the soil, and are placed at a depth of . The top portion of the cutting is tied to the tree using natural fibers such as banana or hemp.\nTissue culture.\nTissue culture was first used as a means of creating vanilla plants during the 1980s at Tamil Nadu University. This was the part of the first project to grow \"V. planifolia\" in India. At that time, a shortage of vanilla planting stock was occurring in India. The approach was inspired by the work going on to tissue culture other flowering plants. Several methods have been proposed for vanilla tissue culture, but all of them begin from axillary buds of the vanilla vine. In vitro multiplication has also been achieved through culture of callus masses, protocorms, root tips and stem nodes. Description of any of these processes can be obtained from the references listed before, but all of them are successful in generation of new vanilla plants that first need to be grown up to a height of at least before they can be planted in the field or greenhouse.\nScheduling considerations.\nIn the tropics, the ideal time for planting vanilla is from September to November, when the weather is neither too rainy nor too dry, but this recommendation varies with growing conditions. Cuttings take one to eight weeks to establish roots, and show initial signs of growth from one of the leaf axils. A thick mulch of leaves should be provided immediately after planting as an additional source of organic matter. Three years are required for cuttings to grow enough to produce flowers and subsequent pods. As with most orchids, the blossoms grow along stems branching from the main vine. The buds, growing along the stems, bloom and mature in sequence, each at a different interval.\nPollination.\nFlowering normally occurs every spring, and without pollination, the blossom wilts and falls, and no vanilla bean can grow. In the wild in the New World, the only organisms ever observed to carry \"Vanilla\" pollen are orchid bees in the genus \"Eulaema\", though direct evidence documenting seed set is lacking. Claims that pollination is achieved by stingless bees of the genus \"Melipona\" or hummingbirds have never been substantiated, though they do visit the flowers. Even within the range of orchid bees, wild vanilla orchids have only a 1% chance of successful pollination. As a result, all vanilla grown today is pollinated by hand. Each flower must be hand-pollinated within 12 hours of opening. A small splinter of wood or a grass stem is used to lift the rostellum or move the flap upward, so the overhanging anther can be pressed against the stigma and self-pollinate the vine. Generally, one flower per raceme opens per day, so the raceme may be in flower for over 20 days. A healthy vine should produce about 50 to 100 beans per year, but growers are careful to pollinate only five or six flowers from the 20 on each raceme. The first flowers that open in each raceme are usually the only ones that are pollinated, so the resulting beans are similar in age and mature together. This agronomic practice facilitates harvest and increases bean quality, as over-pollination results in diseases and inferior bean quality. The fruits require five to six weeks to develop, but around six months to mature. A vine remains productive between 12 and 14 years.\nPest and disease management.\nVanilla is susceptible to many fungal and viral diseases. \"Fusarium\", \"Sclerotium\", \"Phytophthora\", and \"Colletrotrichum\" species cause rots of root, stem, leaf, bean, and shoot apex. Development of most diseases is favoured by unsuitable growing conditions such as overwatering, insufficient drainage, heavy mulch, overpollination, and too much shade. Fungal diseases can be controlled by spraying Bordeaux mixture (1%), carbendazim (0.2%) and copper oxychloride (0.2%).\nBiological control of the spread of such diseases can be managed by applying to the soil \"Trichoderma\" ( per plant in the rhizosphere) and foliar application of pseudomonas (0.2%). Mosaic virus, leaf curl, and cymbidium mosaic potexvirus are the common viral diseases. These diseases are transmitted through the sap, so affected plants must be destroyed. The insect pests of vanilla include beetles and weevils that attack the flower, caterpillars, snakes, and slugs that damage the tender parts of shoot, flower buds, and immature fruit, and grasshoppers that affect cutting shoot tips. If organic agriculture is practiced, insecticides are avoided, and mechanical measures are adopted for pest management. Most of these practices are implemented under greenhouse cultivation, since such field conditions are very difficult to achieve.\nArtificial vanilla.\nMost artificial vanilla products contain vanillin, which can be produced synthetically from lignin, a natural polymer found in wood. Most synthetic vanillin is a byproduct from the pulp used in papermaking, in which the lignin is broken down using sulfites or sulfates. However, vanillin is only one of 171 identified aromatic components of real vanilla fruits.\nThe orchid species \"Leptotes bicolor\" is used as a natural vanilla replacement in Paraguay and southern Brazil.\nIn 1996 the US Food and Drug Administration cautioned that some vanilla products sold in Mexico were made from the cheaper tonka bean which as well as vanillin also contains the toxin coumarin. They advised consumers to always check the ingredients label and avoid suspiciously cheap products.\nNonplant vanilla flavoring.\nIn the United States, castoreum, the exudate from the castor sacs of mature beavers, has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration as a food additive, often referenced simply as a \"natural flavoring\" in the product's list of ingredients. It is used in both food and beverages, especially as vanilla and raspberry flavoring, with a total annual U.S. production of less than 300 pounds. It is also used to flavor some cigarettes and in perfume-making, and is used by fur trappers as a scent lure.\nHarvest.\nHarvesting vanilla fruits is as labor-intensive as pollinating the blossoms. Immature, dark green pods are not harvested. Pale yellow discoloration that commences at the distal end of the fruits is not a good indication of the maturity of pods. Each fruit ripens at its own time, requiring a daily harvest. \"Current methods for determining the maturity of vanilla (\"Vanilla planifolia\" Andrews) beans are unreliable. Yellowing at the blossom end, the current index, occurs before beans accumulate maximum glucovanillin concentrations. Beans left on the vine until they turn brown have higher glucovanillin concentrations but may split and have low quality. Judging bean maturity is difficult as they reach full size soon after pollination. Glucovanillin accumulates from 20 weeks, maximum about 40 weeks after pollination. Mature green beans have 20% dry matter but less than 2% glucovanillin.\" The accumulation of dry matter and glucovanillin are highly correlated. To ensure the finest flavor from every fruit, each individual pod must be picked by hand just as it begins to split on the end. Overmatured fruits are likely to split, causing a reduction in market value. Its commercial value is fixed based on the length and appearance of the pod.\nIf the fruit is more than in length, it is categorized as first-quality. The largest fruits greater than and up to as much as are usually reserved for the gourmet vanilla market, for sale to top chefs and restaurants. If the fruits are between 10 and 15\u00a0cm long, pods are in the second-quality category, and fruits less than in length are in the third-quality category. Each fruit contains thousands of tiny black vanilla seeds. Vanilla fruit yield depends on the care and management given to the hanging and fruiting vines. Any practice directed to stimulate aerial root production has a direct effect on vine productivity. A five-year-old vine can produce between of pods, and this production can increase up to after a few years. The harvested green fruit can be commercialized as such or cured to get a better market price.\nCuring.\nSeveral methods exist in the market for curing vanilla; nevertheless, all of them consist of four basic steps: killing, sweating, slow-drying, and conditioning of the beans.\nKilling.\nThe vegetative tissue of the vanilla pod is killed to stop the vegetative growth of the pods and disrupt the cells and tissue of the fruits, which initiates enzymatic reactions responsible for the aroma. The method of killing varies, but may be accomplished by heating in hot water, freezing, or scratching, or killing by heating in an oven or exposing the beans to direct sunlight. The different methods give different profiles of enzymatic activity.\nTesting has shown mechanical disruption of fruit tissues can cause curing processes, including the degeneration of glucovanillin to vanillin, so the reasoning goes that disrupting the tissues and cells of the fruit allow enzymes and enzyme substrates to interact.\nHot-water killing may consist of dipping the pods in hot water () for three minutes, or at for 10 seconds. In scratch killing, fruits are scratched along their length. Frozen or quick-frozen fruits must be thawed again for the subsequent sweating stage. Tied in bundles and rolled in blankets, fruits may be placed in an oven at for 36 to 48 hours. Exposing the fruits to sunlight until they turn brown, a method originating in Mexico, was practiced by the Aztecs.\nSweating.\nSweating is a hydrolytic and oxidative process. Traditionally, it consists of keeping fruits, for 7 to 10 days, densely stacked and insulated in wool or other cloth. This retains a temperature of and high humidity. Daily exposure to the sun may also be used, or dipping the fruits in hot water. The fruits are brown and have attained much of the characteristic vanilla flavor and aroma by the end of this process, but still retain a 60\u201370% moisture content by weight.\nDrying.\nReduction of the beans to 25\u201330% moisture by weight, to prevent rotting and to lock the aroma in the pods, is always achieved by some exposure of the beans to air, and usually (and traditionally) intermittent shade and sunlight. Fruits may be laid out in the sun during the mornings and returned to their boxes in the afternoons, or spread on a wooden rack in a room for three to four weeks, sometimes with periods of sun exposure. Drying is the most problematic of the curing stages; unevenness in the drying process can lead to the loss of vanillin content of some fruits by the time the others are cured.\nConditioning.\nConditioning is performed by storing the pods for five to six months in closed boxes, where the fragrance develops. The processed fruits are sorted, graded, bundled, and wrapped in paraffin paper and preserved for the development of desired bean qualities, especially flavor and aroma. The cured vanilla fruits contain an average of 2.5% vanillin.\nGrading.\nOnce fully cured, the vanilla fruits are sorted by quality and graded. Several vanilla fruit grading systems are in use. Each country which produces vanilla has its own grading system, and individual vendors, in turn, sometimes use their own criteria for describing the quality of the fruits they offer for sale. In general, vanilla fruit grade is based on the length, appearance (color, sheen, presence of any splits, presence of blemishes), and moisture content of the fruit. Whole, dark, plump and oily pods that are visually attractive, with no blemishes, and that have a higher moisture content are graded most highly. Such pods are particularly prized by chefs for their appearance and can be featured in gourmet dishes. Beans that show localized signs of disease or other physical defects are cut to remove the blemishes; the shorter fragments left are called \"cuts\" and are assigned lower grades, as are fruits with lower moisture contents. Lower-grade fruits tend to be favored for uses in which the appearance is not as important, such as in the production of vanilla flavoring extract and in the fragrance industry.\nHigher-grade fruits command higher prices in the market. However, because grade is so dependent on visual appearance and moisture content, fruits with the highest grade do not necessarily contain the highest concentration of characteristic flavor molecules such as vanillin, and are not necessarily the most flavorful.\n\u2020 \"moisture content varies among sources cited\"\nA simplified, alternative grading system has been proposed for classifying vanilla fruits suitable for use in cooking:\nUnder this scheme, vanilla extract is normally made from Grade B fruits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nProduction.\nIn 2023, world production of raw vanilla was 7,433 tonnes, led by Madagascar with 42% of the total and Indonesia with 25% (table).\nUses.\nThe four main commercial preparations of natural vanilla are:\nVanilla flavoring in food may be achieved by adding vanilla extract or by cooking vanilla pods in the liquid preparation. A stronger aroma may be attained if the pods are split in two, exposing more of a pod's surface area to the liquid. In this case, the pods' seeds are mixed into the preparation. Natural vanilla gives a brown or yellow color to preparations, depending on the concentration. Good-quality vanilla has a strong, aromatic flavor, but food with small amounts of low-quality vanilla or artificial vanilla-like flavorings are far more common, since true vanilla is much more expensive.\nRegarded as the world's most popular aroma and flavor, vanilla is a widely used aroma and flavor compound for foods, beverages and cosmetics, as indicated by its popularity as an ice cream flavor (as of 2004, around half of vanilla flavor consumed in the US was eaten in ice cream). Although vanilla is a prized flavoring agent on its own, it is also used to enhance the flavor of other substances, to which its own flavor is often complementary, such as chocolate, custard, caramel, coffee, and others. Vanilla is a common ingredient in Western sweet baked goods, such as cookies and cakes. Despite the expense, vanilla is highly valued for its flavor.\nThe food industry uses methyl and ethyl vanillin as less-expensive substitutes for real vanilla. Ethyl vanillin is more expensive, but has a stronger note. \"Cook's Illustrated\" ran several taste tests pitting vanilla against vanillin in baked goods and other applications, and to the consternation of the magazine editors, tasters could not differentiate the flavor of vanillin from vanilla; however, for the case of vanilla ice cream, natural vanilla won out. A more recent and thorough test by the same group produced a more interesting variety of results; namely, high-quality artificial vanilla flavoring is best for cookies, while high-quality real vanilla is slightly better for cakes and significantly better for unheated or lightly heated foods.\nThe liquid extracted from vanilla pods was once believed to have medical properties, helping with various stomach ailments.\nContact dermatitis.\nThe sap of most species of vanilla orchid which exudes from cut stems or where beans are harvested can cause moderate to severe dermatitis if it comes in contact with bare skin. The sap of vanilla orchids contains calcium oxalate crystals, which are thought to be the main causative agent of contact dermatitis in vanilla plantation workers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32624", "revid": "6908984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32624", "title": "Video editing software", "text": "Software used to edit digital video files\nVideo editing software or a video editor is software used for performing the post-production video editing of digital video sequences on a non-linear editing system (NLE). It has replaced traditional flatbed celluloid film editing tools and analog video tape editing machines.\nVideo editing software serves a lot of purposes, such as filmmaking, audio commentary, and general editing of video content.\nIn NLE software, the user manipulates sections of video, images, and audio on a sequence. These clips can be trimmed, cut, and manipulated in many different ways. When editing is finished, the user exports the sequence as a video file.\nComponents.\nTimeline.\nNLE software is typically based on a timeline interface where sections moving image video recordings, known as clips, are laid out in sequence and played back. The NLE offers a range of tools for trimming, splicing, cutting, and arranging clips across the timeline.\nAnother kind of clip is a text clip, used to add text to a video, such as title screens or movie credits. Audio clips can additionally be mixed together, such as mixing a soundtrack with multiple sound effects.\nTypically, the timeline is divided into multiple rows on the y-axis for different clips playing simultaneously, whereas the x-axis represents the run time of the video.\nEffects such as transitions can be performed on each clip, such as a crossfade effect going from one scene to another.\nExporting.\nSince video editors represent a project with a file format specific to the program, one needs to export the video file in order to publish it.\nOnce a project is complete, the editor can then export to movies in a variety of formats in a context that may range from broadcast tape formats to compressed video files for web publishing (such as on an online video platform or personal website), optical media, or saved to mobile devices.\nTo facilitate editing, source video typically has a higher resolution than the desired output. Therefore, higher resolution video needs to be downscaled during exporting, or after exporting in a process known as transsizing.\nVisual effects.\nAs digital video editing advanced, visual effects became possible, and is part of the standard toolkit, usually found in prosumer and professional grade software.\nA common ability is to do compositing techniques such as chroma keying or luma keying, among others, which allow different objects to look as if they are in the same scene.\nA different kind of visual effects is motion capture. Software such as Blender can perform motion capture to make animated objects follow an actor's movements.\nAdditional features.\nMost professional video editors are able to do color grading, which is to manipulate visual attributes of a video such as contrast to enhance output, and improve emotional impact.\nSome video editors such as iMovie include stock footage available for use.\nHardware requirements.\nAs video editing puts great demands on storage and graphics performance, especially at high resolutions such as 4K, and for videos with many visual effects, powerful hardware is often required.\nIt is not uncommon for a computer built for video editing to have a lot of drive capacity, and a powerful graphics processing unit, which optimally has hardware accelerated video encoding.\nHaving sufficient disk space is important since videos can take up large amounts of storage, depending on the resolution and compression format used. Each minute of a Full HD (1080p) video at 30 fps takes up 60MB of space.\nWhen visual effects are used, a server farm can be employed to speed up the rendering process.\nExamples.\nVideo editing software can be divided into consumer grade, which focuses on ease-of-use, along with professional grade software, which focuses on feature availability, and advanced editing techniques. The typical use case for the former is to edit personal videos on the go, when more advanced editing is not required.\nProfessional grade.\nFree and open source software.\nWhile most video editing software has been separate from the operating systems, some operating systems have had a video editor installed by default, such as Windows Movie Maker in Windows XP, or as a component of the default photo viewer, such as the Photos app on iOS.\nSome social media platforms, such as TikTok and Instagram may include a rudimentary video editor to trim clips.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32625", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32625", "title": "Veloute sauce", "text": ""}
{"id": "32628", "revid": "91088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32628", "title": "VisiCalc", "text": "1979 computer spreadsheet application\nVisiCalc (\"visible calculator\") is the first spreadsheet computer program for personal computers, originally released for the Apple II by VisiCorp on October 17, 1979. It is considered the killer application for the Apple II, turning the microcomputer from a hobby for computer enthusiasts into a serious business tool, and then prompting IBM to introduce the IBM PC two years later. More than 700,000 copies were sold in six years, and up to 1 million copies over its history. \nInitially developed for the Apple II computer using a 6502 assembler running on the Multics time-sharing system, VisiCalc was ported to numerous platforms, both 8-bit and some of the early 16-bit systems. To do this, the company developed porting platforms that produced bug compatible versions. The company took the same approach when the IBM PC was launched, producing a product that was essentially identical to the original 8-bit Apple II version. Sales were initially brisk, with about 300,000 copies sold. \nVisiCalc uses the A1 notation in formulas.\nWhen Lotus 1-2-3 was launched in 1983, taking full advantage of the larger memory capacity (up to 256 KB) and 80-column screen of the IBM PC, versus 64 KB on the 40-column Apple II Plus, VisiCalc sales declined so rapidly that the company was soon insolvent. In 1985, Lotus Development purchased the company and ended sales of VisiCalc.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;VISICALC represented a new idea of a way to use a computer and a new way of thinking about the world. Where conventional programming was thought of as a sequence of steps, this new thing was no longer sequential in effect: When you made a change in one place, all other things changed instantly and automatically.\u2014\u200a\nDan Bricklin conceived of VisiCalc while watching a presentation at Harvard Business School (HBS). The professor was creating a financial model on a blackboard that was ruled with vertical and horizontal lines (resembling accounting paper) to create a table, and he wrote formulas and data into the cells. When the professor found an error or wanted to change a parameter, he had to erase and rewrite several sequential entries in the table. Bricklin realized that he could replicate the process on a computer using an \"electronic spreadsheet\" to view results of underlying formulae.\nAlthough a HBS professor warned Bricklin that large computers already had much financial modeling software, Bob Frankston joined Bricklin at 231 Broadway, Arlington, Massachusetts. The pair formed the Software Arts company, and developed the VisiCalc program in two months during the winter of 1978\u201379. Bricklin wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;with the years of experience we had at the time we created VisiCalc, we were familiar with many row/column financial programs. In fact, Bob had worked since the 1960s at Interactive Data Corporation, a major timesharing utility that was used for some of them and I was exposed to some at Harvard Business School in one of the classes.\nBricklin was referring to the variety of report generators that were in use at that time, including Business Planning Language (BPL) from International Timesharing Corporation (ITS) and Foresight from Foresight Systems. However, these earlier timesharing programs were not completely interactive, and they pre-dated personal computers. Frankston and Bricklin took a bank loan to purchase a Prime minicomputer, on which they wrote the development tools (editor, assembler, linker) they used to write VisiCalc.\nFrankston described VisiCalc as a \"magic sheet of paper that can perform calculations and recalculations [which] allows the user to just solve the problem using familiar tools and concepts\". The Personal Software company began selling VisiCalc in mid-1979 for under US$, after a demonstration at the fourth West Coast Computer Faire and an official launch on June\u00a04 at the National Computer Conference. It requires an Apple II with 32K of random-access memory (RAM), and supports saving files to magnetic tape cassette or to the Apple Disk II floppy disk system.\nMany in the microcomputer industry had expected that their products would grow in power until they could run the large software library available for minicomputers, but VisiCalc had no equivalent on bigger computers. It had functionality similar to financial modeling languages that cost $20,000, but did not require learning a language. VisiCalc was unusually easy to use and came with excellent documentation. Apple's developer documentation cited the software as an example of one with a simple user interface. Benefiting from personal computers' interactivity, the software uses the familiar metaphor of locations on a spreadsheet and invites iterative development. As a general-purpose application it does not force a particular solution, and is usable for almost any purpose. Observers immediately noticed its power. Noting how those new to computers quickly learned the application, Ben Rosen speculated in July 1979 that \"VisiCalc could someday become the software tail that wags (and sells) the personal computer dog\".\nKiller app.\nRosen was correct. For the first 12 months VisiCalc was only available for Apple II, and became its killer app. John Markoff wrote that the computer was sold as a \"VisiCalc accessory\"; businessmen visiting computer stores saw the software, understood its usefulness, and wanted to buy it immediately. When told that the $100 VisiCalc required a $ Apple II, customers added the computer to the order \u2014 more than 25% of Apple IIs sold in 1979 were reportedly for VisiCalc \u2014 even if they already owned other computers. Steve Wozniak said that small businesses, not the hobbyists he and Steve Jobs had expected, purchased 90% of Apple IIs. Apple's rival Tandy Corporation used VisiCalc on Apple IIs at their headquarters. Other software supports its Data Interchange Format (DIF) to share data. One example is the Microsoft BASIC interpreter supplied with most microcomputers that ran VisiCalc. This allowed skilled BASIC programmers to write features, such as trigonometric functions, that VisiCalc lacked.\nBricklin and Frankston originally intended to fit the program into 16k memory, but they later realized that the program needed at least 32k. Even 32k is too small to support some features that the creators wanted to include, such as a split screen for text and graphics. However, Apple eventually began shipping all Apple IIs with 48k memory following a drop in RAM prices, enabling the developers to include more features. The initial release supported tape cassette storage, but that was quickly dropped.\nAt VisiCalc's release, Personal Software promised to port the program to other computers, starting with those with the MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor, and versions appeared for Atari 8-bit computers and Commodore PET. Both of those were easy, because those computers have the same CPU as Apple II, and large portions of code were reused. The PET version, which contains two separate executables for 40 and 80-column models, was widely criticized for having a very small amount of worksheet space due to the developers' inclusion of their own custom DOS, which uses a large amount of memory. The PET only has 32k versus Apple II's available 48k.\nOther ports followed for Apple III, the Zilog Z80-based Tandy TRS-80 Model I, Model II, Model III, Model 4, and Sony SMC-70. The TRS-80 Model I and Sony SMC-70 ports are the only versions of VisiCalc without copy protection. The HP 125 and Sony SMC-70 ports are the only CP/M version. Most versions are disk-based, but the PET VisiCalc came with a ROM chip that the user must install in one of the motherboard's expansion ROM sockets. The most important port is for the IBM PC, and VisiCalc became one of the first commercial packages available when the IBM PC shipped in 1981. It quickly became a best-seller on this platform, though severely limited to be compatible with the versions for the 8-bit platforms. It is estimated that 300,000 copies were sold on the PC, bringing total sales to about 1 million copies.\nPersonal Software renamed itself VisiCorp in 1982. By that year, VisiCalc's price had risen from $100 to $. Several competitors appeared in the market, such as SuperCalc and Multiplan, each of which have more features and corrected deficiencies in VisiCalc, but could not overcome its market dominance.\nDecline.\nA more dramatic change occurred with the 1983 launch of Lotus Development Corporation's Lotus 1-2-3, created by former Personal Software/VisiCorp employee Mitch Kapor, who had written VisiTrend and VisiPlot. Unlike the IBM PC version of VisiCalc, 1-2-3 was written to take full advantage of the PC's increased memory, screen, and performance. Yet it was designed to be as compatible as possible with VisiCalc, including the menu structure, to allow VisiCalc users to easily migrate to 1-2-3.\n1-2-3 was almost immediately successful, and in 1984, \"InfoWorld\" wrote that sales of VisiCalc were \"rapidly declining\", stating, that it was \"the first successful software product to have gone through a complete life cycle, from conception in 1978 to introduction in 1979 to peak success in 1982 to decline in 1983 to a probable death according to industry insiders in 1984\". The magazine added that the company was slow to upgrade the software, in part due to the choice to focus their update on the ill-fated Apple III; the Advanced Version of VisiCalc for Apple III came out in 1982. Only in 1983 did a version come out for Apple II, with a version for the IBM PC being announced (but not delivered) in 1984. VisiCorp sued Software Arts in September 1983; the lawsuit and countersuit focused on the VisiCalc trademark. The two companies settled in September 1984; VisiCorp paid $500,000 in royalties to Software Arts, which received the VisiCalc trademark but not rights to the \"Visi\" prefix. VisiCorp could continue to use \"Visi\" with other software. By 1985, VisiCorp was insolvent. Lotus Development acquired Software Arts, and ended sales of the application.\nReception.\nIn 1983, \"Softline\" readers named VisiCalc tenth overall and the highest non-game on the magazine's Top Thirty list of Atari 8-bit programs by popularity. \"II Computing\" listed it second on the magazine's list of top Apple II software as of late 1985, based on sales and market-share data.\nIn its 1980 review, \"BYTE\" wrote \"The most exciting and influential piece of software that has been written for any microcomputer application is VisiCalc [...] VisiCalc is the first program available on a microcomputer that has been responsible for sales of entire systems\". \"Creative Computing\"'s review that year similarly concluded, \"for almost anyone in business, education, or any science-related field it is [...] reason enough to purchase a small computer system in the first place\". \"Compute!\" reported, \"Every Visicalc user knows of someone who purchased an Apple just to be able to use Visicalc\". \"Antic\" wrote in 1984, \"VisiCalc isn't as easy to use as prepackaged home accounting programs, because you're required to design both the layout and the formulas used by the program. Because it is not pre-packaged, however, it's infinitely more powerful and flexible than such programs. You can use VisiCalc to balance your checkbook, keep track of credit card purchases, calculate your net worth, do your taxes\u2014the possibilities are practically limitless.\" \"The Addison-Wesley Book of Atari Software 1984\" gave the application an overall A+ rating, praising its documentation and calling it \"indispensable ... a straight 'A' classic\". In 2006, Charles Babcock of \"InformationWeek\" wrote that, in retrospect, \"VisiCalc was flawed and clunky, and couldn't do many things users wanted it to do\", but also, \"It's great because it demonstrated the power of personal computing\".\nIn 1999, HBS put up a plaque commemorating Dan Bricklin in the room where he had studied: \"Forever changed how people use computers in business\". Since 2010, the anniversary of the October 17, 1979, launch of VisiCalc has been celebrated as Spreadsheet Day.\nLegacy.\nVisiCalc is one of the earliest examples of metaphor-driven user interface design, due to its resemblance with paper spreadsheets. This metaphor made the program comprehensible and familiar to accountants, economists, and bookkeepers who were not used to using computers, and VisiCalc's release marked the point where \"personal computers crossed the line from a hobbyist obsession to a compelling tool\". Compared to paper spreadsheets, VisiCalc freed users to change numbers without having to recalculate the whole spreadsheet by hand, which, according to Steven Levy, \"changed the perception of a spreadsheet from a document of hard costs into a modeling tool by which one tested business scenarios\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
