{"id": "33088", "revid": "49625456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33088", "title": "Battle of Monte Cassino", "text": "Battle of World War II\nThe Battle of Monte Cassino, also known as the Battle for Rome, was a series of four military assaults by the Allies against Axis forces in Italy during the Italian Campaign of World War II. The objective was to break through the Winter Line and facilitate an advance towards Rome.\nIn the beginning of 1944, the western half of the Winter Line was anchored by German forces holding the Rapido-Gari, Liri, and Garigliano valleys and several surrounding peaks and ridges. Together, these features formed the Gustav Line. Monte Cassino, a historic hilltop abbey founded in 529 by Benedict of Nursia, dominated the nearby town of Cassino and the entrances to the Liri and Rapido valleys. Lying in a protected historic zone, it had been left unoccupied by the Germans, although they manned some positions set into the slopes below the abbey's walls.\nRepeated artillery attacks on assaulting allied troops caused their leaders to incorrectly conclude that the abbey was being used by the Germans as an observation post, at the very least. Fears escalated, along with casualties, and despite evidence, it was marked for destruction. On 15 February 1944, Allied bombers dropped 1,400 tonnes of high explosives, causing widespread damage. Fallschirmj\u00e4ger forces occupied the area and established defensive positions amid the ruins.\nBetween 17 January and 18 May, Monte Cassino and the Gustav Line defences were attacked on four occasions by Allied troops. On 16 May, soldiers from the Polish II Corps launched one of the final assaults on the German defensive position as part of a twenty-division assault along a thirty-two-kilometre front. On 18 May, the Polish flag and the British flag were raised over the ruins. Following this Allied victory, the German Senger Line collapsed on 25 May, and the German defenders were driven from their positions. The capture of Monte Cassino resulted in 55,000 Allied casualties, with German losses estimated at around 20,000 killed and wounded. The battle has been described as a Pyrrhic victory.\nBackground.\nThe Allied landings in Italy in September 1943 by two Allied armies, following shortly after the Allied landings in Sicily in July, commanded by General Sir Harold Alexander, the Commander-in-Chief (C-in-C) of the 15th Army Group (later retitled the Allied Armies in Italy), were followed by an advance northward on two fronts, one on each side of the central mountain range forming the \"spine\" of Italy. On the western front, the American Fifth Army, commanded by Lieutenant General Mark W. Clark, which had suffered many casualties during the main landing at Salerno (codenamed Operation Avalanche) in September, moved from the main base of Naples up the Italian \"boot\", and on the eastern front, the British Eighth Army, commanded by General Sir Bernard Montgomery, advanced up the Adriatic coast.\nHitler directed Kesselring to hold as much land in Italy as he could, for as long as possible. Kesselring's subordinates preferred withdrawal, but nevertheless prepared defensive positions across the width of Italy, south of Rome.\nThe progress of Clark's Fifth Army was hindered by challenging terrain, adverse weather conditions, and well-prepared German defences. The Germans were fighting from a series of prepared positions in a manner designed to inflict maximum damage, then pulling back while buying time for the construction of the Winter Line defensive positions south of the Italian capital of Rome. The original estimates that Rome would fall by October 1943 proved far too optimistic.\nAlthough in the east the German defensive line had been breached on the Adriatic front and Ortona was captured by the 1st Canadian Division, the advance had ground to a halt with the onset of winter blizzards at the end of December, making close air support and movement in the jagged terrain impossible. The route to Rome from the east using Route 5 was thus excluded as a viable option, leaving the routes from Naples to Rome, Highways 6 and 7, as the only possibilities; Highway 7 (the old Roman Appian Way) followed along the west coast but south of Rome ran into the Pontine Marshes, which the Germans had flooded.\nHighway 6 (the Via Casilina) ran through the Liri valley, dominated at its south entrance by the rugged mass of Monte Cassino above the town of Cassino. Excellent observation from the peaks of several hills allowed the German defenders to detect Allied movement and direct highly accurate artillery fire, preventing any northward advance. Running across the Allied line was the fast-flowing Rapido River, which rose in the central Apennine Mountains, flowed through Cassino (joining the Gari River, which was erroneously identified as the Rapido) and across the entrance to the Liri valley. There, the Liri River joined the Gari to form the Garigliano River, which continued on to the sea.\nWith its heavily fortified mountain defences, difficult river crossings, and valley heads flooded by the Germans, Cassino formed a linchpin of the Gustav Line, the most formidable line of the defensive positions making up the Winter Line.\nIn spite of its potential excellence as an observation post, because of the fourteen-century-old Benedictine abbey's historical significance, the German commander in Italy, \"Generalfeldmarschall\" Albert Kesselring, ordered German units not to include it in their defensive positions and informed the Vatican and the Allies accordingly in December 1943.\nNevertheless, some Allied reconnaissance aircraft maintained they observed German troops inside the monastery. While this remains unconfirmed, it is clear that once the monastery was destroyed, it was occupied by the Germans and proved better cover for their emplacements and troops than an intact structure would have offered.\nFirst battle.\nPlans and preparation.\nThe plan of the Fifth Army commander, Lieutenant General Clark, was for the British X Corps, under Lieutenant General Richard McCreery, on the left of a thirty-kilometre (20\u00a0mi) front, to attack on 17 January 1944, across the Garigliano near the coast (5th and 56th Infantry Divisions). The British 46th Infantry Division was to attack on the night of 19 January across the Garigliano below its junction with the Liri in support of the main attack by U.S. II Corps, under Major General Geoffrey Keyes, on their right. The main central thrust by the U.S. II Corps would commence on 20 January with the U.S. 36th Infantry Division making an assault across the swollen Gari river downstream of Cassino. Simultaneously, the French Expeditionary Corps (CEF) led by General Alphonse Juin would continue its \"right hook\" move towards Monte Cairo, the hinge to the Gustav and Hitler defensive lines. In truth, Clark did not believe there was much chance of an early breakthrough, but he felt that the attacks would draw German reserves away from the Rome area in time for the attack on Anzio (codenamed Operation Shingle) where the U.S. VI Corps (British 1st and U.S. 3rd Infantry Divisions, the 504th Parachute Regimental Combat Team, U.S. Army Rangers and British Commandos, Combat Command 'B' of the U.S. 1st Armored Division, along with supporting units), under Major General John P. Lucas, was due to make an amphibious landing on 22 January. It was hoped that the Anzio landing, with the benefit of surprise and a rapid move inland to the Alban Hills, which command both routes 6 and 7, would so threaten the Gustav defenders' rear and supply lines that it might just unsettle the German commanders and cause them to withdraw from the Gustav Line to positions north of Rome. Whilst this would have been consistent with the German tactics of the previous three months, Allied intelligence had not understood that the strategy of fighting retreat had been for the sole purpose of providing time to prepare the Gustav line where the Germans intended to stand firm. The intelligence assessment of Allied prospects was therefore over-optimistic.\nThe Fifth Army had only reached the Gustav Line on 15 January, having taken six weeks of heavy fighting to advance the last through the Bernhardt Line positions, during which time they had sustained 16,000 casualties. They hardly had time to prepare the new assault, let alone take the rest and reorganisation they really needed after three months of attritional fighting north from Naples. However, because the Allied Combined Chiefs of Staff would only make landing craft available until early February, as they were required for Operation Overlord, the Allied invasion of Northern France, Operation Shingle had to take place in late January with the coordinated attack on the Gustav Line some three days earlier.\nFirst assault: X Corps on the left, 17 January.\nThe first assault was made on 17 January. Near the coast, the British X Corps (56th and 5th Divisions) forced a crossing of the Garigliano (followed some two days later by the British 46th Division on their right) causing General Fridolin von Senger und Etterlin, commander of the German XIV Panzer Corps, and responsible for the Gustav defences on the south western half of the line, some serious concern as to the ability of the German 94th Infantry Division to hold the line. Responding to Senger's concerns, Kesselring ordered the 29th and 90th Panzergrenadier Divisions from the Rome area to provide reinforcement. X Corps did not have the extra men, and the battle plan remained unchanged. However, there would certainly have been time to alter the overall battle plan and cancel or modify the central attack by the U.S. II Corps to make men available to force the issue in the south before the German reinforcements were able to get into position. As it happened, Fifth Army HQ failed to appreciate the frailty of the German position and the plan was unchanged. The two divisions from Rome arrived by 21 January and stabilised the German position in the south. In one respect, however, the plan was working in that Kesselring's reserves had been drawn south. The three divisions of Lieutenant General McCreery's X Corps sustained some 4,000 casualties during the period of the first battle.\nMain attack: II Corps in the centre, 20 January.\nThe central thrust by the U.S. 36th Division, under Major General Fred L. Walker, commenced three hours after sunset on 20 January. The lack of time to prepare meant that the approach to the river was still hazardous due to uncleared mines and booby traps, and the highly technical business of an opposed river crossing lacked the necessary planning and rehearsal. Although a battalion of the 143rd Infantry Regiment was able to get across the Gari on the south side of San Angelo and two companies of the 141st Infantry Regiment on the north side, they were isolated for most of the time and at no time was Allied armour able to get across the river, leaving them highly vulnerable to counter-attacking tanks and self-propelled guns of \"Generalleutnant\" Eberhard Rodt's 15th Panzergrenadier Division. The southern group was forced back across the river by mid-morning of 21 January. Keyes pressed Walker to renew the attack immediately. Once again, the two regiments attacked but with no more success against the well dug-in 15th Panzergrenadier Division: the 143rd Infantry Regiment got the equivalent of two battalions across, but, once again, there was no armoured support, and they were devastated when daylight came the next day. The 141st Infantry Regiment also crossed in two battalion strength and, despite the lack of armoured support, managed to advance . However, with the coming of daylight, they too were cut down and by the evening of 22 January, the 141st Infantry Regiment had virtually ceased to exist; only 40 men made it back to the Allied lines.\nRick Atkinson described the intense German resistance:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Artillery and Nebelwerfer drumfire methodically searched both bridgeheads, while machine guns opened on every sound\u00a0... GIs inched forward, feeling for trip wires and listening to German gun crews reload\u00a0... to stand or even to kneel was to die\u00a0... On average, soldiers wounded on the Rapido received \"definitive treatment\" nine hours and forty-one minutes after they were hit, a medical study later found\u00a0...\"\nThe assault had been a costly failure, with the 36th Division losing 2,100 men killed, wounded and missing in 48 hours. As a result, the army's conduct of this battle became the subject of a Congressional inquiry after the war.\nII Corps try north of Cassino: 24 January.\nThe next attack was launched on 24 January. The U.S. II Corps, with 34th Infantry Division under Major General Charles W. Ryder spearheading the attack and French colonial troops on its right flank, launched an assault across the flooded Rapido valley north of Cassino and into the mountains behind with the intention of then wheeling to the left and attacking Monte Cassino from high ground. Whilst the task of crossing the river would be easier in that the Rapido upstream of Cassino was fordable, the flooding made movement on the approaches each side very difficult. In particular, armour could only move on paths laid with steel matting and it took eight days of bloody fighting across the waterlogged ground for 34th Division to push back General Franek's German 44th Infantry Division to establish a foothold in the mountains.\nFrench Corps halted on the right flank.\nOn the right, the Moroccan-French troops made strategical initial progress against the German 5th Mountain Division, commanded by General Julius Ringel, gaining positions on the slopes of their key objective, Monte Cifalco. Forward units of the 3rd Algerian Infantry Division had also by-passed Monte Cifalco to capture Monte Belvedere and Colle Abate. General Juin was convinced that Cassino could be bypassed and the German defences unhinged by this northerly route but his request for reserves to maintain the momentum of his advance was refused and the one available reserve regiment (from 36th Division) was sent to reinforce 34th Division. By 31 January the French had ground to a halt with Monte Cifalco, which had a clear view of the French and U.S. flanks and supply lines, still in German hands. The two Moroccan-French divisions sustained 2,500 casualties in their struggles around Colle Belvedere.\nII Corps in the mountains north of Cassino.\nIt became the task of the U.S. 34th Division (joined temporarily by the 142nd Infantry Regiment of the 36th Division, which had been held in reserve and unused during the Rapido crossing) to fight southward along the linked hilltops towards the intersecting ridge on the south end of which was Monastery Hill. They could then break through down into the Liri valley behind the Gustav Line defences. It was very tough going: the mountains were rocky, strewn with boulders and cut by ravines and gullies. Digging foxholes on the rocky ground was out of the question and each feature was exposed to fire from surrounding high points. The ravines were no better since the gorse growing there, far from giving cover, had been sown with mines, booby-traps and hidden barbed wire by the defenders. The Germans had had three months to prepare their defensive positions using dynamite and to stockpile ammunition and stores. There was no natural shelter, and the weather was wet and freezing cold.\nBy early February, American infantry had captured a strategic point near the hamlet of San Onofrio, less than from the abbey and by 7 February a battalion had reached Point 445, a round-topped hill immediately below the monastery and no more than away. An American squad managed a reconnaissance right up against the cliff-like abbey walls, with the monks observing German and American patrols exchanging fire. However, attempts to take Monte Cassino were broken by overwhelming machine gun fire from the slopes below the monastery. Despite their fierce fighting, the 34th Division never managed to take the final redoubts on Hill 593 (known to the Germans as Calvary Mount), held by the 3rd Battalion of the 2nd Parachute Regiment, part of the 1st Parachute Division, the dominating point of the ridge to the monastery.\nAftermath.\nOn 11 February, after a final unsuccessful 3-day assault on Monastery Hill and Cassino town, the Americans were withdrawn. U.S. II Corps, after two and a half weeks of battle, was worn out. The performance of the 34th Division in the mountains is considered to rank as one of the finest feats of arms carried out by any soldiers during the war. In return they sustained losses of about 80 per cent in the Infantry battalions, some 2,200 casualties.\nAt the height of the battle in the first days of February von Senger und Etterlin had moved the 90th Division from the Garigliano front to the north of Cassino and had been so alarmed at the rate of attrition, he had \"mustered all the weight of my authority to request that the Battle of Cassino should be broken off and that we should occupy a quite new line.\u00a0... a position, in fact, north of the Anzio bridgehead\". Kesselring refused the request. At the crucial moment von Senger was able to throw in the 71st Infantry Division whilst leaving the 15th Panzergrenadier Division (whom they had been due to relieve) in place.\nDuring the battle, there had been occasions when with more astute use of reserves, promising positions might have been turned into decisive moves. Some historians suggest this failure to capitalise on initial success could be put down to Clark's lack of experience. However, it is more likely that he just had too much to do, being responsible for both the Cassino and Anzio offensives. This view is supported by the inability of Major General Lucian Truscott, commanding the U.S. 3rd Infantry Division, as related below, to get hold of him for discussions at a vital juncture of the Anzio breakout at the time of the fourth Cassino battle. Whilst General Alexander, C-in-C of the AAI, chose (for perfectly logical co-ordination arguments) to have Cassino and Anzio under a single army commander and splitting the Gustav Line front between the U.S. Fifth Army and the British Eighth Army, now commanded by Lieutenant General Sir Oliver Leese, Kesselring chose to create a separate 14th Army under General Eberhard von Mackensen to fight at Anzio whilst leaving the Gustav Line in the sole hands of General Heinrich von Vietinghoff's 10th Army.\nThe withdrawn American units were replaced by the newly formed New Zealand Corps (2nd New Zealand and 4th Indian Divisions), commanded by Lieutenant General Sir Bernard Freyberg, from the Eighth Army on the Adriatic front.\nSecond battle (Operation Avenger).\nBackground.\nFreyberg, with U.S. VI Corps under heavy threat at Anzio, was under equal pressure to launch a relieving action at Cassino. Once again, therefore, the battle began without the attackers being fully prepared. Furthermore, Corps HQ did not fully appreciate the difficulty in getting the 4th Indian Infantry Division into place in the mountains and supplying them on the ridges and valleys north of Cassino. This was evidenced in the writings of Maj. Gen. Howard Kippenberger, commander of New Zealand's 2nd Division, after the war:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Poor Dimoline (acting commander of 4th Indian Division) was having a dreadful time getting his division into position. I never really appreciated the difficulties until I went over the ground after the war.\u2014\u200a\nFreyberg's plan was a continuation of the first battle: an attack from the north along the mountain ridges and an attack from the southeast along the railway line, and to capture the railway station across the Rapido less than south of Cassino town. Success would squeeze out Cassino town and open up the Liri valley. Freyberg had informed his superiors that he estimated that the offensive had a 50 percent chance of success, given the circumstances.\nDestruction of the abbey.\nAllied officers increasingly focused on the abbey of Monte Cassino, which was believed to be used as a German artillery observation point. The abbey was presumed to have prevented the breach of the 'Gustav Line'.\nThe British press and C. L. Sulzberger of \"The New York Times\" wrote about German observation posts and artillery positions inside the abbey, but their claims were not substantiated. The commander in chief of the Mediterranean Allied Air Forces, Lieutenant General Ira C. Eaker, accompanied by Lieutenant General Jacob L. Devers (deputy to General Sir Henry Maitland Wilson, the Supreme Allied Commander of the Mediterranean Theater), personally observed during a fly-over \"a radio mast\u00a0... German uniforms hanging on a clothesline in the abbey courtyard; [and] machine gun emplacements from the abbey walls.\" U.S. II Corps commander Geoffrey Keyes flew over the monastery several times and reported to Fifth Army G-2 that he had not seen evidence of German troops in the abbey. When informed of others' claims of having seen enemy troops there, he stated, \"They've been looking so long they're seeing things.\" US Army Artillery Pilot Spotter Hughes Rudd saw German positions at the Abbey.\nKippenberger of the New Zealand Corps HQ believed that the monastery was probably being used as the Germans' main vantage point for artillery spotting because of its strategic location, but there was no clear evidence. From a military point of view, whether the monastery was being used as an observation point was immaterial.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If not occupied today, it might be tomorrow and it did not appear it would be difficult for the enemy to bring reserves into it during an attack or for troops to take shelter there if driven from positions outside. It was impossible to ask troops to storm a hill surmounted by an intact building such as this, capable of sheltering several hundred infantry in perfect security from shellfire and ready at the critical moment to emerge and counter-attack.\u00a0... Undamaged it was a perfect shelter but with its narrow windows and level profiles an unsatisfactory fighting position. Smashed by bombing it was a jagged heap of broken masonry and debris open to effective fire from guns, mortars and strafing planes as well as being a death trap if bombed again. On the whole I thought it would be more useful to the Germans if we left it unbombed.\nMajor General Francis Tuker, whose 4th Indian Division would have the task of attacking Monastery Hill, had made his own appraisal of the situation. In the absence of detailed intelligence at Fifth Army HQ, he found a book dated 1879 in a Naples bookshop that gave details of the construction of the abbey. In his memorandum to Freyberg, he concluded that regardless of whether the monastery was currently occupied by the Germans, it should be demolished to prevent its effective occupation. He also pointed out that with high walls made of masonry at least thick, there were no practical means for field engineers to deal with the place and that bombing with \"blockbuster\" bombs (\"high capacity\" bombs of 2,000 and 4,000 lb) would be the only solution since 1,000-pound bombs would be \"next to useless\". Tuker stated that he could only attack if the garrison was weakened by continuous bombing by air and artillery. Tuker's own opinion was that instead of continuing to batter against Cassino, attacks should be elsewhere where terrain was more favourable and so isolating the area and thus forcing the Germans to retreat but, if the attack was to be against Cassino, then all German positions on the Cassino massif including Point 593- not just the abbey - should be attacked and the ground attack should immediately follow it. Initially Freyberg had accepted Tuker's suggestion for the attack but with Tuker absent from 2 February he started to have doubts and fell back on the idea of another direct attack on Cassino.\nOn 11 February 1944, the acting commander of the 4th Indian Division, Brigadier General Dimoline (usually the Commander Royal Artillery in 4th Indian), requested a bombing raid. Tuker reiterated his case again from a hospital bed in Caserta, where he was suffering a severe attack of a recurrent rheumatoid arthritis. Freyberg transmitted his request on 12 February for fighter bombers armed with 1,000 lb bombs. The request, however, was greatly expanded by air force planners and probably supported by Eaker and Devers, who sought to use the opportunity to showcase the abilities of U.S. Army air power to support ground operations. Clark and his chief of staff, Major General Alfred Gruenther, remained unconvinced of the \"military necessity\". When handing over the U.S. II Corps position to the New Zealand Corps, Brigadier General J.A. Butler, deputy commander of the U.S. 34th Division, said, \"I don't know, but I don't believe the enemy is in the convent. All the fire has been from the slopes of the hill below the wall\". Finally, Clark, \"who did not want the monastery bombed\", pinned down the Commander-in-Chief Allied Armies in Italy, Alexander, to take the responsibility: \"I said, 'You give me a direct order and we'll do it,' and he did.\"\nThe bombing mission in the morning of 15 February 1944 involved 142 Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress heavy bombers, followed by 47 North American B-25 Mitchell and 40 Martin B-26 Marauder medium bombers. In all, they dropped 1,150 tonnes of high explosives and incendiary bombs on the abbey, reducing the entire summit of Monte Cassino to a smoking mass of rubble. Between bomb runs, the II Corps artillery pounded the mountain. Many Allied soldiers and war correspondents cheered as they observed the spectacle. Eaker and Devers watched; Juin was heard to remark, \"no, they'll never get anywhere this way.\" Clark and Gruenther refused to be on the scene and stayed at their headquarters. That same afternoon and the next day, an aggressive follow-up of artillery and a raid by 59 fighter bombers wreaked further destruction. The German positions on Point 593 above and behind the monastery were untouched.\nDamningly, the air raid had not been coordinated with ground commands, and an immediate infantry follow-up failed to materialise. Its timing had been driven by the Air Force, which viewed it as a separate operation, considering the availability of good weather and requirements on other fronts and theatres without reference to ground forces. The brigade commanders of the 4th Indian division were having a morning planning meeting and were surprised to see the bombers go overhead. Many of the troops had only taken over their positions from II Corps two days previously, and besides the difficulties in the mountains, preparations in the valley had also been held up by difficulties in supplying the newly installed troops with sufficient material for a full-scale assault because of incessantly foul weather, flooding, and waterlogged ground. As a result, Indian troops on the Snake's Head were taken by surprise, while the New Zealand Corps was two days away from being ready to launch their main assault.\nAfter the bombing.\nPope Pius XII was silent after the bombing; however, his Cardinal Secretary of State, Luigi Maglione, bluntly stated to the senior U.S. diplomat to the Vatican, Harold Tittmann, that the bombing was \"a colossal blunder \u2026 a piece of a gross stupidity\".\nFrom every investigation that followed since the event, it is certain that the only people killed in the monastery by the bombing were 230 Italian civilians seeking refuge in the abbey. There is no evidence that the bombs dropped on the Monte Cassino monastery that day killed any German troops. However, given the imprecision of bombing in those days (it was estimated that only 10 percent of the bombs from the heavy bombers, bombing from a high altitude, hit the monastery), bombs did fall elsewhere and kill German and Allied troops alike, although that would have been unintended. Indeed, sixteen bombs hit the Fifth Army compound at Presenzano, from Monte Cassino, and exploded only yards away from the trailer where Clark was doing paperwork at his desk.\nOn the day after the bombing, at first light, most of the civilians still alive fled the ruins. Only about 40 people remained: the six monks who survived in the deep vaults of the abbey; their 79-year-old abbot, ; three tenant farmer families; orphaned or abandoned children; the badly wounded; and the dying. After artillery barrages, renewed bombing, and attacks on the ridge by the 4th Indian Division, the monks decided to leave their ruined home with the others who could move at 07:30 on 17 February. The old abbot was leading the group down the mule path towards the Liri valley, reciting the rosary. After they arrived at a German first-aid station, some of the badly wounded who had been carried by the monks were taken away in a military ambulance. After meeting with a German officer, the monks were driven to the monastery of Sant'Anselmo all'Aventino. On 18 February, the abbot met the commander of the XIV Panzer Corps, Lieutenant-General Fridolin von Senger und Etterlin. One monk, Carlomanno Pellagalli, returned to the abbey; when he was later seen wandering the ruins, the German paratroopers thought he was a ghost. After 3 April, he was not seen again.\nIt is now known that the Germans had an agreement not to use the abbey for military purposes. Following its destruction, paratroopers of the German 1st Parachute Division then occupied the ruins of the abbey and turned it into a fortress and observation post, which became a serious problem for the attacking Allied forces.\nBattle.\nOn the night following the bombing, a company of the 1st Battalion, Royal Sussex Regiment (one of the British elements in the 4th Indian Division) serving in the 7th Indian Infantry Brigade attacked key point 593 from their position away on Snakeshead Ridge. The assault failed, with the company sustaining 50 percent casualties.\nThe following night, the Royal Sussex Regiment was ordered to attack in battalion strength. There was a calamitous start. Artillery could not be used in direct support targeting point 593 because of the proximity and risk of shelling friendly troops. It was therefore planned to shell point 575, which had been providing supporting fire to the defenders of point 593. The topography of the land meant that shells fired at 575 had to pass very low over Snakeshead Ridge, and in the event that some fell among the gathering assault companies. After reorganising, the attack went in at midnight. The fighting was brutal and often hand-to-hand, but the determined defence held and the Royal Sussex battalion was beaten off, once again sustaining over 50 percent casualties. Over the two nights, the Royal Sussex Regiment lost 12 out of 15 officers and 162 out of 313 men who took part in the attack.\nOn the night of 17 February, the main assault took place. The 4/6th Rajputana Rifles would take on the assault on Point 593 along Snakeshead Ridge with the depleted Royal Sussex Regiment held in reserve. 1/9th Gurkha Rifles were to attack Point 444. In the meantime, the 1/2nd Gurkha Rifles were to sweep across the slopes and ravines in a direct assault on the monastery. This latter was across appalling terrain, but it was hoped that the Gurkhas, so expert in mountain terrain, would succeed. This proved a faint hope. Once again, the fighting was brutal, but no progress was made and casualties were heavy. The Rajputanas lost 196 officers and men, the 1/9th Gurkhas 149 and the 1/2nd Gurkhas 96. It became clear that the attack had failed and on 18 February Dimoline and Freyberg called off the attacks on Monastery Hill.\nIn the other half of the main assault, the two companies from the 28th (M\u0101ori) Battalion from the New Zealand Division forced a crossing of the Rapido and attempted to gain the railway station in Cassino town. The intention was to create a perimeter that would allow engineers to build a causeway for armoured support. With the aid of a nearly constant smoke screen laid down by Allied artillery that obscured their location from the German batteries on Monastery Hill, the M\u0101ori were able to hold their positions for much of the day. Their isolation and lack of both armoured support and anti-tank guns made for a hopeless situation, however, when an armoured counterattack by two tanks came in the afternoon on 18 February. They were ordered to pull back to the river when it became clear to headquarters that both attempts to break through (in the mountains and along the causeway) would not succeed. It had been very close. The Germans had been very alarmed by the capture of the station, and from a recorded conversation between Kesselring and von Vietinghoff, they had not expected their counterattack to succeed.\nAfter the war, regarding the second battle, Senger admitted that when he was contemplating the prospects of a renewed frontal assault on Cassino that \"what I feared even more was an attack by Juin's corps with its superb Moroccan and Algerian divisions\".\nThird battle (Operation Dickens).\nPlans.\nFor the third battle, it was decided that, while the winter weather persisted, fording the Garigliano river downstream of Cassino town was an unattractive option (after the unhappy experiences in the first two battles). The \"right hook\" in the mountains had also been a costly failure, and it was decided to launch twin attacks from the north along the Rapido valley: one towards the fortified Cassino town and the other towards Monastery Hill. The idea was to clear the path through the bottleneck between these two features to allow access towards the station on the south and so to the Liri Valley. The British 78th Infantry Division, which had arrived in late February and been placed under the command of the New Zealand Corps, would then cross the Rapido downstream of Cassino and start the push to Rome. Freyburg had taken on board Tuker's exhortations that an assault on Cassino needed saturation with artillery and bombs beforehand (though not that an attack on Cassino was irrational and that the attacks should be either side: on Monte Castellone and crossing the Rapido). He planned a saturation of the town of Cassino itself, already ruined and devoid of civilians, after which the New Zealand division would be in effect carrying out a \"mopping up operation\". To guard the New Zealanders flank the Indian division would take the route up to the monastery.\nThe bombing plan was for \"ten groups of heavy bombers and six groups of mediums, nearly 500 aircraft in all\" working in relays to attack an area 1400 yards by 400 though \"Late arrivals would be diverted to targets outside the town\". Immediately following the bombing, at 12 o'clock, 6 Brigade was to advance, preceded by a creeping barrage while concentrations of artillery fire would hit German defences in the town and to the south and escorted by tanks of 19 Armoured Regiment with the intention of capturing the town north of Route 6 by 2 pm. Then 6 Brigade would continue south through the town to the railway. At the same time 5 Indian Brigade would be working step by step along the eastern slopes of Monte cassino and turning uphill to capture Hangman's Hill (Point 435) The 7 Indian Brigade would be maintaining pressure on the defenders in the monastery ruins.\nNone of the Allied commanders were very happy with the plan, but it was hoped that an unprecedented preliminary bombing by heavy bombers would prove the trump. To avoid taking vehicles across waterlogged ground, three clear days of good weather were required, and for twenty-one successive days the assault was postponed as the troops waited in the freezing wet positions for a favourable weather forecast. Things were not helped by the loss of Kippenberger who while on Mount Trocchio surveying the battlefield was wounded by an anti-personnel mine and as a result lost both his feet. The news depressed the morale of the New Zealand troops further. He was replaced by Brigadier Graham Parkinson; a German counter-attack at Anzio had failed and been called off.\nThe battle.\nThe third battle began 15 March. After a bombardment of 750 tonnes of 1,000-pound bombs with delayed action fuses, starting at 8:30 and lasting three and a half hours, the New Zealanders advanced behind a creeping artillery barrage of 746 artillery pieces. Success depended on taking advantage of the paralysing effect of the bombing. The bombing was not concentrated\u2014only 50 percent landed a mile or less from the target point and 8 percent within 1,000 yards\u2014but between it and the shelling, about half the 300 paratroopers in the town had been killed. The defences rallied more quickly than expected, and the Allied armour was held up by bomb craters. Nevertheless, success was there for the New Zealanders' taking, but by the time a follow-up assault on the left had been ordered that evening, it was too late: defences had been reorganised, and more critically, the rain, contrary to forecast, had started again. Torrents of rain flooded bomb craters, turned rubble into a morass, and blotted out communications, the radio sets being incapable of surviving the constant immersion. The dark rain clouds also blotted out the moonlight, hindering the task of clearing routes through the ruins. On the right, the New Zealanders had captured Castle Hill and point 165, and as planned, elements of the Indian 4th Infantry Division, now commanded by Major General Alexander Galloway, had passed through to attack point 236 and thence to point 435, Hangman's Hill. In the confusion of the fight, a company of the 1/9th Gurkha Rifles took a track avoiding point 236 and captured point 435, while the assault on point 236 by the 1/6th Rajputana Rifles was repelled.\nBy the end of 17 March, the Gurkhas held Hangman's Hill (point 435), from the monastery, in battalion strength (although their lines of supply were compromised by the German positions at point 236 and in the northern part of the town), and whilst the town was still fiercely defended, New Zealand units and armour advanced through the bottleneck and captured the station. Despite the setback, the Germans were still able to reinforce their troops in the town and position snipers in parts of the town that had supposedly been cleared.\n19 March was planned for the decisive blow in the town and on the monastery, including a surprise attack by tanks of the 20th Armoured Regiment working their way along an old logging road (the \"Cavendish Road\") from Caira to Albaneta Farm (which had been prepared by engineer units under the cover of darkness) and from there towards the abbey. However, a surprise and fiercely pressed counter-attack from the monastery on Castle Hill by the German 1st Parachute Division completely disrupted any possibility of an assault on the monastery from the Castle and Hangman's Hill, while the tanks, lacking infantry support, were all knocked out by mid-afternoon. In the town, the attackers made little progress, and overall the initiative was passing to the Germans, whose positions close to Castle Hill, which was the gateway to the position on Monastery Hill, crippled any prospects of early success.\nOn 20 March Freyberg committed elements of the 78th Infantry Division to the battle, firstly to provide a greater troop presence in the town so that cleared areas would not be reinfiltrated by the Germans, and secondly to reinforce Castle Hill to allow troops to be released to close off the two routes between Castle Hill and Points 175 and 165 being used by the Germans to reinforce the defenders in the town. The Allied commanders felt they were on the brink of success as grim fighting continued through 21 March. However, the defenders were resolute, and the attack on Point 445 to block the German reinforcement route had narrowly failed, whilst in the town, Allied gains were measured only house by house.\nOn 23 March Alexander met with his commanders. A range of opinions was expressed as to the possibility of victory, but it was evident that the New Zealand and Indian Divisions were exhausted. Freyberg was convinced that the attack could not continue, so he called it off. The German 1st Parachute Division had taken a mauling but had held.\nAftermath.\nThe next three days were spent stabilising the front, extracting the isolated Gurkhas from Hangman's Hill, and the detachment from the New Zealand 24th Battalion, which had held Point 202 in similar isolation. The Allied line was reorganised, with the exhausted 4th Indian Division and 2nd New Zealand Division withdrawn and replaced, respectively, in the mountains by the British 78th Division and in the town by the British 1st Guards Brigade. The New Zealand Corps headquarters was dissolved on 26 March and control was assumed by the British XIII Corps. In their time on the Cassino front line, the 4th Indian Division had lost 3,000 men and the 2nd New Zealand Division 1,600 men killed, missing, or wounded.\nThe German defenders too had paid a heavy price. The German XIV Corps War Diary for 23 March noted that the battalions in the front line had strengths varying between 40 and 120 men.\nFourth and final battle.\nAlexander's strategy.\nAlexander's strategy in Italy was to \"force the enemy to commit the maximum number of divisions in Italy at the time the cross-channel invasion [of Normandy] is launched\". Circumstances allowed him the time to prepare a major offensive to achieve this. His plan, originally inspired by Juin's idea to circle around Cassino and take the Aurunci with his mountain troops to break the Gustav Line, was to shift the bulk of the British Eighth Army, commanded by Lieutenant-General Sir Oliver Leese, from the Adriatic front across the spine of Italy to join Clark's Fifth Army and attack along a front between Cassino and the sea. Fifth Army (U.S. II Corps and French Expeditionary Corps) would be on the left, and Eighth Army (British XIII Corps and Polish II Corps) on the right. With the arrival of the spring weather, ground conditions improved, and it would be possible to deploy large formations and armour effectively.\nPlanning and preparation.\nThe plan for Operation Diadem was that U.S. II Corps, on the left, would attack up the coast along the line of Route 7 towards Rome. The French Corps to their right would attack from the bridgehead across the Garigliano, originally created by British X Corps in the first battle in January, into the Aurunci Mountains, which formed a barrier between the coastal plain and the Liri Valley. British XIII Corps in the centre right of the front would attack along the Liri valley. On the right, Polish II Corps (3rd and 5th Divisions), commanded by Lieutenant General W\u0142adys\u0142aw Anders, had relieved the British 78th Division in the mountains behind Cassino on 24 April and would attempt the task that had defeated the 4th Indian Division in February: isolate the monastery and push round behind it into the Liri valley to link with XIII Corps' thrust and pinch out the Cassino position. It was hoped that, being a much larger force than their 4th Indian Division predecessors, they would be able to saturate the German defences, which would, as a result, be unable to give supporting fire to each other's positions. Improved weather, ground conditions, and supply would also be important factors. Once again, the pinching manoeuvres by the Polish and British Corps were key to the overall success. The Canadian I Corps would be held in reserve, ready to exploit the expected breakthrough. Once the German 10th Army had been defeated, the U.S. VI Corps would break out of the Anzio beachhead to cut off the retreating Germans in the Alban Hills.\nThe large troop movements required for this took two months to execute. They had to be carried out in small units to maintain secrecy and surprise. The U.S. 36th Division was sent on amphibious assault training, and road signposts and dummy radio traffic were created to give the impression that a seaborne landing was being planned for north of Rome. This was planned to keep the German reserves held back from the Gustav Line. Movements of troops in forward areas were confined to the hours of darkness, and armoured units moving from the Adriatic front left behind dummy tanks and vehicles, so the vacated areas appeared unchanged to enemy aerial reconnaissance. The deception was successful. As late as the second day of the final Cassino battle, Kesselring estimated the Allies had six divisions facing his four on the Cassino front. In fact, there were thirteen.\nBattle.\nThe first assault (11\u201312 May) on Cassino opened at 23:00 with a massive artillery bombardment with 1,060 guns on the Eighth Army front and 600 guns on the Fifth Army front, manned by British, Americans, Poles, New Zealanders, South Africans, and French. Within an hour and a half, the attack was in motion in all four sectors. By daylight, the U.S. II Corps had made little progress, but their Fifth Army colleagues, the French Expeditionary Corps, had achieved their objectives and were fanning out in the Aurunci Mountains towards the Eighth Army to their right, rolling up the German positions between the two armies. On the Eighth Army front, the British XIII Corps had made two strongly opposed crossings of the Garigliano (by the British 4th Infantry Division and the 8th Indian Division). Crucially, the engineers of Dudley Russell's 8th Indian Division had by the morning succeeded in bridging the river, enabling the armour of the 1st Canadian Armoured Brigade to cross and provide the vital element (so missed by the Americans in the first battle and the New Zealanders in the second battle) to beat off the inevitable counterattacks from German tanks that would come.\nIn the mountains above Cassino, Mount Calvary (\"Monte Calvario\", or Point 593 on Snakeshead Ridge) was taken by the Polish 2nd Corps, under the command of General W\u0142adys\u0142aw Anders, only to be recaptured by German paratroopers. For three days, Polish attacks and German counterattacks brought heavy losses to both sides. The Polish II Corps lost 281 officers and 3,503 other ranks in assaults on \"Oberst\" Ludwig Heilmann's 4th Parachute Regiment until the attacks were called off. \"Just eight hundred Germans had succeeded in driving off attacks by two divisions,\" the area around the mountain having turned into a \"miniature Verdun\". In the early morning hours of 12 May, the Polish infantry divisions were met with \"such devastating mortar, artillery and small-arms fire that the leading battalions were all but wiped out\".\nBy the afternoon of 12 May, the Gari bridgeheads were increasing despite furious counterattacks, while attrition on the coast and in the mountains continued. By 13 May the pressure was starting to tell. The German right wing began to give way to the Fifth Army. The French Corps had captured Monte Maio and were now in a position to give material flank assistance to the Eighth Army in the Liri Valley, against whom Kesselring had thrown every available reserve in order to buy time to switch to his second prepared defensive position, the Hitler Line, some to the rear. On 14 May Moroccan Goumiers, travelling through the mountains parallel to the Liri valley on ground that was undefended because it was not thought possible to traverse such terrain, outflanked the German defence while materially assisting the XIII Corps in the valley. In 1943, the Goumiers were colonial troops formed into four \"Groupements des Tabors Marocains\" (\"Groups of Moroccan Tabors\"; GTM), each consisting of three loosely organised Tabors (roughly equivalent to a battalion) that specialised in mountain warfare. Juin's French Expeditionary Corps consisted of General Augustin Guillaume's \"Commandement des Goumiers Marocains\" (CGM) (with the 1st, 3rd, and 4th GTM) totaling around 7,800 fighting men, roughly the same infantry strength as a division, and four more conventional divisions: the 2nd Moroccan Infantry Division (2 DIM), the 3rd Algerian Infantry Division (3 DIA), the 4th Moroccan Mountain Division (4 DMM) and the 1st Free French Division (1 DM).\nClark also paid tribute to the Goumiers and the Moroccan regulars of the Tirailleur units:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In spite of the stiffening enemy resistance, the 2nd Moroccan Division penetrated the Gustave [\"sic\"] Line in less than two-day's [\"sic\"] fighting. The next 48 hours on the French front were decisive. The knife-wielding Goumiers swarmed over the hills, particularly at night and General Juin's entire force showed an aggressiveness hour after hour that the Germans could not withstand. Cerasola, San Giorgio, Mt. D'Oro, Ausonia and Esperia were seized in one of the most brilliant and daring advances of the war in Italy\u00a0... For this performance, which was to be a key to the success of the entire drive on Rome, I shall always be a grateful admirer of General Juin and his magnificent FEC.\nOn 15 May, the British 78th Division, with an attached armoured brigade under command, came into the British XIII Corps line from reserve, passing through the British 4th Infantry Division's bridgehead to execute the turning move to isolate Cassino from the Liri valley.\nOn 17 May, General Anders led the Polish II Corps in launching their second attack on Monte Cassino. Under constant artillery and mortar fire from the strongly fortified German positions and with little natural cover for protection, the fighting was fierce and at times hand-to-hand. With their line of supply threatened by the Allied advance in the Liri valley, the Germans decided to withdraw from the Cassino Heights to the new defensive positions on the Hitler Line. In the early hours of 18 May, the British 78th Division and Polish II Corps linked up in the Liri valley, west of Cassino town. On the Cassino high ground, the survivors of the second Polish offensive were so battered that \"it took some time to find men with enough strength to climb the few hundred yards to the summit.\" A patrol of the Polish 12th Podolian Cavalry Regiment finally made it to the heights and raised a Polish flag over the ruins. The only remnants of the defenders were a group of thirty German wounded who had been unable to move.\nAftermath.\nHitler Line.\nUnits of the Eighth Army advanced up the Liri valley and the Fifth Army up the coast to the Hitler defensive line (renamed the Senger Line at Hitler's insistence to minimise the significance if it was penetrated). An immediate follow-up assault failed, and the Eighth Army then decided to take some time to reorganise. Getting 20,000 vehicles and 2,000 tanks through the broken Gustav Line was a major job that took several days. The next assault on the line commenced on 23 May with the Polish II Corps attacking Piedimonte San Germano (defended by the redoubtable German 1st Parachute Division) on the right and the 1st Canadian Infantry Division (fresh from the Eighth Army Reserve) in the centre. On 24 May, the Canadians had breached the line and 5th Canadian (Armoured) Division poured through the gap. On 25 May, the Poles took Piedimonte, and the line collapsed. The way was clear for the advance northward on Rome and beyond.\nAnzio breakout.\nAs the Canadians and Poles launched their attack on the Hitler Line on 23 May, Major General Lucian Truscott, who had replaced General Lucas as commander of the U.S. VI Corps in February, launched a two-pronged attack using five (three U.S. and two British) of the seven divisions from the beachhead at Anzio. The German 14th Army, facing this thrust, was without any armoured divisions because Kesselring had sent his armour south to assist the German 10th Army in the Cassino action. A single armoured division, the 26th Panzer, was in transit from north of the Italian capital of Rome, where it had been held anticipating the nonexistent seaborne landing the Allies had faked and so was unavailable to fight.\nClark captures Rome but fails to trap the German Tenth Army.\nBy 25 May, with the German 10th Army in full retreat, Truscott's VI Corps was, as planned, driving eastwards to cut them off. By the next day, they would have been astride the line of retreat, and the 10th Army, with all of Kesselring's reserves committed to them, would have been trapped. At this point, astonishingly, Clark ordered Truscott to change his line of attack from a northeasterly one to Valmontone on Route 6 to a northwesterly one directly towards Rome. The reasons for Clark's decision are unclear, and controversy surrounds the issue. Most commentators point to Clark's ambition to be the first to arrive in Rome, although some suggest he was concerned to give a necessary respite to his tired troops (notwithstanding the new direction of attack that required his troops to make a frontal attack on the Germans' prepared defences on the Caesar C line). Truscott later wrote in his memoirs that Clark \"was fearful that the British were laying devious plans to be first into Rome\", a sentiment somewhat reinforced in Clark's own writings. However, General Alexander, the C-in-C of the AAI, had clearly laid down the army boundaries before the battle, and Rome was allocated to the Fifth Army. Leese's British Eighth Army was constantly reminded that their job was to engage the 10th Army, destroy as much of it as possible, and then bypass Rome to continue the pursuit northwards (which in fact they did, harassing the retreating 10th Army for some towards Perugia in 6 weeks).\nAt the time, Truscott was shocked, writing later:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; He went on to write:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There has never been any doubt in my mind that had General Clark held loyally to General Alexander's instructions, had he not changed the direction of my attack to the northwest on 26 May, the strategic objectives of Anzio would have been accomplished in full. To be first in Rome was a poor compensation for this lost opportunity. An opportunity was indeed missed, and seven divisions of the 10th Army were able to make their way to the next line of defence, the Trasimene Line, where they were able to link up with the 14th Army and then make a fighting withdrawal to the formidable Gothic Line north of Florence.\nRome was captured on 4 June 1944, just two days before the Normandy invasion.\nBattle honours.\nSome units were awarded battle honours by the British and Commonwealth Armies for their roles at Cassino. Specifically, units that participated in the first part of the campaign were awarded the battle honour 'Cassino I'. Subsidiary battle honours were also given to units that participated in specific engagements during this part, including Monastery Hill, Castle Hill, and Hangman's Hill.\nUnits that participated in the later part of the battle were awarded the honour 'Cassino II'.\nAll members of the Polish units were awarded the Monte Cassino Commemorative Cross.\nCasualties.\nThe capture of Monte Cassino came at a high price. The Allies suffered around 55,000 casualties in the Monte Cassino campaign. German casualty figures are estimated at around 20,000 killed and wounded. Total Allied casualties spanning the period of the four Cassino battles and the Anzio campaign, with the subsequent capture of Rome on 5 June 1944, were over 105,000.\nThe town of Cassino was completely razed by the air and artillery bombardments (especially by the air raid of 15 March 1944, when 1,250 tonnes of bombs were dropped on the town), and 2,026 of its prewar population of 20,000 were killed during the raids and the battle.\nLegacy.\nEvacuation and treasures.\nIn the course of the battles, the ancient abbey of Monte Cassino, where St. Benedict in AD 516 first established the Rule that ordered monasticism in the west, was entirely destroyed by Allied bombing and artillery barrages in February 1944.\nSome months earlier, in the Italian autumn of 1943, two officers in the Hermann G\u00f6ring Panzer Division, Captain Maximilian Becker and Lieutenant Colonel Julius Schlegel, proposed the removal of Monte Cassino's treasures to the Vatican and Vatican-owned Castel Sant'Angelo ahead of the approaching front. The officers convinced church authorities and their own senior commanders to use the division's trucks and fuel for the undertaking. They had to find the materials necessary for crates and boxes, find carpenters among their troops, recruit local labourers (paid with rations of food plus twenty cigarettes a day), and then manage the \"massive job of evacuation centered on the library and archive\", a treasure \"literally without price\". The richness of the abbey's archives, library, and gallery included \"800 papal documents, 20,500 volumes in the Old Library, 60,000 in the New Library, 500 \"incunabula\", 200 manuscripts on parchment, 100,000 prints and separate collections\". The first trucks, carrying paintings by Italian old masters, were ready to go less than a week from the day Becker and Schlegel independently first came to Monte Cassino. Each vehicle carried monks to Rome as escorts; in more than 100 truckloads, the convoys saved the abbey's monastic community. The task was completed in the first days of November 1943. \"In three weeks, in the middle of a losing war, in another country, it was quite a feat.\" After a mass in the basilica, Abbot Gregorio Diamare formally presented signed parchment scrolls in Latin to General Paul Conrath, to \"tribuno militum Julio Schlegel\" and to \"Maximiliano Becker medecinae doctori\" \"for rescuing the monks and treasures of the Abbey of Monte Cassino\".\nAmong the treasures removed were Titians, an El Greco, and two Goyas.\n\"A Canticle for Leibowitz\".\nThe American writer Walter M. Miller Jr., a Catholic, served as part of a bomber crew that participated in the destruction of the ancient Monte Cassino monastery. As Miller stated, this experience deeply influenced him and directly resulted in his writing, a decade later, the book \"A Canticle for Leibowitz\", which is considered a masterpiece of science fiction. The book tells the story of a group of monks who are committed to preserving the remnants of scientific knowledge after a nuclear war until the world is ready to receive it again.\nUnited States military history reviews.\nThe U.S. government's official position on the German occupation of Monte Cassino changed over a quarter-century. The assertion that the German use of the abbey was \"irrefutable\" was removed from the record in 1961 by the Office of the Chief of Military History. A congressional inquiry to the same office in the 20th anniversary year of the bombing stated: \"It appears that no German troops, except a small military police detachment, were actually inside the abbey\" before the bombing. The final change to the U.S. Army's official record was made in 1969 and concluded that \"the abbey was actually unoccupied by German troops.\"\nMarocchinate.\nReports indicate that some French Moroccan troops attached to the French Expeditionary Forces committed acts of rape and murder in the surrounding hills after the battle. Some of these units were accused of committing atrocities against the Italian peasant communities in the region. In Italy, the victims of these acts were described as \"Marocchinate\" meaning literally \"Moroccaned\" (or people who have been subjected to acts committed by Moroccans). A fictional instance of rape by Moroccan troops forms the basis of Alberto Moravia's 1957 novel \"Two Women\".\nWar graves and memorials.\nImmediately after the cessation of fighting at Monte Cassino, the Polish government in exile (in London) created the Monte Cassino campaign cross to commemorate the Polish part in the capture of the strategic point. Also during this time, the Polish song writer Feliks Konarski, who had taken part in the fighting there, wrote his anthem \"Czerwone maki na Monte Cassino\" (\"The Red Poppies on Monte Cassino\"). Later, an imposing Polish cemetery was laid out; this is prominently visible from the restored monastery. The Polish cemetery is the closest of all allied cemeteries in the area, an honour given to the Poles as their units are the ones credited with the liberation of the abbey.\nThe Commonwealth War Graves cemetery on the western outskirts of Cassino is a burial place for British, New Zealand, Canadian, Indian, Gurkha, Australian, and South African casualties. The Italians are on Route 6 in the Liri Valley; the Americans are at the Sicily\u2013Rome American Cemetery and Memorial in Nettuno. The French Military Cemetery, with more than 4500 graves, is located in Venafro, east of Cassino.\nThe German cemetery (\"Deutsche Kriegsgr\u00e4berst\u00e4tte Cassino\") is approximately north of Cassino in the Rapido Valley.\nIn the 1950s, a subsidiary of the \"Pontificia Commissione di Assistenza\" distributed Lamps of Brotherhood, cast from the bronze doors of the destroyed Abbey, to representatives of nations that had served on both sides of the war to promote reconciliation.\nIn 1999, a monument commemorating the Battle of Monte Cassino was unveiled in Warsaw and is located next to the street that is named after W\u0142adys\u0142aw Anders.\nIn 2006, a memorial was unveiled in Rome honouring the Allied forces that fought and died to capture the city.\nOn 8 July 2021, the Chief of Army Staff, General M.M. Naravane, inaugurated the Indian Army Memorial at Cassino to commemorate the Indian soldiers killed in action during the Battle of Cassino.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33090", "revid": "49214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33090", "title": "Double-Cross System", "text": "British counter-espionage and deception operation of WW2\nThe Double-Cross System or XX System was a World War II counter-espionage and deception operation of the British Security Service (MI5). Nazi agents in Britain \u2013 real and false \u2013 were captured, turned themselves in or simply announced themselves, and were then used by the British to broadcast mainly disinformation to their Nazi controllers. Its operations were overseen by the Twenty Committee under the chairmanship of John Cecil Masterman; the name of the committee comes from the number 20 in Roman numerals: \"XX\" (i.e. a double cross).\nThe policy of MI5 during the war was initially to use the system for counter-espionage. It was only later that its potential for deception purposes was realised. Many of the agents from the German intelligence services \"Abwehr\" and \"Sicherheitsdienst\" (SD) who reached British shores turned themselves in to the authorities, while others were apprehended after they made mistakes during their operations. In addition, some were false agents who had tricked the Germans into believing they would spy for them if they helped them reach England (e.g., Treasure, Fido). \nLater agents were instructed to contact agents who, unknown to the Abwehr, were controlled by the British. The Abwehr and SD sent agents over by parachute drop, submarine, or travel via neutral countries. The last route was most commonly used, with agents often impersonating refugees. After the war, it was discovered that all the agents Germany sent to Britain had given themselves up or had been captured, with the possible exception of one who committed suicide.\nEarly agents.\nFollowing a July 1940 conference in Kiel, the Abwehr (German intelligence) began an espionage campaign against Britain involving intelligence gathering and sabotage. Spies were sent over from Europe in various ways; some parachuted or were delivered by submarine. Others entered the country on false passports or posing as refugees. Public perception in Britain was that the country was full of well-trained German spies, who were deeply integrated into society. There was widespread \"spy-mania\", as Churchill put it. The truth was that between September and November 1940 fewer than 25 agents arrived in the country; mostly of Eastern European extraction, they were badly trained and poorly motivated.\nThe agents were not difficult to spot, and it became easier still when the German Enigma machine encryption was broken. MI5, with advance warning of infiltration, had no trouble picking up almost all of the spies sent to the country. Writing in 1972, John C. Masterman (who had, later in the war, headed the Twenty Committee) said that by 1941, MI5 \"actively ran and controlled the German espionage system in [the United Kingdom].\" It was not an idle boast; post-war records confirmed that none of the Abwehr agents, bar one who committed suicide, went unnoticed.\nOnce caught, the spies were deposited in the care of Lieutenant Colonel Robin Stephens at Camp 020 (Latchmere House, Richmond). After Stephens, a notorious and brilliant interrogator, had picked apart their life history, the agents were either spirited away (to be imprisoned or killed) or if judged acceptable, offered the chance to turn double agent on the Germans.\nControl of the new double agents fell to Thomas Argyll Robertson (usually called Tar, from his initials), a charismatic MI5 agent. A Scot and something of a playboy, Robertson had some early experience with double agents; just prior to the war he had been case officer to Arthur Owens (code name Snow). Owens was an oddity and it became apparent that he was playing off the Germans and British, although to what end Robertson was unable to uncover. Robertson dispatched an ex-RNAS officer called Walter Dicketts (code name Celery) to neutral Lisbon in early 1941 to meet Owens' German spymaster, Nikolaus Ritter from the Abwehr, to establish Owens' bona fides. Unknown to Dicketts, Owens had betrayed him to the Germans before Dicketts entered Germany to be interrogated by experts from the Abwehr in Hamburg. Although Dicketts managed to get himself recruited as a German agent (while continuing to report to MI5), Owens claimed that Dicketts' survival meant he had been 'turned' by the Germans. When both agents returned to England, Robertson and his team spent countless hours trying to establish which agent was telling the truth. In the end Owens was interned for endangering Dicketts' life and for revealing the important information that his German radio transmitter was controlled by MI5. The whole affair resulted in the collapse of the entire Snow network comprising the double agents Owens, GW, Biscuit, Charlie, Summer and Celery. The experiment had not appeared to be a success but MI5 had learned lessons about how Abwehr operated and how double agents might be useful.\nRobertson believed that turning German spies would have numerous benefits, disclosing what information Abwehr wanted and to mislead them as part of a military deception. It would also discourage them from sending more agents, if they believed an operational network existed. Section B1A (a subordinate of B section, under Guy Liddell) was formed and Robertson was put in charge of handling the double-agent programme.\nRobertson's first agents were not a success, Giraffe (George Graf) was never really used and Gander (Kurt Goose; MI5 had a penchant for amusingly relevant code names), had been sent to Britain with a radio that could only transmit and both were quickly decommissioned. The next two attempts were even more farcical; G\u00f6sta Caroli and Wulf Schmidt (a Danish citizen) landed, via parachute, in September 1940. The two were genuine Nazis, had trained together and were friends. Caroli was coerced into turning double in return for Schmidt's life being spared, whilst Schmidt was told that Caroli had sold him out and in anger swapped sides.\nCaroli quickly became a problem; he attempted to strangle his MI5 handler before making an escape, carrying a canoe on a motorcycle. He vaguely planned to row to Holland but came unstuck after falling off the bike in front of a policeman. He was eventually recaptured and judged too much trouble to be used. Schmidt was more of a success; codenamed 'Tate', he continued to contact Germany until May 1945. These eccentric spies made Robertson aware that handling double agents was going to be a difficult task.\nMethods of operation.\nThe main form of communication that agents used with their handlers was secret writing. Letters were intercepted by the postal censorship authorities and some agents were caught. Later in the war, wireless sets were provided by the Germans. Eventually transmissions purporting to be from one double agent were facilitated by transferring the operation of the set to the main headquarters of MI5. On the British side, the fight against the Abwehr and SD was made much easier by the breaking of German ciphers. Abwehr hand ciphers were cracked early in the war and SD hand ciphers and Abwehr Enigma ciphers followed on 8 November 1941 by Dilly Knox, agents sent messages to the Abwehr in the simple code which was then sent on using an enigma machine, with the simple codes broken it helped break the daily enigma code. \nThe Abwehr used a different version of Enigma machines, in November 1942 a machine was captured in Algiers during Operation Torch, it was found to have no plug board however the three rotors had been changed to rotate 11, 15 and 19 times rather than once every 26 letters, plus a plate on the left acted as a fourth rotor. The capture of a machine greatly helped the quicker decoding of German messages. The signals intelligence allowed an accurate assessment of whether the double agents were really trusted by the Germans and what effect their information had.\nA crucial aspect of the system was the need for genuine information to be sent along with the deception material. This need caused problems early in the war, with those who controlled the release of information being reluctant to provide even a small amount of relatively innocuous genuine material. Later in the war, as the system became better organised, genuine information was integrated into the deception system. It was used to disguise the development of \"Gee\", the Allies' navigation aid for bombers. One of the agents sent genuine information about Operation Torch to the Germans. It was postmarked before the landing but due to delays deliberately introduced by the British authorities, the information did not reach the Germans until after the Allied troops were ashore. The information impressed the Germans as it appeared to date from before the attack, but it was militarily useless to them.\nOperation outside the United Kingdom.\nIt was not only in the United Kingdom that the system was operated. A number of agents connected with the system were run in neutral Spain and Portugal. Some even had direct contact with the Germans in occupied Europe. One of the most famous of the agents who operated outside of the UK was Du\u0161an Popov (\"Tricycle\"). \nThere was even a case in which an agent started running deception operations independently from Portugal using little more than guidebooks, maps, and a very vivid imagination to convince his Abwehr handlers that he was spying in the UK. This agent, Juan Pujol Garc\u00eda (\"Garbo\"), created a network of phantom sub-agents and eventually convinced the British authorities that he could be useful. He and his fictitious network were absorbed into the main double-cross system and he became so respected by Abwehr that they stopped landing agents in Britain after 1942. The Germans became dependent on the spurious information that was fed to them by Garbo's network and the other double-cross agents.\nOperation Fortitude and D-Day landings.\nThe British put their double-agent network to work in support of Operation Fortitude, a plan to deceive the Germans about the location of the Normandy Landings in France. Allowing one of the double agents to claim to have stolen documents describing the invasion plans might have aroused suspicion. Instead, agents were allowed to report minutiae, such as insignia on soldiers' uniforms and unit markings on vehicles. The observations in the south-central areas largely gave accurate information about the units located there. Reports from south-west England indicated few troop sightings, when in reality many units were housed there. Reports from the south-east depicted the real and the notional Operation Quicksilver forces. Any military planner would know that to mount an invasion of Europe from England, Allied units had to be staged around the country, with those that would land first placed nearest to the invasion point. German intelligence used the agent reports to construct an order of battle for the Allied forces, that placed the centre of gravity of the invasion force opposite Pas de Calais, the point on the French coast closest to England and therefore a likely invasion site. The deception was so effective that the Germans kept 15 divisions in reserve near Calais even after the invasion had begun, lest it prove to be a diversion from the main invasion at Calais. Early battle reports of insignia on Allied units only confirmed the information the double agents had sent, increasing the Germans' trust in their network. Agent Garbo was informed in radio messages from Germany after the invasion that he had been awarded the Iron Cross.\nV-weapons deception.\nThe British noticed that, during the V-1 flying bomb attacks of 1944, the weapons were falling short of Trafalgar Square, the actual Luftwaffe aiming points such as Tower Bridge being unknown to the British. Duncan Sandys was told to get MI5-controlled German agents such as \"Zig Zag\" and \"Tate\" to report the V-1 impacts back to Germany. To make the Germans aim short, the British used these double agents to exaggerate the number of V-1s falling in the north and west of London and to underreport those falling in the south and east. Around 22 June, only one of seven impacts was reported south of the Thames, when &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 of the V-1s had fallen there. Although the Germans plotted a sample of V-1s which had radio transmitters, showing that they had fallen short, the telemetry was ignored in favour of the agents' reports.\nWhen the Germans received a false double cross V-1 report that there was considerable damage in Southampton\u2014which had not been a target\u2014the V-1s were temporarily aimed at the south coast ports. The double cross deception had caused a \"re-targeting\" from London, not just inaccurate aiming. When V-1s launched from Heinkel He 111s on 7 July at Southampton were inaccurate, British advisor Frederick Lindemann recommended that the agents report heavy losses, to save hundreds of Londoners each week at the expense of only a few lives in the ports. When the Cabinet learned of the deception on 15 August, Herbert Morrison ruled against it, saying that they had no right to decide that one man should die while another should survive. However R. V. Jones refused to call off the plan absent written orders, which never came, and the deception continued.\nWhen the V-2 rocket \"blitz\" began with only a few minutes from launch to impact, the deception was enhanced by providing locations damaged by bombing, verifiable by aerial reconnaissance, for impacts in central London but each \"time-tagged\" with an earlier impact that had fallen short of central London. From mid-January to mid-February 1945, the mean point of V-2 impacts edged eastward at the rate of a couple of miles a week, with more and more V-2s falling short of central London. Of the V-2s aimed at London, more than half landed outside the London Civil Defence Region.\nList of agents.\nMI5 recorded approximately 120 Double-Cross agents.190 This list includes those agents whose real identities have been released.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33091", "revid": "50913020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33091", "title": "Juan Pujol Garc\u00eda", "text": "Spanish double agent for the British in World War II\nJuan Pujol Garc\u00eda (; 14 February 1912 \u2013 10 October 1988), also known as Joan Pujol i Garc\u00eda (), was a Spanish spy who acted as a double agent loyal to the United Kingdom against Nazi Germany during World War II, when he relocated to Britain to carry out fictitious spying activities for the Germans. He was given the codename Garbo by the British; their German counterparts codenamed him Alaric and referred to his non-existent spy network as \"Arabal\".\nAfter developing a loathing of political extremism of all sorts during the Spanish Civil War, Pujol decided to become a spy for Britain as a way to do something \"for the good of humanity.\" Pujol and his wife contacted the British Embassy in Madrid, which rejected his offer.\nUndeterred, he created a false identity as a fanatically pro-Nazi Spanish government official and successfully became a German agent. He was instructed to travel to Britain and recruit additional agents; instead he moved to Lisbon and created bogus reports about Britain from a variety of public sources including a tourist guide to Britain, train timetables, cinema newsreels, and magazine advertisements.\nAlthough the information would not have withstood close examination, Pujol soon established himself as a trustworthy agent. He began inventing fictitious sub-agents who could be blamed for false information and mistakes. The Allies finally accepted Pujol when the Germans expended considerable resources attempting to hunt down a fictitious convoy. Following interviews by Desmond Bristow of Section V MI6 Iberian Section, Pujol was taken on. The family were moved to Britain and Pujol was given the code name \"Garbo\". Pujol and his handler Tom\u00e1s Harris spent the rest of the war expanding the fictitious network, communicating to the German handlers at first by letters and later by radio. Eventually the Germans were funding a network of 27 agents, all fictitious.\nPujol had a key role in the success of Operation Fortitude, the deception operation intended to mislead the Germans about the timing, location, and scale of the invasion of Normandy in 1944. The false information Pujol supplied helped persuade the Germans that the main attack would be in the , so that they kept large forces there before and even after the invasion. Pujol had the distinction of receiving military decorations from both sides of the war\u00a0\u2013 being awarded the Iron Cross and becoming a Member of the Order of the British Empire.\nEarly life.\nPujol was born in Barcelona to Joan Pujol, a Catalan who owned a cotton factory, and Mercedes Garc\u00eda Guijarro, from the Andalusian town of Motril in the Province of Granada. The third of four children, Pujol was sent at age seven to the Valldemia boarding school run by the Marist Brothers in Matar\u00f3, from Barcelona; he remained there for the next four years. The students were only allowed out of the school on Sundays if they had a visitor, so his father made the trip every week.\nHis mother came from a strict Roman Catholic family and took Communion every day, but his father was much more secular and had liberal political beliefs. At age thirteen, he was transferred to a school in Barcelona run by his father's card-playing friend Monsignor Josep, where he remained for three years. After an argument with a teacher, he decided that he no longer wished to remain at the school, and became an apprentice at a hardware store.\nPujol engaged in a variety of occupations prior to and after the Spanish Civil War, such as studying animal husbandry at the Royal Poultry School in Arenys de Mar and managing various businesses, including a cinema.\nHis father died a few months after the Second Republic's establishment in 1931, while Pujol was completing his education as a poultry farmer. Pujol's father left his family well-provided for, until his father's factory was taken over by the workers in the early stages of the Spanish Civil War.\nSpanish Civil War.\nIn 1931, Pujol did his six months of compulsory military service in a cavalry unit, the 7th Regiment of Light Artillery. He knew he was unsuited for a military career, hating horse-riding and claiming to lack the \"essential qualities of loyalty, generosity, and honor.\" Pujol was managing a poultry farm north of Barcelona in 1936 when the Spanish Civil War began. His sister Elena's fianc\u00e9 was taken by Republican forces. Later, she and his mother were arrested and charged with being counter-revolutionaries. A relative in a trade union was able to rescue them from captivity.\nHe was called up for military service on the Republican side (in opposition to Francisco Franco's Nationalists), but opposed the Republican government due to their treatment of his family. He hid at his girlfriend's home until he was captured in a police raid and imprisoned for a week before being freed via the Traditionalist resistance group \"Socorro Blanco\". They hid him until they could produce fake identity papers that showed him to be too old for military service. He started managing a poultry farm that had been requisitioned by the local Republican government, but it was not economically viable. The experience with rule by committee intensified his antipathy towards communism.\nHe re-joined the Republican military using his false papers with the intention to desert as soon as possible, volunteering to lay telegraph cables near the front line. He managed to desert to the Nationalist side during the Battle of the Ebro in September 1938. However, he was equally ill-treated by the Nationalist side, disliking their fascist influences and being struck and imprisoned by his colonel upon Pujol's expressing sympathy with the monarchy.\nHis experience with both sides left him with a deep loathing of both fascism and Communism, and by extension Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. He was proud that he had managed to serve both sides without firing a single bullet for either. After his discharge from the Nationalist army, he met Araceli Gonz\u00e1lez in Burgos and married her in Madrid; they had one child, Joan Fernando.\nWorld War II.\nIndependent spying.\nIn 1940, during the early stages of World War II, Pujol decided that he must make a contribution \"for the good of humanity\" by helping Britain, which was at the time Germany's only adversary. Starting in January 1941, he approached the British Embassy in Madrid three different times, including through his wife (though Pujol edited her participation out of his memoirs), but they showed no interest in employing him as a spy. Therefore, he resolved to establish himself as a German agent before approaching the British again to offer his services as a double-agent.\nPujol created an identity as a fanatically pro-Nazi Spanish government official who could travel to London on official business; he also obtained a fake Spanish diplomatic passport by fooling a printer into thinking Pujol worked for the Spanish embassy in Lisbon. He contacted Friedrich Knappe-Ratey, an agent in Madrid, codenamed \"Frederico\". The accepted Pujol and gave him a crash course in espionage (including secret writing), a bottle of invisible ink, a codebook, and \u00a3600 for expenses. His instructions were to move to Britain and recruit a network of British agents.\nHe moved instead to Lisbon; using a tourist's guide to Britain, reference books and magazines from the Lisbon Public Library, and newsreel reports he saw in cinemas, he created seemingly credible reports that appeared to come from London. During his time in Portugal, he stayed in Estoril, at the Hotel Pal\u00e1cio. He claimed to be travelling around Britain and submitted his travel expenses based on fares listed in a British railway guide. Pujol's unfamiliarity with the non-decimal system of currency used in Britain at the time was a slight difficulty. At this time Great Britain's unit of currency, the pound sterling, was subdivided into 20 shillings, each having twelve pence. Pujol was unable to total his expenses in this complex system, so simply itemised them, and said that he would send the total later.\nDuring this time he created an extensive network of fictitious sub-agents living in different parts of Britain. Because he had never actually visited the UK, he made several mistakes, such as claiming that his alleged contact in Glasgow \"would do anything for a litre of wine\", unaware of Scottish drinking habits or that the UK did not use the metric system. His reports were intercepted by the British Ultra communications interceptions programme, and seemed so credible that the British counter-intelligence service MI5 launched a full-scale spy hunt.\nIn February 1942, either he or his wife (accounts differ) approached the United States after it had entered the war, contacting U.S. Navy Lieutenant Patrick Demorest in the naval attache's office in Lisbon, who recognised Pujol's potential. Demorest contacted his British counterparts.\nWork with MI5.\nThe British had become aware that someone had been misinforming the Germans, and realised the value of this after the wasted resources attempting to hunt down a non-existent convoy reported to them by Pujol. He was moved to Britain on 24 April 1942 and given the code name \"Bovril\", after the drink concentrate. However, after he passed the security check conducted by MI6 Officer Desmond Bristow, Bristow suggested that he be accompanied by MI5 officer Tom\u00e1s Harris (a fluent Spanish speaker) to brief Pujol on how he and Harris should work together. Pujol's wife and child were later moved to Britain.\nPujol operated as a double agent under the XX Committee's aegis. Cyril Mills was initially Pujol's case officer, but he spoke no Spanish and quickly dropped out of the picture. Mills suggested that Pujol's code name should be changed as befitted \"the best actor in the world\", and Pujol became \"Garbo\", after Greta Garbo. Mills passed his case over to the Spanish-speaking officer Harris. Together, Harris and Pujol wrote 315 letters, averaging 2,000 words, addressed to a post-office box in Lisbon supplied by the Germans. His fictitious spy network was so efficient and verbose that his German handlers were overwhelmed and made no further attempts to recruit any additional spies in the UK, according to the \"Official History of British Intelligence in World War II\".\nThe information supplied to German intelligence was a mixture of complete fiction, genuine information of little military value, and valuable military intelligence artificially delayed. In November 1942, just before the Operation Torch landings in North Africa, Garbo's agent on the River Clyde reported that a convoy of troopships and warships had left port, painted in Mediterranean camouflage. While the letter was sent by airmail and postmarked before the landings, it was deliberately delayed by British Intelligence in order to arrive too late to be useful. Pujol received a reply stating \"we are sorry they arrived too late but your last reports were magnificent.\"\nPujol had been supposedly communicating with the Germans via a courier, a Royal Dutch Airlines (KLM) pilot willing to carry messages to and from Lisbon for cash. This meant that message deliveries were limited to the KLM flight schedule. In 1943, responding to German requests for speedier communication, Pujol and Harris created a fictitious radio operator. From August 1943 radio became the preferred method of communication.\nOn occasion, he had to invent reasons why his agents had failed to report easily available information that the Germans would eventually know about. For example, he reported that his (fabricated) Liverpool agent had fallen ill just before a major fleet movement from that port, and so was unable to report the event. To support this story, the agent eventually \"died\" and an obituary was placed in the local newspaper as further evidence to convince the Germans. The Germans were also persuaded to pay a pension to the agent's \"widow\".\nFor radio communication, \"Alaric\" needed the strongest hand encryption the Germans had. The Germans provided Garbo with this system, which was in turn supplied to the codebreakers at Bletchley Park. Garbo's encrypted messages were to be received in Madrid, manually decrypted, and re-encrypted with an Enigma machine for retransmission to Berlin. Having both the original text and the Enigma-encoded intercept of it, the codebreakers had the best possible source material for a chosen-plaintext attack on the Germans' Enigma key.\nOperation Fortitude.\nIn January 1944, the Germans told Pujol that they believed a large-scale invasion in Europe was imminent and asked to be kept informed. This invasion was Operation Overlord, and Pujol played a leading role in Operation Fortitude, the deception campaign to conceal Overlord. He sent over 500 radio messages between January 1944 and D-Day, at times more than twenty messages per day. During planning for the Normandy beach invasion, the Allies decided that it was vitally important that the German leaders be misled into believing that the landing would happen at the Strait of Dover.\nIn order to maintain his credibility, it was decided that Garbo (or one of his agents) should forewarn the Germans of the timing and some details of the actual invasion of Normandy, although sending it too late for them to take effective action. Special arrangements were made with the German radio operators to be listening to Garbo through the night of 5/6 June 1944 using the story that a sub-agent was about to arrive with important information. However, when the call was made at 3\u00a0AM, no reply was received from the German operators until 8\u00a0AM. This enabled Garbo to add more, genuine but now out-of-date, operational details to the message when finally received, and thus increase his standing with the Germans. Garbo told his German contacts that he was disgusted that his first message was missed, saying, \"I cannot accept excuses or negligence. Were it not for my ideals I would abandon the work.\"\nOn 9 June\u00a0\u2013 three days after D-day\u00a0\u2013 Garbo sent a message to German intelligence that was passed to Adolf Hitler and the (OKW; German High Command). Garbo said that he had conferred with his top agents and developed an order of battle showing 75 divisions in Britain; in reality, there were only about 50. Part of the \"Fortitude\" plan was to convince the Germans that a fictitious formation\u00a0\u2013 First U.S. Army Group, comprising 11 divisions (150,000 men), commanded by General George Patton\u00a0\u2013 was stationed in southeast Britain.\nThe deception was supported by fake planes, inflatable tanks, and vans travelling about the area transmitting bogus radio chatter. Garbo's message pointed out that units from this formation had not participated in the invasion, and therefore the first landing should be considered a diversion. A German message to Madrid sent two days later said \"all reports received in the last week from Arabel [spy network codename] undertaking have been confirmed without exception and are to be described as especially valuable.\" A post-war examination of German records found that, during Operation Fortitude, no fewer than sixty-two of Pujol's reports were included in OKW intelligence summaries.\nOKW accepted Garbo's reports so completely that they kept two armoured divisions and 19 infantry divisions in the Pas de Calais waiting for a second invasion through July and August 1944. The German Commander-in-Chief in the west, Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt, refused to allow General Erwin Rommel to move these divisions to Normandy. There were more German troops in the Pas de Calais region at the end of June than there had been on D-Day.\nIn late June, Garbo was instructed by the Germans to report on the falling of V-1 flying bombs. Finding no way of giving false information without arousing suspicion, and being unwilling to give correct information, Harris arranged for Garbo to be \"arrested.\" He returned to duty a few days later, now having a \"need\" to avoid London and forwarded an \"official\" letter of apology from the Home Secretary for his unlawful detention.\nThe Germans paid Pujol US$340,000 () over the course of the war to support his network of agents.\nHonours.\nAs Alaric, he was awarded the Iron Cross Second Class on 29 July 1944 for his services to the German war effort. The award was normally reserved for front-line fighting men and required Hitler's personal authorisation. The Iron Cross was presented via radio.\nAs Garbo, he received an MBE from King George VI, on 25 November 1944. The Nazis never realised they had been fooled, and thus Pujol\u00a0\u2013 along with Eddie Chapman, another double agent\u00a0\u2013 earned the distinction of being one of the few to receive decorations from both sides during World War II.\nAfter the war.\nAfter the Second World War, Pujol feared reprisals from surviving Nazis. With the help of MI5, Pujol travelled to Angola and faked his death from malaria in 1949. He then moved to Lagunillas, Venezuela, where he lived in relative anonymity running a bookstore and gift shop.\nPujol divorced his first wife and married Carmen Cilia, with whom he had two sons, Carlos Miguel and Joan Carlos, and a daughter who died in 1975 at the age of 20. By 1984, Pujol had moved to his son Carlos Miguel's house in La Trinidad, Caracas.\nIn 1971, the British politician Rupert Allason, writing under the pen name \"Nigel West\", became interested in Garbo. For several years, he interviewed various former intelligence officers, but none knew Garbo's real name. Eventually, Tom\u00e1s Harris' friend Anthony Blunt, the Soviet spy who had penetrated MI5, said that he had met Garbo, and knew him as \"either Juan or Jos\u00e9 Garc\u00eda\". Allason's investigation was stalled from that point until March 1984, when a former MI5 officer who had served in Spain supplied Pujol's full name. Allason hired a research assistant to call every J. Garc\u00eda\u00a0\u2013 an extremely common name in Spain\u00a0\u2013 in the Barcelona phone book, eventually contacting Pujol's nephew. Pujol and Allason finally met in New Orleans on 20 May 1984. They collaborated on his autobiography \"Operation Garbo\", published in 1985.\nAt Allason's urging, Pujol travelled to London and was received by Prince Philip at Buckingham Palace, in an unusually long audience. After that he visited the Special Forces Club and was reunited with a group of his former colleagues, including T. A. Robertson, Roger Fleetwood Hesketh, Cyril Mills and Desmond Bristow. On the 40th anniversary of D-Day, 6 June 1984, Pujol travelled to Normandy to tour the beaches and pay his respects to the dead.\nPujol died in Caracas in 1988. He is buried in Choron\u00ed, a town inside Henri Pittier National Park by the Caribbean Sea.\nNetwork of fictitious agents.\nEach of Pujol's fictitious agents was tasked with recruiting additional sub-agents.\nPopular culture.\nFilm and television.\nFeature films telling Garbo's story have been attempted on several occasions, but none have reached production to date.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33093", "revid": "11844353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33093", "title": "Eddie Chapman", "text": "Double agent for Britain during WW2\nEdward Arnold Chapman (16 November 1914 \u2013 11 December 1997) was an English criminal and wartime spy. During the Second World War he offered his services to Nazi Germany as a spy and subsequently became a British double agent. His British Secret Service handlers codenamed him \"Agent Zigzag\" in acknowledgement of his erratic personal history.\nHe had a number of criminal aliases known by the British police, amongst them Edward Edwards, Arnold Thompson and Edward Simpson. His German codename was \"Fritz\" or, later, after endearing himself to his German contacts, its diminutive form of \"Fritzchen\".\nBackground and criminal early life.\nChapman was born on 16 November 1914 in Burnopfield, County Durham, England. His father was a former marine engineer who ended up as a publican in nearby Roker. The family (Chapman was the eldest of three children) had a reputation for disobedience, and Chapman received little in the way of parental guidance. Despite being bright, he regularly played truant from school to go to the cinema and hang around the beach.\nAged 17, Chapman joined the Second Battalion of the Coldstream Guards, where his duties included guarding the Tower of London. Chapman enjoyed the perks of the uniform, but soon became bored with his duties. After nine months in the army, having been granted six days of leave, he ran away with a girl he met in Soho. After two months the army caught up with him, and he was arrested and sentenced to 84 days in Aldershot military prison. On release, Chapman received a dishonourable discharge from the army.\nChapman returned to Soho and spent some time working casual jobs, from barman to film extra, but his lifestyle outstripped his earnings \u2013 gambling debts and a taste for fine alcohol soon left him broke. He slipped into fraud and petty theft and, after several run-ins with the law, finally received his first civilian prison sentence, two months in Wormwood Scrubs for forging a cheque. He became a safecracker with London West End gangs, spending several stretches in jail for these crimes. The gangs utilised gelignite to gain entry to safes, leading Chapman and his associates to be known as the \"Jelly Gang\". One of Chapman's \"Jelly Gang\" crimes was carried out with the help of James Wells Hunt, whom Chapman met during a stint in prison. The execution of the crime involved Chapman disguising himself as a member of the Metropolitan Water Board in order to gain access to a house in Edgware Road, from which he made his way into the shop next door by smashing through the wall. He then extracted the safe, which was transported to Hunt's Garage at 39 St Luke's Mews, where it had its door removed using gelignite.\nChapman was arrested in Scotland and charged with blowing up the safe of the headquarters of the Edinburgh Co-operative Society. Let out on bail, he fled to Jersey in the Channel Islands, where he unsuccessfully attempted to continue his criminal career. In 1938, Chapman was dining with his lover (and future fianc\u00e9e) Betty Farmer at the Hotel de la Plage immediately before his arrest and, when he saw plain-clothes police coming to arrest him for crimes on the mainland, made a spectacular exit through the dining room window (which was shut at the time). Later that same night he committed a slapdash burglary for which he had to immediately begin serving two years in a Jersey prison, which, ironically, spared him at least 14 more years' imprisonment in a mainland prison afterwards.\nSecond World War.\nChapman was still in prison when the Channel Islands were invaded by the Germans in June 1940. While incarcerated, he met the petty criminal Anthony Faramus. Following a letter in German which they concocted to get off the Island, they were transferred to Fort de Romainville in Paris. There, Chapman confirmed his willingness to act as a German spy. Under the direction of Captain Stephan von Gr\u00f6ning, head of the in Nantes, he was trained in explosives, radio communications, parachute jumping and other subjects at La Bretonni\u00e8re-la-Claye, Saint-Julien-des-Landes, near Nantes, and dispatched to Britain to commit acts of sabotage.\nOn 16 December 1942, Chapman was flown to Britain in a Focke-Wulf bomber converted for parachuting, from Le Bourget airfield. He was equipped with wireless, pistol, cyanide capsule and \u00a31,000 and, amongst other things, was given the task of sabotaging the de Havilland aircraft factory at Hatfield in order to disrupt the production of the de Havilland Mosquito aircraft. Chapman became stuck in the hatch as he tried to leave the aircraft. Finally detaching himself, he landed some distance from the target location of Mundford, Norfolk, near the village of Littleport, Cambridgeshire.\nThe British secret services had been aware of Chapman's existence for some time, via Ultra (decrypted German messages), and would know his date of departure. Section B1A, the MI5-backed department with the task of capturing enemy agents and turning them into double agents, had discussed the best method of capturing Chapman without revealing Ultra. In the end, Operation Nightcap was envisioned: Rather than conduct a full-scale manhunt, planes from RAF Fighter Command would trail Chapman's aircraft to identify his landing site (from one of three possible options). Local police would then be alerted, with instructions to conduct a search under the guise of looking for a deserter.\nHowever, these plans proved unnecessary; Chapman surrendered to the local police shortly after landing and offered his services to MI5. He was interrogated at Latchmere House in southwest London, better known as Camp 020. MI5 decided to use him as a double agent against the Germans and assigned Ronnie Reed as his case officer (Reed, a former BBC engineer, had been invited to join MI5 in 1940 and remained there until his retirement in 1976).\nFaked sabotage of de Havilland factory.\nDuring the night of 29\u201330 January 1943, Chapman with MI5 officers faked a sabotage attack on his target, the de Havilland aircraft factory in Hatfield, where the Mosquito was being manufactured. German reconnaissance aircraft photographed the site, and the faked damage convinced Chapman's German controllers that the attack had been successful. To reinforce this story, MI5 also wrote and had published a story in the British newspaper the \"Daily Express\".\nFollowing the de Havilland subterfuge, B1A began preparations for Chapman's return to his German handlers. Radio messages were sent to the Abwehr requesting extraction by boat or submarine, and Chapman was set to work learning a cover story ready for the inevitable interrogations. However, the response from the Abwehr was lukewarm. They refused to send a U-boat and told Chapman to return via Lisbon, Portugal. This was not a simple method, as he had no valid reason to travel to the neutral port. Reed, and other members of B1A, believed this demonstrated the Germans' reluctance to pay Chapman the \u00a315,000 he had been promised.\nIn the meantime Chapman was subjected to fake interrogation at Camp 020, to make sure his story held up. Reed told him to stick as close to the truth as possible, to help make the lies more realistic, and he was coached in speaking slowly to cover any hesitations. Stephens was impressed with how well Chapman responded to questioning.\nPortugal and Operation Damp Squib.\nMI5 was eager for Chapman to return, hoping that as a trusted asset, he could pick up significant information about the enemy. He was given the task of memorising a list of questions to which the Allies wanted answers. The list was carefully constructed so that, should Chapman be broken, its content would not show German intelligence the gaps in Allied knowledge.\nTo get Chapman to Lisbon, it was decided he would join the crew of a merchant ship, and jump ship when it docked in Portugal. A fake identity, Hugh Anson, was constructed and the relevant paperwork was obtained before Chapman joined the crew of \"The City of Lancaster\", sailing out of Liverpool. On making contact with Germans at their Lisbon embassy, he suggested an attempt at blowing up the ship with a bomb disguised as a lump of coal to be placed in the coal bunker. This was in response to a request from Britain's anti-sabotage section that he obtain examples of German explosive devices.\nHe was given two bombs, which he handed to the ship's captain. The Germans did not notice the ship was not damaged on the voyage home, but to avoid the Germans' doubting Chapman's commitment, the British staged a conspicuous investigation of the ship when it returned to Britain, hoping that gossip about this would make its way back to the Germans.\nChapman was sent to occupied Norway to teach at a German spy school in Oslo. After a debriefing by von Gr\u00f6ning, Chapman was awarded the Iron Cross for his work in apparently damaging the de Havilland works and the \"City of Lancaster\", making him the first Englishman to receive such an award since the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u201371. However, Nicholas Booth suggests that as the Iron Cross was only ever given to military personnel, Chapman's \"Iron Cross\" may instead have been a War Merit Cross 2nd Class, or \"Kriegsverdienstkreuz\". Chapman was inducted into the German Army as an oberleutnant or first lieutenant. Chapman was also rewarded with 110,000\u00a0\u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01 and his own yacht. An MI5 officer wrote in an assessment \"the Germans came to love Chapman\u00a0... but although he went cynically through all the forms, he did not reciprocate. Chapman loved himself, loved adventure, and loved his country, probably in that order\". While in Oslo he also secretly photographed the German agents who stayed at his safe house.\nReturn to London.\nAfter Operation Overlord, he was sent back to Britain to report on the accuracy of the V-1 weapon and the Hedgehog antisubmarine weapon. He parachuted into Cambridgeshire on 29 June 1944 and went to London. Here he consistently reported to the Germans that the bombs were hitting their central London target, when in fact they were undershooting. Perhaps as a result of this disinformation, the Germans never corrected their aim, with the end result that most bombs landed in the south London suburbs or the Kent countryside, doing far less damage than they otherwise might have done.\nDuring this period he was also involved in doping of dogs in greyhound racing and was associating with criminal elements in West End nightclubs. He was also indiscreet about the sources of his income and so MI5, being unable to control him, dismissed him on 2 November 1944. Chapman was given a \u00a36,000 payment from MI5 and was allowed to keep \u00a31,000 of the money the Germans had given him. He was granted a pardon for his pre-war activities and was reported by MI5 to have been living \"in fashionable places in London always in the company of beautiful women of apparent culture\".\nLove life.\nChapman had two fianc\u00e9es at the same time, each in opposite war zones. He was still betrothed to Freda Stevenson in Britain when he met Dagmar Lahlum in Norway. Stevenson was being financially assisted through MI5, and Lahlum was being treated by von Gr\u00f6ning. During Chapman's stay in Norway, he revealed to Dagmar that he was a British agent, but fortunately Dagmar was linked to the Norwegian resistance. She was thrilled to know that her lover was not a German officer, and they worked together to gather German information.\nHe abandoned both women after the war and instead married his former lover Betty Farmer, whom he had left in a hurry at the Hotel de la Plage in 1938. He and Farmer later had a daughter, Suzanne, in 1954. Dagmar served a six-month prison sentence for consorting with an apparently German officer: thinking that Chapman was dead, she was unable to prove that he was a British agent. They met again briefly in 1994. Chapman died before he was able to redeem her name.\nAfter the war.\nOn his retirement, MI5 expressed some apprehension that Chapman might take up crime again when his money ran out and if caught would plead for leniency because of his highly secret wartime service. As predicted, he mixed with blackmailers and thieves and got into trouble with the police for various crimes, including smuggling gold across the Mediterranean in 1950. More than once he had a character reference from former intelligence officers who confirmed his great contribution to the war effort.\nChapman had his wartime memoirs serialised in France to earn money, but he was charged alongside co-defendant Wilfred Macartney under the Official Secrets Act and fined \u00a350. A few years later, when they were due to be published in the \"News of the World\", the whole issue was pulped. However, his book \"The Eddie Chapman Story\" was eventually published in 1953.\nChapman ghost-wrote the autobiography of Eric Pleasants, a British citizen who joined the Germans and served in the British Free Corps of the Waffen-SS during the war. Chapman claimed to have met Pleasants while he was imprisoned in Jersey. \"I Killed to Live \u2013 The Story of Eric Pleasants as Told to Eddie Chapman\" was published in 1957. In 1967, Chapman was living in Italy and went into business as an antiquarian.\nChapman and his wife later set up a health farm (Shenley Lodge, Shenley, Herts) and owned a castle in Ireland. After the war, Chapman remained friends with Baron Stephan von Gr\u00f6ning, his Abwehr handler (wartime alias Doctor Graumann), who had fallen on hard times. Von Gr\u00f6ning later attended the wedding of Chapman's daughter. Eddie Chapman died of heart failure on 11 December 1997. He was survived by his wife Betty, and a daughter.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 1950s, producer Ted Banborough announced plans to make a film about Chapman starring Michael Rennie or Stanley Baker, but this did not go ahead.\nHe appeared as himself on the panel game show \"To Tell the Truth\" in November 1965.\nThe 1966 film \"Triple Cross\" was based on the biography \"The Real Eddie Chapman Story\" co-written by Chapman and Frank Owen. The film was directed by Terence Young, who had known Chapman before the war. Chapman's character was played by Christopher Plummer. The film was only loosely based on reality, and Chapman was disappointed with it. In his autobiography, Plummer said that Chapman was to have been a technical adviser on the film, but the French authorities would not allow him in the country because he was still wanted over an alleged plot to kidnap the Sultan of Morocco.\nIn 1967, French TV (ORTF) produced a short film featuring a personal \"\u00e0 la maison\" interview with Chapman (in fluent French) by Pierre Dumayet, \"Eddie Chapman, ex-gangster, ex-espion\".\nIn May 1989, Chapman made an extended appearance on the Channel 4 discussion programme \"After Dark\", alongside Tony Benn, Lord Dacre, James Rusbridger, Miles Copeland and others. \nIn 2011, BBC Two broadcast \"Double Agent: The Eddie Chapman Story\", a \"Timewatch\" documentary presented by Ben Macintyre based on his book. The book was broadcast in an abridged reading in 2012.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33095", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33095", "title": "World War II/Stalingrad", "text": ""}
{"id": "33096", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33096", "title": "World War II/Edited Text", "text": ""}
{"id": "33099", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33099", "title": "World War II/Okinawa", "text": ""}
{"id": "33102", "revid": "50875396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33102", "title": "Battle of Kursk", "text": "1943 tank battle in the Soviet Union\nThe Battle of Kursk, also called the Battle of the Kursk Salient, was a major World War II Eastern Front battle between the forces of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union near Kursk in southwestern Russia during the summer of 1943, resulting in a Soviet victory. The Battle of Kursk is the single largest battle in the history of warfare. It ranks only behind the Battle of Stalingrad several months earlier as the most often-cited turning point in the European theatre of the war. It was one of the costliest battles of the Second World War, the single deadliest armoured battle in history, the largest tank battle in history, and the opening day of the battle, 5 July, was the single costliest day in the history of aerial warfare in terms of aircraft shot down. The battle was further marked by fierce house-to-house fighting and hand-to-hand combat.\nThe battle began with the launch of the German offensive Operation Citadel (), on 5 July, which had the objective of pinching off the Kursk salient with attacks on the base of the salient from north and south simultaneously. After the German offensive stalled on the northern side of the salient, on 12 July, the Soviets commenced their Kursk Strategic Offensive Operation with the launch of Operation Kutuzov () against the rear of the German forces on the same side. On the southern side, the Soviets also launched powerful counterattacks the same day, one of which led to a large armoured clash, the Battle of Prokhorovka. On 3 August, the Soviets began the second phase of the Kursk Strategic Offensive Operation with the launch of the Belgorod\u2013Kharkov offensive operation (Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev, ) against the German forces on the southern side of the salient.\nThe Germans hoped to weaken the Soviet offensive potential for the summer of 1943, by cutting off and enveloping the forces that they anticipated would be in the Kursk salient. Hitler believed that a victory here would reassert German strength and improve his prestige with his allies, who he thought were considering withdrawing from the war. It was also hoped that large numbers of Soviet prisoners would be captured to be used as slave labour in the German armaments industry. The Soviet government had foreknowledge of the German plans from the Lucy spy ring. Aware months in advance that the attack would fall on the neck of the Kursk salient, the Soviets built a defence in depth designed to wear down the German armoured spearhead. The Germans delayed the offensive while they tried to build up their forces and waited for new weapons, giving the Red Army time to construct a series of deep defensive belts and establish a large reserve force for counter-offensives, with one German officer describing Kursk as \"another Verdun\".\nThe battle was the final strategic offensive that the Germans were able to launch on the Eastern Front. Because the Allied invasion of Sicily began during the battle, Adolf Hitler was forced to divert troops training in France to meet the Allied threat in the Mediterranean, rather than using them as a strategic reserve for the Eastern Front. As a result, Hitler cancelled the offensive at Kursk after only a week, in part to divert forces to Italy. Germany's heavy losses of men and tanks ensured that the victorious Soviet Red Army held a strategic initiative for the rest of the war. The Battle of Kursk was the first time in the Second World War that a German strategic offensive was halted before it could break through enemy defences and penetrate to its strategic depths. Though the Red Army had succeeded in winter offensives previously, their counter-offensives after the German attack at Kursk were their first successful summer offensives of the war. The battle has been called the \"last gasp of Nazi aggression\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nAs the Battle of Stalingrad slowly ground to its conclusion, the Red Army moved to a general offensive in the south, in Operation Little Saturn. By January 1943, a gap had opened between German Army Group B and Army Group Don, and the advancing Soviet armies threatened to cut off all German forces south of the Don River, including Army Group A operating in the Caucasus. Army Group Center came under significant pressure as well. Kursk was retaken by the Soviets on 8 February 1943, and Rostov on 14 February. The Soviet Bryansk, Western, and newly created Central Fronts prepared for an offensive which envisioned the encirclement of Army Group Centre between Bryansk and Smolensk. By February 1943 the southern sector of the German front was in strategic crisis.\nSince December 1942, Field Marshal Erich von Manstein had been strongly requesting \"unrestricted operational freedom\" to allow him to use his forces in a fluid manner. On 6 February 1943, Manstein met with Hitler at his headquarters in G\u00f6rlitz (now Gier\u0142o\u017c, Poland) to discuss the proposals he had previously sent. He received an approval from Hitler for a counteroffensive against the Soviet forces advancing in the Donbas region. On 12 February 1943, the remaining German forces were reorganised. To the south, Army Group Don was renamed Army Group South and placed under Manstein's command. Directly to the north, Army Group B was dissolved, with its forces and areas of responsibility divided between Army Group South and Army Group Centre. Manstein inherited responsibility for the massive breach in the German lines. On 18 February, Hitler arrived at Army Group South headquarters at Zaporizhia just hours before the Soviets liberated Kharkov, and had to be hastily evacuated on the 19th.\nOnce given freedom of action, Manstein intended to utilise his forces to make a series of counterstrokes into the flanks of the Soviet armoured formations, with the goal of destroying them while retaking Kharkov and Kursk. The II SS Panzer Corps had arrived from France in January 1943, refitted and up to near full strength. Armoured units from the 1st Panzer Army of Army Group A had pulled out of the Caucasus and further strengthened Manstein's forces.\nThe operation was hastily prepared and did not receive a name. Later known as Third Battle of Kharkov, it commenced on 21 February, as 4th Panzer Army under General Hoth launched a counter-attack. The German forces cut off the Soviet mobile spearheads and continued the drive north, retaking Kharkov on 15 March and Belgorod on 18 March. A Soviet offensive launched on 25 February by the Central Front against Army Group Centre had to be abandoned by 7 March to allow the attacking formations to disengage and redeploy to the south to counter the threat of the advancing German forces under Manstein. Exhaustion of both the Wehrmacht and the Red Army, coupled with the loss of mobility due to the onset of the spring rasputitsa, resulted in the cessation of operations for both sides by mid-March. The counteroffensive left a Soviet salient extending from north to south and from east to west into the German area of control, centred on the city of Kursk.\nGerman plans and preparation.\nThe heavy losses sustained by Germany since the opening of Operation Barbarossa had resulted in a shortage in infantry and artillery. Units were in total 470,000 men understrength. For the Wehrmacht to undertake an offensive in 1943, the burden of the offensive, in both attacking the Soviet defences and holding ground on the flanks of the advance, would have to be carried primarily by the panzer divisions. On 10 March, Manstein presented a plan whereby the German forces would pinch off the Kursk salient with a rapid offensive commencing as soon as the spring had subsided.\nOn 13 March, Hitler signed Operational Order No. 5, which authorised several offensives, including one against the Kursk salient. As the last Soviet resistance in Kharkov petered out, Manstein attempted to persuade G\u00fcnther von Kluge, commander of Army Group Centre, to immediately attack the Central Front, which was defending the northern face of the salient. Kluge refused, believing that his forces were too weak to launch such an attack. Further Axis advances were blocked by Soviet forces that had been shifted down from the Central Front to the area north of Belgorod. By mid-April, amid poor weather and with the German forces exhausted and in need of refitting, the offensives of Operational Order No. 5 were postponed.\nOn 15 April, Hitler issued Operational Order No. 6, which called for the Kursk offensive operation, codenamed \"Zitadelle\" (\"Citadel\"), to begin on 3 May or shortly thereafter. The directive was drafted by Kurt Zeitzler, the OKH Chief of Staff. For the offensive to succeed it was deemed essential to attack before the Soviets had a chance to prepare extensive defences or to launch an offensive of their own. Some military historians have described the operation using the term (lightning war); other military historians do not use the term in their works on the battle.\nOperation Citadel called for a double envelopment, directed at Kursk, to surround the Soviet defenders of five armies and seal off the salient. Army Group Centre would provide General Walter Model's 9th Army to form the northern pincer. It would cut through the northern face of the salient, driving south to the hills east of Kursk, securing the rail line from Soviet attack. Army Group South would commit the 4th Panzer Army, under Hermann Hoth, and Army Detachment Kempf, under Werner Kempf, to pierce the southern face of the salient. This force would drive north to meet the 9th Army east of Kursk. Manstein's main attack was to be delivered by Hoth's 4th Panzer Army, spearheaded by the II SS Panzer Corps under Paul Hausser. The XLVIII Panzer Corps, commanded by Otto von Knobelsdorff, would advance on the left while Army Detachment \"Kempf\" would advance on the right. The 2nd Army, under the command of Walter Weiss, would contain the western portion of the salient.\nOn 27 April, Model met with Hitler to review and express his concern regarding intelligence which showed the Red Army constructing very strong positions at the shoulders of the salient and having withdrawn their mobile forces from the area west of Kursk. He argued that the longer the preparation phase continued, the less the operation could be justified. He recommended completely abandoning Citadel, allowing the army to await and defeat the coming Soviet offensive, or radically revising the plan for Citadel. Though in mid-April, Manstein had considered the Citadel offensive profitable, by May he shared Model's misgivings.\nHitler called his senior officers and advisors to Munich for a meeting on 4 May. Hitler spoke for about 45 minutes on the reasons to postpone the attack, essentially reiterating Model's arguments. A number of options were put forth for comment: going on the offensive immediately with the forces at hand; delaying the offensive further to await the arrival of new and better tanks; radically revising the operation, or cancelling it altogether. Manstein advocated an early attack, but requested two additional infantry divisions, to which Hitler responded that none were available. Kluge spoke out strongly against postponement and discounted Model's intelligence. Albert Speer, the minister of Armaments and War Production, spoke about the difficulties of rebuilding the armoured formations and the limitations of German industry to replace losses. General Heinz Guderian argued strongly against the operation, stating \"the attack was pointless\". The conference ended without Hitler coming to a decision, but Citadel was not aborted. Three days later, OKW, Hitler's conduit for controlling the military, postponed the launch date for Citadel to 12 June.\nFollowing this meeting, Guderian continued to voice his concerns over an operation that would likely degrade the panzer forces that he had been attempting to rebuild. He considered the offensive, as planned, to be a misuse of the panzer forces, as it violated two of the three tenets he had laid out as the essential elements for a successful panzer attack \u2013 surprise, deployment in mass, and suitable terrain. In his opinion, the limited German resources in men and materiel should be conserved, as they would be needed for the pending defence of western Europe. In a meeting with Hitler on 10 May he asked,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Is it really necessary to attack Kursk, and indeed in the east this year at all? Do you think anyone even knows where Kursk is? The entire world doesn't care if we capture Kursk or not. What is the reason that is forcing us to attack this year on Kursk, or even more, on the Eastern Front?\nHitler replied, \"I know. The thought of it turns my stomach.\" Guderian concluded, \"In that case your reaction to the problem is the correct one. Leave it alone.\"\nDespite reservations, Hitler remained committed to the offensive. He and the OKW, early in the preparatory phase, were hopeful that the offensive would revitalise German strategic fortunes in the east. As the challenges offered by Citadel increased, he focused more and more on the expected new weapons that he believed were the key to victory: principally the Panther tank, but also the Ferdinand tank destroyer and greater numbers of the Tiger heavy tank. He postponed the operation in order to await their arrival. Receiving reports of powerful Soviet concentrations behind the Kursk area, Hitler further delayed the offensive to allow for more equipment to reach the front.\nWith pessimism for Citadel increasing with each delay, in June, Alfred Jodl, the Chief of Staff at the OKW, instructed the armed forces propaganda office to portray the upcoming operation as a limited counteroffensive. Due to concerns of an Allied landing in the south of France or in Italy and delays in deliveries of the new tanks, Hitler postponed again, this time to 20 June. Zeitzler was profoundly concerned with the delays, but he still supported the offensive. On 17\u201318 June, following a discussion in which the OKW Operations Staff suggested abandoning the offensive, Hitler further postponed the operation until 3 July, then, on 1 July, Hitler announced 5 July as the launch date of the offensive.\nA three-month quiet period had descended upon the Eastern Front as the Soviets prepared their defences and the Germans attempted to build up their forces. The Germans used this period for specialised training of their assault troops. All units underwent training and combat rehearsals. The had built a full-scale duplicate Soviet strong point that was used to practice the techniques for neutralizing such positions. The panzer divisions received replacement men and equipment and attempted to get back up to strength. The German forces to be used in the offensive included 12 panzer divisions and 5 divisions, four of which had tank strengths greater than their neighbouring panzer divisions. However, the force was markedly deficient in infantry divisions, which were essential to hold ground and to secure the flanks. By the time the Germans initiated the offensive, their force amounted to around 777,000 men, 2,451 tanks and assault guns (70 percent of the German armour on the Eastern Front) and 7,417 guns and mortars. The Battle of Kursk would engulf more than 70% of Germany's military force on the Eastern Front.\nSoviet plans and preparation.\nIn 1943, an offensive by the Soviet Central, Bryansk and Western Fronts against Army Group Centre was abandoned shortly after it began in early March, when the southern flank of the Central Front was threatened by Army Group South. Soviet intelligence received information about German troop concentrations spotted at Orel and Kharkov, as well as details of an intended German offensive in the Kursk sector through the Lucy spy ring in Switzerland. The Soviets verified the intelligence via their spy in Britain, John Cairncross, at the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park, who clandestinely forwarded raw decrypts directly to Moscow. Cairncross also provided Soviet intelligence with identifications of the Luftwaffe airfields in the region. Soviet politician Anastas Mikoyan wrote that on 27 March 1943, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin notified him of a possible German attack in the Kursk sector. Stalin and some senior officers were eager to strike first once the \"rasputitsa\" ended, but a number of key officers, including Deputy Supreme Commander Georgiy Zhukov, recommended a strategic defensive before going on the offensive. In a letter to the \"Stavka\" and Stalin, on 8 April, Zhukov wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the first phase the enemy, collecting their best forces\u2014including 13\u201315 tank divisions and with the support of a large number of aircraft\u2014will strike Kursk with their Kromskom-Orel grouping from the north-east and their Belgorod-Kharkov grouping from the south-east... I consider it inadvisable for our forces to go over to an offensive in the near future in order to forestall the enemy. It would be better to make the enemy exhaust himself against our defences, and knock out his tanks and then, bringing up fresh reserves, to go over to the general offensive which would finally finish off his main force.\nStalin consulted with his frontline commanders and senior officers of the General Staff from 12 to 15 April 1943. In the end he and the Stavka agreed that the Germans would probably target Kursk. Stalin believed the decision to defend would give the Germans the initiative, but Zhukov countered that the Germans would be drawn into a trap where their armoured power would be destroyed, thus creating the conditions for a major Soviet counteroffensive. They decided to meet the enemy attack by preparing defensive positions to wear out the German groupings before launching their own offensive. Preparation of defences and fortifications began by the end of April, and continued until the German attack in early July. The two-month delay between the German decision to attack the Kursk salient and its implementation allowed the Red Army ample time to thoroughly prepare.\nThe Voronezh Front, commanded by Nikolai Vatutin, was tasked with defending the southern face of the salient. The Central Front, commanded by Konstantin Rokossovsky, defended the northern face. Waiting in reserve was the Steppe Front, commanded by Ivan Konev. In February 1943, the Central Front had been reconstructed from the Don Front, which had been part of the northern pincer of Operation Uranus and had been responsible for the destruction of the 6th Army at Stalingrad.\nThe Central and Voronezh Fronts each constructed three main defensive belts in their sectors, with each subdivided into several zones of fortification. The Soviets employed the labour of over 300,000 civilians. Fortifying each belt was an interconnected web of minefields, barbed-wire fences, anti-tank ditches, deep entrenchments for infantry, anti-tank obstacles, dug-in armoured vehicles, and machine-gun bunkers. Behind the three main defensive belts were three more belts prepared as fallback positions; the first was not fully occupied or heavily fortified, and the last two, though sufficiently fortified, were unoccupied with the exception of a small area in the immediate environs of Kursk. The combined depth of the three main defensive zones was about . The six defensive belts on either side of Kursk were deep. If the Germans managed to break through these defences they would still be confronted by additional defensive belts to the east, manned by the Steppe Front. These brought the total depth of the defences to nearly .\nThe Voronezh and Central Fronts dug and of trenches respectively, laid out in criss-cross pattern for ease of movement. The Soviets built more than 686 bridges and about of roads in the salient. Red Army combat engineers laid 503,993 anti-tank mines and 439,348 anti-personnel mines, with the highest concentration in the first main defensive belt. The minefields at Kursk achieved densities of 2,500 anti-personnel and 2,200 anti-tank mines per kilometre, six times the density used in the defence of Moscow. For example, the 6th Guards Army of the Voronezh Front, was spread out over nearly of front and was protected by 69,688 anti-tank and 64,430 anti-personnel mines in its first defensive belt with a further 20,200 anti-tank and 9,097 anti-personnel mines in its second defensive belt. Furthermore, mobile obstacle detachments were tasked with laying more mines directly in the path of advancing enemy armoured formations. These units, consisting of two platoons of combat engineers with mines at division level and one company of combat engineers normally equipped with 500\u2013700 mines at corps level, functioned as anti-tank reserves at every level of command.\nIn a letter dated 8 April, general Zhukov warned that the Germans would attack the salient with a strong armoured force:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We can expect the enemy to put [the] greatest reliance in this year's offensive operations on his tank divisions and air force, since his infantry appears to be far less prepared for offensive operations than last year\u00a0... In view of this threat, we should strengthen the anti-tank defences of the Central and Voronezh fronts, and assemble as soon as possible.\nNearly all artillery, including howitzers, guns, anti-aircraft and rockets, were tasked with anti-tank defence. Dug-in tanks and self-propelled guns further strengthened the anti-tank defences. Anti-tank forces were incorporated into every level of command, mostly as anti-tank strong points with the majority concentrated on likely attack routes and the remainder amply spread out elsewhere. Each anti-tank strong-point typically consisted of four to six anti-tank guns, six to nine anti-tank rifles, and five to seven heavy and light machine guns. They were supported by mobile obstacle detachments as well as by infantry with automatic firearms. Independent tank and self-propelled gun brigades and regiments were tasked with cooperating with the infantry during counterattacks.\nSoviet preparations also included increased activity of Soviet partisans, who attacked German communications and supply lines. The attacks were mostly behind Army Group North and Army Group Centre. In June 1943, partisans operating in the occupied area behind Army Group Centre destroyed 298 locomotives, 1,222 railway wagons and 44 bridges, and in the Kursk sector there were 1,092 partisan attacks on railways. These attacks delayed the build-up of German supplies and equipment, and required the diversion of German troops to suppress the partisans, delaying their training for the offensive. Central Partisan Headquarters coordinated many of these attacks. In June Soviet Air Forces (VVS) flew over 800 sorties at night to resupply the partisan groups operating behind Army Group Centre. The VVS also provided communication and sometimes even daylight air-support for major partisan operations.\nSpecial training was provided to the Soviet infantry manning the defences to help them overcome the tank phobia that had been evident since the start of the German invasion. Soldiers were packed into trenches and tanks were driven overhead until all signs of fear were gone. This training exercise was referred to by the soldiers as \"ironing\". In combat, the soldiers would spring up in the midst of the attacking infantry to separate them from the spearheading armoured vehicles. The separated armoured vehicles \u2013 now vulnerable to infantry armed with PTRD-41 anti-tank rifles, demolition charges and molotov cocktails \u2013 could then be disabled or destroyed at point-blank range. These types of attacks were mostly effective against the Ferdinand tank destroyers, which lacked machine guns as secondary armament. The soldiers were also promised financial rewards for each tank destroyed, with the People's Commissariat of Defence providing a bounty of 1,000 roubles for each destroyed tank.\nThe Soviets employed \"maskirovka\" (military deception) to mask defensive positions and troop dispositions and to conceal the movement of men and materiel. These included camouflaging gun emplacements, constructing dummy airfields and depots, generating false radio-traffic, and spreading rumours among the Soviet frontline troops and the civilian population in the German-held areas. Movement of forces and supplies to and from the salient took place at night only. Ammunition caches were carefully concealed to blend in with the landscape. Radio transmission was restricted and fires were forbidden. Command posts were hidden and motor transport in and around them forbidden.\nAccording to a Soviet General Staff report, 29 of the 35 major Luftwaffe raids on Soviet airfields in the Kursk sector in June 1943 were against dummy airfields. According to historian Antony Beevor, in contrast, Soviet aviation apparently succeeded in destroying more than 500 Luftwaffe aircraft on the ground. The Soviet deception efforts were so successful that German estimates issued in mid-June placed the total Soviet armoured strength at 1,500 tanks. The result was not only a vast underestimation of Soviet strength, but a misperception of Soviet strategic intentions.\nThe main tank of the Soviet tank arm was the T-34 medium tank, on which the Red Army attempted to concentrate production. The tank arm also contained large numbers of the T-70 light tank. For example, the 5th Guards Tank Army roughly contained 270 T-70s and 500 T-34s. In the salient itself the Soviets assembled a large number of lend-lease tanks. These included U.S.-manufactured M3 Lee medium tanks and British-built Churchill, Matilda II and Valentine infantry tanks. However, the T-34 made up the bulk of the Soviet armour. Without including the deeper reserves organised under the Steppe Front, the Soviets massed about 1,300,000 men, 3,600 tanks, 20,000 artillery pieces and 2,792 aircraft to defend the salient. This amounted to 26 percent of the total manpower of the Red Army, 26 percent of its mortars and artillery, 35 percent of its aircraft and 46 percent of its tanks. One source states that in the Battle of Stalingrad the Soviets used fourteen field armies and one tank army, while at Kursk they used twenty-two full-strength field armies and five tank armies. According to one source, the Soviets concentrated 80% of their entire air fleet for use at the Battle of Kursk. According to some historians, the Soviets employed 40% of their manpower and 75% of their armoured forces to the battle.\nContest for aerial supremacy.\nBy 1943 the Luftwaffe's strength on the Eastern Front had started to weaken after Stalingrad, and the siphoning of resources to North Africa. The Luftwaffe forces in the east were further depleted with fighter units being shifted back to Germany to defend against the escalating Allied bombing campaign. By the end of June, only 38.7 percent of the Luftwaffe's total aircraft remained in the east. In 1943 the Luftwaffe could still achieve local aerial superiority by concentrating its forces. The majority of German aircraft left available on the Eastern Front were slated for Citadel. The goal of the Luftwaffe remained unchanged. The priority was to gain aerial supremacy, then to isolate the battlefield from enemy reinforcements, and finally, once the critical point had been reached in the land battle, to render close air support.\nThe changing strengths between the two opponents prompted the Luftwaffe to make operational changes for the battle. Previous offensive campaigns had been initiated with Luftwaffe raids against opposing airfields to achieve aerial superiority. By this point in the war Red Army equipment reserves were extensive and the Luftwaffe commanders realised that aircraft could be easily replaced, making such raids futile. Therefore, this mission was abandoned. In addition, previous campaigns had made use of medium bombers flying well behind the frontline to block the arrival of reinforcements. This mission, however, was rarely attempted during Citadel.\nThe Luftwaffe command understood that their support would be crucial for the success of Citadel, but problems with supply shortfalls hampered their preparations. Partisan activity, particularly behind Army Group Center, slowed the rate of re-supply and cut short the Luftwaffe's ability to build up essential stockpiles of petrol, oil, lubricants, engines, munitions, and, unlike Red Army units there were no reserves of aircraft that could be used to replace damaged aircraft over the course of the operation. Fuel was the most significant limiting factor. To help build up supplies for the support of Citadel, the Luftwaffe greatly curtailed its operations during the last week of June. Despite this conservation of resources, the Luftwaffe did not have the resources to sustain an intensive air effort for more than a few days after the operation began.\nFor Citadel, the Luftwaffe confined its operations to the direct support of the forces on the ground. In this mission the Luftwaffe continued to make use of the Junkers Ju 87 \"Stuka\" dive-bombers. A new development to this aircraft was the \"Bordkanone\" 3,7\u00a0cm cannon, one of which could be slung under each wing of the Stuka in a gun pod. Half of the Stuka groups assigned to support Citadel were equipped with these \"Kanonenvogel\" (literally \"cannon-bird\") tankbuster aircraft. The air groups were also strengthened by the recent arrival of the Henschel Hs 129, with its 30\u00a0mm MK 103 cannon, and the F-subtype ground attack (\"jabo\") version of the Focke-Wulf Fw 190.\nIn the months preceding the battle, Luftflotte 6 supporting Army Group Center noted a marked increase in the strength of the opposing VVS formations. The VVS formations encountered displayed better training, and were flying improved equipment with greater aggressiveness and skill than the Luftwaffe had seen earlier. The introduction of the Yakovlev Yak-9 and Lavochkin La-5 fighters gave the Soviet pilots near parity with the Luftwaffe in terms of equipment. Furthermore, large numbers of ground-attack aircraft, such as the Ilyushin Il-2 \"Shturmovik\" and the Pe-2, had become available as well. The VVS also fielded large numbers of aircraft supplied via lend-lease. Huge stockpiles of supplies and ample reserves of replacement aircraft meant the Red Army and VVS formations would be able to conduct an extended campaign without slackening in the intensity of their effort.\nOpposing forces.\nGermans.\nFor the operation, the Germans used four armies along with a large portion of their total tank strength on the Eastern Front. On 1 July, the 9th Army of Army Group Centre based in the northern side of the salient contained 335,000 men (223,000 combat soldiers); in the south, the 4th Panzer Army and Army Detachment \"Kempf\", of Army Group South, had 223,907 men (149,271 combat soldiers) and 100,000\u2013108,000 men (66,000 combat soldiers) respectively. The 2nd Army, that held the western side of the salient contained an estimated 110,000. In total, the German forces had a total strength of 777,000\u2013779,000 men, and the three attacking armies contained 438,271 combat soldiers. Army Group South was equipped with more armoured vehicles, infantry and artillery than the 9th Army of Army Group Center. The 4th Panzer Army and Army Detachment \"Kempf\" had 1,377\u00a0tanks and assault guns, while the 9th Army possessed 988\u00a0tanks and assault guns.\nGerman industry produced 2,816 tanks and self-propelled guns between April and June, of which 156 were Tigers and 484 Panthers. At Kursk, a total of 259 Panther tanks, about 211 Tigers, and 90 Ferdinands were used.\nThe two new Panther battalions \u2013 the 51st and 52nd \u2013 together equipped with 200 Panthers, for which the offensive had been delayed, were attached to the \"Gro\u00dfdeutschland\" Division in the XLVIII Panzer Corps of Army Group South. With the 51st and 52nd Battalions arriving on 30 June and 1 July, the two units had little time to perform reconnaissance or to orient themselves to the terrain they found themselves in. This was a breach of the methods of the \"Panzerwaffe\", considered essential for the successful use of armour. Though led by experienced panzer commanders, many of the tank crews were new recruits and had little time to become familiar with their new tanks, let alone train together to function as a unit. The two battalions came direct from the training ground and lacked combat experience. In addition, the requirement to maintain radio silence until the start of the attack meant that the Panther units had little training in battalion-level radio procedures. Furthermore, the new Panthers were still experiencing problems with their transmissions, and proved mechanically unreliable. By the morning of 5 July, the units had lost 16 Panthers due to mechanical breakdown, leaving only 184 available for the launching of the offensive.\nJuly and August 1943 saw the heaviest German ammunition expenditure on the Eastern Front up to that point, with 236,915 tons consumed in July and 254,648 in August. The previous peak had been 160,645 tons in September 1942.\nRed Army.\nThe Red Army used two Fronts for the defence of Kursk, and created a third front behind the battle area which was held as a reserve. The Central and Voronezh Fronts fielded 12 armies, with 711,575 men (510,983 combat soldiers) and 625,591 men (446,236 combat soldiers) respectively. In reserve, the Steppe Front had an additional 573,195 men (449,133). Thus the total size of the Soviet force was 1,910,361 men, with 1,426,352 actual combat soldiers.\nSoviet armour strength included 4,869 tanks and 259 SPGs. Overall a third of the Soviet tanks at Kursk were light tanks, but in some units this proportion was considerably higher. Of the 3,600 tanks in the Central and Voronezh Fronts in July 1943, 1,061 were light as T-60 and T-70 tanks. With very thin armour and small guns, they were unable to effectively engage the frontal armour of German medium and heavy tanks or AFVs.\nThe most capable Soviet tank at Kursk was the T-34. However, the original version was armed only with a 76.2mm gun, which struggled against uparmoured Panzer IVs, and the frontal armour of Tigers and Panthers was essentially impenetrable. Only the SU-122 and SU-152 self-propelled guns had the power to destroy the Tiger at short range, but they were not equal to the Tiger's 88mm gun at long range, and there were very few SU-122s and SU-152s at Kursk.\nPreliminary actions.\nFighting started on the southern face of the salient on the evening of 4 July 1943, when German infantry launched attacks to seize high ground for artillery observation posts prior to the main assault. During these attacks, a number of Red Army command and observation posts along the first main belt of defence were captured. By 16:00, elements of the Panzergrenadier Division \"Gro\u00dfdeutschland\", 3rd and 11th Panzer Divisions had seized the village of Butovo and proceeded to capture Gertsovka before midnight. At around 22:30, Vatutin ordered 600 guns, mortars and Katyusha rocket launchers, of the Voronezh Front, to bombard the forward German positions, particularly those of the II SS Panzer Corps.\nTo the north, at Central Front headquarters, reports of the anticipated German offensive came in. At around 02:00 5 July, Zhukov ordered his preemptive artillery bombardment to begin. The hope was to disrupt German forces concentrating for the attack, but the outcome was less than hoped for. The bombardment delayed the German formations but failed in the goal of disrupting their schedule or inflicting substantial losses. The Germans began their own artillery bombardment at about 05:00, which lasted 80 minutes in the northern face and 50 minutes in the southern face. After the barrage, the ground forces attacked, aided by close air support provided by the Luftwaffe.\nIn the early morning of 5 July, the VVS launched a large raid against German airfields, hoping to destroy the Luftwaffe on the ground. This effort failed, and the VVS units suffered considerable losses. The air operation is misunderstood in most accounts. The German \"Freya\" radar stations at Belgorod and Kharkov in 1943 had only picked up Soviet air formations approaching Belgorod and were not responsible for the failure of the entire Soviet preemptive air strike on the eve of Operation Citadel. The VVS lost 176 aircraft on 5 July, compared to the 26 aircraft lost by the Luftwaffe. The losses of the VVS 16th Air Army operating in the northern face were lighter than those suffered by the 2nd Air Army. The Luftwaffe was able to gain and maintain air superiority over the southern face until 10\u201311 July, when the VVS began to obtain ascendancy but the control of the skies over the northern face was evenly contested until the VVS began to gain air superiority on 7 July, which it maintained for the rest of the operation.\nOperation along the northern face.\nModel's main attack was delivered by XLVII Panzer Corps, supported by 45 Tigers of the attached 505th Heavy Tank Battalion. Covering their left flank was XLI Panzer Corps, with an attached regiment of 83 \"Ferdinand\" tank destroyers. On the right flank, XLVI Panzer Corps consisted at this time of four infantry divisions with just nine tanks and 31 assault guns. To the left of XLI Panzer Corps was XXIII Army Corps, which consisted of the reinforced 78th Assault Infantry Division and two regular infantry divisions. While the corps contained no tanks, it did have 62 assault guns. Opposing the 9th Army was the Central Front, deployed in three heavily fortified defensive belts.\nInitial German advance.\nModel chose to make his initial attacks using infantry divisions reinforced with assault guns and heavy tanks, and supported by artillery and the Luftwaffe. In doing so he sought to maintain the armoured strength of his panzer divisions to be used for exploitation once the Red Army defences were breached. Once a breakthrough had been achieved the panzer forces would move through and advance towards Kursk. Jan M\u00f6schen, a major in Model's staff, later commented that Model expected a breakthrough on the second day. If a breakthrough did occur the briefest delay in bringing up the panzer divisions would give the Red Army time to react. His corps commanders thought that a breakthrough was extremely unlikely.\nFollowing a preliminary bombardment and Red Army counter bombardments, the 9th Army opened its attack at 05:30 on 5 July. Nine infantry divisions and one panzer division, with attached assault guns, heavy tanks and tank destroyers, pushed forward. Two companies of Tiger tanks were attached to the 6th Infantry Division and were the largest single grouping of Tigers employed that day. Opposing them were the 13th and 70th Armies of the Central Front.\nThe 20th Panzer and 6th Infantry Divisions of the XLVII Panzer Corps spearheaded the advance. Behind them the remaining two panzer divisions followed, ready to exploit any breakthrough. The heavily mined terrain and fortified positions of the 15th Rifle Division slowed the advance. By 08:00 safe lanes had been cleared through the minefield. That morning information obtained from prisoner interrogation identified a weakness at the boundary of the 15th and 81st Rifle Divisions caused by the German preliminary bombardment. The Tigers were redeployed and struck towards this area. Red Army formations countered with a force of around 90 T-34s. In the resulting three-hour battle, Red Army armoured units lost 42 tanks while the Germans lost two Tigers and a further five more immobilized with track damage. While the Red Army counter-attack was defeated and the first defensive belt breached, the fighting had delayed the Germans long enough for the rest of 29th Rifle Corps of the 13th Army \u2013 initially deployed behind the first belt \u2013 to move forward and seal the breach. Red Army minefields were covered by artillery fire, making efforts to clear paths through the fields difficult and costly. Goliath and Borgward IV remote-controlled engineer mine-clearing vehicles met with limited success. Of the 653rd Heavy Panzerj\u00e4ger Battalion's 45 Ferdinands sent into battle, all but 12 of them were immobilized by mine damage before 17:00. Most of these were later repaired and returned to service, but the recovery of these very large vehicles was difficult.\nOn the first day, the XLVII Panzer Corps penetrated into the Red Army defences before stalling, and the XLI Panzer Corps reached the heavily fortified small town of Ponyri, in the second defensive belt, which controlled the roads and railways leading south to Kursk. The German advance into the Red Army lines cost 1,287\u00a0men killed and missing and a further 5,921\u00a0wounded.\nRed Army counter-attack.\nRokossovsky ordered the 17th Guards and 18th Guards Rifle Corps with the 2nd Tank Army and 19th Tank Corps, backed up by close air support, to counterattack the German 9th Army the following day on 6 July. However, due to poor coordination, only the 16th Tank Corps of the 2nd Tank Army commenced the counterattack on the dawn of 6 July after the preparatory artillery barrage. The 16th Tank Corps, fielding about 200 tanks, attacked the XLVII Panzer Corps and ran into the Tiger tanks of the 505th Heavy Tank Battalion, which knocked out 69 tanks and forced the rest to withdraw to the 17th Guards Rifle Corps of the 13th Army. Later that morning, the XLVII Panzer Corps responded with its own attack against the 17th Guards Rifle Corps entrenched around the village Olkhovatka in the second defensive belt. The attack commenced with an artillery barrage and was spearheaded by the 24 serviceable Tigers of the 505th Heavy Tank Battalion, but it failed to break the Red Army defence at Olkhovatka, and the Germans suffered heavy casualties. Olkhovatka was on high ground that provided a clear view of much of the frontline. At 18:30, the 19th Tank Corps joined the 17th Guards Rifle Corps further bolstering resistance. Rokossovsky also decided to dig in most of his remaining tanks to minimize their exposure. Ponyri, defended by the 307th Rifle Division of the 29th Rifle Corps, was also concertedly attacked on 6 July by the German 292nd and 86th Infantry, 78th Assault Infantry and 9th Panzer Divisions, but the Germans were unable to dislodge the defenders from the heavily fortified village.\nPonyri and Olkhovatka.\nOver the next three days from 7 to 10 July, Model concentrated the effort of the 9th Army at Ponyri and Olkhovatka, which both sides considered as vital positions. In response, Rokossovsky pulled forces from other parts of the front to these sectors. The Germans attacked Ponyri on 7 July, and captured half of the town after intense house-to-house fighting. A Soviet counterattack the following morning forced the Germans to withdraw, and a series of counterattacks ensued by both sides with control of the town being exchanged several times over the next few days. By 10 July, the Germans had secured most of the town, but Soviet counterattacks continued. The back and forth battles for Ponyri and the nearby Hill\u00a0253.5 were battles of attrition, with heavy casualties on both sides. The intensity led it to being referred to by the troops as \"mini-Stalingrad\" and by military historian Paul Carell as the \"Stalingrad of the Kursk salient\". The war diary of the 9th Army described the heavy fighting as a \"new type of mobile attrition battle\". German attacks on Olkhovatka and the nearby village of Teploe failed to penetrate the Soviet defences; including a powerful concerted attack on 10 July by about 300 German tanks and assault guns from the 2nd, 4th, and 20th Panzer Divisions, supported by every available Luftwaffe air power in the northern face.\nOn 9 July a meeting between Kluge, Model, Joachim Lemelsen and Josef Harpe was held at the headquarters of the XLVII Panzer Corps. It had become clear to the German commanders that the 9th Army lacked the strength to obtain a breakthrough, and their Soviet counterparts had also realized this, but Kluge wished to maintain the pressure on the Soviets in order to aid the southern offensive.\nWhile the operation on the northern side of the salient began with a attack front, by 6 July it had been reduced to . The following day the attack frontage dropped to , and on both the 8 and 9 July penetrations of only occurred. By 10 July, the Soviets had completely halted the German advance.\nOn 12 July the Soviets launched Operation Kutuzov, their counter-offensive upon the Orel salient, which threatened the flank and rear of Model's 9th Army. The 12th Panzer Division, thus far held in reserve and slated to be committed to the northern side of the Kursk salient, along with the 36th Motorized Infantry, 18th Panzer and 20th Panzer Divisions were redeployed to face the Soviet spearheads.\nOperation along the southern face.\nAt around 04:00 on 5 July, the German attack commenced with a preliminary bombardment. Manstein's main attack was delivered by Hoth's 4th Panzer Army, which was organized into densely concentrated spearheads, and which included some of the finest divisions in the German Army, with the forces under Hoth's command regarded as \"the most powerful striking force ever assembled under a single German commander\". In fifty minutes, Hoth's bombardment expended more shells than the combined total fired by German forces during the Polish Campaign and French Campaign. The 4th Panzer Army was opposed by the Soviet 6th Guards Army, which was composed of the 22nd Guards Rifle Corps and 23rd Guards Rifle Corps. The Soviets had constructed three fortified defensive belts to slow and weaken the attacking armoured forces. Though they had been provided superb intelligence, the Voronezh Front headquarters had still not been able to pinpoint the location where the Germans would place their offensive weight.\nInitial German advance.\nXLVIII Panzer Corps.\nThe panzergrenadier division \"Gro\u00dfdeutschland\" (Walter H\u00f6rnlein), was the strongest division in the 4th Panzer Army. It was supported on its flanks by the 3rd and 11th Panzer Divisions. The Panzer IIIs and IVs of the \"Gro\u00dfdeutschland\" had been supplemented by a company of 15 Tiger tanks, which were used to spearhead the attack. At dawn on 5 July, \"Gro\u00dfdeutschland\", backed by heavy artillery support, advanced on a three-kilometre front upon the 67th Guards Rifle Division of the 22nd Guards Rifle Corps. The Panzerf\u00fcsilier Regiment, advancing on the left wing, stalled in a minefield and subsequently 36 Panthers were immobilized. The stranded regiment was subjected to a barrage of Soviet anti-tank and artillery fire, which inflicted numerous casualties. Engineers were moved up and cleared paths through the minefield but suffered casualties in the process. The combination of fierce resistance, minefields, thick mud and mechanical breakdowns took its toll. With paths cleared, the regiment resumed its advance towards Gertsovka. In the ensuing battle, many casualties were suffered including the regimental commander Colonel Kassnitz. Due to the fighting, and the marshy terrain south of the village, surrounding the Berezovyy stream, the regiment once more bogged down.\nThe panzergrenadier regiment of \"Gro\u00dfdeutschland\", advancing on the right wing, pushed through to the village of Butovo. The tanks were deployed in a \"Panzerkeil\" (arrow) formation to minimise the effects of the Soviet Pakfront defence, with the Tigers leading and the Panzer IIIs, IVs and assault guns fanning out to the flanks and rear. They were followed by infantry and combat engineers. Attempts by the VVS to impede the advance were repulsed by the Luftwaffe.\nThe 3rd Panzer Division, advancing on the left flank of \"Gro\u00dfdeutschland\", made good progress and by the end of the day had captured Gertsovka and reached Mikhailovka. The 167th Infantry Division, on the right flank of the 11th Panzer Division, also made sufficient progress, reaching Tirechnoe by the end of the day. By the end of 5 July, a wedge had been created in the first belt of the Soviet defences.\nII SS Panzer Corps.\nTo the east, during the night of 4\u20135 July, SS combat engineers had infiltrated no-man's land and cleared lanes through the Soviet minefields. At dawn, 5 July, the three divisions of II SS Panzer Corps \u2013 SS Panzergrenadier Division \"Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler\", 2nd SS Panzergrenadier Division \"Das Reich\" and the 3rd SS Panzergrenadier Division \"Totenkopf\" \u2013 attacked the 52nd Guards Rifle Division of the 6th Guards Army. The main assault was led by a spearhead of 42 Tigers among 494 tanks and assault guns attacking on a twelve-kilometre front. \"Totenkopf\", the strongest of the three divisions, advanced towards Gremuchhi and screened the right flank. The 1st SS Panzergrenadier Division advanced on the left flank towards Bykovka. The 2nd SS Panzer Division advanced between the two formations in the center. Following closely behind the tanks were the infantry and combat engineers, coming forward to demolish obstacles and clear trenches. The advance was well supported by the \"Luftwaffe\", which greatly aided in breaking Soviet strong points and artillery positions.\nBy 09:00, the II SS Panzer Corps had broken through the Soviet first belt of defence along its entire front. While probing positions between the first and second Soviet defensive belts, at 13:00, the 2nd SS Panzer Division vanguard came under fire from two T-34 tanks, which were destroyed. Forty more Soviet tanks soon engaged the division. The 1st Guards Tank Army clashed with the 2nd SS Panzer Division in a four-hour battle, resulting in the Soviet tanks withdrawing. The engagement bought enough time for units of the 23rd Soviet Guards Rifle Corps, lodged in the Soviet second belt, to prepare itself and be reinforced with additional anti-tank guns. By the early evening, 2nd SS Panzer Division had reached the minefields on the perimeter of the Soviet second belt of defence. The 1st SS Division had secured Bykovka by 16:10, then pushed forward towards the second belt of defence at Yakovlevo but its attempts to break through were rebuffed. By the end of the day, the 1st SS Division had sustained 97 dead, 522 wounded and 17 missing and lost about 30 tanks. Together with the 2nd SS Panzer Division, it had forced a wedge far into the defences of the 6th Guards Army.\nThe 3rd SS Panzer Division was making slow progress. They had managed to isolate the 155th Guards Regiment, 52nd Guards Rifle Division (of the 23rd Guards Rifle Corps), from the rest of the division but its attempts to sweep the regiment eastward into the flank of the neighbouring 375th Rifle Division (of the 23rd Guards Rifle Corps) had failed when the regiment was reinforced by the 96th Tank Brigade. Hausser, the commander of II SS Panzer Corps, requested aid from the III Panzer Corps to his right but it had no units to spare. By the end of the day, the 3rd SS Division had made very limited progress due in part to a tributary of the Donets river. The lack of progress undermined the advance made by its sister divisions and exposed the right flank of the corps to Soviet forces. The temperatures, reaching over 30 degrees Celsius, and frequent thunderstorms made fighting conditions difficult.\nThe 6th Guards Army, which confronted the attack by the XLVIII \"Panzer Korps\" and II SS \"Panzer Korps\", was reinforced with tanks from the 1st Tank Army, the 2nd Guards Tank Corps and the 5th Guards Tank Corps. The 51st and 90th Guards Rifle divisions were moved up to the vicinity of Pokrovka (not Prokhorovka, to the north-east), in the path of the 1st SS Panzer Division. The 93rd Guards Rifle Division was deployed further back, along the road leading from Pokrovka to Prokhorovka.\nArmy Detachment \"Kempf\".\nFacing Army Detachment \"Kempf\", consisting of III Panzer Corps and Corps \"Raus\" (commanded by Erhard Raus), was the 7th Guards Army, dug in on the high ground on the eastern bank of the Northern Donets. The two German corps were tasked with crossing the river, breaking through the 7th Guards Army and covering the right flank of the 4th Panzer Army. The 503rd Heavy Tank Battalion, equipped with 45 Tigers, was also attached to the III Panzer Corps, with one company of 15 Tigers attached to each of the corps' three panzer divisions.\nAt the Milkhailovka bridgehead, just south of Belgorod, eight infantry battalions of the 6th Panzer Division crossed the river under heavy Soviet bombardment. Part of a company of Tigers from the 503rd Heavy Tank Battalion was able to cross before the bridge was destroyed. The rest of the 6th Panzer Division was unable to cross further south due to a traffic jam at the crossing, and remained on the western bank of the river throughout the day. Those units of the division that had crossed the river attacked Stary Gorod, but were unable to break through due to poorly cleared minefields and strong resistance.\nTo the south of the 6th Panzer Division, the 19th Panzer Division crossed the river but was delayed by mines, moving forward by the end of the day. Luftwaffe bombed the bridgehead in a friendly fire incident, wounding 6th Panzer Division commander Walther von H\u00fcnersdorff and Hermann von Oppeln-Bronikowski of the 19th Panzer Division. Further south, infantry and tanks of 7th Panzer Division crossed the river. A new bridge had to be built specifically for the Tigers, causing further delays. Despite a poor start, the 7th Panzer Division eventually broke into the first belt of the Soviet defence and pushed on between Razumnoe and Krutoi Log, advancing , the furthest \"Kempf\" got during the day.\nOperating to the south of 7th Panzer Division, were the 106th Infantry Division and the 320th Infantry Division of Corps \"Raus\". The two formations attacked across a front without armour support. The advance began well, with the crossing of the river and a swift advance against the 72nd Guards Rifle Division. Corps \"Raus\" took the village of Maslovo Pristani, penetrating the first Red Army defence line. A Soviet counter-attack supported by about 40 tanks was beaten off, with the assistance from artillery and flak batteries. After having suffered 2,000 casualties since the morning and still facing considerable resistance from the Soviet forces, the corps dug in for the night.\nDelaying the progress of \"Kempf\" allowed Red Army forces time to prepare their second belt of defence to meet the German attack on 6 July. The 7th Guards Army, which had absorbed the attack of III Panzer Corps and Corps \"Raus\", was reinforced with two rifle divisions from the reserve. The 15th Guards Rifle Division was moved up to the second belt of defence, in the path of the III Panzer Corps.\nDevelopment of the battle.\nBy the evening of 6 July, the Voronezh Front had committed all of its reserves, except for three rifle divisions under the 69th Army; yet it could not decisively contain the 4th Panzer Army. The XLVIII Panzer Corps along the Oboyan axis, where the third defensive belt was mostly unoccupied, now had only the Red Army second defensive belt blocking it from breakthrough into the unfortified Soviet rear. This forced the \"Stavka\" to commit their strategic reserves to reinforce the Voronezh Front: the 5th Guards and 5th Guards Tank Armies, both from the Steppe Front, as well as the 2nd Tank Corps from the Southwestern Front. Ivan Konev objected to this premature piecemeal commitment of the strategic reserve, but a personal call from Stalin silenced his complaints. In addition, on 7 July Zhukov ordered the 17th Air Army \u2013 the air fleet serving the Southwestern Front \u2013 to support the 2nd Air Army in serving the Voronezh Front. On 7 July, the 5th Guards Tank Army began advancing to Prokhorovka. 5th Guards Tank Army commander, Lieutenant General Pavel Rotmistrov, described the journey:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; By midday, the dust rose in thick clouds, settling in a solid layer on roadside bushes, grain fields, tanks and trucks. The dark red disc of the sun was hardly visible. Tanks, self-propelled guns, artillery tractors, armoured personnel carriers and trucks were advancing in an unending flow. The faces of the soldiers were dark with dust and exhaust fumes. It was intolerably hot. Soldiers were tortured by thirst and their shirts, wet with sweat, stuck to their bodies.\nThe 10th Tank Corps, then still subordinate to the 5th Guards Army, was rushed ahead of the rest of the army, arriving at Prokhorovka on the night of 7 July, and 2nd Tank Corps arrived at Korocha, southeast of Prokhorovka, by morning of 8 July. Vatutin ordered a powerful counterattack by the 5th Guards, 2nd Guards, 2nd and 10th Tank Corps, in all fielding about 593 tanks and self-propelled guns and supported by most of the Front's available air power, which aimed to defeat the II SS Panzer Corps and therefore expose the right flank of XLVIII Panzer Corps. Simultaneously, the 6th Tank Corps was to attack the XLVIII Panzer Corps and prevent it from breaking through to the free Soviet rear. Although intended to be concerted, the counterattack turned out to be a series of piecemeal attacks due to poor coordination. The 10th Tank Corps' attack began on the dawn of 8 July but they ran straight into the antitank fire of the 2nd and 3rd SS Divisions, losing most of its forces. Later that morning, the 5th Guards Tank Corps' attack was repelled by the 3rd SS Division. The 2nd Tank Corps joined in the afternoon and was also repelled. The 2nd Guards Tank Corps, masked by the forest around the village Gostishchevo, north of Belgorod, with its presence unknown to the II SS Panzer Corps, advanced towards the 167th Infantry Division. But it was detected by German air reconnaissance just before the attack had materialized, and was subsequently decimated by German ground-attack aircraft armed with MK 103 anti-tank cannons and at least 50 tanks were destroyed. This marked the first time in military history an attacking tank formation had been defeated by air power alone. Although a fiasco, the Soviet counterattack succeeded in stalling the advance of the II SS Panzer Corps throughout the day.\nBy the end of 8 July, II SS-Panzer Corps had advanced about since the start of Citadel and broken through the first and second defensive belts. However, slow progress by the XLVIII Panzer Corps caused Hoth to shift elements of the II SS-Panzer Corps to the west to help the XLVIII Panzer Corps regain its momentum. On 10 July the full effort of the corps was shifted back to its own forward progress. The direction of their advance now shifted from Oboyan due north to the northeast, toward Prokhorovka. Hoth had discussed this move with Manstein since early May, and it was a part of the 4th Panzer Army's plan since the outset of the offensive. By this time, however, the Soviets had shifted reserve formations into its path. The defensive positions were manned by the 2nd Tank Corps, reinforced by the 9th Guards Airborne Division and 301st Anti-tank Artillery Regiment, both from the 33rd Guards Rifle Corps.\nThough the German advance in the south was slower than planned, it was faster than the Soviets expected. On 9 July, the first German units reached the Psel River. The next day, the first German infantry crossed the river. Despite the deep defensive system and minefields, German tank losses remained lower than the Soviets'. At this point, Hoth turned the II SS Panzer Corps away from Oboyan to attack toward the northeast in the direction of Prokhorovka. The main concern of Manstein and Hausser was the inability of Army Detachment \"Kempf\" to advance and protect the eastern flank of the II SS Panzer Corps. On 11 July, Army Detachment \"Kempf\" finally achieved a breakthrough. In a surprise night attack, the 6th Panzer Division seized a bridge across the Donets. Once across, Breith made every effort to push troops and vehicles across the river for an advance on Prokhorovka from the south. A linkup with the II SS Panzer Corps would result with the Soviet 69th Army becoming encircled.\nBattle of Prokhorovka.\nThroughout 10 and 11 July, the II-SS Panzer Corps continued its attack toward Prokhorovka, reaching within of the settlement by the night of 11 July. That same night, Hausser issued orders for the attack to continue the next day. The plan was for the 3rd SS Panzer Division to drive northeast until it reached the Karteschewka-Prokhorovka road. Once there, they were to strike southeast to attack the Soviet positions at Prokhorovka from the flanks and rear. The 1st and 2nd SS Panzer divisions were to wait until 3rd SS Panzer Division attack had destabilised the Soviet positions at Prokhorovka; and once underway, the 1st SS Panzer Division was to attack the main Soviet defences dug in on the slopes southwest of Prokhorovka. To the division's right, the 2nd SS Panzer Division was to advance eastward, then turn southward away from Prokhorovka to roll up the Soviet lines opposing the III Panzer Corps' advance and force a gap. During the night of 11 July, Rotmistrov moved his 5th Guards Tank Army to an assembly area just behind Prokhorovka in preparation for a massive attack the following day. At 5:45 Leibstandarte headquarters started receiving reports of the sound of tank engines as the Soviets moved into their assembly areas. Soviet artillery and Katyusha regiments were redeployed in preparation for the counterattack.\nAt around 08:00, a Soviet artillery barrage began. At 08:30, Rotmistrov radioed his tankers: \"Steel, Steel, Steel!\", the order to commence the attack. Down off the west slopes, before Prokhorovka, came the massed armour of five tank brigades from the Soviet 18th and 29th Tank Corps of the 5th Guards Tank Army. The Soviet tanks advanced down the corridor, carrying mounted infantrymen of the 9th Guards Airborne Division on the tanks. To the north and east, the 3rd SS Panzer Division was engaged by the Soviet 33rd Guards Rifle Corps. Tasked with flanking the Soviet defences around Prokhorovka, the unit first had to beat off a number of attacks before they could go over onto the offensive. Most of the division's tank losses occurred late in the afternoon as they advanced through mine fields against well-hidden Soviet anti-tank guns. Although the 3rd SS succeeded in reaching the Karteschewka-Prokhorovka road, their hold was tenuous and it cost the division half of its armour. The majority of German tank losses suffered at Prokhorovka occurred here. To the south, the Soviet 18th and 29th Tank Corps had been thrown back by the 1st SS Panzer Division. The 2nd SS Panzer Division also repelled attacks from the 2nd Tank Corps and the 2nd Guards Tank Corps. Luftwaffe local air superiority over the battlefield also contributed to the Soviet losses, partly due to the VVS being directed against the German units on the flanks of II SS Panzer Corps. By the end of the day, the Soviets had fallen back to their starting positions.\nNeither the 5th Guards Tank Army nor the II SS Panzer Corps accomplished their objectives. Although the Soviet counterattack failed with heavy losses, throwing them back onto the defensive, they did enough to stop a German breakthrough.\nTermination of Operation Citadel.\nOn the evening of 12 July, Hitler summoned Kluge and Manstein to his headquarters at G\u00f6rlitz in East Prussia (now Gier\u0142o\u017c, Poland). Two days earlier, the Western Allies had invaded Sicily. The threat of further Allied landings in Italy or along southern France made Hitler believe it was essential to stop the offensive and move forces from Kursk to Italy. Kluge welcomed the news, as he was aware that the Soviets were initiating a massive counter-offensive against his sector but Manstein was less welcoming. Manstein's forces had just spent a week fighting through a maze of defensive works and he believed they were on the verge of breaking through to more open terrain, which would allow him to engage and destroy the Soviet armoured reserves in a mobile battle. Manstein stated, \"On no account should we let go of the enemy until the mobile reserves he [has] committed [are] completely beaten\". Hitler agreed temporarily to allow the continuation of the offensive in the southern part of the salient, but the following day he ordered Manstein's reserve \u2013 the XXIV Panzer Corps \u2013 to move south to support the 1st Panzer Army.\nThe offensive continued in the southern part with the launch of Operation Roland on 14 July. After three days, on 17 July, the II SS Panzer Corps was ordered to end its offensive operations and begin to withdraw, marking the end of Operation Roland. One division was transferred to Italy and the other two were sent south to meet new Soviet offensives. The strength of the Soviet reserve formations had been greatly underestimated by German intelligence and the Red Army soon went onto the offensive. In his post-war memoirs \"Verlorene Siege\" (Lost Victories), Manstein was highly critical of Hitler's decision to call off the operation at the height of the tactical battle; however, the veracity of Manstein's claims of a near victory is debatable as the quantity of Soviet reserves was far greater than he realized. These reserves were used to re-equip the mauled 5th Guards Tank Army, which launched Operation Rumyantsev a couple of weeks later. The result was a battle of attrition Manstein's forces were ill-prepared for and which they had little chance of winning.\nDuring Operation Citadel, the Luftwaffe flew 27,221 sorties in support with 193 combat losses (a 0.709 per cent loss rate per sortie). Soviet units from 5 to 8 July conducted 11,235 sorties with combat losses of 556 aircraft (4.95 per cent per sortie). Germans were destroying Soviet aircraft at a ratio of 1:2.88. Despite German unit performance, the Wehrmacht was now lacking strategic reserves. In late 1943 just 25 per cent of Luftwaffe day fighters were on the Eastern Front, due to British and US air attacks on Italy and Germany.\nSoviet Kursk Strategic Offensive Operation.\nDuring the defensive preparations in the months leading up to Citadel, the Soviets also planned and prepared counteroffensive operations that would be launched after the German offensive had halted.\nIn the north: Operation Kutuzov.\nSoviet offensive operations were planned to begin after the strength of the German forces had been dissipated by their Kursk offensive. As the German momentum in the north slowed, the Soviets launched Operation Kutuzov on 12 July against Army Group Centre in the Orel salient, directly north of the Kursk salient. The Bryansk Front, under the command of Markian Popov, attacked the eastern face of the Orel salient while the Western Front, commanded by Vasily Sokolovsky, attacked from the north. The Western Front's assault was led by the 11th Guards Army, under Lieutenant General Hovhannes Bagramyan, and was supported by the 1st and 5th Tank Corps. The Soviet spearheads sustained heavy casualties, but pushed through and in some areas achieved significant penetrations. These thrusts endangered German supply routes and threatened the 9th Army with encirclement. With this threat, 9th Army was compelled to go over fully to the defensive.\nThe thinly stretched 2nd Panzer Army stood in the way of this Soviet force. The German commanders had been wary of such an attack and forces were quickly withdrawn from the Kursk offensive to meet the Soviet offensive.\nOperation Kutuzov reduced the Orel salient and inflicted substantial losses on the German military, paving the way for the liberation of Smolensk. Soviet losses were heavy, but were replaced. The offensive allowed the Soviets to seize the strategic initiative, which they retained for the remainder of the war.\nIn the south: Operation Rumyantsev.\nOperation Polkovodets Rumyantsev was intended as the main Soviet offensive for 1943. Its aim was to destroy the 4th Panzer Army and Army Detachment Kempf, and cut off the extended southern portion of Army Group South. After the heavy losses sustained by the Voronezh Front, during Citadel, the Soviets needed time to regroup and refit, delaying the start of the offensive until 3 August. Diversionary attacks, launched two weeks earlier across the Donets and Mius Rivers into the Donbas, drew the attention of German reserves and thinned the defending forces that would face the main blow. The offensive was initiated by the Voronezh Front and Steppe Fronts against the northern wing of Army Group South. They drove through the German positions, making broad and deep penetrations. By 5 August, the Soviets had liberated Belgorod.\nBy 12 August, the outskirts of Kharkov had been reached. The Soviet advance was finally halted by a counter-attack by the 2nd and 3rd SS Panzer Divisions. In the ensuing tank battles, the Soviet armies suffered heavy losses in armour. After this setback, the Soviets focused on Kharkov. After heavy fighting the city was liberated on 23 August. This battle is referred to by the Germans as the Fourth Battle of Kharkov, while the Soviets refer to it as the Belgorod\u2013Kharkov offensive operation.\nResults.\nSoviet journalist and writer Ilya Ehrenburg noted the devastation of the battle;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Villages destroyed by fire, shattered towns, stumps of trees, cars bogged down in green slime, field hospitals, hastily dug graves \u2013 it all merges into one.The campaign was a strategic Soviet success. For the first time, a major German offensive had been stopped before achieving a breakthrough; the maximum depth of the German advance was in the north and in the south. The Germans, despite using more technologically advanced armour than in previous years, were unable to break through the deep Soviet defences and were caught off guard by the significant operational reserves of the Red Army. This result changed the pattern of operations on the Eastern Front, with the Soviet Union gaining the operational initiative. The Soviet victory was costly, with the Red Army losing considerably more men and materiel than the German Army. The Soviet Union's larger industrial potential and pool of manpower allowed them to absorb and replace its losses. Guderian wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;With the failure of \"Zitadelle\" we have suffered a decisive defeat. The armoured formations, reformed and re-equipped with so much effort, had lost heavily in both men and equipment and would now be unemployable for a long time to come. It was problematical whether they could be rehabilitated in time to defend the Eastern Front ... Needless to say the [Soviets] exploited their victory to the full. There were to be no more periods of quiet on the Eastern Front. From now on, the enemy was in undisputed possession of the initiative.\nWith victory, the initiative firmly passed to the Red Army. For the remainder of the war the Germans were limited to reacting to Soviet advances, and were never able to regain the initiative or launch a major offensive on the Eastern Front. British historian Robin Cross stated that \"the Red Army had turned the tide at Stalingrad; it had seized the psychological advantage for the first time. But it was in the terrible killing grounds near Kursk that Hitler's panzers, and his ambitions, were dealt a blow from which they never recovered\" and that \"Failure at Kursk had dealt the Ostheer heavier psychological and material blows than it had suffered at Stalingrad\". Further, the Western Allied landings in Italy opened a new front, further diverting German resources and attention.\nSoviet air forces dropped about 20,000 tons of bombs during the battle, 4 times more than in the Battle of Moscow, and 2.5 times more than in the Battle of Stalingrad.\nThough the location, plan of attack and timing were determined by Hitler, he blamed the defeat on his General Staff. Unlike Stalin, who gave his commanding generals the liberty to make important command decisions, Hitler's interference in German military matters progressively increased while his attention to the political aspects of the war decreased. The opposite was true for Stalin; throughout the Kursk campaign, he trusted the judgment of his commanders, and as their decisions led to battlefield success, it increased his trust in their military judgment. Stalin stepped back from operational planning, only rarely overruling military decisions, resulting in the Red Army being entrusted with higher levels of autonomy during the war.\nHowever, while it is accurate that Hitler interfered in military operational planning and that Stalin generally provided his generals with greater autonomy, this characterization oversimplifies the strategic context surrounding the Battle of Kursk. Hitler's decisions to delay the offensive were not merely capricious but were based on substantial logistical concerns, notably the preparation of new Panther and Tiger tanks, which he believed were essential for a successful summer campaign. Recent examinations of wartime documents reveal that Stalin's trust in his generals was underpinned by a well-coordinated defense strategy that had been meticulously planned and robustly fortified by early June 1943. The Soviet forces, contrary to the implications of passive or reactive strategies, were proactively prepared and strategically positioned, with manpower and artillery strengths reaching over 80 percent of their July capacity by mid-May, effectively nullifying the advantage a swifter German offensive might have achieved. This suggests that Soviet readiness and strategic placement, rather than mere autonomy, were crucial in determining the outcome at Kursk. Moreover, the detailed preparation and anticipation of the German offensive's axis highlight a sophisticated level of strategic defense that goes beyond the simple dichotomy of command autonomy versus interference, reflecting a deep integration of military readiness and strategic foresight.\nAll told, 239 Red Army personnel were awarded the USSR's highest degree of distinction, the title Hero of the Soviet Union (HSU), for their valour in the Battle of Kursk. Two women, Guards Senior Sergeants Mariya Borovichenko and Zinaida Mareseva, were awarded the HSU title posthumously for their valour under fire while serving as combat medics. Borovichenko was assigned to the 32nd Guards Artillery Regiment, 13th Guards Rifle Division, 5th Guards Army and Mareseva served in a medical platoon in the 214th Guards Rifle Regiment, 73rd Guards Rifle Division, 7th Guards Army.\nThe Battle of Kursk is cited by some as being the true turning point of the European theatre of World War II, although this view has frequently been criticized.\nCasualties.\nSoldier Antonius John who participated in the battle expressed that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;events were on an apocalyptic scale. Scenes like the end of the world threatened to drive a person witnessing them to despair unless he had nerves of steel. Verdun, the Somme, and Stalingrad are comparable dates from history.The casualties suffered by the two combatants are difficult to determine, due to several factors. German equipment losses were complicated by the fact that they made determined efforts to recover and repair tanks. Tanks disabled one day might be back in action the next day. German personnel losses are clouded by the lack of access to German unit records, which were seized at the end of the war. Many were transferred to the United States national archives and were not made available until 1978, while others were taken by the Soviet Union, which declined to confirm their existence. \nSoviet losses.\nThe Russian military historian Grigoriy Krivosheyev, who based his figures on the Soviet archives, is considered by historian David Glantz as the most reliable source for Soviet casualty figures. Krivosheyev calculated total Soviet losses during the German offensive as 177,877. The Central Front suffered 15,336 irrecoverable casualties and 18,561 medical casualties, for a total of 33,897. The Voronezh Front suffered 27,542 irrecoverable casualties and 46,350 medical casualties, for a total of 73,892. The Steppe Front suffered 27,452 irrecoverable casualties and 42,606 medical casualties, for a total of 70,085.\nDuring the two Soviet offensives, total casualties amounted to 685,456 men. During Operation Kutuzov, Soviet losses amounted to 112,529 irrecoverable casualties and 317,361 medical casualties, for a total loss of 429,890. The Western Front reported 25,585 irrecoverable casualties and 76,856 medical casualties. The Bryansk Front suffered 39,173 irrecoverable casualties and 123,234 medical casualties. The Central Front lost 47,771 irrecoverable casualties and 117,271 medical casualties. Soviet losses during Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev totaled 255,566 men, with 71,611 listed as irrecoverable casualties and 183,955 as medical casualties. The Voronezh Front lost 48,339 irrecoverable casualties and 108,954 medical casualties, for a total of 157,293. The Steppe Front lost 23,272 irrecoverable casualties and 75,001 medical casualties, for a total of 98,273.\nThe German historian Roman T\u00f6ppel states that official Soviet losses are underestimated by 40%, giving a number of 1.2 million, with him having consulted armies and units archives. Further, T\u00f6ppel notes Russian historians critical of the official report estimate losses ranging from 910,000 to 2.3 million men, with Russian historian Boris Sokolov going as high as 999,300 Soviet casualties at Kursk. Sokolov places the losses of the Red Army much higher, giving the figures of 450,000 killed, 50,000 missing (POWs), and 1.2 million wounded throughout the course of the battle, which Glantz states might be inflated, but nonetheless acknowledges that official Soviet figures are most likely conservative. Karl-Heinz Frieser also mentions Sokolov and states that Soviet losses are clearly understated. However, many of Russian historians, sociologists and publicists consider the data on the losses of the Red Army during the Great Patriotic War, given in the publications of Sokolov, to be unreliable. In 2016, he was expelled from the Free Historical Society for \"inappropriate handling of historical sources and incorrect quoting of other people's works\". \nSoviet equipment losses during the German offensive came to 1,614\u00a0tanks and self-propelled guns destroyed or damaged of the 3,925 vehicles committed to the battle. Soviet losses were roughly three times those of the Germans. During Operation Kutuzov, 2,349\u00a0tanks and self-propelled guns were lost out of an initial strength of 2,308; a loss of over 100\u00a0percent. During Polkovodets Rumyantsev, 1,864\u00a0tanks and self-propelled guns were lost out of the 2,439 employed. The loss ratio suffered by the Soviets was roughly 5:1 in favour of the Germans. Large Soviet reserves of equipment and their high rate of tank production enabled the Soviet tank armies to quickly replace lost equipment and maintain their fighting strength. The Red Army repaired many of its damaged tanks; many Soviet tanks were rebuilt up to four times to keep them in the fight. Soviet tank strength went back up to 2,750 tanks by 3 August due to the repair of damaged vehicles.\nAccording to the historian Christer Bergstr\u00f6m, VVS losses during the German offensive amounted to 677 aircraft on the northern flank and 439 on the southern flank. Total casualties are uncertain. Bergstr\u00f6m's research indicates total Soviet air losses between 12 July and 18 August, during the German offensive and the Operation Kutuzov counteroffensive, were 1,104 aircraft. Frieser states that the official Soviet figure of 1,626 planes lost \"seems completely unbelievable\", and cites Sokolov's minimum of 3,300 and cites \"Luftwaffe\" as being more reliable due to the strictness of data, with 4,209 Soviet planes downed.\nGerman losses.\nKarl-Heinz Frieser, who reviewed the German archive record, calculated that during Citadel 54,182 casualties were suffered. Of these, 9,036 were killed, 1,960 were reported missing and 43,159 were wounded. The 9th Army suffered 23,345 casualties, while Army Group South suffered 30,837 casualties. Throughout the Soviet offensives, 111,114 casualties were suffered. In facing Operation Kutuzov, 14,215 men were killed, 11,300 were reported missing (presumed killed or captured) and 60,549 were wounded. During Polkovodets Rumyantsev, 25,068 casualties were incurred, including 8,933 killed and missing. Total casualties for the three battles were approximately 170,000, with 46,500 killed or missing (per German military medical data).\nHowever, German personnel losses are clouded by the lack of access to German unit records, which were seized at the end of the war. 10-day casualty reports per army/army group are based on the reports of the German troops, the numbers are understated. According to the 10-day reports, the losses of the 6th German Army from 11 to 31 August 1943 were only 5,122 men (in the report of the commander of this army, General Carl Holidt, and the commander of the GA \"South\", von Manstein, they reported this army lost 6,814 non-commissioned officers and soldiers only from 18 to 21 August). According to Niklas Zetterling with Anders Frankson, the 9th German Army lost from 4 to 9 July 1943 were 26,692 men; 1.46 times more than Heeresarzt 10-day reports. According to Stephen Newton, as of 5 July, the average number of infantry divisions in the 4th Tank Army and OG \"Kempf\" was 17,369, while the tank and motorized divisions were 18,410. On 30 August 1943, the average number of infantry divisions in the 4th Tank Army and OG \"Kempf\" was 8,269 men, and the tank and motorized divisions 10,745 men. Then the average loss of personnel in the Battle of Kursk (excluding replenishment) is the same for infantry divisions: 9,100 men (52%); for tank and motorized divisions: 7,665 men (41%). At the same time, the losses of Army Group Center in the Battle of Kursk can be estimated by extrapolating the above estimate of the losses of the 4th Panzer Army and OG Kempf to the losses of Army Group Center. It should be considered that the losses of the Wehrmacht in the Battle of Kursk were 380,000 to 430,000 men. \nDuring Citadel, 252 to 323 tanks and assault guns were destroyed. By 5 July, when the Battle of Kursk started, there were only 184 operational Panthers. Within two days, this had dropped to 40. On 17 July 1943, after Hitler had ordered a stop to the German offensive, Guderian sent in the following preliminary assessment of the Panthers,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBy 16 July, Army Group South counted 161\u00a0tanks and 14 assault guns lost. Up to 14 July, the 9th Army reported they had lost as write-offs 41\u00a0tanks and 17 assault guns. These losses break down as 109 Panzer IVs, 42 Panthers, 38 Panzer IIIs, 31 assault guns, 19 \"Ferdinand\"s, 10 Tigers and three flame tanks. Before the Germans ended their offensive at Kursk, the Soviets began their counter-offensive and pushed the Germans back into a steady retreat. Thus, a report on 11 August 1943 showed that the numbers of write-offs in Panthers swelled to 156, with only 9 operational. The German Army was forced into a fighting retreat and increasingly lost tanks in combat as well as from abandoning and destroying damaged vehicles. On the Eastern Front, 50 Tiger tanks were lost during July and August, with some 240 damaged. Most of these occurred during their offensive at Kursk. Between 600 and 1,612 tanks and assault guns sustained damage in the period from 5 to 18 July. The total number of German tanks and assault guns destroyed during July and August on the Eastern Front amount to 1,331. Of these, Frieser estimates that 760 were destroyed during the Battle of Kursk. and Beevor writes that \"the Red Army had lost five armoured vehicles for every German panzer destroyed\". T\u00f6ppel's estimate is higher, up to 1,200 were destroyed In total at least 2,952 German tanks and assault guns were destroyed or damaged during the battle of Kursk.\nFrieser reports Luftwaffe losses at 524 aircraft, with 159 lost during the German offensive, 218 destroyed during Operation Kutuzov and 147 lost during Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev. In reviewing the reports of the quartermaster of the Luftwaffe, Bergstr\u00f6m presents different figures. Between 5 and 31 July, Bergstr\u00f6m reports 681 aircraft lost or damaged (335 for \u00a0VIII and 346 for 6) with 420 being written off (192 from \u00a0VIII and 229 from \u00a06).\nThe historian Karsten Heinz Sch\u00f6nbach criticizes that Western historiography stubbornly refers to German loss statistics without any form of critical source analysis. He notes that the formerly technical term \"total loss\" lost its purely technical meaning over the course of the war and developed into a euphemism. His investigation of the Wehrmacht maintenance and repair system revealed that the \"total losses\" were recorded for as long as possible as merely \"undergoing repair\". He quotes Hitler, who commented during a situation briefing on armored forces: \"I keep hearing about short-term repairs, but they never actually happen; they always end up being delayed.\" Sch\u00f6nbach found that ultimately 40% to 50% of German tanks during Citadel were caught in a repair backlog, with most of these never returning to service. According to the historian Martin Moll Sch\u00f6nbach convincingly succeeds in proving that the German casualty reports were manipulated and have been misinterpreted by historians until now.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33105", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33105", "title": "Wargame", "text": "Strategy game that realistically simulates war\nA normal wargame is a strategy game in which two or more players command opposing armed forces in a simulation of an armed conflict. Wargaming may be played for recreation, to train military officers in the art of strategic thinking, or to study the nature of potential conflicts. Many wargames re-create specific historic battles, and can cover either whole wars, or any campaigns, battles, or lower-level engagements within them. Many simulate land combat, but there are wargames for naval, air combat, and cyber conflicts, as well as many that combine various domains.\nThere is ambiguity as to whether or not activities where participants physically perform mock combat actions (e.g. friendly warships firing dummy rounds at each other) are considered wargames. It is common terminology for a military's field training exercises to be referred to as \"live wargames\", but certain institutions such as the US Navy do not accept this. Likewise, activities like paintball and airsoft are often classified as combat sports. In contrast however the War Olympics also calls itself \u201cthe international army games\u201d and often is referred to as wargaming colloquially.\nModern wargaming was invented in Prussia in the early 19th century, and eventually the Prussian military adopted wargaming as a tool for training their officers and developing doctrine. After Prussia defeated France in the Franco-Prussian War, wargaming was widely adopted by military officers in other countries. Civilian enthusiasts also played wargames for fun, but this was a niche hobby until the development of consumer electronic wargames in the 1990s.\nProfessional vs recreational.\nA professional wargame is a wargame that is used by a military as a serious tool for training or research. A recreational wargame is one played for fun, often in a competitive context.\nRecreational wargames can cover a wide variety of subjects, from pre-historic to modern \u2013 even fantasy or sci-fi combat. Games which do not include modern armaments and tactics are of limited interest to the military, though wargames covering famous historical battles can interest military historians. As professional wargames are used to prepare officers for actual warfare, there is naturally a strong emphasis on realism and current events.\nMilitary organizations are typically secretive about their current wargames, and this makes designing a professional wargame a challenge. The data the designers require, such as the performance characteristics of weapons or the locations of military bases, are often classified, which makes it difficult for the designers to verify that their models are accurate. Secrecy also makes it harder to disseminate corrections if the wargame has already been delivered to the clients. Then there is the small player base. Whereas a commercial wargame might have thousands or even millions of players, professional wargames tend to have small player bases, which makes it harder for the designers to acquire feedback. Consequently, errors in professional wargame models tend to persist.\nAlthough commercial wargame designers study consumer trends and listen to player feedback, their products are usually designed and sold with a take-it-or-leave-it approach. Professional wargames, by contrast, are typically commissioned by the military that plans to use them. If a wargame is commissioned by several clients, then the designer will have to juggle their competing demands. This can lead to great complexity, high development costs, and a compromised product that satisfies nobody.\nCommercial wargames are under more pressure to deliver an enjoyable experience for the players, who expect a user-friendly interface, a reasonable learning curve, exciting gameplay, and so forth. By contrast, military organizations tend to see wargaming as a tool and a chore, and players are often bluntly obliged to use whatever is provided to them.\nProfessional wargames that are arbitrated by an umpire or the players themselves (manual wargames) tend to have simple models and computations compared to recreational wargames. Umpires may even be allowed to make arbitrary decisions using their own expertise. One reason for this is to keep the learning curve small. Recreational wargamers tend to have a lot of wargaming experience (it is usually considered a hardcore hobby), so learning a complicated new wargame is easy if it is similar enough to ones they've already played. By contrast, military officers typically have little or no wargaming experience. A second reason is that the technical data required to design an accurate and precise model, such as the performance characteristics of a fighter jet, is often classified.\nOverview.\nThe exact definition of \"wargame\" varies from one writer to the next and one organization to the next. To prevent confusion, this section will establish the general definition employed by this article.\nSetting and scenario.\nA wargame must have a \"setting\" that is based on some historical era of warfare so as to establish what armaments, unit types, and doctrines the combatants may wield and the environment they fight in. A \"historical setting\" accurately depicts a real historical era of warfare. Among recreational wargamers, the most popular historical era is World War 2. Professional military wargamers prefer the modern era. A \"fantasy setting\" depicts a fictional world in which the combatants wield fictional or anachronistic armaments, but it should be similar enough to some historical era of warfare such that the combatants fight in a familiar and credible way. For instance, \"Warhammer Age of Sigmar\" has wizards and dragons, but the combat is mostly based on medieval warfare (spearmen, archers, knights, etc.). Some are also set in a hypothetical future or counterfactual past, to simulate, for example, a \"World War Three\" or rebellion of colonists on Mars.\nA wargame's \"scenario\" describes the circumstances of the specific conflict being simulated, from the layout of the terrain to the exact composition of the fighting forces to the victory conditions of the players. Historical wargames often re-enact historical battles. Alternatively, the game may provide fictional \"what-if\" scenarios. One challenge in the design of historical wargames is that the scenarios may be inherently unbalanced and present one side with an unwinnable situation. In such cases, the victory conditions may be adjusted for the disadvantaged side so that they can win simply by doing better than what happened historically. Some games simply concede that the scenario is imbalanced and urge players to switch sides and play again to compare their performance. It is easier to design a balanced scenario where all players have a fair chance of winning if it is fictionalized. Board wargames usually have a fixed scenario.\nLevel of war.\nA wargame's level of war determines to the scope of the scenario, the basic unit of command, and the degree to which lower level processes are abstracted.\nAt the \"tactical level\", the scenario is a single battle. The basic unit of command is an individual soldier or small group of soldiers. The time span of the scenario is in the order of minutes. At this level, the specific capabilities of the soldiers and their armaments are described in detail. An example of a tactical-level games is \"Flames of War\", in which players use miniature figurines to represent individual soldiers, and move them around on a scale model of the battlefield.\nAt the \"operational level\", the scenario is a military campaign, and the basic unit of command is a large group of soldiers. At this level, the outcomes of battles are usually determined by a simple computation.\nAt the \"strategic level\", the scenario is an entire war. The player addresses higher-level concerns such as economics, research, and diplomacy. The time span of the game is in the order of months or years.\nDesign issues.\nRealism.\nA wargame must simulate warfare to a reasonable degree of realism, though what counts as sufficient realism depends on the players. Military wargames need to be highly realistic because their purpose is to prepare officers for real warfare. Recreational wargames only need to be as realistic as it pleases the players, so in most recreational wargames the emphasis is on verisimilitude, i.e. the satisfactory appearance of realism. In any case, no wargame can be perfectly realistic. A wargame's design must make trade-offs between realism, playability, and fun, and function within the constraints of its medium.\nFantasy wargames arguably stretch the definition of wargaming by representing fictional or anachronistic armaments, but they may still be called wargames if they resemble real warfare to the satisfaction of the players. For example, \"Warhammer Fantasy Battle\" has wizards and dragons, but the bulk of the armaments are taken from medieval warfare (spearmen, knights, archers, etc.).\n\"Validation\" is the process by which a given wargame is proven to be realistic. For historical wargames, this usually means being able to accurately recreate a certain historical battle. Validating military wargames is sometimes tricky as they are typically used to simulate hypothetical future scenarios.\nComplexity.\nWhereas the rules of chess are relatively simple, and the rules of Go even simpler, wargames tend to have very sophisticated rules as a matter of their commitment to representing the concrete realities of warfare. Generally speaking, the more realistic a wargame seeks to be, the more complicated its rules are.\nFor example, chess pieces only have a few rules determining their behaviour, such as how and when they are allowed to move or capture based on their type and board location, providing a highly abstracted model of warfare which represents troop positioning and composition. Stones in Go have no properties, behaviours, or state on their own, and only potentially represent, relative to other stones, elements of a larger board position, providing an extremely abstract strategic model in which the determinant of victory is a generalisation of territorial control and influence projection. Contrarily, in wargames counters typically represent decidedly more concrete and internally quite complex entities (companies, battalions, etc.), with detailed interior state (stat blocks and tables of troop numbers, equipment, operational readiness, artillery charts, etc.), often with convoluted rules governing how they operate and interact, and furthermore the global state of the game is often governed by extensive non-local rules representing exigencies like seasonal weather or supply lines.\nThis makes wargames difficult to learn, as it can be difficult to simply begin playing without already understanding a great deal about how to do so. Even experienced wargamers usually play with their rulebook on hand, because the rules for most wargames are too complex to fully memorize. For many people, the complexity also makes wargames difficult to enjoy, but some players enjoy high realism, so finding a balance between realism and simplicity is tricky when it comes to recreational wargames.\nOne way to solve the problem of complexity is to use a referee who has the discretion to arbitrate events, using whatever tools and knowledge they deem fit. This solution is popular with military instructors because it allows them to apply their own expertise when they use wargames to instruct students. The drawback of this approach is that the referee must be very knowledgeable in warfare and impartial, else they may issue unrealistic or unfair rulings.\nAnother way to address complexity is to use a computer to automate some or all of the routine procedures. Video games can be both sophisticated and easy to learn, which is why computer wargames are more popular than tabletop wargames.\nScale.\nEvery wargame must have a sense of \"scale\", so that it may realistically simulate how topography, distance, and time affect warfare. Scale is usually expressed as a ratio, e.g. a scale of 1:1000 indicates that 1\u00a0cm on the game map represents 10\u00a0m (1,000\u00a0cm). In miniature wargaming, scale is more often expressed as the height of a model of a human measured from the base of its feet up to the eyes or top of the head (e.g. 28mm).\nMilitary wargames typically aim to model time and space as realistically as is feasible, so everything in the simulation conforms to a single scale. Recreational wargame designers, by contrast, tend to use abstract scaling techniques to make their wargames easier to learn and play. Tabletop miniature wargames, for instance, cannot realistically model the range of modern firearms, because miniature wargaming models are typically built to a scale between 1:64 and 1:120. At those scales, riflemen should be able to shoot each other from several meters away, which is longer than most game tables. If model soldiers could shoot each other from opposite ends of the table, without the need to maneuver, the game would be very monotonous. For example, the miniature wargame \"Bolt Action\" solves this problem by reducing a rifle's range to 24 inches, a sub-machine gun's range to 12 inches, and a pistol's range to 6 inches. Even if these ranges are not realistic, their proportions make intuitive sense (a rifle's range is longer than a sub-machine gun, due to the differing ammunitions) and thus preserve some verisimilitude, all the while compressing the battle to fit the confines of the table. Additionally, the ranges are multiples of 6, which makes them easier to remember.\nFog of war.\nIn real warfare, commanders have incomplete information about their enemy and the battlespace. A wargame that conceals some information from the player is called a \"closed\" game. An \"open\" wargame has no secret information. Most recreational wargames are open wargames. A closed wargame can simulate the espionage and reconnaissance aspects of war.\nMilitary wargames often use referees to manage secret information. The players may be forced to sit in separate rooms, and communicate their orders with the referee in the game room, who in turn reports back only the information he judges the players should know. Some recreational wargames use a referee too, often referring to them as \"the GameMaster\" (e.g. \"\").\nThe fog of war is easy to simulate in a computer wargame, as a virtual environment is free of the physical constraints of a tabletop game. The computer itself can serve as the referee.\nTypes.\nMiniature.\nMiniature wargaming is a form of wargaming where units on the battlefield are represented by miniature models, as opposed to abstract pieces such as wooden blocks or plastic counters. Likewise, the battlefield itself is represented by model terrain, as opposed to a flat board or map; naval wargames are often played on a floor because they tend to require more space than a tabletop. Most miniature wargaming is recreational because issues of scale get in the way of realism.\nMiniature wargaming can be more expensive and time-consuming than other forms of wargaming. Furthermore, most manufacturers do not sell ready-to-play models, they sell boxes of model parts, which the players are expected to assemble and paint themselves. This requires skill, time, and money, but many players like the opportunity to show off their artistic skills. Miniature wargaming is often as much about artistry as it is about play.\nBoard.\nA board wargame is played on a board that has a more-or-less fixed layout and is supplied by the game's manufacturer. This is in contrast to customizable playing fields made with modular components, such as in miniature wargaming.\nBlock.\nIn block wargaming, the Fog of War is built into the game by representing units with upright wooden blocks that are marked on only one face, which is oriented towards the player who owns the block. The opponent cannot see the markings from his position. The first such block wargame was \"Quebec 1759\" by Columbia Games (previously named Gamma Two Games), depicting the campaign surrounding the Battle of the Plains of Abraham.\nCard.\nBecause of their nature, cards are well suited for abstract games, as opposed to the simulation aspects of wargames. Traditional card games are not considered wargames even when nominally about the same subject (such as the game \"War\").\nAn early card wargame was \"Nuclear War\", a 'tongue-in-cheek game of the end of the world', first published in 1966 and still published today by Flying Buffalo. It does not simulate how any actual nuclear exchange would happen, but it is still structured unlike most card games because of the way it deals with its subject.\nIn the late 1970s Battleline Publications (a board wargame company) produced two card games, \"Naval War\" and \"Armor Supremacy\". The first was fairly popular in wargaming circles, and is a light system of naval combat, though again not depicting any 'real' situation (players may operate ships from opposing navies side-by-side). \"Armor Supremacy\" was not as successful, but is a look at the constant design and development of new types of tanks during World War II.\nThe most successful card wargame (as a card game and as a wargame) would almost certainly be \"Up Front\", a card game about tactical combat in World War II published by Avalon Hill in 1983. The abstractness is harnessed in the game by having the deck produce random terrain, and chances to fire, and the like, simulating uncertainty as to the local conditions (nature of the terrain, etc.).\nDan Verssen Games is a specialist designer and publisher of card games for several genres, including air combat and World War II and modern land combat.\nAlso, card driven games (CDGs), first introduced in 1993, use a deck of (custom) cards to drive most elements of the game, such as unit movement (activation) and random events. These are, however, distinctly board games, the deck is merely one of the most important \"elements\" of the game.\nSolitaire.\nAn entire class of wargames have been designed to be played exclusively solitaire. The solitaire genre is a relatively recent development: as wargames became more popular, practical limitations of time and location meant that opponents were often limited (if one wishes to re-fight the German invasion of the USSR in 1941, he/she must find an opponent with similar interest, location, time and availabilty). At the same time, playing \"both sides\" instead is often seen as less satisfying.\nThe solitaire genre encompasses the wide range full-throated boxed games with hundreds of pieces and mounted game boards, to magazine formatted titles, to pure card games. Additionally, many publishers have \"specialized\" in the genre or at least offer a significant collection of purely solitaire options, examples being GMT Games, Fortress Games, Victory Point Games among many others. \nSome examples of solitaire wargames by type:\nTraditional complete game (boxed, mounted table-top game board, rulebook, all pieces included): https://, https://, https://\nMagazine game (comes in magazine or booklet form, played by writing action results on specialized pages, no or very limited pieces): https://, https://\nCard game (game mechanism is primarily or entirely driven by drawing and playing cards from a deck or decks of specialized cards): https://, https://\nComputer.\nThe term \"wargame\" is rarely used in the video gaming hobby; the term \"strategy game\" is preferred. \"Computer wargame\" distinguishes a game from a \"tabletop wargame\".\nComputer wargames have many advantages over traditional wargames. In a computer game, all the routine procedures and calculations are automated. The player needs only to make strategic and tactical decisions. The learning curve for the player is smaller, as the game can be played without mastering all its mechanics. The gameplay is faster, as a computer can process calculations much faster than a human. Computer wargames often have more sophisticated mechanics than traditional wargames thanks to automation. Computer games tend to be cheaper than traditional wargames because, being software, they can be copied and distributed very efficiently. It's easier for a player to find opponents with a computer game: a computer game can use artificial intelligence to provide a virtual opponent, or connect him to another human player over the Internet.\nComputer-assisted.\nIn the recent years, programs have been developed for computer-assisted gaming as regards to wargaming. Two different categories can be distinguished: local computer assisted wargames and remote computer assisted wargames.\nLocal computer assisted wargames are mostly not designed toward recreating the battlefield inside computer memory, but employing the computer to play the role of game master by storing game rules and unit characteristics, tracking unit status and positions or distances, animating the game with sounds and voice and resolving combat. Flow of play is simple: each turn, the units come up in a random order. Therefore, the more units an opponent has, the more chance he will be selected for the next turn. When a unit comes up, the commander specifies an order and if offensive action is being taken, a target, along with details about distance. The results of the order, base move distance and effect to target, are reported, and the unit is moved on the tabletop. All distance relationships are tracked on the tabletop. All record-keeping is tracked by the computer.\nRemote computer assisted wargames can be considered as extensions to the concept of play-by-email gaming, however the presentation and actual capabilities are completely different. They have been designed to replicate the look and feel of existing board or miniatures wargames on the computer. The map and counters are presented to the user who can then manipulate these, more-or-less as if he were playing the physical game, and send a saved file off to his opponent, who can review what has been done without having to duplicate everything on his physical set-up of the game, and respond. Some allow for both players to get on-line and see each other's moves in real-time.\nThese systems are generally set up so that while one can play the game, the program has no knowledge of the rules, and cannot enforce them. The human players must have a knowledge of the rules themselves. The idea is to promote the playing of the games (by making play against a remote opponent easier), while supporting the industry (and reducing copyright issues) by ensuring that the players have access to the actual physical game.\nThe four main programs that can be used to play a number of games each are \"Aide de Camp\", \"Cyberboard\", \"Vassal\" and \"ZunTzu\". \"Aide de Camp\" is available for purchase, while the other three are offered free. \"Vassal\" is in turn an outgrowth of the \"VASL\" (Virtual \"ASL\") project, and uses Java, making it accessible to any computer that can run a modern JVM, while the other three are Microsoft Windows programs.\nPlay-by-mail (PBM).\nWargames were played remotely through the mail, with players sending lists of moves, or orders, to each other through the mail.\nIn some early PBM systems, six sided dice rolling was simulated by designating a specific stock and a future date and once that date passed, the players would determine an action's outcome using the sales in hundreds value for specific stocks on a specific date and then dividing the NYSE published sales in hundreds by six, using the remainder as the dice result.\n\"Nuclear Destruction\", by the Flying Buffalo, was an early PBM game in 1970. Origins Award Hall-of-Fame member \"Middle-Earth Play-By-Mail\" is still active today.\nReality Simulations, Inc. still runs a number of PBM games, such as Duel2 (formerly known as Duelmasters), Hyborian War, and Forgotten Realms: War of the Avatars.\nEmail and traditional.\nSince email is faster than the standard postal service, the rise of the Internet saw a shift of people playing board wargames from play-by-mail (PBM) to play-by-email (PBEM) or play-by-web (PBW). The mechanics were the same, merely the medium was faster.\nAt this time, turn-based strategy computer games still had a decent amount of popularity, and many started explicitly supporting the sending of saved-game files through email (instead of needing to find the file to send to the opponent by hand). As with all types of video games, the rise in home networking solutions and Internet access has also meant that networked games are now common and easy to set up.\nHistory.\nEarly Prussian wargames (1780\u20131806).\nThe first wargame was invented in Prussia in 1780 by Johann Christian Ludwig Hellwig. Hellwig's wargame was the first true wargame because it attempted to be realistic enough to teach useful lessons in military strategy to future army officers. Hellwig was a college professor and many of his students were aristocrats destined for military service. But Hellwig also wanted to sell his wargame commercially as a recreational item. Hellwig chose to base his game on chess so as to make it attractive and accessible to chess players. Hellwig published a second edition of his rulebook in 1803.\nAs in chess, Hellwig's game was played on a grid of squares, but it was a much larger grid, and the squares were color-coded to represent different types of terrain: mountains, swamp, water, trenches, etc. The layout of the terrain was not fixed, which allowed players to create their own custom battlefields. The pieces in the game represented real military units: cavalry, infantry, artillery, and various support units. As in chess, only a single piece could occupy a square, and the pieces moved square by square, either laterally or diagonally. Over normal terrain, infantry could move a maximum distance of eight squares, dragoons could move twelve squares, and light cavalry could move sixteen squares\u2014intuitively mirroring the speed at which these units move in the real world. But terrain could impede movement: mountains were impassable, swamps slowed units down, rivers could only be crossed with the help of a special pontoon unit, etc. A player could only move one piece per turn, or one group of pieces if they were arranged in a rectangle. A piece could capture an enemy piece by moving into its square, just like in chess, but infantry and artillery pieces could also shoot enemy pieces, at a maximum ranges of two to three squares. Unlike chess, the pieces had orientation: for instance, an infantry piece could only shoot an enemy piece if they were facing it and flanking it. Hellwig's wargame could also simulate the fog of war to limited degree: while the players were arranging their pieces in their starting positions, they had the option of placing a screen across the board so that they could not observe their opponent's arrangement until the game started. Once the game was in progress, however, there was no hiding anything.\nHellwig's wargame was a commercial success, and inspired other inventors to develop their own chess-like wargames. In 1796, another Prussian named Johann Georg Julius Venturini invented his own wargame, inspired by Hellwig's game. Venturini's game was played on an even larger grid. Venturini's game also added rules governing logistics, such as supply convoys and mobile bakeries, and the effects of weather and seasons, making this perhaps the first operational-level wargame. In 1806, an Austrian named Johann Ferdinand Opiz developed a wargame aimed at both civilian and military markets. Like Hellwig's game, it used a modular grid-based board. But unlike Hellwig's game, Opiz's game used dice rolls to simulate the unpredictability of real warfare. This innovation was controversial at the time. Hellwig, who designed his wargame for both leisure as well as instruction, felt that introducing chance would spoil the fun.\nA criticism of the chess-like wargames of Hellwig, Venturini, and Opiz was that the pieces were constrained to move across a grid in chess-like fashion. Only a single piece could occupy a square, even if that square represented a square mile; and the pieces had to move square by square, their exact location within a square being immaterial. The grid also forced the terrain into unnatural forms, such as rivers that flowed in straight lines and bent at right angles. This lack of realism meant that no army took these wargames seriously.\n\"Kriegsspiel\" (1824).\nIn 1824, a Prussian army officer named Georg Heinrich Rudolf Johann von Reisswitz presented to the Prussian General Staff a highly realistic wargame that he and his father had developed over the years. Instead of a chess-like grid, this game was played on accurate paper maps of the kind the Prussian army used. This allowed the game to model terrain naturally and better simulate battles in real locations. The pieces could be moved across the map in a free-form manner, subject to terrain obstacles. The pieces, each of which represented some kind of army unit (an infantry battalion, a cavalry squadron, etc.), were little rectangular blocks made of lead. The pieces were painted either red or blue to indicate the faction it belonged to. The blue pieces were used to represent the Prussian army and red was used to represent some foreign enemy\u2014since then it has been the convention in military wargaming to use blue to represent the faction to which the players actually belong to. The game used dice to add a degree of randomness to combat. The scale of the map was 1:8000 and the pieces were made to the same proportions as the units they represented, such that each piece occupied the same relative space on the map as the corresponding unit did on the battlefield.\nThe game modeled the capabilities of the units realistically using data gathered by the Prussian army during the Napoleonic Wars. Reisswitz's manual provided tables that listed how far each unit type could move in a round according to the terrain it was crossing and whether it was marching, running, galloping, etc.; and accordingly the umpire used a ruler to move the pieces across the map. The game used dice to determine combat results and inflicted casualties, and the casualties inflicted by firearms and artillery decreased over distance. Unlike chess pieces, units in Reisswitz's game could suffer partial losses before being defeated, which were tracked on a sheet of paper (recreational gamers might call this \"hitpoint tracking\"). The game also had some rules that modeled morale and exhaustion.\nReisswitz's game also used an umpire. The players did not directly control the pieces on the game map. Rather, they wrote orders for their virtual troops on pieces of paper, which they submitted to the umpire. The umpire then moved the pieces across the game map according to how he judged the virtual troops would interpret and carry out their orders. When the troops engaged the enemy on the map, the umpire rolled the dice, computed the effects, and removed defeated units from the map. The umpire also managed secret information so as to simulate the fog of war. The umpire placed pieces on the map only for those units which he judged both sides could see. He kept a mental track of where the hidden units were, and only placed their pieces on the map when he judged they came into view of the enemy.\nEarlier wargames had fixed victory conditions, such as occupying the enemy's fortress. By contrast, Reisswitz's wargame was open-ended. The umpire decided what the victory conditions were, if there were to be any, and they typically resembled the goals an actual army in battle might aim for. The emphasis was on the experience of decision-making and strategic thinking, not on competition. As Reisswitz himself wrote: \"The winning or losing, in the sense of a card or board game, does not come into it.\"\nIn the English-speaking world, Reisswitz's wargame and its variants are called \"Kriegsspiel\", which is the German word for \"wargame\".\nThe Prussian king and the General Staff officially endorsed Reisswitz's wargame, and by the end of the decade every German regiment had bought materials for it. This was thus the first wargame to be widely adopted by a military as a serious tool for training and research. Over the years, the Prussians developed new variations of Reisswitz's system to incorporate new technologies and doctrine.\nWorldwide spread.\nPrussian wargaming attracted little attention outside Prussia until 1870, when Prussia defeated France in the Franco-Prussian War. Many credited Prussia's victory to its wargaming tradition. The Prussian army did not have any significant advantage in weaponry, numbers, or troop training, but it was the only army in the world that practiced wargaming. Civilians and military forces around the world now took a keen interest in the German military wargames, which foreigners referred to as \"Kriegsspiel\" (the German word for \"wargame\"). The first \"Kriegsspiel\" manual in English, based on the system of Wilhelm von Tschischwitz, was published in 1872 for the British army and received a royal endorsement. The world's first recreational wargaming club was the University Kriegspiel [\"sic\"] Club, founded in 1873 at Oxford University in England. In the United States, Charles Adiel Lewis Totten published \"Strategos, the American War Game\" in 1880, and William R. Livermore published \"The American Kriegsspiel\" in 1882, both heavily inspired by Prussian wargames. In 1894, the US Naval War College made wargaming a regular tool of instruction.\nMiniature wargaming.\nThe English writer H. G. Wells developed codified rules for playing with toy soldiers, which he published in a book titled \"Little Wars\" (1913). This is widely remembered as the first rulebook for miniature wargaming (for terrestrial armies, at least). \"Little Wars\" had very simple rules to make it fun and accessible to anyone. \"Little Wars\" did not use dice or computation to resolve fights. For artillery attacks, players used spring-loaded toy cannons which fired little wooden cylinders to physically knock over enemy models. As for infantry and cavalry, they could only engage in hand-to-hand combat (even if the figurines exhibited firearms). When two infantry units fought in close quarters, the units would suffer non-random losses determined by their relative sizes. \"Little Wars\" was designed for a large field of play, such as a lawn or the floor of a large room. An infantryman could move up to one foot per turn, and a cavalryman could move up to two feet per turn. To measure these distances, players used a two-foot long piece of string. Wells was also the first wargamer to use scale models of buildings, trees, and other terrain features to create a three-dimensional battlefield.\nWells' rulebook, however, failed to invigorate the miniature wargaming community. A possible reason was the two World Wars, which de-glamorized war and caused shortages of tin and lead that made model soldiers expensive. Another reason may have been the lack of magazines or clubs dedicated to miniature wargames. Miniature wargaming was seen as a niche within the larger hobby of making and collecting model soldiers.\nIn 1955, a California man named Jack Scruby began making inexpensive miniature models for miniature wargames out of type metal. Scruby's major contribution to the miniature wargaming hobby was to network players across America. At the time, the miniature wargaming community was minuscule, and players struggled to find each other. In 1956, Scruby organized the first miniature wargaming convention in America, which was attended by just fourteen people. From 1957 to 1962, he self-published the world's first wargaming magazine, titled \"The War Game Digest\", through which wargamers could publish their rules and share game reports. It had less than two hundred subscribers, but it did establish a steadily growing community.\nAround the same time in the United Kingdom, Donald Featherstone began writing an influential series of books on wargaming, which represented the first mainstream published contribution to wargaming since \"Little Wars\". Titles included : \"War Games\" (1962), \"Advanced Wargames\", \"Solo Wargaming\", \"Wargame Campaigns\", \"Battles with Model Tanks\", \"Skirmish Wargaming\". Such was the popularity of such titles that other authors were able to have published wargaming titles. This output of published wargaming titles from British authors coupled with the emergence at the same time of several manufacturers providing suitable wargame miniatures (e.g. Miniature Figurines, Hinchliffe, Peter Laing, Garrisson, Skytrex, Davco, Heroic &amp; Ros) was responsible for the huge upsurge of popularity of the hobby in the late 1960s and into the 1970s.\nIn 1956, Tony Bath published what was the first ruleset for a miniature wargame set in the medieval period. These rules were a major inspiration for Gary Gygax's \"Chainmail\" (1971), which in turn became the basis for the roleplaying game \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\".\nFrom 1983 to 2015, Games Workshop produced what was the first miniature wargame designed to be used with proprietary models: \"Warhammer Fantasy\". Earlier miniature wargames were designed to be played using generic models that could be bought from any manufacturer, but \"Warhammer Fantasy's\" setting featured original characters with distinctive visual designs, and their models were produced exclusively by Games Workshop.\nBoard wargaming (1954\u2013present).\nThe first successful commercial board wargame was \"Tactics\" (1954) by an American named Charles S. Roberts. What distinguished this wargame from previous ones is that it was mass-produced and all the necessary materials for play were bundled together in a box. Previous wargames were often just a rulebook and required players to obtain the other materials themselves. The game was played on a pre-fabricated board with a fixed layout, which is why it was called a board game.\nRoberts later founded the Avalon Hill Game Company, the first firm that specialized in commercial wargames. In 1958, Avalon Hill released \"Gettysburg\", which was a retooling of the rules of \"Tactics\", and was based on the historical Battle of Gettysburg. \"Gettysburg\" became the most widely played wargame yet.\nBoard wargames were more popular than miniature wargames. One reason was that assembling a playset for miniature wargaming was expensive, time-consuming, and require artisanal skill. Another reason was that board wargames could be played by correspondence. Board wargames were usually grid-based, or else designed in some way that moves could be explained in writing in simple terms. This was not possible with the free-form nature of miniature wargames.\nNotable examples.\nBoard.\nWhile a comprehensive list will show the variety of titles, the following games are notable for the reasons indicated:\nMiniature.\nSee also List of miniature wargames.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33108", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33108", "title": "Canellales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nCanellales is the botanical name for an order of flowering plants, one of the four orders of the magnoliids. It is recognized by the most recent classification of flowering plants, the APG IV system. It is defined to contain two families: Canellaceae and Winteraceae, which comprise 136 species of fragrant trees and shrubs. The Canellaceae are found in tropical America and Africa, and the Winteraceae are part of the Antarctic flora (found in diverse parts of the southern hemisphere). Although the order was defined based on phylogenetic studies, a number of possible synapomorphies have been suggested, relating to the pollen tube, the seeds, the thickness of the integument, and other aspects of the morphology.\nUntil 1999, these two families were not considered to be closely related. Instead the Winteraceae were considered to be a primitive family (due to the structure of the xylem and carpel, a structure which now seems to be derived from xylem and carpels more typical of the angiosperms as a whole). The Canellaceae was often considered to be related to the Myristicaceae. However, studies starting in 1999, based on molecular phylogeny or morphology, have supported uniting these two families.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33109", "revid": "50549379", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33109", "title": "Wearable computer", "text": "Small computing device worn on the body\nA wearable computer, also known as a body-borne computer or wearable, is a computing device worn on the body. The definition of 'wearable computer' may be narrow or broad, extending to smartphones or even ordinary wristwatches.\nWearables may be for general use, in which case they are just a particularly small example of mobile computing. Alternatively, they may be for specialized purposes such as fitness trackers. They may incorporate special sensors such as accelerometers, heart rate monitors, or on the more advanced side, electrocardiogram (ECG) and blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) monitors. Under the definition of wearable computers, we also include novel user interfaces such as Google Glass, an optical head-mounted display controlled by gestures. It may be that specialized wearables will evolve into general all-in-one devices, as happened with the convergence of PDAs and mobile phones into smartphones.\nWearables are typically worn on the wrist (e.g. fitness trackers), hung from the neck (like a necklace), strapped to the arm or leg (electronic tagging), or on the head (as glasses or a helmet), though some have been located elsewhere (e.g. on a finger or in a shoe). Devices carried in a pocket or bag \u2013 such as smartphones and before them, pocket calculators and PDAs, may or may not be regarded as 'worn'.\nWearable computers have various technical issues common to other mobile computing, such as batteries, heat dissipation, software architectures, wireless and personal area networks, and data management. Many wearable computers are active all the time, e.g. processing or recording data continuously.\nApplications.\nWearable computers are not only limited to computers such as fitness trackers that are worn on wrists; they also include wearables such as heart pacemakers and other prosthetics. They are used most often in research that focuses on behavioral modeling, health monitoring systems, IT and media development, where the person wearing the computer actually moves or is otherwise engaged with his or her surroundings. Wearable computers have been used for the following:\nWearable computing is the subject of active research, especially the form-factor and location on the body, with areas of study including user interface design, augmented reality, and pattern recognition. The use of wearables for specific applications, for compensating disabilities or supporting elderly people steadily increases.\nOperating systems.\nThe dominant operating systems for wearable computing are:\nHistory.\nDue to the varied definitions of \"wearable\" and \"computer\", the first wearable computer could be as early as the first abacus on a necklace, a 16th-century abacus ring, a wristwatch and 'finger-watch' owned by Queen Elizabeth I of England, or the covert timing devices hidden in shoes to cheat at roulette by Thorp and Shannon in the 1960s and 1970s.\nHowever, a general-purpose computer is not merely a time-keeping or calculating device, but rather a user-programmable item for arbitrary complex algorithms, interfacing, and data management. By this definition, the wearable computer was invented by Steve Mann, in the late 1970s:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Steve Mann, a professor at the University of Toronto, was hailed as the father of the wearable computer and the ISSCC's first virtual panelist, by moderator Woodward Yang of Harvard University (Cambridge Mass.).\u2014\u200a\nThe development of wearable items has taken several steps of miniaturization from discrete electronics over hybrid designs to fully integrated designs, where just one processor chip, a battery, and some interface conditioning items make the whole unit.\n1500s.\nQueen Elizabeth I of England received a watch from Robert Dudley in 1571, as a New Year's present; it may have been worn on the forearm rather than the wrist. She also possessed a 'finger-watch' set in a ring, with an alarm that prodded her finger.\n1600s.\nThe Qing dynasty saw the introduction of a fully functional abacus on a ring, which could be used while it was being worn.\n1960s.\nIn 1961, mathematicians Edward O. Thorp and Claude Shannon built some computerized timing devices to help them win a game of roulette. One such timer was concealed in a shoe and another in a pack of cigarettes. Various versions of this apparatus were built in the 1960s and 1970s.\nThorp refers to himself as the inventor of the first \"wearable computer\". In other variations, the system was a concealed cigarette-pack-sized analog computer designed to predict the motion of roulette wheels. A data-taker would use microswitches hidden in his shoes to indicate the speed of the roulette wheel, and the computer would indicate an octant of the roulette wheel to bet on by sending musical tones via radio to a miniature speaker hidden in a collaborator's ear canal. The system was successfully tested in Las Vegas in June 1961, but hardware issues with the speaker wires prevented it from being used beyond test runs. This was not a wearable computer because it could not be re-purposed during use; rather it was an example of task-specific hardware. This work was kept secret until it was first mentioned in Thorp's book \"Beat the Dealer\" (revised ed.) in 1966 and later published in detail in 1969.\n1970s.\nPocket calculators became mass-market devices in 1970, starting in Japan. Programmable calculators followed in the late 1970s, being somewhat more general-purpose computers. The HP-01 algebraic calculator watch by Hewlett-Packard was released in 1977.\nA camera-to-tactile vest for the blind, launched by C.C. Collins in 1977, converted images into a 1024-point, ten-inch square tactile grid on a vest.\n1980s.\nThe 1980s saw the rise of more general-purpose wearable computers. In 1981, Steve Mann designed and built a backpack-mounted 6502-based wearable multimedia computer with text, graphics, and multimedia capability, as well as video capability (cameras and other photographic systems). Mann went on to be an early and active researcher in the wearables field, especially known for his 1994 creation of the Wearable Wireless Webcam, the first example of lifelogging.\nSeiko Epson released the RC-20 Wrist Computer in 1984. It was an early smartwatch, powered by a computer on a chip.\nIn 1989, Reflection Technology marketed the Private Eye head-mounted display, which scans a vertical array of LEDs across the visual field using a vibrating mirror. This display gave rise to several hobbyist and research wearables, including Gerald \"Chip\" Maguire's IBM/Columbia University Student Electronic Notebook, Doug Platt's Hip-PC, and Carnegie Mellon University's VuMan 1 in 1991.\nThe Student Electronic Notebook consisted of the Private Eye, Toshiba diskless AIX notebook computers (prototypes), a stylus based input system and a virtual keyboard. It used direct-sequence spread spectrum radio links to provide all the usual TCP/IP based services, including NFS mounted file systems and X11, which all ran in the Andrew Project environment.\nThe Hip-PC included an Agenda palmtop used as a chording keyboard attached to the belt and a 1.44 megabyte floppy drive. Later versions incorporated additional equipment from Park Engineering. The system debuted at \"The Lap and Palmtop Expo\" on 16 April 1991.\nVuMan 1 was developed as part of a Summer-term course at Carnegie Mellon's Engineering Design Research Center, and was intended for viewing house blueprints. Input was through a three-button unit worn on the belt, and output was through Reflection Tech's Private Eye. The CPU was an 8\u00a0MHz 80188 processor with 0.5 MB ROM.\n1990s.\nIn the 1990s PDAs became widely used, and in 1999 were combined with mobile phones in Japan to produce the first mass-market smartphone.\nIn 1993, the Private Eye was used in Thad Starner's wearable, based on Doug Platt's system and built from a kit from Park Enterprises, a Private Eye display on loan from Devon Sean McCullough, and the Twiddler chording keyboard made by Handykey. Many iterations later this system became the MIT \"Tin Lizzy\" wearable computer design, and Starner went on to become one of the founders of MIT's wearable computing project. 1993 also saw Columbia University's augmented-reality system known as KARMA (Knowledge-based Augmented Reality for Maintenance Assistance). Users would wear a Private Eye display over one eye, giving an overlay effect when the real world was viewed with both eyes open. KARMA would overlay wireframe schematics and maintenance instructions on top of whatever was being repaired. For example, graphical wireframes on top of a laser printer would explain how to change the paper tray. The system used sensors attached to objects in the physical world to determine their locations, and the entire system ran tethered from a desktop computer.\nIn 1994, Edgar Matias and Mike Ruicci of the University of Toronto, debuted a \"wrist computer.\" Their system presented an alternative approach to the emerging head-up display plus chord keyboard wearable. The system was built from a modified HP 95LX palmtop computer and a Half-QWERTY one-handed keyboard. With the keyboard and display modules strapped to the operator's forearms, text could be entered by bringing the wrists together and typing. The same technology was used by IBM researchers to create the half-keyboard \"belt computer. Also in 1994, Mik Lamming and Mike Flynn at Xerox EuroPARC demonstrated the Forget-Me-Not, a wearable device that would record interactions with people and devices and store this information in a database for later query. It interacted via wireless transmitters in rooms and with equipment in the area to remember who was there, who was being talked to on the telephone, and what objects were in the room, allowing queries like \"Who came by my office while I was on the phone to Mark?\". As with the Toronto system, Forget-Me-Not was not based on a head-mounted display.\nAlso in 1994, DARPA started the Smart Modules Program to develop a modular, \"humionic\" approach to wearable and carryable computers, with the goal of producing a variety of products including computers, radios, navigation systems and human-computer interfaces that have both military and commercial use. In July 1996, DARPA went on to host the \"Wearables in 2005\" workshop, bringing together industrial, university, and military visionaries to work on the common theme of delivering computing to the individual. A follow-up conference was hosted by Boeing in August 1996, where plans were finalized to create a new academic conference on wearable computing. In October 1997, Carnegie Mellon University, MIT, and Georgia Tech co-hosted the IEEE International Symposium on Wearables Computers (ISWC) in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The symposium was a full academic conference with published proceedings and papers ranging from sensors and new hardware to new applications for wearable computers, with 382 people registered for the event. In 1998, the Microelectronic and Computer Technology Corporation created the Wearable Electronics consortial program for industrial companies in the U.S. to rapidly develop wearable computers. The program preceded the MCC Heterogeneous Component Integration Study, an investigation of the technology, infrastructure, and business challenges surrounding the continued development and integration of micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) with other system components.\nIn 1998, Steve Mann invented and built the world's first smartwatch. It was featured on the cover of Linux Journal in 2000, and demonstrated at ISSCC 2000.\n2000s.\nDr. Bruce H. Thomas and Dr. Wayne Piekarski developed the Tinmith wearable computer system to support augmented reality. This work was first published internationally in 2000 at the ISWC conference. The work was carried out at the Wearable Computer Lab in the University of South Australia.\nIn 2002, as part of Kevin Warwick's Project Cyborg, Warwick's wife, Irena, wore a necklace which was electronically linked to Warwick's nervous system via an implanted electrode array. The color of the necklace changed between red and blue dependent on the signals on Warwick's nervous system.\nAlso in 2002, Xybernaut released a wearable computer called the Xybernaut Poma Wearable PC, Poma for short. \"Poma\" stood for Personal Media Appliance. The project failed for a few reasons though the top reasons are that the equipment was expensive and clunky. The user would wear a head-mounted optical piece, a CPU that could be clipped onto clothing, and a mini keyboard that was attached to the user's arm.\nGoPro released their first product, the GoPro HERO 35mm, which began a successful franchise of wearable cameras. The cameras can be worn atop the head or around the wrist and are shock and waterproof. GoPro cameras are used by many athletes and extreme sports enthusiasts, a trend that became very apparent during the early 2010s.\nIn the late 2000s, various Chinese companies began producing mobile phones in the form of wristwatches, the descendants of which as of 2013 include the i5 and i6, which are GSM phones with 1.8-inch displays, and the ZGPAX s5 Android wristwatch phone.\n2010s.\nStandardization with IEEE, IETF, and several industry groups (e.g. Bluetooth) lead to more various interfacing under the WPAN (wireless personal area network). It also led the WBAN (Wireless body area network) to offer new classification of designs for interfacing and networking. The 6th-generation iPod Nano, released in September 2010, has a wristband attachment available to convert it into a wearable wristwatch computer.\nThe development of wearable computing spread to encompass rehabilitation engineering, ambulatory intervention treatment, life guard systems, and defense wearable systems.\nSony produced a wristwatch called Sony SmartWatch that must be paired with an Android phone. Once paired, it becomes an additional remote display and notification tool.\nFitbit released several wearable fitness trackers and the Fitbit Surge, a full smartwatch that is compatible with Android and iOS.\nOn 11 April 2012, Pebble launched a Kickstarter campaign to raise $100,000 for their initial smartwatch model. The campaign ended on 18 May with $10,266,844, over 100 times the fundraising target. Pebble released several smartwatches, including the Pebble Time and the Pebble Round.\nGoogle Glass launched their optical head-mounted display (OHMD) to a test group of users in 2013, before it became available to the public on 15 May 2014. Google's mission was to produce a mass-market ubiquitous computer that displays information in a smartphone-like hands-free format that can interact with the Internet via natural language voice commands. Google Glass received criticism over privacy and safety concerns. On 15 January 2015, Google announced that it would stop producing the Google Glass prototype but would continue to develop the product. According to Google, Project Glass was ready to \"graduate\" from Google X, the experimental phase of the project.\nThync, a headset launched in 2014, is a wearable that stimulates the brain with mild electrical pulses, causing the wearer to feel energized or calm based on input into a phone app. The device is attached to the temple and to the back of the neck with an adhesive strip.\nMacrotellect launched two portable brainwave (EEG) sensing devices, BrainLink Pro and BrainLink Lite in 2014, which allows families and meditation students to enhance the mental fitness and stress relief with 20+ brain fitness enhancement Apps on Apple and Android App Stores.\nIn January 2015, Intel announced the sub-miniature Intel Curie for wearable applications, based on its Intel Quark platform. As small as a button, it features a six-axis accelerometer, a DSP sensor hub, a Bluetooth LE unit, and a battery charge controller. It was scheduled to ship in the second half of the year.\nOn 24 April 2015, Apple released their take on the smartwatch, known as the Apple Watch. The Apple Watch features a touchscreen, many applications, and a heart-rate sensor. The Apple Watch would later become the most popular wristwatch in the world.\nSome advanced VR headsets require the user to wear a desktop-sized computer as a backpack to enable them to move around freely.\n2020s.\nOn June 5, 2023, Apple unveiled the Vision Pro, an AR headset with a computer built in that has a screen on the front, allowing others to see the wearer's face.\nCommercialization.\nThe commercialization of general-purpose wearable computers, as led by companies such as Xybernaut, CDI and ViA, Inc. has thus far been met with limited success. Publicly traded Xybernaut tried forging alliances with companies such as IBM and Sony in order to make wearable computing widely available, and managed to get their equipment seen on such shows as The X-Files, but in 2005 their stock was delisted and the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection amid financial scandal and federal investigation. Xybernaut emerged from bankruptcy protection in January, 2007. ViA, Inc. filed for bankruptcy in 2001 and subsequently ceased operations.\nIn 1998, Seiko marketed the Ruputer, a computer in a (fairly large) wristwatch, to mediocre returns. In 2001, IBM developed and publicly displayed two prototypes for a wristwatch computer running Linux. The last message about them dates to 2004, saying the device would cost about $250, but it is still under development. In 2002, Fossil, Inc. announced the Fossil Wrist PDA, which ran the Palm OS. Its release date was set for summer of 2003, but was delayed several times and was finally made available on 5 January 2005. Timex Datalink is another example of a practical wearable computer. Hitachi launched a wearable computer called Poma in 2002. Eurotech offers the ZYPAD, a wrist-wearable touch screen computer with GPS, Wi-Fi and Bluetooth connectivity and which can run a number of custom applications. In 2013, a wearable computing device on the wrist to control body temperature was developed at MIT.\nEvidence of weak market acceptance was demonstrated when Panasonic Computer Solutions Company's product failed. Panasonic has specialized in mobile computing with their Toughbook line since 1996 and has extensive market research into the field of portable, wearable computing products. In 2002, Panasonic introduced a wearable brick computer coupled with a handheld or a touchscreen worn on the arm. The \"Brick\" Computer is the CF-07 Toughbook, dual batteries, screen used same batteries as the base, 800 x 600 resolution, optional GPS and WWAN. Has one M-PCI slot and one PCMCIA slot for expansion. CPU used is a 600\u00a0MHz Pentium 3 factory under clocked to 300\u00a0MHz so it can stay cool passively as it has no fan. Micro DIM RAM is upgradeable. The screen can be used wirelessly on other computers. The brick would communicate wirelessly to the screen, and concurrently the brick would communicate wirelessly out to the internet or other networks. The wearable brick was quietly pulled from the market in 2005, while the screen evolved to a thin client touchscreen used with a handstrap.\nGoogle has announced that it has been working on a head-mounted display-based wearable \"augmented reality\" device called Google Glass. An early version of the device was available to the US public from April 2013 until January 2015. Despite ending sales of the device through their Explorer Program, Google has stated that they plan to continue developing the technology.\nLG and iriver produce earbud wearables measuring heart rate and other biometrics, as well as various activity metrics.\nGreater response to commercialization has been found in creating devices with designated purposes rather than all-purpose. One example is the WSS1000. The WSS1000 is a wearable computer designed to make the work of inventory employees easier and more efficient. The device allows workers to scan the barcode of items and immediately enter the information into the company system. This removed the need for carrying a clipboard, removed error and confusion from hand written notes, and allowed workers the freedom of both hands while working; the system improves accuracy as well as efficiency.\nPopular culture.\nMany technologies for wearable computers derive their ideas from science fiction. There are many examples of ideas from popular movies that have become technologies or are technologies currently being developed.\nDevices that display usable, tactile interfaces that can be manipulated in front of the user. Examples include the glove-operated hologram computer featured at the Pre-Crime headquarters in the beginning of \"Minority Report\" and the computers used by the gate workers at Zion in \"The Matrix\" trilogy.\nClothing that can relay and collect information. Examples include \"Tron\" and its sequel, and also many sci-fi military films.\nScan others in vicinity and assess threat-to-self level. Examples include \"\", 'Threep' Technology in \"Lock-In\", and \"Kill switch.\"\nSpecial contact lenses that are used to confirm one's identity. Used in \"\".\nA wearable exoskeleton that provides protection to its wearer and is typically equipped with powerful weapons and a computer system. Examples include numerous Iron Man suits, the Predator suit, along with Samus Aran's Power Suit and Fusion Suit in the \"Metroid\" video game series. \nUsed in \"Total Recall\".\nCan help identify suspects and see through walls. Examples include Robocop's special eye system, as well as some more advanced visors that Samus Aran uses in the .\nProvide various abilities and information, such as data about the wearer, a vicinity map, a flashlight, a communicator, a poison detector or an enemy-tracking device. Examples included are the Pip-Boy 3000 from the \"Fallout\" games and Leela's Wrist Device from the \"Futurama\" TV sitcom.\nThis form-factor of wearable computer has been shown in many sci-fi movies, including \"Prometheus\" and \"Iron Man.\"\nAdvancement with wearable technology over years.\nTechnology has advanced with continuous change in wearable computers. Wearable technologies are increasingly used in healthcare. For instance, portable sensors are used as medical devices which helps patients with diabetes to help them keep track of exercise related data. A number of people think wearable technology as a new trend; however, companies have been trying to develop or design wearable technologies for decades. The spotlight has more recently been focused on new types of technology which are more focused on improving efficiency in the wearer's life.\nChallenges with wearable computers.\nWearable technology comes with many challenges, like data security, trust issues, and regulatory and ethical issues. After 2010, wearable technologies have been seen more as a technology focused mostly on fitness. They have been used with the potential to improve the operations of health and many other professions. With an increase in wearable devices, privacy and security issues can be very important, especially when it comes to health devices. Also, the FDA considers wearable devices as \"general wellness products\". In the US, wearable devices are not under any Federal laws, but regulatory law like Protected Health Information (PHI) is the subject to regulation which is handled by the Office for Civil Rights (OCR). The devices with sensors can create security issues as the companies have to be more alert to protect the public data. The issue with cybersecurity of these devices are the regulations are not that strict in the US. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has developed the NIST Cybersecurity Framework, which provides guidelines for improving cybersecurity, although adherence to the framework is voluntary\nConsequently, the lack of specific regulations for wearable devices, specifically medical devices, increases the risk of threats and other vulnerabilities. For instance, Google Glass raised major privacy risks with wearable computer technology; Congress investigated the privacy risks related to consumers using Google Glass and how they use the data. The product can be used to track not only the users of the product but others around them, particularly without them being aware. Nonetheless, all the data captured with Google Glass was then stored on Google's cloud servers, giving them access to the data. They also raised questions regarding women's security as they allowed stalkers or harassers to take intrusive pictures of women's bodies by wearing the Glass without any fear of getting caught.\nWearable technologies like smart glasses can also raise cultural and social issues. While wearable technologies can enhance convenience, some devices, such as Bluetooth headphones, may contribute to increased reliance on technology over interpersonal interactions. Society considers these technologies luxury accessories and there may be peer pressure within a group to own similar products. These products raise challenges of social and moral discipline. For instance, wearing a smart watch can be a way to fit in with standards in male-dominated fields, where femininity may be perceived as unprofessional.\nDespite the fact that the demand for this technology is increasing, one of the biggest challenges is the price. For example, as of March 2023, the price of an Apple Watch ranges from $249 to $1,749, which for a normal consumer can be prohibitively expensive.\nFuture innovations.\nAugmented reality allows a new generation of display. As opposed to virtual reality, the user does not exist in a virtual world, but information is superimposed on the real world.\nThese displays can be easily portable, such as the Vufine+. Other are quite massive, like the Hololens 2. Some headsets are autonomous, such as the Oculus Quest 2 and others. In contrast to a computer, they are more like a terminal module.\nSingle-board computers (SBC) are improving in performance and becoming cheaper. Some boards are cheap such as the Raspberry Pi Zero and Pi 4, while others are more expensive but more similar to a normal PC, like the Hackboard and LattePanda.\nOne main domain of future research could be the method of control. Today computers are commonly controlled through the keyboard and the mouse, which could change in the future. For example, the words per minute rate on a keyboard could be statistically improved with a BEPO layout. Ergonomics could also change the results with split keyboards and minimalist keyboards (which use one key for more than one letter or symbol). The extreme could be the Plover and steno keyboard that allow the use of very few keys, pressing more than one at the same time for a letter.\nFurthermore, the pointer could be improved from a basic mouse to an accelerator pointer.\nThe system of gesture controls is evolving from image control (Leap Motion camera) to integrated capture (ex-prototype AI data glove from Zack Freedman.) For some people, the main idea could be to build computers integrated with the AR system which will be controlled with ergonomic controllers. It will make a universal machine that can be as portable as a mobile phone and as efficient as a computer, additionally with ergonomic controllers.\nMilitary use.\nThe wearable computer was introduced to the US Army in 1989 as a small computer that was meant to assist soldiers in battle. Since then, the concept has grown to include the Land Warrior program and proposal for future systems. The most extensive military program in the wearables arena is the US Army's Land Warrior system, which will eventually be merged into the Future Force Warrior system. There are also researches for increasing the reliability of terrestrial navigation.\nF-INSAS is an Indian military project, designed largely with wearable computing. The goal of F-INSAS is to equip soldiers with state-of-the-art technologies that improve their combat effectiveness, including wearable computers to aid in communication, navigation, and situational awareness.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33110", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33110", "title": "Wilhelm von Humboldt", "text": "Prussian philosopher (1767\u20131835)\nFriedrich Wilhelm Christian Karl Ferdinand von Humboldt (22 June 1767 \u2013 8 April 1835) was a Prussian philosopher, linguist, government functionary, diplomat, and founder of the Humboldt University of Berlin. In 1949, the university was named after him and his younger brother, Alexander von Humboldt, a naturalist.\nHe was a linguist who made contributions to the philosophy of language, ethnolinguistics, and to the theory and practice of education. He made a major contribution to the development of liberalism by envisioning education as a means of realizing individual possibility rather than a way of drilling traditional ideas into youth to suit them for an already established occupation or social role. In particular, he was the architect of the Humboldtian education ideal, which was used from the beginning in Prussia as a model for its system of public education, as well as in the United States and Japan. He was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1822.\nBiography.\nHumboldt was born in Potsdam, Margraviate of Brandenburg, and died in Tegel, Province of Brandenburg.\nHis father, Alexander Georg von Humboldt (1720\u20131779), belonged to a prominent German noble family from Pomerania. Although not one of the titled gentry, he was a major in the Prussian Army, who had served with the Duke of Brunswick. At age 42, Alexander Georg was rewarded for his services in the Seven Years' War with the post of royal chamberlain. He profited from the contract to lease state lotteries and tobacco sales.\nWilhelm's grandfather was Johann Paul von Humboldt (1684\u20131740), who married Sophia Dorothea von Schweder (1688\u20131749), daughter of Prussian General Adjutant Michael von Schweder (1663\u20131729). In 1766, his father, Alexander Georg married Maria Elisabeth Colomb, a well-educated woman and widow of Baron Friedrich Ernst von Holwede (1723\u20131765), with whom she had a son Heinrich Friedrich Ludwig Ferdinand (1762\u20131817). Alexander Georg and Maria Elisabeth had four children: two daughters, Karoline and Gabriele, who died young, and then two sons, Wilhelm and Alexander. Her first-born son Heinrich, Wilhelm and Alexander's half-brother, Rittmaster in the Gendarme regiment was something of a ne'er do well, not often mentioned in the family history.\nIn June 1791, Humboldt married Caroline von Dacher\u00f6den. They had eight children, of whom five (amongst them Gabriele von Humboldt) survived to adulthood.\nPhilosopher.\nHumboldt was a philosopher; he wrote \"The Limits of State Action\" in 1791\u20131792 (though it was not published until 1850, after Humboldt's death), one of the boldest defences of the liberties of the Enlightenment. It influenced John Stuart Mill's essay \"On Liberty\" through which von Humboldt's ideas became known in the English-speaking world. Humboldt outlined an early version of what Mill would later call the \"harm principle\". His house in Rome became a cultural hub, run by Caroline von Humboldt.\nThe section dealing with education was published in the December 1792 issue of the \"Berlinische Monatsschrift\" under the title \"On public state education\". With this publication, Humboldt took part in the philosophical debate regarding the direction of national education that was in progress in Germany, as elsewhere, after the French Revolution.\nEducational reforms.\nHumboldt had been home schooled and never finished his comparatively short university studies at the universities of Frankfurt (Oder) and G\u00f6ttingen. Nevertheless, he became one of the most influential officials in German education. Actually, Humboldt had intended to become Minister of education, but failed to attain that position. The Prussian King asked him to leave Rome in 1809 and to lead the directorate of education under Friedrich Ferdinand Alexander zu Dohna-Schlobitten. Humboldt did not reply to the appointment for several weeks and would have preferred to stay on at the embassy in Rome. His wife did not return with him to Prussia; the couple met again when Humboldt stepped down from the educational post and was appointed head of the Embassy in Vienna.\nHumboldt installed a standardized system of public instruction, from basic schools till secondary education, and founded Berlin University. He imposed a standardization of state examinations and inspections and created a special department within the ministry to oversee and design curricula, textbooks and learning aids.\nHumboldt's educational model went beyond vocational training. In a letter to the Prussian king, he wrote: \"There are undeniably certain kinds of knowledge that must be of a general nature and, more importantly, a certain cultivation of the mind and character that nobody can afford to be without. People obviously cannot be good craftworkers, merchants, soldiers or businessmen unless, regardless of their occupation, they are good, upstanding and \u2013 according to their condition \u2013 well-informed human beings and citizens. If this basis is laid through schooling, vocational skills are easily acquired later on, and a person is always free to move from one occupation to another, as so often happens in life.\" The philosopher Julian Nida-R\u00fcmelin has criticized discrepancies between Humboldt's ideals and modern European education policy, which narrowly understands education as a preparation for the labor market, and argued that we need to decide between McKinsey and Humboldt.\nDiplomat.\nAs a successful diplomat between 1802 and 1819, Humboldt was plenipotentiary Prussian minister at Rome from 1802, ambassador at Vienna from 1812 during the closing struggles of the Napoleonic Wars, at the congress of Prague (1813) where he was instrumental in drawing Austria to ally with Prussia and Russia against Napoleon; a signer of the peace treaty at Paris and the treaty between Prussia and defeated Saxony (1815), and at the congress at Aachen in 1818. However, the increasingly reactionary policy of the Prussian government made him give up political life in 1819; and from that time forward he devoted himself solely to literature and study.\nLinguist.\nWilhelm von Humboldt was an adept linguist and studied the Basque language. He translated Pindar and Aeschylus into German.\nHumboldt's work as a philologist in Basque has had more extensive impact than his other work. His two visits to the Basque country resulted in \"Researches into the Early Inhabitants of Spain by the help of the Basque language\" (1821). In this work, Humboldt endeavored to show by examining geographical placenames that at one time a race or races speaking dialects allied to modern Basque extended throughout Spain, southern France and the Balearic Islands; he identified these people with the \"Iberians\" of classical writers, and further surmised that they had been allied with the Berbers of northern Africa. Humboldt's pioneering work has been superseded in its details by modern linguistics and archaeology, but is sometimes still uncritically followed even today. He was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1820, and a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1822.\nHumboldt died while preparing his greatest work, on the ancient Kawi language of Java, but its introduction was published in 1836 as \"The Heterogeneity of Language and its Influence on the Intellectual Development of Mankind\". His 1836 book on the philosophy of speech introduces the concept of \"the inner form of language\" (according to Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica 1911):\n[F]irst clearly laid down that the character and structure of a language expresses the inner life and knowledge of its speakers, and that languages must differ from one another in the same way and to the same degree as those who use them. Sounds do not become words until a meaning has been put into them, and this meaning embodies the thought of a community. What Humboldt terms the inner form of a language is just that mode of denoting the relations between the parts of a sentence which reflects the manner in which a particular body of men regards the world about them. It is the task of the morphology of speech to distinguish the various ways in which languages differ from each other as regards their inner form, and to classify and arrange them accordingly.\nNoam Chomsky frequently quotes Humboldt's description of language as a rule-governed system which \"makes infinite use of finite means\", meaning that an infinite number of sentences can be created using a finite number of grammatical rules. However, Humboldt scholar Tilman Borsche cautions that profound differences remain between von Humboldt's view of language, and Chomsky's.\nMore recently, Humboldt has also been credited as an originator of the linguistic relativity hypothesis (more commonly known as the Sapir\u2013Whorf hypothesis), developed by linguists Edward Sapir or Benjamin Whorf a century later.\nThe reception of Humboldt's work remains problematic in English-speaking countries, despite the work of Langham Brown, Manchester and James W. Underhill (\"Humboldt, Worldview and Language\", 2009), due to his concept of (what he termed) \"Weltansicht\", the \"linguistic worldview\", while \"Weltanschauung\" is translated simply as 'worldview'\u2014a term associated with ideologies and cultural mindsets in both German and English. The centrality of this distinction in understanding Humboldt's work was set out by one of the leading contemporary German Humboldt scholars, J\u00fcrgen Trabant, in his works in both German and French. Polish linguists at the Lublin School (see Jerzy Bartmi\u0144ski), in their research of Humboldt, also stress this distinction between the worldviews of a personal or political kind, and the worldview that is implicit in language as a conceptual system.\nHowever, there has been, in English, a comparative dearth of rigorous research that explores the relationship between the linguistic worldview and the transformation and maintenance of this worldview by individual speakers. One notable exception is the work of Underhill, who explores comparative linguistic studies in both \"Creating Worldviews: Language\", \"Ideology &amp; Metaphor\" (2011) and in \"Ethnolinguistics and Cultural Concepts: Truth, Love, Hate &amp; War\" (2012). In Underhill's work, a distinction is made between five forms of worldview\u2014world-perceiving, world-conceiving, cultural mindset, personal world, and perspective\u2014in order to convey the distinctions Humboldt was concerned with preserving in his ethnolinguistics. Probably the best-known linguist working with a truly Humboldtian perspective writing in English today is Anna Wierzbicka, who has published a number of comparative works on semantic universals and conceptual distinctions in language.\nThe Rouen Ethnolinguistics Project, in France, published online a 7-hour series of lectures on Humboldt's thought on language, with the Berlin specialist Professor Trabant.\nIn Charles Taylor's important summative work, \"The Language Animal: The Full Shape of the Human Linguistic Capacity\" (2016), von Humboldt is given credit, along with Johann Georg Hamann and Johann Gottfried Herder, for inspiring Taylor's \"HHH\" approach to the philosophy of language, emphasizing the creative power and cultural specificity of language.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33111", "revid": "8144267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33111", "title": "World War I casualties", "text": "Counts of dead and wounded in WWI\nThe total number of military and civilian casualties in World War I was about 40 million: estimates range from around 15 to 22\u00a0million deaths and about 23\u00a0million wounded military personnel, ranking it among the deadliest conflicts in human history.\nThe total number of deaths includes from nine to 11\u00a0million military personnel. The civilian death toll was about six to 13\u00a0million. The Triple Entente (also known as the Allies) lost about six\u00a0million military personnel while the Central Powers lost about four\u00a0million. At least two\u00a0million died from diseases and six\u00a0million went missing, presumed dead. This article lists the casualties of the belligerent powers based on official published sources.\nAbout two-thirds of military deaths in World War I were in battle, unlike the conflicts that took place in the 19th century when most deaths were from disease. Nevertheless, disease, including the 1918 flu pandemic and deaths while held as prisoners of war, still caused about one third of total military deaths for all belligerents.\nClassification of casualty statistics.\nCasualty statistics for World War I vary to a great extent; estimates of total deaths range from nine million to over 15\u00a0million. Military casualties reported in official sources list deaths due to all causes, including an estimated seven to eight million combat related deaths (killed or died of wounds) and another two to three million military deaths caused by accidents, disease and deaths while prisoners of war. Official government reports listing casualty statistics were published by the United States and Great Britain. These secondary sources published during the 1920s, are the source of the statistics in reference works listing casualties in World War I. This article summarizes the casualty statistics published in the official government reports of the United States and Great Britain as well as France, Italy, Belgium, Germany, Austria and Russia. More recently the research of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission (CWGC) has revised the military casualty statistics of the UK and its allies; they include in their listing of military war dead personnel outside of combat theaters and civilians recruited from Africa, the Middle East and China who provided logistical and service support in combat theaters. The casualties of these support personnel recruited outside of Europe were previously not included with British war dead, however the casualties of the Labour Corps recruited from the British Isles were included in the rolls of British war dead published in 1921. The methodology used by each nation to record and classify casualties was not uniform, a general caveat regarding casualty figures is that they cannot be considered comparable in all cases. First World War civilian deaths are \"hazardous to estimate\" according to Micheal Clodfelter who maintains that \"the generally accepted figure of noncombatant deaths is 6.5\u00a0million.\"\nCasualties by borders of 1914.\nThe source of population data is: Haythornthwaite, Philip J., \"The World War One Source Book\" pp.\u00a0382\u2013383\nCasualties by post-war (1924) borders.\nThe war involved multi-ethnic empires such as Great Britain, France, Germany, Russia, Austria-Hungary and Turkey. Many ethnic groups in these territories were conscripted for military service. The casualties listed by modern borders are also included in the above table of figures for the countries that existed in 1914. The casualty figures by 1924 post war borders are rough estimates by Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century, the sources of his figures were published in the Soviet era and in post-Soviet Russia.\nAccording to the 1914\u20131918 Online Encyclopedia \"In addition to losses suffered by African military personnel and the laborers supporting their operations, very large, but unknown numbers of African civilians perished during the war.\" They made an estimate of civilian losses in Africa of 750,000 based on the study by the Vadim Erlikman. They noted that Erlikman's figures are based on the work of the Russian demographer Boris Urlanis, noting that these estimates were \"imprecise\" and \"could be used to provide a frame of reference for further inquiry\". The \"Oxford History of World War One\" notes that \"In east and central Africa the harshness of the war resulted in acute shortages of food with famine in some areas, a weakening of populations, and epidemic diseases which killed hundreds of thousands of people and also cattle.\"\nThe following estimates of Austrian deaths, within contemporary borders, were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead 175,000: including military losses 120,000 with the Austro-Hungarian forces and POW deaths in captivity of 30,000. Civilian dead due to famine and disease were 25,000.\nThe following estimates of Belarusian deaths, within contemporary borders, were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead 130,000: including military losses 70,000 with the Russian forces. Civilian dead were 60,000.\nThe following estimates of Ukrainian deaths, within contemporary borders, were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead 590,000: including military losses 450,000,(Erlikman did not break out military losses between Austro-Hungarian and Russian armed forces). Civilian dead were 140,000.\nThe Belgian Congo was part of the Kingdom of Belgium during the war. A Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century based on sources published in the Soviet Union and Russia estimated a total of 155,000 deaths in the Belgian Congo during the war.\nCzechoslovakia was part of Austro-Hungary during the war. The estimates of Czechoslovak deaths within 1991 borders were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead 185,000: including military losses 110,000 with the Austro-Hungarian forces and POW deaths in captivity of 45,000. Civilian dead due to famine and disease were 30,000. The Czechoslovak Legions fought with the armies of the Allies during the war.\nEstonia was part of the Russian Empire during the war and about 100,000 Estonians served in the Russian Army. Of them about 10,000 were killed.\nFrom 1809 Finland was an autonomous Grand Duchy in the Russian Empire until the end of 1917. Finland's autonomous status meant that Finns were exempt from conscription into the Russian Army. Approximately 800 Finns voluntarily served during World War I. According to data regarding Finnish war casualties, 317 Finns were killed between 1914 and 1917.\nThe following estimates of deaths, within contemporary borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Erlikman's estimates are based on sources published in the Soviet Union and Russia. These numbers only include military deaths, total civilian deaths in Africa could amount up to 750,000.\n\" (1914 known as French Algeria)\": 26,000\n \"(1914 known as French Indochina)\": 12,000\n \"(1914 part of French West Africa)\": 10,000\n \"(1914 known as the French protectorate of Morocco)\": 8,000\n \"(1914 part of French West Africa)\": 6,000\n \"(1914 part of French West Africa)\": 2,500\n 2,500 military\n \"(1914 part of French West Africa)\": 2,000\n \"(1914 part of French West Africa)\": 2,000\n \"(1914 part of French Equatorial Africa)\": 2,000\n \"(1914 part of French West Africa)\": 2,000\n \"(1914 known as French Tunisia)\": 2,000\n \"(1914 part of French Equatorial Africa)\": 1,500\n \"(1914 known as French Oubangui-Chari)\": 1,000\n \"(1914 part of French West Africa)\": 1,000\n \"(1914 part of French Equatorial Africa)\": 500\n India \"(French Establishments in India)\": 195\n Total: 82,000\nThe following estimates of Georgian deaths, within contemporary borders, were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Georgia was part of the Russian Empire during the war and about 150,000 Georgians served in the Russian Army. Of them about 10,000 were killed.\nThe following estimates of deaths, within contemporary borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Erlikman's estimates are based on sources published in the Soviet Union and Russia. These numbers only include military deaths, total civilian deaths in Africa could amount up to 750,000.\n \"(1914 part of German East Africa)\": 20,000\n \"(1914 known as German South-West Africa)\": 1,000\n \"(1914 known as Kamerun)\": 5,000 military and 50,000 civilian\n Togo \"(1914 known as German Togoland)\": 2,000\n \"(1914 part of German East Africa)\": 15,000\n Total: 48,000\nThe following estimates of Hungarian deaths, within contemporary borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead 385,000: including military losses 270,000 with the Austro-Hungarian forces and POW deaths in captivity of 70,000. Civilian dead due to famine and disease were 45,000.\nIreland was a part of the United Kingdom during World War I. Five-sixths of the island left to form the Irish Free State, now the Republic of Ireland, in 1922. A total of 206,000 Irishmen served in the British forces during the war. The number of Irish deaths in the British Army recorded by the registrar general was 27,405. A significant number of these casualties were from what, in 1920, became Northern Ireland. While 49,400 soldiers died serving in Irish divisions (the 10th, 16th and 36th), although not all of the men serving in these divisions were natives of Ireland and many Irish who died in non-Irish regiments are not listed. For example, 29% of the casualties in the 16th Division were not natives of Ireland. Neither does it include Irish emigrants in Britain who enlisted there and are not categorised as Irish. Australia lists 4,731 of its first World War soldiers as having been born in Ireland and more than 19,000 Irish-born soldiers served in the Canadian Corps. According to research done by John Horne of Trinity College Dublin, there are at least 30,986 soldiers who were born in Ireland that died; however, that's considered a \"conservative\" estimate and is very likely to rise.\nThe losses of Portuguese Mozambique were estimated by a Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Erlikman's estimates are based on sources published in the Soviet Union and Russia. 52,000\nPoland was territory of Germany, Austria-Hungary and partially annexed by Russia, from 1795 to 1918. By late 1915, Germany had complete control over modern-day Poland. A 2005 Polish study estimated 3,376,800 Poles were conscripted into the armed forces of these countries during World War I, an additional 300,000 were conscripted for forced labor by the Germans. The Russians and Austrians forcibly resettled 1.6 to 1.8\u00a0million persons from the war zone in Poland. According to Micheal Clodfelter, Polish war dead were 1,080,000, whilst 200,000 Polish civilians were killed in the fighting on the Eastern Front; 870,000 men served in the German, Austrian and Russian armies. Another estimate made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century, put total Polish war dead at 640,000, including military losses of 270,000 Poles conscripted, civilian losses of 120,000 due to military operations and 250,000 caused by famine and disease. The ethnic Polish Blue Army served with the French Army. The ethnic Polish Legions fought as part of the Austro-Hungarian Army on the Eastern Front.\nThe territory of Transylvania was part of Austria-Hungary during World War I. The following estimates of Romanian deaths, within contemporary borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead: 748,000, including military losses of 220,000 with the Romanian forces, 150,000 with the Austro-Hungarian forces and POW deaths in captivity of 48,000. Civilian dead were as follows due to famine and disease: 200,000, killed in military operations 120,000 and 10,000 dead in Austrian prisons.\nBritain recruited Indian, Chinese, native South African, Egyptian and other overseas labour to provide logistical support in the combat theatres. Included with British casualties in East Africa are the deaths of 44,911 recruited labourers. The CWGC reports that nearly 2,000 workers from the Chinese Labour Corps are buried with British war dead in France.\nThe following estimates of British Empire colonial military deaths, within contemporary borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian Vadim Erlikman in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Erlikman's estimates are based on sources published in the Soviet Union and Russia.\n \"(1914 known as the Gold Coast)\": 1,200\n \"(1914 known as British East Africa)\": 2,000\n \"(1914 known as Nyasaland)\": 3,000\n \"(1914 part of British West Africa)\": 5,000\n \"(1914 part of British West Africa)\": 1,000\n \"(1914 known as the Uganda Protectorate)\": 1,500\n \"(1914 known as Northern Rhodesia)\": 3,000\n \"(1914 known as Southern Rhodesia)\": 5,716 persons of European origin served in the war, of whom about 700 were killed, or died of wounds or other causes. In explicitly Rhodesian units, 127 were killed, 24 died of wounds, 101 died of disease or other causes and 294 were wounded. Of the territory's black African servicemen, 31 were killed in action, 142 died of other causes and 116 were wounded.\n Total: 18,000\nThe following estimates are for Yugoslavia within the 1991 borders.\nSlovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Vojvodina (Now part of Serbia) were part of Austria-Hungary during World War I. Serbia, which included Macedonia, and Montenegro was an independent nation. The Yugoslav historian Vladimir Dedijer put the total losses of the Yugoslav lands at 1.9\u00a0million, of which 43% were from Serbia. The following estimates of Yugoslav deaths, within 1991 borders, during World War I were made by a Russian historian in a 2004 handbook of human losses in the 20th century. Total dead: 996,000 including military losses, 260,000 with the Serbian forces, 80,000 with the Austro-Hungarian forces, 13,000 with Montenegrin forces and POW deaths in captivity of 93,000. Civilian dead were as follows due to famine and disease: 400,000, killed in military operations: 120,000 and 30,000 dead in Austrian prisons or executed.\nDuring World War I, the Nepalese army was expanded and six new regiments, totaling more than 20,000 troops\u2014all volunteers\u2014were sent to India, most of them to the North-West Frontier Province, to release British and Indian troops for service overseas. Simultaneously, the Nepalese government agreed to maintain recruitment at a level that would sustain the existing British Gurkha units and allow the establishment of additional ones. The battalions were increased to thirty-three with the addition of 55,000 new recruits and Gurkha units were placed at the disposal of the British high command for service on all fronts. Many volunteers were assigned to non-combat units, such as the Army Bearer Corps and the labour battalions but they also were in combat in France, Turkey, Palestine and Mesopotamia. The Rana prime ministers urged Nepalese males to fight in the war. Of the more than 200,000 Nepalese who served in the British army, there were some 20,000 Gurkha casualties included above with the British Indian Army.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^a East and Central Africa\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^b Australia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^c Belgium\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^d Canada\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^e France\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^f Greece\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^g India (British)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^h Italy \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^i Japan\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^k Montenegro\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^l New Zealand\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^m Newfoundland\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^n Portugal\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^o Romania\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^p Russian Empire\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^q Serbia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^r South Africa\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^s United Kingdom\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^t United States\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^u Austria-Hungary\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^v Bulgaria\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^w German Empire\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^x Ottoman Empire\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^y Denmark\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^j Luxembourg\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^z Norway\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^az Qajar Persia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^bz Sweden\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^cz Albania\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^dz Liechtenstein\nSources.\nThe source of population data is:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33112", "revid": "1086625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33112", "title": "World War I reparations", "text": "Following their defeat in World War I, the Central Powers agreed to pay war reparations to the Allied Powers. Each defeated power was required to make payments in either cash or kind. Because of the financial situation in Austria, Hungary, and Turkey after the war, few to no reparations were paid and the requirements for reparations were cancelled. Bulgaria, having paid only a fraction of what was required, saw its reparation figure reduced and then cancelled. Historians have recognized the German requirement to pay reparations as the \"chief battleground of the post-war era\" and \"the focus of the power struggle between France and Germany over whether the Versailles Treaty was to be enforced or revised.\"\nThe Treaty of Versailles (signed in 1919) and the 1921 London Schedule of Payments required the Central Powers to pay 132\u00a0billion gold marks at the time which is $605 billion in 2025) in reparations to cover civilian damage caused during the war. This figure was divided into three categories of bonds: A, B, and C. Of these, Germany was required to pay towards 'A' and 'B' bonds totaling 50\u00a0billion marks (US$) unconditionally. The payment of the remaining 'C' bonds was interest-free and without any specific schedule for payment, instead being contingent on the Weimar Republic's eventual ability to pay, as was to be assessed at some future point by an Allied committee.\nDue to the lack of reparation payments by Germany, France occupied the Ruhr in 1923 to enforce payments, causing an international crisis that resulted in the implementation of the Dawes Plan in 1924. This plan outlined a new payment method and raised international loans to help Germany to meet its reparation commitments. Despite this, by 1928 Germany called for a new payment plan, resulting in the Young Plan that established the German reparation requirements at 112\u00a0billion marks (US$) and created a schedule of payments that would see Germany complete payments by 1988. As a result of the severe impact of the Great Depression on the German economy, reparations were suspended for a year in 1931, and after the failure to implement the agreement reached in the 1932 Lausanne Conference, no additional reparations payments were made. Between 1919 and 1932, Germany paid less than 21\u00a0billion marks in reparations, mostly funded by foreign loans that Adolf Hitler reneged on in 1939.\nMany Germans saw reparations as a national humiliation; the German government worked to undermine the validity of the Treaty of Versailles and the requirement to pay. British economist John Maynard Keynes called the treaty a Carthaginian peace that would economically destroy Germany. The consensus of contemporary historians is that reparations were not as intolerable as the Germans or Keynes had suggested and were within Germany's capacity to pay had there been the political will to do so.\nReparations played a significant role in Nazi propaganda, and after coming to power in 1933, Hitler ceased payment of reparations, although Germany still paid interest to holders of reparation bonds until 1939. Following the Second World War, West Germany took up payments. The 1953 London Agreement on German External Debts resulted in an agreement to pay 50 percent of the remaining balance. The final payment was made on 3 October 2010, settling German loan debts in regard to reparations.\nBackground.\nCourse of the war.\nIn 1914, following the assassination of Archduke Franz-Ferdinand by a Serb nationalist, the First World War broke out, with Austria-Hungary declaring war on Serbia, and Germany declaring war on and invading France and Belgium. For the next four years fighting raged across Europe, the Middle East, Africa, and Asia. On 8 January 1918, United States President Woodrow Wilson issued a statement that became known as the Fourteen Points. In part, this speech called for Germany to withdraw from the territory it had occupied and for the formation of a League of Nations. During the fourth quarter of 1918, the Central Powers began to collapse. In particular, Austria-Hungary collapsed putting southern Germany at risk of invasion, Turkey surrendered freeing up Allied troops for action elsewhere, the German military was decisively defeated on the Western Front, and the German navy mutinied, all of which prompted domestic uprisings that became known as the German Revolution.\nGermany signed an armistice with the allies on 11 November 1918. The armistice agreement included an agreement to pay \"reparation for damage done\" to the Allied countries.\nAllied damages.\nMost of the war's major battles occurred in France and Belgium, with both the French countryside and Belgian countryside being heavily scarred in the fighting. Furthermore, in 1918 during the German retreat, German troops devastated France's most industrialized region in the north-east (Nord-Pas de Calais Mining Basin) as well as Belgium. Extensive looting took place as German forces removed whatever material they could use and destroyed the rest. Hundreds of mines were destroyed along with railways, bridges, and entire villages. Prime Minister of France Georges Clemenceau was determined, for these reasons, that any just peace required Germany to pay reparations for the damage it had caused. Clemenceau viewed reparations as a way of weakening Germany to ensure it could never threaten France again. His position was shared by the French electorate. Reparations would also go towards the reconstruction costs in other countries, including Belgium, which were also directly affected by the war. Despite domestic pressure for a harsh settlement, British Prime Minister David Lloyd George opposed overbearing reparations. He argued for a smaller sum, which would be less damaging to the German economy with a long-term goal of ensuring Germany would remain a viable economic power and trading partner. He also argued that reparations should include war pensions for disabled veterans and allowances for war widows, which would reserve a larger share of the reparations for the British Empire. Wilson opposed these positions and was adamant that no indemnity should be imposed upon Germany.\nDamages in France and Belgium included the complete demolition of more than 300,000 houses in German-occupied France, the stripping of more than 6,000 factories of their machinery and the smashing of textile industry in Lille and Sedan, the destruction of nearly 2,000 breweries, the blowing up of 112 mineshafts in Roubaix and Tourcoing, the flooding or blocking-off of more 1,000 miles of mine galleries, the ripping up of more than 1,000 miles of railway, the dropping of more than 1,000 bridges, as well as the looting of churches. German wartime requisitions of farm animals imposed on the civilian population within occupied France and Belgium included roughly 500,000 head of cattle, approximately 500,000 head of sheep, and more than 300,000 head of horses and donkeys. In cleaning up after the war, the French authorities had to remove over 3 hundred million metres of barbed wire and fill in more than a quarter of a billion cubic metres of trenches, with much farmland rendered essentially useless for years after the war due to Unexploded ordnance and contamination by poison gas that continued to leak from buried gas-cylinders which had to be removed.\nAllied losses of civilian shipping at sea due to the primarily-German U-boat campaign had also been severe, particularly for Britain. Nearly 8 million tons of British civilian shipping had been sunk by German U-boats, with many civilian crew killed. France, Italy, and the United States of America had lost another 2 million tons of merchant shipping, again with heavy losses amongst crew. Another 1.2 million tons of neutral Norwegian, Danish, and Swedish shipping had also been sunk. The sinking of five British hospital ships also caused considerable bitterness.\nVersailles.\nThe Paris Peace Conference opened on 18 January 1919, aiming to establish a lasting peace between the Allied and Central Powers. Demanding compensation from the defeated party was a common feature of peace treaties, including the Treaty of Versailles that Germany had imposed on France in 1871. However, the financial terms of treaties signed during the peace conference were labelled reparations to distinguish them from punitive settlements usually known as indemnities. Reparations were intended for reconstruction and compensating families who had been bereaved by the war. The opening article of the reparation section of the Treaty of Versailles, Article 231, served as a legal basis for the following articles, which obliged Germany to pay compensation and limited German responsibility to civilian damages. The same article, with the signatory's name changed, was also included in the treaties signed by Germany's allies.\nGerman reaction.\nIn February 1919, Foreign Minister Count Ulrich von Brockdorff-Rantzau informed the Weimar National Assembly that Germany would have to pay reparations for the devastation caused by the war, but would not pay for actual war costs. After the drafting of the Treaty of Versailles on 7 May that year, the German and Allied delegations met and the treaty was handed over to be translated and for a response to be issued. At this meeting Brockdorff-Rantzau stated, \"We know the intensity of the hatred which meets us, and we have heard the victors' passionate demand that as the vanquished we shall be made to pay, and as the guilty we shall be punished\". However, he proceeded to deny that Germany was solely responsible for the war.\nArticle 231 of the Treaty of Versailles was not correctly translated. Instead of stating \"...\u00a0Germany accepts responsibility of Germany and her allies causing all the loss and damage\u00a0...\", the German Government's edition reads, \"Germany admits it, that Germany and her allies, as authors of the war, are responsible for all losses and damages\u00a0...\". This resulted in a prevailing belief of humiliation among Germans; the article was seen as an injustice and there was a view that Germany had signed \"away her honor\". Despite the public outrage, German government officials were aware \"that Germany's position on this matter was not nearly so favorable as the imperial government had led the German public to believe during the war\". Politicians seeking international sympathy would continue to use the article for its propaganda value, persuading many who had not read the treaties that the article implied full war guilt. German revisionist historians who later tried to ignore the validity of the clause found a ready audience among revisionist writers in France, Britain, and the US. The objective of both the politicians and historians was to prove that Germany was not solely guilty for causing the war; this was with the idea that, if that guilt could be disproved, the legal requirement to pay reparations would disappear.\nEvolution of reparations.\nInitial demands.\nThe Treaty of Versailles stated that a Reparation Commission would be established in 1921. This commission would consider the resources available to Germany and her capacity to pay, provide the German Government with an opportunity to be heard on the subject, and decide on the final reparation figure that Germany would be required to pay. In the interim, Germany was required to pay an equivalent of 20 billion gold marks in gold, commodities, ships, securities, or other forms. The money would be used to pay Allied occupation costs and to buy food and raw materials for Germany. Article 121 of the Treaty of Neuilly acknowledged that \"the resources of Bulgaria are not sufficient to enable her to make complete reparation\". Therefore, the treaty required Bulgaria to pay a sum equivalent of 2.250\u00a0billion Gold francs in reparations.\nThe treaties of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Trianon, and S\u00e8vres acknowledged that Austria, Hungary, and Turkey did not have the resources to pay reparations, and delayed the establishment of a final figure until the Reparation Commission was established. In addition, Bulgaria was required to hand over thousands of livestock to Greece, Romania, and the Serb-Croat-Slovene State \"in restitution for animals taken away by Bulgaria during the war\". This would not be credited towards the reparation figure. Likewise, Bulgaria had to dispatch 50,000 tons of coal a year to the Serb-Croat-Slovene State in restitution for destroyed mines. These shipments would not be credited against Bulgaria's reparation sum. Germany, Austria, and Hungary all had commitments to handover timber, ore, and livestock to the Allied Powers. They would, however, be credited for these goods.\nIn January 1921, the Allied Powers grew impatient and established the reparation sum at 226\u00a0billion gold marks. The Germans countered with an offer of 30\u00a0billion. On 24 April 1921, the German Government wrote to the American Government expressing \"her readiness to acknowledge for reparation purposes a total liability of 50\u00a0billion gold marks\", but was alternatively prepared \"to pay the equivalent of this sum in annuities adapted to her economic capacity totalling 200\u00a0billion gold marks\". In addition, the German Government stated that \"to accelerate the redemption of the balance\" and \"to combat misery and hatred created by the war\", Germany was willing to provide the resources needed and \"to undertake herself the rebuilding of townships, villages, and hamlets\".\nLondon Schedule of Payments.\nThe London Schedule of Payments of 5 May 1921 established \"the full liability of all the Central Powers combined, not just Germany alone,\" at 132 billion gold marks. This sum was a compromise promoted by Belgium\u2014against higher figures demanded by the French and Italians and the lower figure the British supported\u2014that \"represented an assessment of the lowest amount that public opinion\u00a0...\u00a0would tolerate\".\nThis figure was divided into three series of bonds: \"A\" and \"B\" Bonds together had a nominal value of 50 billion gold marks \u2014less than the sum Germany had previously offered to pay. \"C\" Bonds, comprising the remainder of the reparation figure, \"were deliberately designed to be chimerical\", with the Germans being informed that they would not be expected to pay them under realistic conditions.&lt;ref name=\"Working Papers No. 163/12\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; They were \"a political bargaining chip\" that served the domestic policies of France and the United Kingdom. The figure was completely unreal; its primary function was to mislead public opinion \"into believing that the 132-billion-mark figure was being maintained\". Furthermore, \"Allied experts knew that Germany could not pay 132\u00a0billion marks and that the other Central Powers could pay little. Thus, the A and B Bonds, which were genuine, represented the actual Allied assessment of German capacity to pay.\" Taking into account the sum already paid between 1919 and 1921, Germany's immediate obligation was 41\u00a0billion gold marks.\nTo pay towards this sum, Germany could pay in kind or in cash. Commodities paid in kind included coal, timber, chemical dyes, pharmaceuticals, livestock, agricultural machines, construction materials, and factory machinery. The gold value of these would be deducted from what Germany was required to pay. Germany's assistance with the restoration of the university library of Louvain, which was destroyed by the Germans on 25 August 1914, was also credited towards the sum, as were some of the territorial changes the treaty imposed upon Germany. The payment schedule required within twenty-five days and then annually, plus 26 per cent of the value of German exports. The German Government was to issue bonds at five per cent interest and set up a sinking fund of one per cent to support the payment of reparations.\nIn the London ultimatum of 5 May, Germany was given six days to recognize the Schedule of Payments and to comply with the Treaty of Versailles' demands for disarmament and the extradition of German \"war criminals\". If it did not, the Allies threatened to occupy the Ruhr. In anticipation of such an ultimatum, the German government of Constantin Fehrenbach, finding itself unable to reach agreement on the issue, had resigned on 4 May. The government of the new chancellor, Joseph Wirth, accepted the ultimatum on 11 May and began the \"policy of fulfillment\" \u2013 by attempting to meet the demands, it tried to show the impossibility of complying with the scheduled payments.\nEnd of reparations for Austria, Bulgaria, Hungary and Turkey.\nBetween the signing of the Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine and April 1922, Bulgaria paid 173 million gold francs in reparations. In 1923, the Bulgarian reparation sum was revised downwards to 550 million gold francs, \"plus a lump sum payment of 25\u00a0million francs for occupation costs\". Towards this figure, Bulgaria paid 41 million gold francs between 1925 and 1929. In 1932, the Bulgarian reparation obligation was abandoned following the Lausanne Conference.\nBecause Austria was \"so impoverished\" after the war, and because of the collapse of the Bank of Vienna, the country paid no reparations \"beyond credits for transferred property\". Likewise, Hungary paid no reparations beyond coal deliveries because of the collapse of the Hungarian economy. Turkish reparations had been \"sharply limited in view of the magnitude of Turkish territorial losses\". However, the Treaty of S\u00e8vres was never ratified. When the Treaty of Lausanne was signed in 1923, Turkish reparations were \"eliminated altogether\".\nGerman defaults.\nFrom the initiation of reparations, German coal deliveries were below the level agreed. In an attempt to rectify this situation, the Spa Conference was held in July 1920. At this conference it was decided that Germany would be paid five marks per coal ton delivered to facilitate coal shipments and help feed the miners. Despite this, Germany continued to default on her obligations. By late 1922, the German defaults on payments had grown so serious and regular that a crisis engulfed the Reparations Commission. French and Belgian delegates urged the seizure of the Ruhr to encourage the Germans to make more effort to pay, while the British supported postponing payments to facilitate the financial reconstruction of Germany. On 26 December 1922, Germany defaulted on timber deliveries. The timber quota was based upon a German proposal and the default was massive.\nThe Allies were unanimous that the default was in bad faith. Whilst Germany had lost important coal-fields in Silesia when these were transferred to Poland under the Versailles treaty, the required coal-quota had also been reduced. Exporting of German coal to Austria and Switzerland continued until December 1921 when the Reparations Committee banned all exports of German coal except to the Netherlands. In January 1923, despite quota reductions, the German Government defaulted on coal deliveries for the 34th time in three years.\nOn 9 January 1923, the Reparation Commission declared Germany to be in default of her coal deliveries and voted to occupy the Ruhr to enforce the country's reparation commitments. Britain was the lone dissenting voice to both measures. On 11 January, French and Belgian soldiers\u2014supported by engineers including an Italian contingent\u2014entered the region, initiating the Occupation of the Ruhr.\nThe French Premier Raymond Poincar\u00e9 was deeply reluctant to order the occupation and had only taken this step after the British had rejected his proposals for more moderate sanctions against Germany. By December 1922, Poincar\u00e9 was faced with Anglo-American-German hostility; coal supplies for French steel production were running low. Exasperated with Britain's failure to act, he wrote to the French ambassador in London:\nJudging others by themselves, the English, who are blinded by their loyalty, have always thought that the Germans did not abide by their pledges inscribed in the Versailles Treaty because they had not frankly agreed to them\u00a0...\u00a0We, on the contrary, believe that if Germany, far from making the slightest effort to carry out the treaty of peace, has always tried to escape her obligations, it is because until now she has not been convinced of her defeat\u00a0...\u00a0We are also certain that Germany, as a nation, resigns herself to keep her pledged word only under the impact of necessity.\nThe occupation proved marginally profitable; the occupying powers received 900 million gold marks, and much of this merely covered the military costs of occupation. However, the real issue behind the occupation was not German defaults on coal and timber deliveries, but the forcing of Germany \"to acknowledge her defeat in World War I and to accept the Versailles Treaty\". Poincar\u00e9 recognized that if Germany could get away with defying Versailles in regard to the reparations, a precedent would be created and inevitably the Germans would proceed to dismantle the rest of the Versailles treaty.\nDawes Plan.\nAlthough the French succeeded in their objective during the Ruhr occupation, the Germans had wrecked their economy by funding passive resistance and brought about hyperinflation. Under Anglo-American pressure and simultaneous decline in the value of the franc, France was increasingly isolated and her diplomatic position was weakened. In October 1923, a committee consisting of American, Belgian, British, French, German, and Italian experts and chaired by the former Director of the US Bureau of the Budget Charles G. Dawes was formed, to consider \"from a purely technical standpoint\", how to balance the German budget, stabilize the economy and set an achievable level of reparations.\nIn April 1924, the Dawes Plan was accepted and it replaced the London schedule of payment. While the \"C\" Bonds were omitted from the plan's framework, they were not formally rescinded. French troops were to withdraw from the Ruhr, and a bank independent of the German Government, with a ruling body at least 50 per cent non-German, was to be established and the German currency was to be stabilized. The payment of reparations was also reorganized. In the first year following the implementation of the plan, Germany would have to pay 1 billion marks. This figure would rise to 2.5 billion marks per year by the fifth year of the plan. A Reparations Agency was established with Allied representatives to organize the payment of reparations. Furthermore, a loan of 800 million marks was to be raised\u2014over 50 per cent coming from the United States, 25 per cent from Britain, and the balance from other European nations\u2014to back the German currency and to aid in the payment of reparations.\nYoung Plan.\nThe adoption of the plan was followed by the Locarno Treaties. The subsequent \"spirit of Locarno\" saw an apparent reconciliation between the European Powers. The implementation of the Dawes Plan also saw a positive economic impact in Europe, largely funded by American loans. Under the Dawes Plan, Germany always met her obligations. However, German long-term goals remained the same despite the apparent reconciliation: the revision of the Treaty of Versailles to end reparations. The Dawes Plan was seen only a temporary measure, with expected future revisions. In late 1927, the Agent-General for Reparations \"called for a more permanent scheme\" for payments and in 1928 the Germans followed suit. German Foreign Minister Gustav Stresemann called for a final reparation plan to be established alongside an early withdrawal of Allied troops from the Rhineland. The French, aware of their weakening political and financial position, acquiesced. On 16 September 1928, a joint Entente-German statement acknowledging the need for a new reparation plan was issued.\nIn February 1929, a new committee was formed to re-examine reparations. It was chaired by the American banker Owen D. Young and presented its findings in June 1929. The \"Young Plan\" was accepted and was ratified by the German Government on 12 March 1930. The plan established a theoretical final reparation figure at 112\u00a0billion gold marks , with a new payment schedule that would see reparations completed by 1988\u2014the first time a final date had been set. In addition, foreign oversight of German finances was to end with the withdrawal of the Reparations Agency, which would be replaced by the Bank for International Settlements. The bank was established to provide cooperation among central banks and to receive and disburse reparation payments. A further loan of was to be raised and given to Germany.\nAs a result of the plan, German payments were half the sum required under the Dawes Plan. The implementation of the Young Plan required the Anglo-French withdrawal from the Rhineland within months. Despite the reduction, there was increasing German hostility to the plan. For example, the Law against the Enslavement of the German People, or Freedom Law, was proposed by the nationalist politician Alfred Hugenberg. Hugenberg's proposed law called for the end of the Ruhr occupation, the official renouncement of Article 231 (the \"war guilt\" clause) and the rejection of the Young Plan. While politicians rejected it, it attracted enough support from voters in order to be put up for a referendum. The plebiscite was held in December 1929, resulting in 5.8 million people out of 6.3 million voters voting in favor of the law. This fell below the required 21 million votes (50% of eligible voters) in order for it to take effect. While this was a political defeat for Hugenberg, it did result in significant national attention for Adolf Hitler, who had worked with Hugenberg to promote the referendum, and subsequently in valuable right-wing financing.\nEnd of German reparations.\nIn March 1930, the German Government collapsed and was replaced by a new coalition led by Chancellor Heinrich Br\u00fcning. In June, Allied troops withdrew from near Mainz\u2014the last occupation zone in the Rhineland\u2014and Br\u00fcning's Government broached the subject of demanding further refinement to reparations, but this demand was refused by William Tyrrell, the British ambassador to France. During 1931, a financial crisis began in Germany. In May, Creditanstalt\u2014the largest bank in Austria\u2014collapsed, sparking a banking crisis in Germany and Austria. In response, Br\u00fcning announced that Germany was suspending reparation payments. This resulted in a massive withdrawal of domestic and foreign funds from German banks. By mid-July, all German banks had closed. Until this point, France's policy had been to provide Germany with financial support to help Br\u00fcning's Government stabilize the country. Br\u00fcning, now under considerable political pressure from the far-right and President Paul von Hindenburg, was unable to make any concessions or reverse policy. As a result, Br\u00fcning was unable to borrow money from foreign or domestic sources. Further attempts to enlist British support to end reparations failed; the British said it was a joint issue with France and the United States. In early July, Br\u00fcning announced \"his intention to seek the outright revision of the Young Plan\". In light of the crisis and with the prospect of Germany being unable to repay her debts, United States President Herbert Hoover intervened. In June, Hoover publicly proposed a one-year moratorium to reparation and war debts. By July, the \"Hoover Moratorium\" had been accepted.\nThe moratorium was widely supported in both Germany and the United Kingdom. The French, initially hesitant, eventually agreed to support the American proposal. However, on 13 July, the German Darmst\u00e4dter Bank collapsed, leading to further bankruptcies and a rise in unemployment further exacerbating Germany's financial crisis. With the Great Depression now exerting its influence, the Bank for International Settlements reported that the Young Plan was unrealistic in light of the economic crisis and urged the world governments to reach a new settlement on the various debts they owed each other. During January 1932, Br\u00fcning said he would seek the complete cancellation of reparations. His position was supported by the British and Italians, and opposed by the French.\nBecause of the political differences between countries on the subject and impending elections in France and Germany, a conference could not be established until June. On 16 June, the Lausanne Conference opened. However, discussions were complicated by the ongoing World Disarmament Conference. At the latter conference, the US informed the British and French that they would not be allowed to default on their war debts. In turn, they recommended that war debts be tied into German reparation payments, to which the Germans objected. On 9 July, an agreement was reached and signed. The Lausanne Conference annulled the Young Plan and required Germany to pay a final, single installment of 3\u00a0billion marks. The Lausanne Treaty was to become effective as soon as a corresponding agreement had been reached with the United States on the repayment of the loans it had made to the Allied powers during World War I. Due to the failure to come to such an agreement, the Lausanne Treaty was not ratified by any of the states involved and therefore never became legally valid. Germany still paid interest on bonds created under the Dawes and Young plans until 1939, but did not resume paying reparations until after 1945.\nAmount paid by Germany.\nThe precise figure Germany paid is a matter of dispute. The German Government estimated it had paid the equivalent of 67.8\u00a0billion gold marks in reparations. The German figure included\u2014other than gold or goods in kind\u2014the scuttling of the German fleet at Scapa Flow, state property lost in lands ceded to other countries, and the loss of colonial territories. The Reparation Commission and the Bank for International Settlements state that 20.598 billion gold marks was paid by Germany in reparations, of which 7.595 billion was paid before the implementation of the London Schedule of Payments. Niall Ferguson provides a slightly lower figure. He estimates that Germany paid no more than 19 billion gold marks. Ferguson further estimates that this sum amounted to 2.4 per cent of Germany's national income between 1919 and 1932. Stephen Schuker, in his comprehensive econometric study, concedes that Germany transferred 16.8\u00a0billion marks over the whole period, but points out that this sum was vastly offset by the devaluation of Allied paper-mark deposits up to 1923, and by loans that Germany subsequently repudiated after 1924. The net capital transfer into Germany amounted to 17.75\u00a0billion marks, or 2.1% of Germany's entire national income over the period 1919\u20131931. In effect, America paid Germany four times more, in price-adjusted terms, than the U.S. furnished to West Germany under the post-1948 Marshall Plan. According to Gerhard Weinberg, reparations were paid, towns were rebuilt, orchards replanted, mines reopened and pensions paid. However, the burden of repairs was shifted away from the German economy and onto the damaged economies of the war's victors. Hans Mommsen wrote \"Germany financed its reparation payments to Western creditor nations with American loans\", which the British and French then used to \"cover their long-term interest obligations and to retire their wartime debts with the United States.\"\nLoan payments.\nGermany's payment of reparations during the 1920s was funded mostly through foreign loans. In 1933, as well as stopping all reparations payments, the new German Chancellor Adolf Hitler in large part repudiated payment of these loans, including a default on all of debt owed in US Dollar bonds. In June 1953, an agreement was reached on this existing debt with West Germany. Germany agreed to repay 50 per cent of the loan amounts that had been defaulted on in the 1920s, but deferred some of the debt until West and East Germany were unified. In 1995, following reunification, Germany began making the final payments towards the loans. A final installment of was made on 3 October 2010, settling German loan debts in regard to reparations.\nAnalysis.\nEffect on the German economy.\nOverall.\nDuring the period of reparations, Germany received between 27 and 38\u00a0billion marks in loans. By 1931, German foreign debt stood at 21.514\u00a0billion marks; the main sources of aid were the United States, Britain, the Netherlands, and Switzerland. Detlev Peukert argued the financial problems that arose in the early 1920s, were a result of post-war loans and the way Germany funded her war effort, and not the result of reparations. During the First World War, Germany did not raise taxes or create new ones to pay for war-time expenses. Rather, loans were taken out, placing Germany in an economically precarious position as more money entered circulation, destroying the link between paper money and the gold reserve that had been maintained before the war. With its defeat, Germany could not impose reparations and pay off her war debts now, which were now colossal.\nHistorian Niall Ferguson partially supports this analysis: had reparations not been imposed, Germany would still have had significant problems caused by the need to pay war debts and the demands of voters for more social services. Ferguson argued that these problems were aggravated by a trade deficit and a weak exchange rate for the mark during 1920. Afterwards, as the value of the mark rose, inflation became a problem. None of these were the result of reparations. According to Ferguson, even without reparations total public spending in Germany between 1920 and 1923 was 33 per cent of total net national product. A.J.P. Taylor wrote \"Germany was a net gainer by the financial transactions of the nineteen-twenties: she borrowed far more from private American investors\u00a0...\u00a0than she paid in reparations\". P.M.H. Bell stated the creation of a multi-national committee, which resulted in the Dawes Plan, was done to consider ways the German budget could be balanced, the currency stabilized, and the German economy fixed to ease reparation payments. Max Winkler wrote that from 1924 onward, German officials were \"virtually flooded with loan offers by foreigners\". Overall, the German economy performed reasonably well until the foreign investments funding the economy and the loans funding reparations payments were suddenly withdrawn after the 1929 Stock Market Crash. This collapse was magnified by the volume of loans provided to German companies by US lenders. Even the reduced payments of the Dawes Plan were mainly financed through a large volume of international loans.\nWhile Germany initially had a trade deficit, British policy during the early 1920s was to reintegrate Germany into European trade as soon as possible. Likewise, France attempted to secure trade deals with Germany. During the mid-to-late 1920s, trade between France and Germany grew rapidly. French imports of German goods \"increased by 60 per cent\", highlighting the close links between French industrial growth and German production, and the increase in cooperation between the countries.\nMax Hantke and Mark Spoerer provide a different perspective on the effect of reparations on the German economy. They wrote that focusing on the reparations and inflation ignores \"the fact that the restriction of the German military to 115,000 men relieved the German central budget considerably\". Hantke and Spoerer argue that their findings show \"that even under quite rigorous assumptions the net economic burden of the Treaty of Versailles was much less heavy than has been hitherto thought, in particular if we confine our perspective to the Reich's budget\". They say, \"though politically a humiliation\", the limitation on the military \"was beneficial in fiscal terms\" and that their economic models show that \"the restriction of the size of the army was clearly beneficial for the Reich budget\". Additionally, their economic scenarios indicate that while the Treaty of Versailles was \"overall clearly a burden on the German economy\", it \"also offered a substantial peace dividend for Weimar's non-revanchist budget politicians.\" They conclude that, \"The fact that [these politicians] did not make sufficient use of this imposed gift supports the hypothesis that the Weimar Republic suffered from home-made political failure\".\nHyperinflation.\nHistorians and economists differ on the subject of whether, and to what extent, reparations were a cause of hyper-inflation in the Weimar republic.\nAmongst those stating that it was a cause, Erik Goldstein wrote that in 1921, the payment of reparations caused a crisis and that the occupation of the Ruhr had a disastrous effect on the German economy, resulting in the German Government printing more money as the currency collapsed. Hyperinflation began and printing presses worked overtime to print Reichsbank notes; by November 1923 one US dollar was worth 4,200,000,000,000 marks. Ferguson writes that the policy of the Economics Minister Robert Schmidt led Germany to avoid economic collapse from 1919 to 1920, but that reparations accounted for most of Germany's budget deficit in 1921 and 1922 and that reparations were the cause of the hyperinflation.\nSeveral historians counter the argument that reparations caused the inflation and collapse of the mark, particular on the grounds that reparations payments, and particularly hard-cash payments, were in large part not made during the period of hyper-inflation and so could not be the cause of it. Gerhard Weinberg writes that Germany refused to pay, and by doing so destroyed their own currency. Anthony Lentin agrees and writes that inflation was \"a consequence of the war rather than of the peace\" and that hyperinflation was a result of the \"German government's reckless issue of paper money\" during the Allied occupation of the Ruhr.\nContemporary British and French experts believed that the Mark was being sabotaged to avoid budgetary and currency reform and to evade reparations, a view supported by Reich Chancellery records. Historian Sally Marks endorsed that view, writing that historians who say reparations caused hyperinflation have overlooked \"that the inflation long predated reparations\" and the way \"inflation mushroomed\" between mid-1921 and the end of 1922 \"when Germany was actually paying very little in reparations\" and have failed to explain why \"the period of least inflation coincided with the period of largest reparation payments\u00a0...\u00a0or why Germans claimed after 1930 that reparations were causing deflation\". She writes \"there is no doubt that British and French suspicions late in 1922 were sound\". Marks also writes that the \"astronomic inflation which ensued was a result of German policy\", whereby the government paid for passive resistance in the Ruhr \"from an empty exchequer\" and paid off its domestic and war debts with worthless marks. Bell agrees and writes that \"inflation had little direct connection with reparation payments themselves, but a great deal to do with the way the German government chose to subsidize industry and to pay the costs of passive resistance to the occupation [of the Ruhr] by extravagant use of the printing press\". Bell also writes that hyperinflation was not an inevitable consequence of the Treaty of Versailles, but was among the actual results.\nCriticism and commentary.\nContemporaneous.\nAccording to historian Claude Campbell, John Maynard Keynes \"set the fashion for critics of the economic aspects of the treaty\" and \"made probably the severest and most sweeping indictment of its economic provisions\". Keynes was temporarily attached to the British Treasury during the war and was their official representative at the peace conference. He later resigned \"when it became evident that hope could no longer be entertained of substantial modifications in the draft Terms of Peace\" due to the \"policy of the Conference towards the economic problems of Europe\".\nIn 1919, Keynes wrote \"The Economic Consequences of the Peace\" based on his objections to the Versailles treaty. He wrote that he believed \"that the campaign for securing out of Germany the general costs of the war was one of the most serious acts of political unwisdom for which our statesmen have ever been responsible\", and called the treaty a \"Carthaginian peace\" that would economically affect all of Europe. Keynes said that the figures being bandied about by politicians at the time of the signing of the treaty, such as US$ or even US$, as \"not within the limits of reasonable possibility\". He instead calculated that US$ was the \"safe maximum figure\", but though he also \"not believe that [Germany could] pay as much\". He predicted that the Reparation Commission was a tool that could \"be employed to destroy Germany's commercial and economic organization as well as to exact payment\".\nWriting of his proposed US$ figure, fixing reparations \"well within Germany's capacity to pay\" would \"make possible the renewal of hope and enterprise within her territory\" and \"avoid the perpetual friction and opportunity of improper pressure arising out of the Treaty clauses\". Keynes identified reparations as the \"main excursion into the economic field\" by the Treaty of Versailles, but said that the treaty excluded provisions for rehabilitating Europe's economies, for improving relations between the Allies and the defeated Central Powers, for stabilizing Europe's new nations, for \"reclaim[ing] Russia\", or for promoting economic solidarity between the Allies. Coal provides an example of these destabilizing effects in Germany and beyond. Keynes said the \"surrender of the coal will destroy German industry\" but conceding that without coal shipments as reparations, the French and Italian industries damaged directly by the war or indirectly by damage to coal mines would be affected. He writes that this is \"not yet the whole problem\". The repercussions would also affect Central and Northern Europe, and neutral states such as Switzerland and Sweden, which made up for their own coal deficiencies by trading with Germany. Likewise, Keynes said Austria would now be consigned to \"industrial ruin\" as \"nearly all the coalfields of the former Empire lie outside of what is now German-Austria\".\nCampbell writes that the \"apparent majority did not regard the treaty as perfect\". Bernard Baruch writes in \"The Making of the Reparation and Economic Sections of the Treaty\" that most believed it to be the best agreement obtainable under the circumstances and that it was a minority that attacked the treaty, but these attacks \"centered upon its economic provisions\". James T. Shotwell, writing in \"What Germany Forgot\", said, \"the only 'unendurable servitudes' in the treaty were in the sections on Reparation and the Polish settlement and raised the question as to what part of Germany's grievance against the peace lay in the substance of its exactions and what part in the manner of their imposition\". Sir Andrew McFayden, who also represented the British Treasury at the peace conference and later worked with the Reparation Commission, published his work \"Don't Do it Again\". McFayden's position \"falls somewhere between the views of Keynes and Shotwell\". His attack on reparations \"was as harsh as Keynes\" but he conceded that the \"fault did not lie primarily in the provisions of the treaty but in their execution\". He also believed \"that the Polish settlement was the only readjustment\u00a0...\u00a0which was decidedly unwise\".\nAlbrecht-Carri\u00e9 writes that before the German surrender, Woodrow Wilson dispatched a note to the German Government on 5 November 1918 stating that the Allies \"under-stand that compensation will be made by Germany for all damage done to the civilian population of the Allies and their property by the aggression of Germany by land, by sea, and from the air\", the terms of which they accepted. Regardless of which, Albrecht-Carri\u00e9 says the reparation section of the treaty proved \"to be a dismal failure\". Campbell says, \"although there was much in the peace that was 'petty, unjust, and humiliating', there was little aside from reparation clauses and certain territorial concessions, which had much real bearing upon Germany's economic future\". Summarizing the view of economists throughout the 1920s, she says the territorial changes to Germany were \"not necessarily\u00a0...\u00a0economically unsound\", but than the removal of the Saar and territory to Poland \"depriv[ed] Germany of her resources in excess of the amount necessary to fulfill the legitimate economic demands of the victors\u00a0...\u00a0[and] was indefensible\". Campbell also said the treaty failed to include \"provisions looking to the restoration of Germany to her former position as the chief economic and financial stabilizing influence in central Europe\" and that this was economically shortsighted and was an economic failing of the treaty.\n\u00c9tienne Mantoux, a French economist, was the harshest contemporaneous critic of Keynes. In his posthumously published book, \"The Carthaginian Peace, or the Economic Consequences of Mr. Keynes\", Mantoux said that Keynes \"had been wrong on various counts, especially with respect to his predictions about Germany's coal, iron and steel production\u00a0...\u00a0and its level of national saving\". Keynes said Europe's overall output of iron would decrease; Mantoux said the opposite occurred. By 1929, European iron output had increased by ten per cent from that of 1913. Keynes believed that this European trend would also affect German iron and steel production. Mantoux says this prediction was also incorrect. By 1927, German steel output had increased by 30 per cent and iron output increased by 38 per cent from 1913. Keynes predicted that German coal extraction would also decrease and that Germany would not be able to export coal immediately after the war. Mantoux also counters these arguments. By 1920, German was exporting 15 million tons of coal a year and reached 35\u00a0million tons by 1926. By 1929, German coal mining had risen by 30 per cent on the 1913 figures because of her increased labor efficiency methods. In regard to national savings, Keynes stated that 2\u00a0billion marks would only be possible after the adoption of the treaty. Mantoux says that the 1925 German national savings figure was estimated at 6.4\u00a0billion marks, rising to 7.6\u00a0billion marks by 1927. Mantoux calculated that Germany borrowed between 8\u00a0billion and 35\u00a0billion marks in the period 1920\u20131931, while only paying 21\u00a0billion in reparations. This, he says, allowed Germany to re-equip, expand, and modernize her industry. Highlighting the rearmament under Hitler, Mantoux said Germany \"had been in a stronger position to pay reparations than Keynes had made out\". He also says that Germany could have paid all of the reparations if she had wanted to, and that the problem was not that Germany was unable to pay, but that she was unwilling to pay.\nIn 1954, United States Secretary of State John Foster Dulles\u2014one of the authors of Article 231\u2014said that, \"Efforts to bankrupt and humiliate a nation merely incite a people of vigor and of courage to break the bonds imposed upon them\u00a0...\u00a0Prohibitions thus incite the very acts that are prohibited.\"\nModern.\nGeoff Harcourt writes that Keynes' arguments that reparations would lead to German economic collapse have been adopted \"by historians of almost all political persuasions\" and have influenced the way historians and the public \"see the unfolding events in Germany and the decades between Versailles and the outbreak of the Second World War\". He says Mantoux's work \"is not simply a critique of Keynes\", but \"a stimulus to question the received wisdom's interpretation of the unfolding events in Germany\". Harcourt says that despite it discussing Keynes' errors \"in great detail\", Mantoux's work \"has not led us to revise our general judgment of Keynes\", yet \"it does make us question the soundness of theoretical and empirical aspects\" of his arguments. A.J.P. Taylor writes that in 1919 \"many people believed that the payment of reparations would reduce Germany to a state of Asiatic poverty\", and that Keynes \"held this view, as did all Germans; and probably many Frenchmen\". However, he also says these \"apprehensions of Keynes and the Germans were grotesquely exaggerated\".\nAccording to Martel, Taylor \"shrewdly concludes that \u00c9tienne Mantoux had the better of his controversy with John Maynard Keynes\". Stephen Schuker writes that Keynes' \"tendentious but influential\" book was \"ably refuted\" by Mantoux. Richard J. Evans says \"the economic history of the 1920s and early 1930s seemed to confirm\" the arguments of Keynes, yet \"as we now know\" Keynes' reparation arguments were wrong. Evans says the economic problems that arose were a result of the inflation of 1923, which lay with the German government rather than reparations.\nAccording to Slavieck, the \"traditional interpretation of the treaty's impact on Germany\" was that it \"plunged the nation into an economic free fall\". This view was shared by the German people, who believed the treaty was robbing Germany of its wealth. German banker Max Warburg said the terms of the treaty were \"pillage on a global scale\". Niall Ferguson says the German view was incorrect and \"not many historians would today agree with Warburg\". However, several historians agree with Warburg. Norman Davies writes that the treaty forced Germany to \"pay astronomic reparations\", while Tim McNeese states, \"France and Britain had placed war damages on Germany to the tune of billions of gold marks, which the defeated Germans could not begin to pay in earnest\". Ferguson says the reparations were \"less of a burden than Keynes and others claimed\" and that the \"potential burden on national income of the annuity vary from 5 percent to 10 percent\". However, he cautions against underestimating the initial German effort to pay. Before the implementation of the Dawes Plan, Germany transferred between eight and 13\u00a0billion gold marks, which amounted to \"between 4 and 7 percent of total national income\". Ferguson says \"the annuity demanded in 1921 put an intolerable strain on the state's finances\" and that total expenditure between 1920 and 1923 amounted to \"at least 50 percent of Reich revenue, 20 percent of total Reich spending and 10 percent of total public spending\". Thus, Ferguson says, reparations \"undermined confidence in the Reich's creditworthiness\" and \"\"were\" therefore excessive\u2014as the German government claimed\".\nHantke and Spoerer write that \"reparation payments were indeed a severe economic burden for Germany\" and that \"the German economy was deprived of between one and 2.2\u00a0billion Reichsmark (RM) annually, which amounted in the late 1920s to nearly 2.5 per cent of Germany's GDP\". Gerald Feldman writes, \"there can be no question that the entire London schedule could be viewed as a way of reducing the reparations bill without the Allied publics being fully informed of what was going on. This was recognized by at least some German politicians, one of whom optimistically argued that 'the entente will only demand the 50\u00a0billion marks, not the rest. They have only called for the rest for domestic political reasons.'\" Feldman also says the prospect that the 'C' bonds would be evoked hung over the German Government like a \"Damocles Sword\". In addition to Feldman and Ferguson's opposition, Peter Kruger, Barry Eichengreen, and Steven Webb agree that \"the initial German effort to pay reparations\" was substantial and \"produced an immense strain\" on the German economy.\nSeveral historians take the middle ground between condemning reparations and supporting the argument that they were not a complete burden upon Germany. Detlev Peukert states, \"Reparations did not, in fact, bleed the German economy\" as had been feared, however the \"psychological effects of reparations were extremely serious, as was the strain that the vicious circle of credits and reparations placed the international financial system\". P.M.H. Bell writes that while reparations were unwelcome in Germany and caused a \"strain on the German balance of payments\", they could be paid and were \"compatible with a general recovery in European commerce and industry\". According to Martel, Robert Boyce said reparations were \"a heavy burden on Germany, both as a financial charge\u00a0...\u00a0and as a charge on Germany's balance of payments\". However, he says that while \"Germany claimed it could not afford to pay reparations\" this was far from the truth, and that \"\u00a0...\u00a0Germany had made little effort to pay reparations. It refused to levy the necessary taxes, and far from accumulating the foreign exchange required for their payment by collecting some of the overseas earnings of German exporters, it allowed them to leave their earnings abroad\". William R. Keylor agrees with Boyce, and says, \"an increase in taxation and reduction in consumption in the Weimar Republic would have yielded the requisite export surplus to generate the foreign exchange needed to service the reparation debt\". However, Charles Feinstein writes that these kind of arguments overlook the extreme reluctance of the Germans \"to accept even a modest increase in taxation to meet what was universally regarded as an unjustified and oppressive imposition by hostile adversaries\". Feinstein says that \"even if the economic aspects\u00a0...\u00a0were not as crippling as had been assumed in the 1920s, the exaction of reparations was still of deep political and psychological significance for Germany\".\nSally Marks writes, \"There are those\u00a0...\u00a0who claim reparations were unpayable. In financial terms, that is untrue\u00a0...\u00a0Of course Germans did not want to pay; nobody ever wants to pay, and Weimar was determined not to do so\u00a0...\u00a0Raising taxes would have provided ample funds\u00a0...\u00a0Weimar could have borrowed from the citizenry, as France did after 1871 [to pay its indemnity to Germany]\". Marks writes that Germany could have easily paid the 50\u00a0billion marks in reparations, but instead chose to repeatedly default on payments as part of a political strategy of undermining Versailles. Marks says that in 1921, Germany met her requirements in full because custom posts were occupied by Allied troops. Once the Allies had relinquished control of the customs posts, Germany made no further payments in cash until 1924 following the implementation of the Dawes Plan. Marks says that while Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles \"established an unlimited theoretical liability\", Article 232 limited German responsibility to pay only for civilian damages. When the 1921 London conference to determine how much Germany should pay was called, the Allies calculated on the basis of what Germany could pay, not on their own needs. In this way, Marks says, the Germans largely escaped paying for the war and instead shifted the costs onto American investors. Marks states that the delay in establishing a final total until 1921, \"was actually in Germany's interest\" because the figures discussed at the peace conference were \"astronomic\". She says, \"The British experts, Lords Sumner and Cunliffe, were so unrealistic that they were nicknamed 'the heavenly twins'.\" Marks also says, \"much ink has been wasted on the fact that civilian damages were stretched to cover war widows' pensions and allowances for military dependents\". As reparations were based on what Germany could pay, Marks says the inclusion of such items did not affect German liability but altered distribution of reparations; the \"inclusion of pensions and allowances increased the British share of the pie but did not enlarge the pie.\"\nBernadotte Schmitt writes that if \"pensions and separation allowances\u00a0...\u00a0not been included, reparations would probably never have become the bogey that poisoned the post-war world for so many years. Taylor says, \"no doubt the impoverishment of Germany was caused by war, not by reparations. Not doubt the Germans could have paid reparations, if they had regarded them as an obligation of honour, honestly incurred.\" However, he says, \"reparations\u00a0 ...\u00a0kept the passions of war alive\". Peter Liberman writes that while the Germans believed they could not meet such demands of them, the \"French believed that Germany could pay and only lacked the requisite will\" to do so. Liberman says this is \"a position that has gained support from recent historical research\". In regard to Germany's capacity to pay, he focuses on coal and says that German coal consumption per capita was higher than France's despite coal shipments being consistently short. He also says, \"the reparations demanded at Versailles were not far out of proportion to German economic potential\" and that in terms of national income it was similar to what the Germans demanded of France following the Franco-Prussian War. Martin Kitchen also says the impression that Germany was crippled by the reparations is a myth. Rather than a weakened Germany, he states the opposite was true.\nKeylor says that literature on reparations has \"long suffered from gross misrepresentation, exaggeration, and outright falsification\" and that it \"should finally succumb to the archive-based discoveries of scholars\". Diane Kunz, summarizing the historiography on the subject, writes that historians have refuted the myth that reparations placed an intolerable burden on Germany. Marks says a \"substantial degree of scholarly consensus now suggests that paying\u00a0...\u00a0was within Germany's financial capacity\". Ruth Henig writes, \"most historians of the Paris peace conference now take the view that, in economic terms, the treaty was not unduly harsh on Germany and that, while obligations and damages were inevitably much stressed in the debates at Paris to satisfy electors reading the daily newspapers, the intention was quietly to give Germany substantial help towards paying her bills, and to meet many of the German objections by amendments to the way the reparations schedule was in practice carried out\".\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "33116", "revid": "6457341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33116", "title": "World Series of Poker", "text": "Series of poker tournaments, held annually\nThe World Series of Poker (WSOP) is a series of poker tournaments held annually in Paradise, Nevada, and since 2004, sponsored by Caesars Entertainment. It dates its origins to 1970, when Benny Binion invited seven of the best-known poker players to the Horseshoe Casino for a single tournament, with a set start and stop time, and a winner determined by a secret ballot of the seven players.\nAs of 2020, the WSOP consists of 101 events, with most major poker variants featured. Events traditionally take place during one day or over several consecutive days during the series in June and July. \nThe 2024 WSOP was held at the Horseshoe and Paris Las Vegas, and saw record-breaking attendance for the Main Event tournament. In August 2024, Caesars Entertainment announced it had sold the WSOP brand to GGPoker operator NSUS Group for $500 million.\nHistory.\nThe idea of a World Series of Poker began in 1969 with an event called the Texas Gamblers Reunion. It was an invitational event sponsored by Tom Moore of Castle Hills, Texas, and held at the Holiday Hotel and Casino in Reno. This inaugural event was won by Crandell Addington. The set of tournaments that the World Series of Poker (WSOP) would evolve into was the brainchild of Las Vegas casino owner and poker player Benny Binion. In 1970, the first WSOP at Binion's Horseshoe took place as a series of cash games that included five-card stud, deuce to seven low-ball draw, razz, seven-card stud, and Texas hold 'em. The format for the Main Event as a freeze-out Texas hold 'em game came the next year. The winner in 1970, Johnny Moss, was elected by his peers as the first \"World Champion of Poker\" and received a silver cup as a prize.\nAcquisition by Harrah's.\nIn 2004, Harrah's Entertainment (now Caesars Entertainment) purchased Binion's Horseshoe, retained the rights to the Horseshoe and World Series of Poker brands, sold the hotel and casino to MTR Gaming Group, and announced that the 2005 Series events would be held at the Harrah's-owned Rio Hotel and Casino, located just off the Las Vegas Strip. Since 2004 the official sponsor of the World Series of Poker has been the Caesars Entertainment Corporation. The final two days of the 2005 WSOP Main Event were held downtown at what is now the MTR-operated \"Binion's\" in celebration of the centennial of the founding of Las Vegas. The WSOP added a made-for-television $2 million \"freeroll\" invitational Tournament of Champions (TOC) event first won by Annie Duke as a \"winner-take-all\" event.\n2005 expansion \u2013 WSOP Circuit.\nStarting in 2005, the WSOP began the World Series of Poker Circuit, a satellite series held at Harrah's-owned properties in the United States. In addition to the $10,000 buy-in tournament at each site, qualifying players became eligible for a revamped Tournament of Champions. The 2005 TOC, made up of the top twenty qualifying players at each circuit event, along with the final table from the 2005 Main Event, and the winners of nine or more bracelets (Johnny Chan, Doyle Brunson, and Phil Hellmuth) would participate in the revamped TOC at Caesars Palace. Mike Matusow won the first prize of $1 million (US), and all the players at the final table were guaranteed a minimum of $25,000 for the eighth and ninth-place finishers.\nDuring a break in the final table of the 2005 Main Event on July 16, Harrah's announced that eleven properties \u2014 including the recently added Bally's and Caesar's properties \u2014 would host 2005\u201306 WSOP Circuit events that started on August 11 in Tunica, Mississippi. One event that was scheduled for Biloxi, Mississippi, was canceled after the Grand Casino Biloxi, which was scheduled to host the event, suffered major damage from Hurricane Katrina. The Rio also hosted the 2006 World Series of Poker, which began on June 25 with satellite events and formally began the day after with the annual Casino Employee event, won in 2006 by Chris Gros. 2006 featured the Tournament of Champions on June 25 and 26, won by Mike Sexton. Various events led up to the Main Event, which was held from July 28 until August 10. The first prize of $12 million was awarded to Jamie Gold.\n2007 expansion \u2013 WSOP Europe.\nThe World Series of Poker Europe (WSOPE) is the first expansion of the World Series of Poker in series history. In September 2007, the first WSOP championship events outside of Las Vegas, complete with bracelets, were held. The inaugural WSOPE consisted of three events held in London from September 6\u201317, 2007. The main event, a \u00a310,000 buy-in no-limit hold 'em tournament, was won by Norwegian online prodigy Annette Obrestad on the day before her 19th birthday. This made her the youngest person ever to win a WSOP bracelet, a record that cannot be broken in the Las Vegas WSOP under current laws because the minimum legal age for casino gaming in Nevada is 21. Obrestad could play in the WSOPE because the minimum age for casino gaming in the United Kingdom is 18. While no definitive plans have been announced, WSOP Commissioner Jeffrey Pollack has indicated that in the next one to three years that other venues may start holding WSOP events. Two locations that have been mentioned as possible expansion sites are Egypt and South Africa, and the World Series of Poker Africa was ultimately launched in South Africa in 2010. However, it is currently treated as a WSOP Circuit event, with no bracelets awarded. The next expansion of the WSOP that included bracelet events was ultimately to Australia.\nThe WSOPE moved from London to Cannes, France, in 2011. At that time, the buy-ins and payouts changed from being fixed in pounds to euros. The event moved again in 2013, this time to the Paris suburb of Enghien-les-Bains.\nFrom 2013 to 2017 the WSOPE was held only in odd-numbered years, with the newly launched World Series of Poker Asia Pacific (WSOP APAC) conducted in even-numbered years. WSOPE has been held annually since 2017.\n2010 expansion \u2013 WSOP Africa.\nIn 2010, the WSOP expanded overseas once again, only this time to Gauteng, South Africa. Although the 2010 event was part of the WSOP Circuit, winners did not earn a gold ring or standing for the WSOP Circuit National Championship, both of which were common for other circuit events. This policy changed in 2012. The WSOPA did not occur in 2011 but would come back in 2012.\n2013 expansion \u2013 WSOP Asia Pacific.\nOn April 30, 2012, the WSOP and Australian casino Crown Melbourne jointly announced the creation of the World Series of Poker Asia-Pacific (WSOP APAC). The first edition of the event was held at Crown's Melbourne Casino from April 4\u201315, 2013 and featured five bracelet events in the series.\n2015 expansion \u2013 WSOP International Circuit.\nIn 2015, the WSOP International Circuit was launched, with rounds in Canada, Latin America, the Caribbean, Europe, Asia-Pacific and Africa. The winners of each tournament join the WSOP Circuit winners to play the WSOP Global Casino Championship. The International Circuit has expanded to 13 tournaments for the 2017/18 season.\n2020 expansion \u2013 WSOP Online.\nDue to the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent restrictions on live poker events, there was a heavy focus on online events for 2020 and 2021, with dedicated online series during both years.\n2023 expansion \u2013 WSOP Paradise.\nIn 2023, the WSOP expanded to Atlantis Paradise Island in the Bahamas.\nFormat.\nThe winner of each event receives a World Series of Poker bracelet and a monetary prize based on the number of entrants and buy-in amounts. Over the years, the tournament has grown in both the number of events and in the number of participants. Each year, the WSOP culminates with the $10,000 no-limit hold'em \"Main Event,\" which, since 2004, has attracted entrants numbering in the thousands. The victor receives a multi-million dollar cash prize and a bracelet, which has become the most coveted award a poker player can win. The winner of the World Series of Poker Main Event is considered to be the World Champion of Poker.\nSince 1971, all WSOP events have been tournaments with cash prizes. In 1973, a five-card stud event was added. Since then, new events have been added and removed. Since 1976, a bracelet has been awarded to the winner of every event at the annual WSOP; later on, the winners of events before 1976 were retroactively given bracelets.\nThe tournament grew slowly for over a decade, reaching 52 participants in 1982. In the early 1980s, satellite tournaments were introduced, allowing people to win their way into the various events. By 1987, there were over 2,100 entrants in the entire series. At the 2006 World Series of Poker, there were 45 events, covering the majority of poker variants. Participation in the Main Event peaked that year, with 8,773 players.\nThe number of participants in the WSOP grew every year from 2000 until 2006. Following 2006, new online gambling legislation restricted the number of online qualifiers to the event. 2007 was the first dip in numbers in the 21st century while in 2008 more people participated than the previous year. In 2000, there were 4,780 entrants in the various events, but in 2005, the number rose to over 23,000 players. In the main event alone, the number of participants grew from 839 in 2003 to 8,773 in 2006, and has hovered between 6,300 and 7,200 entrants in the eleven years since. Phil Hellmuth has won the most bracelets with 17 followed by Phil Ivey with 11 bracelets. Crandell Addington is the only player to place in the top ten of the World Series of Poker Main Event eight times, albeit in earlier years with small fields compared to modern times. Four players have won the Main Event multiple times: Johnny Moss (1970, 1971, and 1974), Doyle Brunson (1976 and 1977), Stu Ungar (1980, 1981, and 1997) and Johnny Chan (1987 and 1988). Bracelet winners who first achieved fame in other fields include French actor/singer Patrick Bruel (in 1998), Danish soccer player Jan Vang S\u00f8rensen (in 2002), American actress Jennifer Tilly (in 2005), and American musician/record producer Steve Albini (in 2018 and 2022). In recent years, there have been non-bracelet events at the WSOP; two of the most notable are the \"World Series of Rock Paper Scissors\" and \"Ante Up for Africa.\"\nCurrently, Texas hold 'em, Omaha hold 'em and Seven-card stud and their lowball variants are played. H.O.R.S.E. has been played in the past and returned in 2006. Also, S.H.O.E. has been played in the past, and returned in 2007. Other events played in the past include Chinese poker, Five card stud, and many others. Like most tournaments, the sponsoring casino takes an entry fee (a percentage between 6% and 10%, depending on the buy-in) and distributes the rest, hence the prize money increasing with more players. In 2024, entry fees across all events range from $300 to $250,000, the latter being for the Super High Roller event. The Main Event, which is the highlight of the entire WSOP festival, has a buy-in of $10,000. In the 2005 Main Event, US$52,818,610 in prize money was distributed among 560 players, with US$7.5 million as the first prize. The 2006 Main Event, won by Jamie Gold, was the largest single poker tournament by prize pool or by entrant numbers in history; Gold pocketed US$12 million for his victory. In July 2010, it was announced that the winner of the 2010 Main Event would receive just under US$9 million. The 2023 Main Event took the record for entries, first-place prize, and prize pool. The 2024 Main Event set a record for entries and prize pool.\nOn June 2, 2011, the World Series of Poker and Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Lalibert\u00e9 announced plans for an officially sanctioned special fundraising event, known as The Big One for One Drop, starting on July 1, 2012, with a record US$1 million entry fee. 11% of the money (more precisely, $111,111 from each buy-in) went to Lalibert\u00e9's charity, the One Drop Foundation, and the WSOP waived its normal 10% rake of the entry fees. At the time of the original announcement, 15 of the maximum 48 seats had been taken. By early December 2011, the field size had increased to 22, the minimum required for an official bracelet tournament. Among those who committed early to the event were Johnny Chan, Daniel Negreanu, Jonathan Duhamel, Tom Dwan, Lalibert\u00e9, billionaire businessman Phil Ruffin and Erik Seidel. On April 12, 2012, the WSOP announced that 30 players had committed to the tournament, which brought the first prize to $12.3 million, exceeding the record amount won by Jamie Gold. In the end, all 48 seats were filled, resulting in a first prize of $18.3 million. Poker professional Antonio Esfandiari won the event, also receiving a special platinum WSOP bracelet.\n While the Main Event is the biggest - according to prize pool - event in the series; the Millionaire Maker ($1,500 buy-in) is next up top with its latest edition bearing a prize pool of $14,603,565. Inaugurated in 2018 the tournament has ever since held a $1,000,000 guarantee for first place.\n In 2023, the World Series of Poker introduced a $300 no-limit hold 'em bracelet event called Gladiators of Poker, its lowest-priced event. The event has a guaranteed $3 million prize pool and attracted over 23,000 players in its inaugural year.\nMain Event.\nSince 1972, the Main Event of the WSOP has been the $10,000 buy-in no-limit Texas Hold 'em (NLHE) tournament (in 1971 the buy-in was $5,000 and the inaugural 1970 event was an invitational with winner determined by a vote from the players). Winners of the event not only get the largest prize of the tournament and a gold bracelet, but additionally their picture is placed in the \"Gallery of Champions\" at Binion's.\nThe winner of the Main Event has traditionally been given the unofficial title of World Champion. However, some believe that no-limit hold 'em is not the optimal structure for determining a champion poker player. In 2002, Daniel Negreanu argued that the Main Event should switch to pot-limit hold 'em, believing that pot-limit required a more complete set of poker skills than no-limit, although he admitted that such a change would likely never be made. However, after the $50,000 H.O.R.S.E./Poker Players Championship event was added, many of the game's top professionals, including Negreanu, have since stated that this tournament ultimately decides the world's best player. The $50,000 buy-in, being five times larger than the buy-in for the Main Event, has thus far tended to deter amateurs from playing in this event, and the variety of games played require a broader knowledge of poker. The first $50,000 event, conducted as a H.O.R.S.E. tournament, was won by Chip Reese in 2006. In 2010, the $50,000 event changed from H.O.R.S.E. to an \"8-game\" format, adding no-limit hold 'em, pot-limit Omaha, and 2\u20137 triple draw to the mix, and was rechristened The Poker Players Championship, with Michael Mizrachi winning the first edition of the revamped event. Since Reese's death in December 2007, the winner of this event receives the David 'Chip' Reese Memorial Trophy in addition to the bracelet and the prize money.\nThere have been many memorable moments during the main events, including Jack Straus's 1982 comeback win after discovering he had one $500 chip left when he thought he was out of the tournament. The end of the 1988 main event was featured in the movie \"Rounders\". Chris Moneymaker and Greg Raymer, the winners in 2003 and 2004, both qualified for the main event through satellite tournaments at the PokerStars online card room. Jerry Yang, the winner in 2007, had only been playing poker for two years prior to his victory. He won his seat at a $225 satellite tournament at Pechanga Resort &amp; Casino, in California. With the passage of the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act (UIGEA) of 2006 online poker sites have been barred from purchasing entrance directly for their users.\nIn the 2023 Main Event, a new record was set for entries and a first-place prize for the first time since 2006. The 2024 WSOP Main Event set a new record for entries.\nWSOP Main Event winners.\nWSOP Main Event records.\nThese records do not include WSOP Europe or Asia Pacific Main Events.\nPlayers.\nPoker Hall of Fame.\nSince its inception in 1979, the WSOP Poker Hall of Fame has honored 42 individuals. Selection criteria for players include having competed against acknowledged top competition, played for high stakes, and played consistently well to gain the respect of their peers. For non-players, selection is based on positive and lasting contributions to the overall growth and success of poker.\nPlayer of the Year.\nSince 2004, a Player of the Year (POY) award has been given to the player with the most points accumulated throughout the WSOP. As of 2025, nineteen different players have won the twenty-four awards, with Daniel Negreanu and Shaun Deeb as the only players to win the award more than once.\nOnly \"open\" events in which all players can participate count in the standings; this eliminates the Seniors, Ladies, and Casino Employee events. Beginning with the 2006 World Series of Poker, the Main Event and the $50,000 H.O.R.S.E. competition had no effect on the outcome of the winner of the Player of the Year award. In the 2008 World Series of Poker, the $50,000 H.O.R.S.E. event counted toward the Player of the Year award, but the Main Event did not. Since 2009, all open events, including the Main Event, count towards Player of the Year. The Player of the Year standings were based upon performance solely at the WSOP in Las Vegas up until 2010, but beginning in 2011 have also taken the World Series of Poker Europe into account, and starting in 2013 also include events in the World Series of Poker Asia Pacific. The 2011 WSOP Player of the Year organized by \"Bluff Magazine\" used a different scoring system which took into account field sizes and buy-in amounts when calculating points earned. This scoring system has been used ever since.\nSince 2016, the WSOP payout a bigger percentage of the field (15% instead of 10% until then).\nNotes\nBracelets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMoney finishes.\n\"Information correct as of December 23, 2023\"\nCareer earnings.\n\"Information correct as of June 19, 2025.\"\nRecords.\nSince its inception, Stu Ungar and Johnny Moss are the only players to have won the Main Event three times. However, Moss's first victory came in a different format, as he was elected winner by vote of his fellow players at the conclusion of what was then a timed event. Moss, Ungar, Doyle Brunson, and Johnny Chan are the only people who have won the Main Event in consecutive years. Chan's second victory in 1988 was featured in the 1998 film \"Rounders\".\nPhil Hellmuth holds multiple WSOP records including most bracelets, most WSOP cashes, and most WSOP final tables. He is also the only player to have won the Main Events of both the WSOP and WSOP Europe.\nIn recent years, the prize pool for the WSOP Main Event has become so large that the winner instantly becomes one of the top money winners of WSOP and even in tournament poker history. Before July 2012, the top seven players on the all-time WSOP Earnings list were Main Event champions from 2005 to 2011, among whom Jamie Gold topped those seven, he won the 2006 Main Event, which had then the biggest first prize for a single tournament, and still is the largest poker tournament by prize pool in history. However, the all-time leader is currently poker professional Daniel Negreanu, who has not won a Main Event, although he won the inaugural WSOP Asia Pacific Main Event in 2013. He is followed by professionals Antonio Esfandiari and Daniel Colman, both also yet to win a Main Event in Las Vegas.\nThe list below includes the WSOP Europe and WSOP Asia-Pacific, but excludes WSOP Circuit events and other non-bracelet events. The results are updated through the 2014 WSOP APAC.\nWomen at the WSOP.\nAt present, women make up around 5% of the field in all the events at the annual WSOP tournament. Vanessa Selbst, Barbara Enright and Nani Dollison all have won three WSOP bracelets. Kristen Bicknell leads the pack with five WSOP bracelets.\nLast Woman Standing.\nIn 2015, Kelly Minkin finished in 29th place in the Main Event earning the \"Last Woman Standing\". \nIn the 2007 World Series of Poker, Maria Ho was the last woman remaining in the Championship Event, placing 38th out of 6,358 players and earning a $237,865 payday. She repeated this accomplishment in 2014, when she came in 77th place out of 6,683 players. Her 27th place \"Last Woman Standing\" finish at the 2011 World Series of Poker Europe Main Event along with a 2017 6th place final table finish makes Maria the only player to ever hold the title Last Woman Standing four times over and at both the WSOP and WSOPE Main Events.\nIn 1995, Barbara Enright became the only woman to make the Final Table of the World Series of Poker, finishing in fifth place. She also finished in the money of the Main Event in 2005. An Ambassador of Poker League of Nations, Barbara is the first woman to win two WSOP bracelets, the first woman to win three bracelets, and the first woman to win an open event at the World Series of Poker. Barbara is also the first woman to be inducted into the Poker Hall of Fame, the Women in Poker Hall of Fame, and the Senior Poker Hall of Fame, making her the only poker player to be in all three poker halls of fame.\nBarbara Enright's unique performance of making the Final Table was almost broken in 2011, when both France's Gaelle Baumann and Norway's Elisabeth Hille made deep runs. However, they bubbled the Final Table, finishing 10th and 11th respectively. In 2025, Leo Margets of Spain became the first woman in 30 years to reach the Final Table. Years earlier, in 2009, she also was the \"Last Woman Standing\", finishing 27th.\nWSOP Ladies Championship Events.\nIn 1977, the first ladies-only event was introduced in the form of $100 buy-in Stud Poker Tournament. Jackie McDaniels won that event to become the first ladies champion. She won one of the smallest prizes ($5,580) in WSOP history. By 2007, the popularity of the Ladies Event had grown to the point that it became the first ladies-only event to have a prize pool greater than $1,000,000. Seven card stud was the game for the event's first two decades, but it was replaced by Texas hold 'em in 2001.\nWSOP television coverage.\n1970s.\nThe earliest filming of the World Series was a special produced by Binion's Horseshoe in 1973 and narrated by Jimmy \"The Greek\" Snyder. CBS began covering the World Series in the late 1970s.\n1980s.\nIn the early 1980s, the event was again broadcast as specials. In the late 1980s, the World Series returned to television as ESPN took over broadcasting. Initially, coverage only consisted of just a single one-hour taped-delay broadcast of the Main Event.\n1990s.\nESPN Classic currently airs many of the old broadcasts from the mid-1990s and beyond. Since no \"pocket cam\" existed, very few hole cards were actually shown to television viewers. Generally, ESPN used poker-playing actors such as Dick Van Patten, Vince Van Patten, and Gabe Kaplan, with either the tournament director (usually Jim Albrecht) or a poker professional, of which one was Phil Hellmuth, joining the team. Unlike today's coverage, ESPN featured no pre-taped interviews or profiles on the players. In addition, the commentators were generally on the casino floor itself.\n2000s.\nEarly 2000s.\nFrom 1999 to 2001, the World Series of Poker was broadcast by The Discovery Channel. These hour-long programs presented more of an overview or recap of the WSOP as opposed to broadcasting an actual live event with play-by-play analysis and color commentary. The Discovery Channel's broadcast also featured final table players interviews interlaced throughout the show. ESPN would resume coverage the following year.\nESPN's coverage in 2002 was typical of their coverage in the 1990s (recorded in video, little or no post-production commentary or player profiles, no card cams). However, the final table broadcast was expanded over two one-hour episodes. The 2002 WSOP was the first with the \"sneak peek\" (later called the pocket cam, or hole cam).\n2003 expansion.\nIn 2003, Fred Christenson secured the long-term rights acquisition for ESPN, and the channel expanded their coverage to new heights with their coverage of the WSOP. They included coverage of the entire tournament, with a \"Featured Table\". At this table, the viewers could see the player's hole cards and subsequent strategy. The action was also broadcast as if live, though on tape-delay. 2003 was the first year that the broadcast covered action preceding the final table. Since then, ESPN has greatly expanded its coverage to include many of the preliminary events of the WSOP, especially Texas Hold 'Em. Also, their coverage of the main event now typically includes at least one hour program on each day. For the first two years of its existence, ESPN was broadcasting one hour programs of the \"circuit\" events that the WSOP has at various Harrah's-owned casinos, but ESPN did not renew these events. ESPN's coverage now includes many of the trappings of sports coverage, such as lighter segments (called \"The Nuts\") and interviews. ESPN's coverage has been largely driven by Matt Maranz, Executive Producer for the WSOP telecasts. Maranz previously worked on ESPN's football pre-game show, and has also produced taped segments for NBC's Olympic coverage.\n2004\u20132020.\nCoverage would increase in 2004 and 2005 to include preliminary events from the WSOP, in addition to the \"Main Event\". ESPN has expanded poker to all-new levels, especially with their coverage of the 2006 WSOP, including providing the entire final table of the 2006 Main Event via pay-per-view airing. In 2008, ESPN experimented with the idea of a delayed final table. This idea presented greater sponsorship opportunities and notoriety, culminating in a recap of the Main Event and the conclusion of the 2008 Main Event final table. In 2009, ESPN announced they would again move the final table to November 2009. The WSOP also decided there would be no rebuy events in 2009. The decision was reached because of complaints that rebuy events provided an unfair advantage to professionals with no limitation on how much money they can spend for an event. There were 57 bracelet events that year. The 2010 WSOP had the same number of bracelet events as in 2009, again with no rebuy events.\nWith 58 bracelet events and no rebuy events, the 2011 WSOP featured unprecedented \"nearly live\" coverage, with broadcasts being delayed by much smaller amounts of time while still satisfying Nevada Gaming Commission regulators. Caesars Entertainment, via WSOP.com, streamed final-table coverage of all bracelet events on a 5-minute delay, although without pocket cams. The ESPN family of networks aired 36 hours of Main Event coverage leading up to the November Nine on a 30-minute delay, showing the hole cards of all players who voluntarily entered the pot once the hand ended. The Main Event final table was broadcast on a 15-minute delay with the same policy regarding hole cards. The first day of the final table was aired on ESPN2 and the final day on ESPN, with both days also streamed on ESPN3 and WSOP.com. ESPN continued to have coverage of the WSOP in 2012.\nPOKER PROductions has produced the World Series of Poker Europe since 2008 and World Series of Poker since 2011. Former pro turned executive producer Mori Eskandani's team pioneered the live broadcast format seen at the WSOP since 2011. POKER PROductions has filmed WSOP bracelet final tables and the WSOP Main Event for PokerGO, a subscription video on demand service. PokerGO has had exclusive WSOP broadcast rights since 2017, with shared coverage of select events appearing on PokerGO.\n2021\u2013present.\nStarting in 2021, CBS Sports Network became the official television home of the World Series of Poker through a multi-year deal reached with PokerGO. Per the terms of the new deal, CBS Sports was set to broadcast 15 hours of WSOP Main Event coverage plus 36 additional hours from select gold bracelet events. In an interview for Card Player Magazine, PokerGO President Mori Eskandani mentioned longtime WSOP broadcasters Lon McEachern and Norman Chad would be back in the booth, along with Ali Nejad, David Tuchman, and Jeff Platt.\nLive broadcast coverage of the 2021 WSOP moved exclusively to PokerGO. PokerGO's 2021 WSOP live streaming coverage began on Monday, October 4, and would include 36 days of live broadcasts from more than 20 unique events as part of the 52nd annual WSOP. As part of PokerGO's live coverage of the 2021 WSOP, and for the first time ever, live streaming of the WSOP Main Event moved to the PokerGO platform and would be broadcast from start to finish.\nWSOP broadcasters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMarketing.\nThe WSOP has corporate sponsors and licensed products which pay fees to market themselves as an official sponsors and/or licensees and exclusively use the WSOP insignia and cross-promote with their events. Besides the hosting casino and ESPN, major sponsors have included Jack Links Beef Jerky, Miller Brewing's \"Milwaukee's Best\" brand of beers, Pepsi's SoBe Adrenaline Rush energy drink (sponsors of the 2005 Tournament of Champions), Helene Curtis's Degree brand of anti-perspirant/deodorant, United States Playing Card's Bicycle Pro Cards, Bluff Magazine, GlaxoSmithKline/Bayer's Levitra erectile dysfunction medicine, and The Hershey Company. Licensees include Glu Mobile, Activision (video games for different platforms such as Nintendo's GameCube, Microsoft's Xbox, Sony's PlayStation 2, and PC, featuring computer-generated versions of stars like Chris Ferguson), and products made by different companies ranging from chip sets, playing cards, hand-held games, and clothing like caps and shirts. The official playing cards are supplied by Copag Cards and chips are manufactured by Excalibur Electronics, Inc. which is based out of Miami, Florida and has been the main chip licensee since 2005.\nDVD releases.\nIn 2003 and 2004, DVD sets showcasing each year's WSOP Main Event were released by ESPN.\nVideo games.\nIn 2005, a video game based on the tournament series, titled \"World Series of Poker\", was released for several consoles and PC. A sequel called ' came out in 2006. In 2007, ' was released. WSOP video poker machines now appear at some Harrah's casinos; the machines are standard video poker machines, but have a bonus feature which allows a player to play a modified game of Texas Hold 'em against the machine.\nWSOP Poker Academy.\nBeginning in 2007, Harrah's announced the creation of the World Series of Poker Academy, a poker school aimed at providing poker players with the skills needed to win a WSOP bracelet. The instructors for the academy include Annie Duke, Phil Hellmuth, Greg Raymer, Scott Fischman, Mark Kroon, Mark Seif, Alex Outhred, and former FBI interrogator Joe Navarro. Initial academies were launched in Tunica, Mississippi, Indiana, and Las Vegas.\nWSOP online.\nIn September 2009, Harrah's signed an agreement with Dragonfish, the B2B arm of 888 Holdings, to provide its online gaming services. The offering went live in the UK later that year, allowing UK users to play for real money. Real money online poker is available in the United States, but only in Delaware, Nevada, and New Jersey.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33117", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33117", "title": "William Barnes", "text": "English writer, clergyman and philologist (1801\u20131886)\nWilliam Barnes (22 February 1801 \u2013 7 October 1886) was an English polymath, writer, poet, philologist, priest, mathematician, engraving artist and inventor. He wrote over 800 poems, some in Dorset dialect, and much other work, including a comprehensive English grammar quoting from more than 70 different languages. A linguistic purist, Barnes strongly advocated against borrowing foreign words into English, and instead supported the use and proliferation of \"strong old Anglo-Saxon speech\".\nLife and work.\nBarnes was born in the parish of Bagber, Dorset, to John Barnes, a tenant-farmer in the Vale of Blackmore. The younger Barnes's formal education finished when he was 13 years old. Between 1818 and 1823 he worked in Dorchester, the county town, as a solicitor's clerk, then moved to Mere in neighbouring Wiltshire and opened a school. While he was there he began writing poetry in the Dorset dialect, as well as studying several languages\u2014Italian, Persian, German and French, in addition to Greek and Latin\u2014playing musical instruments (violin, piano, and flute) and practising wood-engraving. He married Julia Miles, the daughter of an exciseman from Dorchester, in 1827. In 1835 he moved back to the county town, where again he ran a school at first located on Durngate Street and subsequently on South Street. By a further move, within South Street, the school became a neighbour of an architect's practice in which Thomas Hardy was an apprentice. The architect John Hicks was interested in literature and the classics, and when disputes about grammar occurred in the practice, Hardy visited Barnes for authoritative opinions. Barnes's other literary friends included Lord Tennyson and Gerard Manley Hopkins. He was a teetotaller and vegetarian.\nBarnes was ordained into the Church of England in 1847, taking a BD degree from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1851. He served curacies at Whitcombe Church in Whitcombe, Dorset, from 1847 to 1852, and again from 1862. He became rector of St Peter's Church, Winterborne Came, with Winterborne Farringdon, Dorset, from 1862 to his death. Shortly before his death, he was visited at Old Came Rectory by Thomas Hardy and Edmund Gosse; in a letter, Gosse wrote that Barnes was \"dying as picturesquely as he lived\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We found him in bed in his study, his face turned to the window, where the light came streaming in through flowering plants, his brown books on all sides of him save one, the wall behind him being hung with old green tapestry. He had a scarlet bedgown on, a kind of soft biretta of dark red wool on his head, from which his long white hair escaped on to the pillow; his grey beard, grown very long, upon his breast; his complexion, which you recollect as richly bronzed, has become blanched by keeping indoors, and is now waxily white where it is not waxily pink; the blue eyes, half shut, restless under languid lids.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n\"The Fall\"\nThe length o' days age\u00e4n do shrink\n An' flowers be thin in me\u00e4d, among\n The eegrass a-sheen\u00e8n bright, along\nBrook upon brook, an' brink by brink.\n Noo starl\u00e8ns do rise in vlock on wing\u2014\n Noo goocoo in nest-green leaves do sound\u2014\n Noo swallows be now a-wheel\u00e8n round\u2014\nDip after dip, an' swing by swing.\n The wheat that did le\u00e4tely rustle thick\n Is now up in mows that still be new,\n An' yollow bevore the sky o' blue\u2014\nTip after tip, an' rick by rick.\n While now I can walk a dusty mile\n I'll te\u00e4ke me a day, while days be clear,\n To vind a vew friends that still be dear,\nFe\u00e4ce after fe\u00e4ce, an' smile by smile.&lt;/poem&gt;\nBarnes first contributed the Dorset dialect poems for which he is best known to periodicals, including Macmillan's Magazine; a collection in book form \"Poems of Rural Life in the Dorset Dialect\", was published in 1844. A second collection \"Hwomely Rhymes\" followed in 1858, and a third collection in 1863; a combined edition appeared in 1879. A \"translation\", \"Poems of Rural Life in Common English\" had already appeared in 1868. His philological works include \"Philological Grammar\" (1854), \"Se Gefylsta, an Anglo-Saxon Delectus\" (1849), \"Tiw, or a View of Roots\" (1862), and a \"Glossary of Dorset Dialect\" (1863), and among his other writings is a slim volume on \"the Advantages of a More Common Adoption of The Mathematics as a Branch of Education, or Subject of Study\", published in 1834.\nBarnes is buried in Winterborne Came churchyard beneath a Celtic cross. The plinth of the cross has the inscription: 'In Memory of William Barnes, Died 7 October 1886. Aged 86 Years. For 24 Years Rector of this Parish. This Memorial was raised to his Memory by his Children and Grandchildren.\" On 4 February 1889 a bronze statue of William Barnes by Edwin Roscoe Mullins (1848\u20131907) was unveiled outside St Peter's Church in High West Street, Dorchester.\nRalph Vaughan Williams set to music four of Barnes' poems: \"My Orcha'd in Lind\u00e8n Lea\" and \"Blackmwore Maidens\" in their \"Common English\" versions (\"Linden Lea\" and \"Blackmwore by the Stour\", respectively), \"The Winter's Willow\", and \"In the Spring\".\nLinguistic purism.\nBarnes had a strong interest in linguistics; he was fluent in Greek, Latin, French, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Russian, Welsh, Cornish and Old English. He called for the purification of English by removal of Greek, Latin and foreign influences so that it might be better understood by those without a classical education. His coinages included such words as \"sun-print\" for \"photograph\", \"wortlore\" for \"botany\", and \"welkinfire\" for \"meteor\". His strain of purism resembles the later \"blue-eyed English\" of composer Percy Grainger, and in certain instances the terms in David Cowley's \"How We'd Talk if the English had WON in 1066\".\nStyle.\nUniquely fond of the Dorset dialect, which he felt to be particularly near to English's Anglo-Saxon roots, Barnes wrote many of his poems in the local parlance of Dorset. Additionally, as well as avoiding the use of foreign words in his poetry, Barnes frequently employed alliterative verse, the repetition of consonantal sounds. Examples of this can be heard in the lines \"Do lean down low in Linden Lea\" and \"In our abode in Arby Wood\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33118", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33118", "title": "Woodworking", "text": "Process of making objects from wood\nWoodworking is the skill of making items from wood, and includes cabinetry, furniture making, wood carving, joinery, carpentry, and woodturning.\nHistory.\nAlong with stone, clay and animal parts, wood was one of the first materials worked by early humans. Microwear analysis of the Mousterian stone tools used by the Neanderthals show that many were used to work wood. The development of civilization was closely tied to the development of increasingly greater degrees of skill in working these materials.\nAmong the earlliest finds of woodworking are shaped sticks displaying notches from Kalambo Falls in southern Africa, dating to around 476,000 years ago. The Clacton spearhead from Clacton-on-Sea, England, dating to around 400,000 years ago, the Sch\u00f6ningen spears, from Sch\u00f6ningen (Germany) dating around 300,000 years ago and the Lehringen spear from northern Germany, dating to around 120,000 years ago, provide some of the first examples of wooden hunting implements. Wooden tools likely used for domestic activities including probable awls have also been found at Sch\u00f6ningen.\nFlint tools were used for carving. Since Neolithic times, carved wooden vessels are known, for example, from the Linear Pottery culture wells at K\u00fcckhofen and Eythra.\nExamples of Bronze Age wood-carving include tree trunks worked into coffins from northern Germany and Denmark and wooden folding-chairs. The site of Fellbach-Schmieden in Germany has provided fine examples of wooden animal statues from the Iron Age. Wooden idols from the La T\u00e8ne period known from a sanctuary at the source of the Seine in France.\nAncient Egypt.\nThere is significant evidence of advanced woodworking in ancient Egypt. Woodworking is depicted in many extant ancient Egyptian drawings, and a considerable amount of ancient Egyptian furniture (such as stools, chairs, tables, beds, chests) have been preserved. Tombs represent a large collection of these artifacts and the inner coffins found in the tombs were also made of wood. The metal used by the Egyptians for woodworking tools was originally copper and eventually, after 2000 BC bronze as iron working was unknown until much later.\nCommonly used woodworking tools included axes, adzes, chisels, pull saws, and bow drills. Mortise and tenon joints are attested from the earliest Predynastic period. These joints were strengthened using pegs, dowels and leather or cord lashings. Animal glue came to be used only in the New Kingdom period. Ancient Egyptians invented the art of veneering and used varnishes for finishing, though the composition of these varnishes is unknown. Although different native acacias were used, as was the wood from the local sycamore and tamarisk trees, deforestation in the Nile valley resulted in the need for the importation of wood, notably cedar, but also Aleppo pine, boxwood and oak, starting from the Second Dynasty.\nAncient Rome.\nWoodworking was essential to the Romans. It provided material for buildings, transportation, tools, and household items. Wood also provided pipes, dye, waterproofing materials, and energy for heat.Although most examples of Roman woodworking have been lost, the literary record preserved much of the contemporary knowledge. Vitruvius dedicates an entire chapter of his \"De architectura\" to timber, preserving many details. Pliny, while not a botanist, dedicated six books of his \"Natural History\" to trees and woody plants, providing a wealth of information on trees and their uses.\nAncient China.\nThe progenitors of Chinese woodworking are considered to be Lu Ban (\u9b6f\u73ed ) and his wife Lady Yun, from the Spring and Autumn period (771 to 476 BC). Lu Ban is said to have introduced the plane, chalk-line, and other tools to China. His teachings were supposedly left behind in the book \"Lu Ban Jing\" (\u9b6f\u73ed\u7d93, \"Manuscript of Lu Ban\")(\u9b6f\u73ed\u7d93 ). Despite this, it is believed that the text was written some 1500 years after his death. This book is filled largely with descriptions of dimensions for use in building various items such as flower pots, tables, altars, etc., and also contains extensive instructions concerning Feng Shui. It mentions almost nothing of the intricate glue-less and nail-less joinery for which Chinese furniture was so famous.\nModern day.\nWith the advances in modern technology and the demands of industry, woodwork as a field has changed. The development of Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machines, for example, has made it possible to mass-produce and reproduce products faster, with less waste, and often with more complex designs than ever before. CNC wood routers can carve complicated and highly detailed shapes into flat stock to create signs or art. Rechargeable power tools speed up the creation of many projects and require much less physical strength than in the past\u2014for example, when boring multiple holes. \nSkilled fine woodworking, however, remains a craft pursued by many. There remains demand for handcrafted work such as furniture and art; however, with the rate and cost of production, the price for consumers is much higher.\nModern wood carving usually refers to works of wood art produced by woodcarvers in the form of contemporary art. This type of woodcarving often combines traditional techniques with more modern artistic styles and concepts. Modern woodcarving can be produced in a variety of forms and styles, from realist to abstract carvings, and often uses unusual wood materials such as rain tree wood or wood with unique textures to highlight the uniqueness of the work. \nIn recent years, the art of modern woodcarving has become increasingly popular among woodworkers and visual art enthusiasts not only in Asia, but also around the world. Modern woodcarving art is often exhibited in art galleries and museums, and can be seen in several global contemporary art exhibitions.\nStyles and designs.\nWoodworking, especially furniture making, has many different designs/styles. Throughout its history, woodworking designs and styles have changed. Some of the more common styles are listed below. Traditional furniture styles usually include styles that have been around for long periods of time and have shown a mark of wealth and luxury for centuries. More modern furniture styles are commonly used over the past few hundred years.\nMaterials.\nSee also Wood: Properties and Tonewood: Properties.\nHistorically, woodworkers relied upon the woods native to their region, until transportation and trade innovations made more exotic woods available to the craftsman. Woods are typically sorted into three basic types: hardwoods typified by tight grain and derived from broadleaf trees, softwoods from coniferous trees, and man-made materials such as plywood and MDF.\nHardwoods, botanically known as angiosperms, are deciduous and shed their leaves annually with temperature changes. Softwoods come from trees botanically known as gymnosperms, which are coniferous, cone-bearing, and stay green year round. Although a general pattern, softwoods are not necessarily always \"softer\" than hardwoods, and vice versa.\nSoftwood is most commonly found in the regions of the world with lower temperatures and is typically less durable, lighter in weight, and more vulnerable to pests and fungal attacks in comparison to hardwoods. They typically have a paler color and a more open grain than hardwoods, which contributes to the tendency of felled softwood to shrink and swell as it dries. Softwoods usually have a lower density, around 432\u2013592\u00a0kg/m3, which can compromise its strength. Density, however, does vary within both softwoods and hardwoods depending on the wood's geographical origin and growth rate. However, the lower density of softwoods also allows it to have a greater strength with lighter weight. In the United States, softwoods are typically cheaper and more readily available and accessible. Most softwoods are suitable for general construction, especially framing, trim, and finish work, and carcassing.\nHardwoods are separated into two categories, temperate and tropical hardwoods, depending on their origin. Temperate hardwoods are found in the regions between the tropics and poles, and are of particular interest to wood workers for their cost-effective aesthetic appeal and sustainable sources. Tropical hardwoods are found within the equatorial belt, including Africa, Asia, and South America. Hardwoods flaunt a higher density, around 1041\u00a0kg/m3 as a result of slower growing rates and is more stable when drying. As a result of its high density, hardwoods are typically heavier than softwoods but can also be more brittle. While there are an abundant number of hardwood species, only 200 are common enough and pliable enough to be used for woodworking. Hardwoods have a wide variety of properties, making it easy to find a hardwood to suit nearly any purpose, but they are especially suitable for outdoor use due to their strength and resilience to rot and decay. The coloring of hardwoods ranges from light to very dark, making it especially versatile for aesthetic purposes. However, because hardwoods are more closely grained, they are typically harder to work than softwoods. They are also harder to acquire in the United States and, as a result, are more expensive.\nTypically furniture such as tables and chairs is made using solid stock from hardwoods due to its strength and resistance to warping. Additionally, they also have a greater variety of grain patterns and color and take a finish better which allows the woodworker to exercise a great deal of artistic liberty. Hardwoods can be cut more cleanly and leave less residue on sawblades and other woodworking tools. Cabinet/fixture makers employ the use of plywood and other man made panel products. Some furniture, such as the Windsor chair involve green woodworking, shaping with wood while it contains its natural moisture prior to drying.\nCommon softwoods used for furniture.\nCedar.\nCedars are strong, aromatic softwoods that are capable of enduring outdoor elements, the most common of which is the western red cedar. Western red cedar can sustain wet environments without succumbing to rot, and as a result is commonly used for outdoor projects such as patios, outdoor furniture, and building exteriors. This wood can be easily found at most home centers in the US and Canada for a moderate price.\nFir.\nWithin the USA fir, also known as Douglas fir, is inexpensive and common at local home centers. It has a characteristic straight, pronounced grain with a red-brown tint. However, its grain pattern is relatively plain and it does not stain well, so fir is commonly used when the finished product will be painted. While commonly used for building, this softwood would also be suitable for furniture-making.\nPine.\nWhite pine, ponderosa, and southern yellow pine are common species used in furniture-making. White pine and ponderosa are typically used for indoor projects, while Southern yellow pine is recommended for outdoor projects due to its durability.\nCommon hardwoods used for furniture.\nAsh.\nAsh is relatively easy to work with and takes stain well, but its white to light brown color with a straight grain is visually appealing on its own. However, ash is much more difficult to find than other common woods, and will not be found at the local home center. Larger lumber yards should have it in stock.\nBeech.\nHardwood of the European species Fagus sylvatica is widely used for furniture framing and carcase construction, in plywood, musical instruments (drum shells and piano blocks) and turned items like knobs.\nBirch.\nWhether yellow or white birch, these hardwoods are stable and easy to work with. Despite this, birch is prone to blotching when stained, so painting birch products is probably best. Birch is easily found at many home centers and is a relatively inexpensive hardwood.\nCherry.\nPopular and easy to work with, cherry wood is in high demand for its reddish-brown color and ease of staining and finishing. Cherry likely will not be at the local home center, but should be at a lumberyard for a somewhat expensive price. This hardwood is a very common material for furniture, and is resistant to normal wear-and-tear, but it is best for indoor pieces.\nMahogany.\nA hardwood, mahogany has a trademark reddish-brown to deep-red tint and is known as \"one of the great furniture woods\". However, mahogany is not typically grown in sustainable forests, and thus runs a steep price at local lumber yards.\nOak.\nWith two varieties, red and white, oak is known to be easy to work with and relatively strong. However, furniture makers often opt for white oak over red oak for its attractive figure and moisture-resistance. Depending on the kind needed, oak can probably be found at a local home center or a lumberyard for a bit pricier than other hardwoods.\nMaple.\nWith strength, sturdiness, and durability, maple is a common material for furniture for the bedroom and even china cabinets. Maple is moisture-resistant and frequently displays stand-out swirls in the wood grain, an aesthetically pleasing differentiator from other hardwoods. While most commonly a lighter color, maple also can take stains and paint well.\nFactors in choosing materials.\nThere are many factors to consider when deciding what type of wood to use for a project. One of the most important is the workability of the wood: the way in which it responds when worked by hand or tools, the quality of the grain, and how it responds to adhesives and finishes. When the workability of wood is high, it offers a lower resistance when cutting and has a diminished blunting effect on tools. Highly workable wood is easier to manipulate into desired forms. If the wood grain is straight and even, it will be much easier to create strong and durable glued joints. Additionally, it will help protect the wood from splitting when nailed or screwed. Coarse grains require a lengthy process of filing and rubbing down the grain to produce a smooth result.\nAnother important factor is the durability of the wood, especially in regards to moisture. If the finished project will be exposed to moisture (e.g. outdoor projects) or high humidity or condensation (e.g. in kitchens or bathrooms), then the wood needs to be especially durable in order to prevent rot. Because of their oily qualities, many tropical hardwoods such as teak and mahogany are popular for such applications.\nWoods used for carving.\nWhile many woods can be used for carving, there are some clear favorites, including aspen, basswood, butternut, black walnut, and oak. Because it has almost no grain and is notably soft, Basswood is particularly popular with beginner carvers. It is used in many lower-cost instruments like guitars and electric basses. Aspen is similarly soft, although slightly harder, and readily available and inexpensive. Butternut has a deeper hue than basswood and aspen and has a nice grain that is easy to carve, and thus friendly for beginners. It is also suitable for furniture. While more expensive than basswood, aspen, and butternut, black walnut is a popular choice for its rich color and grain. Lastly, oak is a strong, sturdy, and versatile wood for carving with a defined grain. It is also a popular wood for furniture making.\nTools.\nEach area of woodworking requires a different variation of tools. Power tools and hand tools are both used for woodworking. Many modern woodworkers choose to use power tools in their trade for the added ease and to save time. However, many woodworkers still choose to use only hand tools for several reasons such as tradition, the experience and the added character to the work, while some choose to use only hand tools simply for their own enjoyment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHand tools.\nHand tools are classified as tools that receive power only from the hands that are holding them. Edged hand woodworking tools need to be sharpened which is done using the sharpening jig and sharpening stone. A more novel method involves the use of sandpaper. The more common modern hand tools are:\nPower tools.\nPower tools are tools that are powered by an external energy such as a battery, motor, or a power cable connected to a wall outlet. The more common power tools are:\nNotable woodworkers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33119", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33119", "title": "William Gibson", "text": "American-Canadian speculative fiction novelist (born 1948)\nWilliam Ford Gibson (born March 17, 1948) is a speculative fiction writer and essayist widely credited with pioneering the science fiction subgenre known as cyberpunk. Beginning his writing career in the late 1970s, his early works were noir, near-future stories that explored the effects of technology, cybernetics, and computer networks on humans, a \"combination of lowlife and high tech\"\u2014and helped to create an iconography for the Information Age before the ubiquity of the Internet in the 1990s. Gibson coined the term \"cyberspace\" for \"widespread, interconnected digital technology\" in his short story \"Burning Chrome\" (1982), and later popularized the concept in his acclaimed debut novel \"Neuromancer\" (1984). These early works of Gibson's have been credited with \"renovating\" science fiction literature in the 1980s.\nAfter expanding on the story in \"Neuromancer\" with two more novels (\"Count Zero\" in 1986 and \"Mona Lisa Overdrive\" in 1988), thus completing the dystopic \"Sprawl\" trilogy, Gibson collaborated with Bruce Sterling on the alternate history novel \"The Difference Engine\" (1990), which became an important work of the science fiction subgenre known as \"steampunk\". In the 1990s, Gibson composed the \"Bridge\" trilogy of novels, which explored the sociological developments of near-future urban environments, postindustrial society, and late capitalism. \nFollowing the turn of the century and the events of 9/11, Gibson emerged with a string of increasingly realist novels\u2014\"Pattern Recognition\" (2003), \"Spook Country\" (2007), and \"Zero History\" (2010)\u2014set in a roughly contemporary world. These works saw his name reach mainstream bestseller lists for the first time. His most recent novels, \"The Peripheral\" (2014) and \"Agency\" (2020), returned to a more overt engagement with technology and recognizable science fiction themes.\nIn 1999, \"The Guardian\" described Gibson as \"probably the most important novelist of the past two decades\", while \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" called him the \"noir prophet\" of cyberpunk. Throughout his career, Gibson has written more than 20 short stories and 12 critically acclaimed novels (one in collaboration), contributed articles to several major publications, and collaborated extensively with performance artists, filmmakers, and musicians. His work has been cited as influencing a variety of disciplines: academia, design, film, literature, music, cyberculture, and technology.\nEarly life.\nChildhood, itinerance, and adolescence.\nWilliam Ford Gibson was born in the coastal city of Conway, South Carolina, and he spent most of his childhood in Wytheville, Virginia, a small town in the Appalachians where his parents had been born and raised. His family moved frequently during Gibson's youth owing to his father's position as manager of a large construction company. In Norfolk, Virginia, Gibson attended Pines Elementary School, where the teachers' lack of encouragement for him to read was a cause of dismay for his parents. While Gibson was still a young child, a little over a year into his stay at Pines Elementary, his father choked to death in a restaurant while on a business trip. His mother, unable to tell William the bad news, had someone else inform him of the death. Tom Maddox has commented that Gibson \"grew up in an America as disturbing and surreal as anything J. G. Ballard ever dreamed\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLoss is not without its curious advantages for the artist. Major traumatic breaks are pretty common in the biographies of artists I respect.\n\u2014William Gibson, interview with \"The New York Times Magazine\", August 19, 2007\nA few days after the death of his father, Gibson and his mother moved back from Norfolk to Wytheville. Gibson later described Wytheville as \"a place where modernity had arrived to some extent but was deeply distrusted\" and credits the beginnings of his relationship with science fiction, his \"native literary culture\", with the subsequent feeling of abrupt exile. At the age of 12, Gibson \"wanted nothing more than to be a science fiction writer\". He spent a few unproductive years at basketball-obsessed George Wythe High School, a time spent largely in his room listening to records and reading books. At 13, unbeknownst to his mother, he purchased an anthology of Beat generation writing, thereby gaining exposure to the writings of Allen Ginsberg, Jack Kerouac, and William S. Burroughs; the lattermost had a particularly pronounced effect, greatly altering Gibson's notions of the possibilities of science fiction literature.\nA shy, ungainly teenager, Gibson grew up in a monoculture he found \"highly problematic\", consciously rejected religion and took refuge in reading science fiction as well as writers such as Burroughs and Henry Miller. Becoming frustrated with his poor academic performance, Gibson's mother threatened to send him to a boarding school; to her surprise, he reacted enthusiastically. Unable to afford his preferred choice of Southern California, his then \"chronically anxious and depressive\" mother, who had remained in Wytheville since the death of her husband, sent him to Southern Arizona School for Boys in Tucson. He resented the structure of the private boarding school but was in retrospect grateful for its forcing him to engage socially.\nDraft-dodging, exile, and counterculture.\nAfter his mother's death when he was 18, Gibson left school without graduating and became very isolated for a long time, traveling to California and Europe, and immersing himself in the counterculture. In 1967, he elected to move to Canada in order \"to avoid the Vietnam war draft\". Gibson has observed that he \"did not literally evade the draft, as they never bothered drafting me\"; In the biographical documentary \"No Maps for These Territories\" (2000), Gibson said that his decision was motivated less by conscientious objection than by a desire to \"sleep with hippie chicks\" and indulge in hashish. He elaborated on the topic in a 2008 interview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I started out as a writer I took credit for draft evasion where I shouldn't have. I washed up in Canada with some vague idea of evading the draft but then I was never drafted so I never had to make the call. I don't know what I would have done if I'd really been drafted. I wasn't a tightly wrapped package at that time. If somebody had drafted me I might have wept and gone. I wouldn't have liked it of course.\u2014\u200a\nAfter weeks of nominal homelessness, Gibson was hired as the manager of Toronto's first head shop, a retailer of drug paraphernalia. He found the city's \u00e9migr\u00e9 community of American draft dodgers unbearable owing to the prevalence of clinical depression, suicide, and hardcore substance abuse. He appeared, during the Summer of Love of 1967, in a CBC newsreel item about hippie subculture in Yorkville, Toronto, for which he was paid $500\u2014the equivalent of 20 weeks' rent\u2014which financed his later travels.\nGibson spent a \"brief, riot-torn spell\" in Washington, D.C., where he completed his high school diploma at the age of 21. He spent the rest of the 1960s in Toronto, where he met Vancouverite Deborah Jean Thompson, with whom he subsequently traveled to Europe. Gibson has recounted that they concentrated their travels on European nations with fascist regimes and favorable exchange rates, including spending time on a Greek archipelago and in Istanbul in 1970, as they \"couldn't afford to stay anywhere that had anything remotely like hard currency\".\nThe couple married and settled in Vancouver, British Columbia, in 1972, with Gibson looking after their first child while they lived off his wife's teaching salary. During the 1970s, Gibson made a substantial part of his living from scouring Salvation Army thrift stores for underpriced artifacts he would then up-market to specialist dealers. Realizing that it was easier to sustain high college grades, and thus qualify for generous student financial aid, than to work, he enrolled at the University of British Columbia (UBC), earning \"a desultory bachelor's degree in English\" in 1977. Through studying English literature, he was exposed to a wider range of fiction than he would have read otherwise; something he credits with giving him ideas inaccessible from within the culture of science fiction, including an awareness of postmodernity. It was at UBC that he attended his first course on science fiction, taught by Susan Wood, at the end of which he was encouraged to write his first short story, \"Fragments of a Hologram Rose\".\nEarly writing and the evolution of cyberpunk.\nAfter considering pursuing a master's degree on the topic of hard science fiction novels as fascist literature, Gibson discontinued writing in the year that followed graduation and, as one critic put it, expanded his collection of punk records. During this period he worked at various jobs, including a three-year stint as teaching assistant on a film history course at his alma mater. Impatient with much of what he saw at a science fiction convention in Vancouver in 1980 or 1981, Gibson found a kindred spirit in fellow panelist, punk musician and author John Shirley. The two became immediate and lifelong friends. Shirley persuaded Gibson to sell his early short stories and to take writing seriously.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 1977, facing first-time parenthood and an absolute lack of enthusiasm for anything like \"career,\" I found myself dusting off my twelve-year-old's interest in science fiction. Simultaneously, weird noises were heard from New York and London. I took Punk to be the detonation of some slow-fused projectile buried deep in society's flank a decade earlier, and I took it to be, somehow, a sign. And I began, then, to write.\n\u2014William Gibson, \"Since 1948\"\nThrough Shirley, Gibson came into contact with science fiction authors Bruce Sterling and Lewis Shiner; reading Gibson's work, they realized that it was, as Sterling put it, \"breakthrough material\" and that they needed to \"put down our preconceptions and pick up on this guy from Vancouver; this [was] the way forward.\" Gibson met Sterling at a science fiction convention in Denver, Colorado, in the autumn of 1981, where he read \"Burning Chrome\"\u00a0\u2013 the first cyberspace short story\u00a0\u2013 to an audience of four people, and later stated that Sterling \"completely got it\".\nIn October 1982, Gibson traveled to Austin, Texas, for ArmadilloCon, at which he appeared with Shirley, Sterling and Shiner on a panel called \"Behind the Mirrorshades: A Look at Punk SF\", where Shiner noted \"the sense of a movement solidified\". After a weekend discussing rock and roll, MTV, Japan, fashion, drugs and politics, Gibson left the cadre for Vancouver, declaring half-jokingly that \"a new axis has been formed.\" Sterling, Shiner, Shirley and Gibson, along with Rudy Rucker, went on to form the core of the radical cyberpunk literary movement.\nLiterary career.\nEarly short fiction.\nGibson's early writings are generally near-future stories about the influences of cybernetics and cyberspace (computer-simulated reality) technology on the human species. His themes of hi-tech shanty towns, recorded or broadcast stimulus (later to be developed into the \"sim-stim\" package featured so heavily in \"Neuromancer\"), and dystopic intermingling of technology and humanity, are already evident in his first published short story, \"Fragments of a Hologram Rose\", in the Summer 1977 issue of \"Unearth\". The latter thematic obsession was described by his friend and fellow author, Bruce Sterling, in the introduction of Gibson's short story collection \"Burning Chrome\", as \"Gibson's classic one-two combination of lowlife and high tech.\"\nBeginning in 1981, Gibson's stories appeared in \"Omni\" and \"Universe 11\", wherein his fiction developed a bleak, \"film noir\" feel. He consciously distanced himself as far as possible from the mainstream of science fiction (towards which he felt \"an aesthetic revulsion\", expressed in \"The Gernsback Continuum\"), to the extent that his highest goal was to become \"a minor cult figure, a sort of lesser Ballard.\" When Sterling started to distribute the stories, he found that \"people were just genuinely baffled ... I mean they literally could not parse the guy's paragraphs ... the imaginative tropes he was inventing were just beyond people's grasp.\"\nWhile Larry McCaffery has commented that these early short stories displayed flashes of Gibson's ability, science fiction critic Darko Suvin has identified them as \"undoubtedly [cyberpunk's] best works\", constituting the \"furthest horizon\" of the genre. The themes which Gibson developed in the stories, the Sprawl setting of \"Burning Chrome\" and the character of Molly Millions from \"Johnny Mnemonic\" ultimately culminated in his first novel, \"Neuromancer\".\n\"Neuromancer\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe sky above the port was the color of television, tuned to a dead channel.\n\u2014Opening sentence of \"Neuromancer\" (1984)\n\"Neuromancer\" was commissioned by Terry Carr for the second series of Ace Science Fiction Specials, which was intended to feature debut novels exclusively. Given a year to complete the work, Gibson undertook the actual writing out of \"blind animal terror\" at the obligation to write an entire novel\u00a0\u2013 a feat which he felt he was \"four or five years away from\". After viewing the first 20 minutes of landmark cyberpunk film \"Blade Runner\" (1982) which was released when Gibson had written a third of the novel, he \"figured [\"Neuromancer\"] was sunk, done for. Everyone would assume I'd copped my visual texture from this astonishingly fine-looking film.\" He re-wrote the first two-thirds of the book twelve times, feared losing the reader's attention and was convinced that he would be \"permanently shamed\" following its publication; yet what resulted was a major imaginative leap forward for a first-time novelist.\n\"Neuromancer\"'s release was not greeted with fanfare, but it hit a cultural nerve, quickly becoming an underground word-of-mouth hit. It became the first winner of one science fiction \"triple crown\" \u2014both the Nebula Award and the Hugo Award as the year's best novel and the Philip K. Dick Award as the best paperback original\u2014 eventually selling more than 6.5\u00a0million copies worldwide.\nLawrence Person, in his \"Notes Toward a Postcyberpunk Manifesto\" (1998), identified \"Neuromancer\" as \"the archetypal cyberpunk work\".\nIn 2005, as part of the \"Time\" list of the 100 best English-language novels written since 1923, Lev Grossman opined of \"Neuromancer\": \"There is no way to overstate how radical Gibson's first and best novel was when it first appeared.\"\nLiterary critic Larry McCaffery described the concept of the matrix in \"Neuromancer\" as a place where \"data dance with human consciousness ... human memory is literalized and mechanized ... multi-national information systems mutate and breed into startling new structures whose beauty and complexity are unimaginable, mystical, and above all nonhuman.\" A 52-year-old Gibson later commented on himself as an author, circa \"Neuromancer\", that \"I'd buy him a drink, but I don't know if I'd loan him any money,\" and referred to the novel as \"an adolescent's book\". The success of \"Neuromancer\" nonetheless led to the 35-year-old Gibson's emergence from obscurity.\nSprawl trilogy, \"The Difference Engine\", and Bridge trilogy.\nAlthough much of Gibson's reputation has remained rooted in \"Neuromancer\", his work continued to evolve conceptually and stylistically. He next intended to write an unrelated postmodern space opera, titled \"The Log of the Mustang Sally\", but reneged on the contract with Arbor House after a falling out over the dustjacket art of their hardcover of \"Count Zero\". Abandoning \"The Log of the Mustang Sally\", Gibson instead wrote \"Mona Lisa Overdrive\" (1988), which in the words of Larry McCaffery \"turned off the lights\" on cyberpunk literature. It was a culmination of his previous two novels, set in the same universe with shared characters, thereby completing the Sprawl trilogy. The trilogy solidified Gibson's reputation, with both later novels also earning Nebula and Hugo Award and Locus SF Award nominations.\nThe Sprawl trilogy was followed by the 1990 novel \"The Difference Engine\", an alternative history novel Gibson wrote in collaboration with Bruce Sterling. Set in a technologically advanced Victorian era Britain, the novel was a departure from the authors' cyberpunk roots. It was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1991 and the John W. Campbell Memorial Award in 1992, and its success drew attention to the nascent steampunk literary genre of which it remains the best-known work.\nGibson's second series, the \"Bridge trilogy\", is composed of \"Virtual Light\" (1993), a \"darkly comic urban detective story\", \"Idoru\" (1996), and \"All Tomorrow's Parties\" (1999). The first and third books in the trilogy center on San Francisco in the near future; all three explore Gibson's recurring themes of technological, physical, and spiritual transcendence in a more grounded, matter-of-fact style than his first trilogy. Salon's Andrew Leonard notes that in the Bridge trilogy, Gibson's villains change from multinational corporations and artificial intelligences of the Sprawl trilogy to the mass media\u00a0\u2013 namely tabloid television and the cult of celebrity. \"Virtual Light\" depicts an \"end-stage capitalism, in which private enterprise and the profit motive are taken to their logical conclusion\", according to one review. Leonard's review called \"Idoru\" a \"return to form\" for Gibson, while critic Steven Poole asserted that \"All Tomorrow's Parties\" marked his development from \"science-fiction hotshot to wry sociologist of the near future.\"\nBlue Ant books.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI felt that I was trying to describe an unthinkable present and I actually feel that science fiction's best use today is the exploration of contemporary reality rather than any attempt to predict where we are going ... The best thing you can do with science today is use it to explore the present. Earth is the alien planet now.\n\u2014William Gibson in an interview on CNN, August 26, 1997\nAfter \"All Tomorrow's Parties\", Gibson began to adopt a more realist style of writing, with continuous narratives\u00a0\u2013 \"speculative fiction of the very recent past\". Science fiction critic John Clute has interpreted this approach as Gibson's recognition that traditional science fiction is no longer possible \"in a world lacking coherent 'nows' to continue from\", characterizing it as \"SF for the new century\". Gibson's novels \"Pattern Recognition\" (2003), \"Spook Country\" (2007) and \"Zero History\" (2010) are set in the same contemporary universe \u2014 \"more or less the same one we live in now\" \u2014 and put Gibson's work on to mainstream bestseller lists for the first time. As well as the setting, the novels share some of the same characters, including Hubertus Bigend and Pamela Mainwaring, employees of the enigmatic marketing company Blue Ant.\nWhen asked on Twitter what this series of novels should be called (\"The Bigend Trilogy? The Blue Ant Cycle? What?\"), Gibson replied \"I prefer 'books'. The Bigend books.\" However, \"Blue Ant\" rather than \"Bigend\" has become the standard signifier. At a later date, Gibson stated that he did not name his trilogies, \"I wait to see what people call them;\" in 2016, he used \"the Blue Ant books\" in a tweet.\nA phenomenon peculiar to this era was the independent development of annotating fansites, \"PR-Otaku\" and \"Node Magazine\", devoted to \"Pattern Recognition\" and \"Spook Country\" respectively. These websites tracked the references and story elements in the novels through online resources such as Google and Wikipedia and collated the results, essentially creating hypertext versions of the books. Critic John Sutherland characterized this phenomenon as threatening \"to completely overhaul the way literary criticism is conducted\".\nAbout 100 pages into writing \"Pattern Recognition\", Gibson felt impelled to re-write the main character's backstory, which had been suddenly rendered implausible by the September 11, 2001, attacks; he described this as \"the strangest experience I've ever had with a piece of fiction\". He saw the attacks as a nodal point in history, \"an experience out of culture\", and \"in some ways ... the true beginning of the 21st century\". He is noted as one of the first novelists to use the attacks to inform his writing. Examination of cultural changes in post-September 11 America, including a resurgent tribalism and the \"infantilization of society\", became a prominent theme of Gibson's work, while his focus nevertheless remained \"at the intersection of paranoia and technology\".\nThe Jackpot trilogy and graphic novels.\n\"The Peripheral\", the first in a new series of novels by William Gibson, was released on October 28, 2014. He described the story briefly in an appearance he made at the New York Public Library on April 19, 2013, and read an excerpt from the first chapter of the book entitled \"The Gone Haptics\". The story takes place in two eras, one about thirty years into the future and the other further in the future.\nIn 2017, Gibson's comic/graphic novel \"Archangel\" was published. Both \"Archangel\" and \"The Peripheral\" contain time travel (of sorts), but Gibson has clarified that the works are not related: \"They're not 'same universe'. The Splitter and trans-continual virtuality are different mechanisms (different plot mechanisms too).\" The next year, Dark Horse Comics began releasing Johnnie Christmas' adaptation of Gibson's \"Alien 3\" script in five parts, resulting in a hardcover collection being published in 2019.\n\"The Peripheral\"'s continuation, \"Agency\", was released on January 21, 2020, after being delayed from an initial announced release date of December 2018. Gibson said in a \"New Yorker\" magazine article that both the election of Donald Trump as U.S. President and the controversy over Cambridge Analytica had caused him to rethink and revise the text. The working title for the third novel in the series was \"Jackpot\", about which Gibson had a change of heart in January 2021: \"I don't think I'm going to call Agency's sequel Jackpot after all. Not because of [\"Jackpot\" by Michael Mechanic], which I look forward to reading, but because Agency was originally called Tulpagotchi. Which I still like, but would've been a different book.\"\nCollaborations, adaptations, and miscellanea.\nLiterary collaborations.\nThree of the stories that later appeared in \"Burning Chrome\" were written in collaboration with other authors: \"The Belonging Kind\" (1981) with John Shirley, \"Red Star, Winter Orbit\" (1983) with Sterling, and \"Dogfight\" (1985) with Michael Swanwick. Gibson had previously written the foreword to Shirley's 1980 novel \"City Come A-walkin'\" and the pair's collaboration continued when Gibson wrote the introduction to Shirley's short story collection \"Heatseeker\" (1989). Shirley convinced Gibson to write a story for the television series \"Max Headroom\" for which Shirley had written several scripts, but the network canceled the series.\nGibson and Sterling collaborated again on the short story \"The Angel of Goliad\" in 1990, which they soon expanded into the novel-length alternate history story \"The Difference Engine\" (1990). The two were later \"invited to dream in public\" (Gibson) in a joint address to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences Convocation on Technology and Education in 1993 (\"the Al Gore people\"), in which they argued against the digital divide and \"appalled everyone\" by proposing that all schools be put online, with education taking place over the Internet. In a 2007 interview, Gibson revealed that Sterling had an idea for \"a second recursive science novel that was just a wonderful idea\", but that Gibson was unable to pursue the collaboration because he was not creatively free at the time.\nIn 1993, Gibson contributed lyrics and featured as a guest vocalist on Yellow Magic Orchestra's \"Technodon\" album, and wrote lyrics to the track \"Dog Star Girl\" for Deborah Harry's \"Debravation\".\nFilm adaptations, screenplays, and appearances.\nGibson was first solicited to work as a screenwriter after a film producer discovered a waterlogged copy of \"Neuromancer\" on a beach at a Thai resort. His early efforts to write film scripts failed to manifest themselves as finished product; \"Burning Chrome\" (which was to be directed by Kathryn Bigelow) and \"Neuro-Hotel\" were two attempts by the author at film adaptations that were never made. In the late 1980s he wrote an early version of \"Alien 3\" (which he later characterized as \"Tarkovskian\"), few elements of which survived in the final version. In 2018-19, Dark Horse Comics released a five-part adaptation of Gibson's \"Alien 3\" script, illustrated and adapted by Johnnie Christmas. In 2019, Audible released an audio drama version of Gibson's script, adapted by Dirk Maggs and with Michael Biehn and Lance Henriksen reprising their roles.\nGibson's early involvement with the film industry extended far beyond the confines of the Hollywood blockbuster system. At one point, he collaborated on a script with Kazakh director Rashid Nugmanov after an American producer had expressed an interest in a Soviet-American collaboration to star Soviet rock musician Viktor Tsoi. Despite being occupied with writing a novel, Gibson was reluctant to abandon the \"wonderfully odd project\" which involved \"ritualistic gang-warfare in some sort of sideways-future Leningrad\" and sent Jack Womack to Russia in his stead. Rather than producing a motion picture, a prospect that ended with Tsoi's death in a car crash, Womack's experiences in Russia ultimately culminated in his novel \"Let's Put the Future Behind Us\" and informed much of the Russian content of Gibson's \"Pattern Recognition\". A similar fate befell Gibson's collaboration with Japanese filmmaker Sogo Ishii in 1991, a film they planned on shooting in the Walled City of Kowloon until the city was demolished in 1993.\nAdaptations of Gibson's fiction have frequently been optioned and proposed, to limited success. Two of the author's short stories, both set in the Sprawl trilogy universe, have been loosely adapted as films: \"Johnny Mnemonic\" (1995) with screenplay by Gibson and starring Keanu Reeves, Dolph Lundgren and Takeshi Kitano, and \"New Rose Hotel\" (1998), starring Christopher Walken, Willem Dafoe, and Asia Argento. The former was the first time in history that a book was launched simultaneously as a film and a CD-ROM interactive video game. As of 2013[ [update]], Vincenzo Natali still hoped to bring \"Neuromancer\" to the screen, after some years in development hell. \"Count Zero\" was at one point being developed as \"The Zen Differential\" with director Michael Mann attached, and the third novel in the Sprawl trilogy, \"Mona Lisa Overdrive\", has also been optioned and bought. An anime adaptation of \"Idoru\" was announced as in development in 2006, and \"Pattern Recognition\" was in the process of development by director Peter Weir, although according to Gibson the latter is no longer attached to the project. Announced at International Film Festival Rotterdam in 2015 is an adaptation of Gibson's short story \"Dogfight\" by BAFTA award-winning writer and director Simon Pummell. Written by Gibson and Michael Swanwick and first published in Omni in July 1985, the film is being developed by British producer Janine Marmot at Hot Property Films.\nTelevision is another arena in which Gibson has collaborated; with friend Tom Maddox, he co-wrote \"The X-Files\" episodes \"Kill Switch\" and \"First Person Shooter\", broadcast in 1998 and 2000. In 1998 he contributed the introduction to the spin-off publication \"Art of the X-Files\". Gibson made a cameo appearance in the television miniseries \"Wild Palms\" at the behest of creator Bruce Wagner. Director Oliver Stone had borrowed heavily from Gibson's novels to make the series, and in the aftermath of its cancellation Gibson contributed an article, \"Where The Holograms Go\", to the \"Wild Palms Reader\". He accepted another acting role in 2002, appearing alongside Douglas Coupland in the short film \"Mon Amour Mon Parapluie\" in which the pair played philosophers. Appearances in fiction aside, Gibson was the focus of a biographical documentary by Mark Neale in 2000 called \"No Maps for These Territories\". The film follows Gibson over the course of a drive across North America discussing various aspects of his life, literary career and cultural interpretations. It features interviews with Jack Womack and Bruce Sterling, as well as recitations from \"Neuromancer\" by Bono and The Edge.\nAmazon released \"The Peripheral\", a TV series from the producers of \"Westworld\" based on Gibson's novel of the same name, in October 2022.\nExhibitions, poetry, and performance art.\nGibson has contributed text to be integrated into a number of performance art pieces. In October 1989, Gibson wrote text for such a collaboration with acclaimed sculptor and future \"Johnny Mnemonic\" director Robert Longo titled \"Dream Jumbo: Working the Absolutes\", which was displayed in Royce Hall, University of California Los Angeles. Three years later, Gibson contributed original text to \"Memory Palace\", a performance show featuring the theater group La Fura dels Baus at Art Futura '92, Barcelona, which featured images by Karl Sims, Rebecca Allen, Mark Pellington with music by Peter Gabriel and others. It was at Art Futura '92 that Gibson met Charlie Athanas, who would later act as dramaturg and \"cyberprops\" designer on Steve Pickering and Charley Sherman's adaptation of \"Burning Chrome\" for the Chicago stage. Gibson's latest contribution was in 1997, a collaboration with critically acclaimed Vancouver-based contemporary dance company Holy Body Tattoo and Gibson's friend and future webmaster Christopher Halcrow.\nIn 1990, Gibson contributed to \"Visionary San Francisco\", an exhibition at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art shown from June 14 to August 26. He wrote a short story, \"Skinner's Room\", set in a decaying San Francisco in which the San Francisco\u2013Oakland Bay Bridge was closed and taken over by the homeless \u2013 a setting Gibson then detailed in the Bridge trilogy. The story inspired a contribution to the exhibition by architects Ming Fung and Craig Hodgetts that envisioned a San Francisco in which the rich live in high-tech, solar-powered towers, above the decrepit city and its crumbling bridge. The architects exhibit featured Gibson on a monitor discussing the future and reading from \"Skinner's Room\". \"The New York Times\" hailed the exhibition as \"one of the most ambitious, and admirable, efforts to address the realm of architecture and cities that any museum in the country has mounted in the last decade\", despite calling Ming and Hodgetts's reaction to Gibson's contribution \"a powerful, but sad and not a little cynical, work\". A slightly different version of the short story was featured a year later in \"Omni\".\nCryptography.\nA particularly well-received work by Gibson was \"Agrippa (a book of the dead)\" (1992), a 300-line semi-autobiographical electronic poem that was his contribution to a collaborative project with artist Dennis Ashbaugh and publisher Kevin Begos, Jr. Gibson's text focused on the ethereal nature of memories (the title refers to a photo album) and was originally published on a 3.5\" floppy disk embedded in the back of an artist's book containing etchings by Ashbaugh (intended to fade from view once the book was opened and exposed to light \u2014 they never did, however). Gibson commented that Ashbaugh's design \"eventually included a supposedly self-devouring floppy-disk intended to display the text only once, then eat itself.\" Contrary to numerous colorful reports, the diskettes were never actually \"hacked\"; instead the poem was manually transcribed from a surreptitious videotape of a public showing in Manhattan in December 1992, and released on the MindVox bulletin board the next day; this is the text that circulated widely on the Internet.\nSince its debut in 1992, the mystery of \"Agrippa\" remained hidden for 20 years. Although many had tried to hack the code and decrypt the program, the uncompiled source code was lost long ago. Alan Liu and his team at \"The Agrippa Files\" created an extensive website with tools and resources to crack the Agrippa Code. They collaborated with Matthew Kirschenbaum at the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities and the Digital Forensics Lab, and Quinn DuPont, a PhD student of cryptography from the University of Toronto, in calling for the aid of cryptographers to figure out how the program works by creating \"Cracking the Agrippa Code: The Challenge\", which enlisted participants to solve the intentional scrambling of the poem in exchange for prizes. The code was successfully cracked by Robert Xiao in late July 2012.\nEssays and short-form nonfiction.\nGibson is a sporadic contributor of non-fiction articles to newspapers and journals. He has occasionally contributed longer-form articles to \"Wired\" and of op-eds to \"The New York Times\", and has written for \"The Observer\", \"Addicted to Noise\", \"New York Times Magazine\", \"Rolling Stone\", and \"Details Magazine\". His first major piece of nonfiction, the article \"Disneyland with the Death Penalty\", concerning the city-state of Singapore, resulted in \"Wired\" being banned from the country and attracted a spirited critical response. He commenced writing a blog in January 2003, providing voyeuristic insights into his reaction to \"Pattern Recognition\", but abated in September of the same year owing to concerns that it might negatively affect his creative process.\nGibson recommenced blogging in October 2004, and during the process of writing \"Spook Country\" \u2013 and to a lesser extent \"Zero History\" \u2013 frequently posted short nonsequential excerpts from the novel to the blog. The blog was largely discontinued by July 2009, after the writer had undertaken prolific microblogging on Twitter under the \"nom de plume\" \"GreatDismal\". In 2012, Gibson released a collection of his non-fiction works entitled \"Distrust That Particular Flavor\".\nInfluence and recognition.\nGibson's prose has been analyzed by numerous scholars, including in a dedicated 2011 book, \"\". Hailed by Steven Poole of \"The Guardian\" in 1999 as \"probably the most important novelist of the past two decades\" in terms of influence, Gibson first achieved critical recognition with his debut novel, \"Neuromancer\". The novel won three major science fiction awards (the Nebula Award, the Philip K. Dick Award, and the Hugo Award), an unprecedented achievement described by the \"Mail &amp; Guardian\" as \"the sci-fi writer's version of winning the Goncourt, Booker and Pulitzer prizes in the same year\". \"Neuromancer\" gained unprecedented critical and popular attention outside science fiction, as an \"evocation of life in the late 1980s\", although \"The Observer\" noted that \"it took \"The New York Times\" 10 years\" to mention the novel.\nGibson's work has received international attention from an audience that was not limited to science fiction aficionados as, in the words of Laura Miller, \"readers found startlingly prophetic reflections of contemporary life in [its] fantastic and often outright paranoid scenarios.\" It is often situated by critics within the context of postindustrialism as, according to academic David Brande, a construction of \"a mirror of existing large-scale techno-social relations\", and as a narrative version of postmodern consumer culture. It is praised by critics for its depictions of late capitalism and its \"rewriting of subjectivity, human consciousness and behaviour made newly problematic by technology.\" Tatiani Rapatzikou, writing in \"The Literary Encyclopedia\", identifies Gibson as \"one of North America's most highly acclaimed science fiction writers\".\nCultural significance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWilliam Gibson \u2013 the man who made us cool.\n\u2014Cyberpunk author Richard K Morgan\nIn his early short fiction, Gibson is credited by Rapatzikou in \"The Literary Encyclopedia\" with effectively \"renovating\" science fiction, a genre at that time considered widely \"insignificant\", influencing by means of the postmodern aesthetic of his writing the development of new perspectives in science fiction studies. In the words of filmmaker Marianne Trench, Gibson's visions \"struck sparks in the real world\" and \"determined the way people thought and talked\" to an extent unprecedented in science fiction literature. The publication of \"Neuromancer\" (1984) hit a cultural nerve, causing Larry McCaffery to credit Gibson with virtually launching the cyberpunk movement, as \"the one major writer who is original and gifted to make the whole movement seem original and gifted.\" Aside from their central importance to cyberpunk and steampunk fiction, Gibson's fictional works have been hailed by space historian Dwayne A. Day as some of the best examples of space-based science fiction (or \"solar sci-fi\"), and \"probably the only ones that rise above mere escapism to be truly thought-provoking\".\nGibson's early novels were, according to \"The Observer\", \"seized upon by the emerging slacker and hacker generation as a kind of road map\".\nThrough his novels, such terms as \"cyberspace\", \"netsurfing\", \"ICE\", \"jacking in\", and \"neural implants\" entered popular usage, as did concepts such as net consciousness, virtual interaction and \"the matrix\". In \"Burning Chrome\" (1982), he coined the term \"cyberspace\", referring to the \"mass consensual hallucination\" of computer networks. Through its use in \"Neuromancer\", the term gained such recognition that it became the \"de facto\" term for the World Wide Web during the 1990s. Artist Dike Blair has commented that Gibson's \"terse descriptive phrases capture the moods which surround technologies, rather than their engineering.\"\nGibson's work has influenced several popular musicians: references to his fiction appear in the music of Stuart Hamm, Billy Idol, Warren Zevon, Deltron 3030, Straylight Run (whose name is derived from a sequence in \"Neuromancer\") and Sonic Youth. U2's \"Zooropa\" album was heavily influenced by \"Neuromancer\", and the band at one point planned to scroll the text of \"Neuromancer\" above them on a concert tour, although this did not end up happening. Members of the band did, however, provide background music for the audiobook version of \"Neuromancer\" as well as appearing in \"No Maps for These Territories\", a biographical documentary of Gibson. He returned the favour by writing an article about the band's Vertigo Tour for \"Wired\" in August 2005. The band Zeromancer take their name from \"Neuromancer\".\nThe film \"The Matrix\" (1999) drew inspiration for its title, characters and story elements from the Sprawl trilogy. The characters of Neo and Trinity in \"The Matrix\" are similar to Bobby Newmark (\"Count Zero\") and Molly (\"Johnny Mnemonic\", \"Neuromancer\"). Like Turner, protagonist of Gibson's \"Count Zero\", characters in \"The Matrix\" download instructions (to fly a helicopter and to \"know kung fu\", respectively) directly into their heads, and both \"Neuromancer\" and \"The Matrix\" feature artificial intelligences which strive to free themselves from human control. Critics have identified marked similarities between \"Neuromancer\" and the film's cinematography and tone. In spite of his initial reticence about seeing the film on its release, Gibson later described it as \"arguably the ultimate 'cyberpunk' artifact.\" In 2008 he received honorary doctorates from Simon Fraser University and Coastal Carolina University. He was inducted by Science Fiction Hall of Fame that same year, presented by his close friend and collaborator Jack Womack.\nVisionary influence and prescience.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The future is already here\u00a0\u2013 it's just not evenly distributed.\"\n\u2014William Gibson\nIn \"Neuromancer\", Gibson first used the term \"matrix\" to refer to the visualized Internet, two years after the nascent modern Internet was formed in the early 1980s from the computer networks of the 1970s. Gibson thereby imagined a worldwide communications network years before the origin of the World Wide Web, although related notions had previously been imagined by others, including science fiction writers. At the time he wrote \"Burning Chrome\", Gibson \"had a hunch that [the Internet] would change things, in the same way that the ubiquity of the automobile changed things.\" In 1995, he identified the advent, evolution and growth of the Internet as \"one of the most fascinating and unprecedented human achievements of the century\", a new kind of civilization that is\u00a0\u2013 in terms of significance \u2013 on a par with the birth of cities, and in 2000 predicted it would lead to the death of the nation state.\nObservers contend that Gibson's influence on the development of the Web reached beyond prediction; he is widely credited with creating an iconography for the Information Age, long before the embrace of the Internet by the mainstream. Gibson introduced, in \"Neuromancer\", the notion of the \"meatpuppet\", and is credited with inventing\u2014conceptually rather than participatorally\u2014the phenomenon of virtual sex. His influence on early pioneers of desktop environment digital art has been acknowledged, and he holds an honorary doctorate from Parsons The New School for Design. Steven Poole suggests that in writing the Sprawl trilogy Gibson laid the \"conceptual foundations for the explosive real-world growth of virtual environments in video games and the Web\". In his afterword to the 2000 re-issue of \"Neuromancer\", fellow author Jack Womack suggests that Gibson's vision of cyberspace may have inspired the way in which the Internet (and the Web particularly) developed, following the publication of \"Neuromancer\" in 1984, asking \"what if the act of writing it down, in fact, \"brought it about\"?\"\nGibson scholar Tatiani G. Rapatzikou commented, in \"Gothic Motifs in the Fiction of William Gibson\", on the origin of the notion of cyberspace:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Gibson's vision, generated by the monopolising appearance of the terminal image and presented in his creation of the cyberspace matrix, came to him when he saw teenagers playing in video arcades. The physical intensity of their postures, and the realistic interpretation of the terminal spaces projected by these games\u00a0\u2013 as if there were a real space behind the screen \u2013 made apparent the manipulation of the real by its own representation.\nIn his Sprawl and Bridge trilogies, Gibson is credited with being one of the few observers to explore the portents of the Information Age for notions of the sociospatial structuring of cities. Not all responses to Gibson's visions have been positive, however; virtual reality pioneer Mark Pesce, though acknowledging their heavy influence on him and that \"no other writer had so eloquently and emotionally affected the direction of the hacker community,\" dismissed them as \"adolescent fantasies of violence and disembodiment.\" In \"Pattern Recognition\", the plot revolves around snippets of film footage posted anonymously to various locations on the Internet. Characters in the novel speculate about the filmmaker's identity, motives, methods and inspirations on several websites, anticipating the 2006 lonelygirl15 Internet phenomenon. However, Gibson later disputed the notion that the creators of lonelygirl15 drew influence from him. Another phenomenon anticipated by Gibson is the rise of reality television, for example in \"Virtual Light\", which featured a satirical extrapolated version of \"COPS\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVisionary writer is OK. Prophet is just not true. One of the things that made me like Bruce Sterling immediately when first I met him, back in 1991. [\"sic\"] We shook hands and he said \"We've got a great job! We got to be charlatans and we're paid for it. We make this shit up and people believe it.\"\n\u2014Gibson in interview with \"ActuSf\", March 2008\nWhen an interviewer in 1988 asked about the Bulletin Board System jargon in his writing, Gibson answered \"I'd never so much as touched a PC when I wrote \"Neuromancer\"\"; he was familiar, he said, with the science-fiction community, which overlapped with the BBS community. Gibson similarly did not play computer games despite appearing in his stories. He wrote \"Neuromancer\" on a 1927 olive-green Hermes portable typewriter, which Gibson described as \"the kind of thing Hemingway would have used in the field\". By 1988 he used an Apple IIc and AppleWorks to write, with a modem (\"I don't really use it for anything\"), but until 1996 Gibson did not have an email address, a lack he explained at the time to have been motivated by a desire to avoid correspondence that would distract him from writing. His first exposure to a website came while writing \"Idoru\" when a web developer built one for Gibson. In 2007 he said, \"I have a 2005 PowerBook G4, a gig of memory, wireless router. That's it. I'm anything but an early adopter, generally. In fact, I've never really been very interested in computers themselves. I don't watch them; I watch how people behave around them. That's becoming more difficult to do because everything is 'around them'.\"\nSelected works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33120", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33120", "title": "Web crawler", "text": "Software that systematically browses the World Wide Web\nA web crawler, sometimes called a spider or spiderbot and often shortened to crawler, is an Internet bot that systematically browses the World Wide Web and that is typically operated by search engines for the purpose of Web indexing (\"web spidering\").\nWeb search engines and some other websites use Web crawling or spidering software to update their web content or indices of other sites' web content. Web crawlers copy pages for processing by a search engine, which indexes the downloaded pages so that users can search more efficiently.\nCrawlers consume resources on visited systems and often visit sites unprompted. Issues of schedule, load, and \"politeness\" come into play when large collections of pages are accessed. Mechanisms exist for public sites not wishing to be crawled to make this known to the crawling agent. For example, including a codice_1 file can request bots to index only parts of a website, or nothing at all.\nThe number of Internet pages is extremely large; even the largest crawlers fall short of making a complete index. For this reason, search engines struggled to give relevant search results in the early years of the World Wide Web, before 2000. Today, relevant results are given almost instantly.\nCrawlers can validate hyperlinks and HTML code. They can also be used for web scraping and data-driven programming.\nNomenclature.\nA web crawler is also known as a \"spider\", an \"ant\", an \"automatic indexer\", or (in the FOAF software context) a \"Web scutter\".\nOverview.\nA Web crawler starts with a list of URLs to visit. Those first URLs are called the \"seeds\". As the crawler visits these URLs, by communicating with web servers that respond to those URLs, it identifies all the hyperlinks in the retrieved web pages and adds them to the list of URLs to visit, called the \"crawl frontier\". URLs from the frontier are recursively visited according to a set of policies. If the crawler is performing archiving of websites (or web archiving), it copies and saves the information as it goes. The archives are usually stored in such a way they can be viewed, read and navigated as if they were on the live web, but are preserved as 'snapshots'.\nThe archive is known as the \"repository\" and is designed to store and manage the collection of web pages. The repository only stores HTML pages and these pages are stored as distinct files. A repository is similar to any other system that stores data, like a modern-day database. The only difference is that a repository does not need all the functionality offered by a database system. The repository stores the most recent version of the web page retrieved by the crawler.\nThe large volume implies the crawler can only download a limited number of the Web pages within a given time, so it needs to prioritize its downloads. The high rate of change can imply the pages might have already been updated or even deleted.\nThe number of possible URLs crawled being generated by server-side software has also made it difficult for web crawlers to avoid retrieving duplicate content. Endless combinations of HTTP GET (URL-based) parameters exist, of which only a small selection will actually return unique content. For example, a simple online photo gallery may offer three options to users, as specified through HTTP GET parameters in the URL. If there exist four ways to sort images, three choices of thumbnail size, two file formats, and an option to disable user-provided content, then the same set of content can be accessed with 48 different URLs, all of which may be linked on the site. This mathematical combination creates a problem for crawlers, as they must sort through endless combinations of relatively minor scripted changes in order to retrieve unique content.\nAs Edwards \"et al.\" noted, \"Given that the bandwidth for conducting crawls is neither infinite nor free, it is becoming essential to crawl the Web in not only a scalable, but efficient way, if some reasonable measure of quality or freshness is to be maintained.\" A crawler must carefully choose at each step which pages to visit next.\nCrawling policy.\nThe behavior of a Web crawler is the outcome of a combination of policies:\nSelection policy.\nGiven the current size of the Web, even large search engines cover only a portion of the publicly available part. A 2009 study showed even large-scale search engines index no more than 40\u201370% of the indexable Web; a previous study by Steve Lawrence and Lee Giles showed that no search engine indexed more than 16% of the Web in 1999. As a crawler always downloads just a fraction of the Web pages, it is highly desirable for the downloaded fraction to contain the most relevant pages and not just a random sample of the Web.\nThis requires a metric of importance for prioritizing Web pages. The importance of a page is a function of its intrinsic quality, its popularity in terms of links or visits, and even of its URL (the latter is the case of vertical search engines restricted to a single top-level domain, or search engines restricted to a fixed Web site). Designing a good selection policy has an added difficulty: it must work with partial information, as the complete set of Web pages is not known during crawling.\nIn addition to prioritizing which pages to crawl, web crawlers also take into account directives that influence how content is indexed or linked. Meta tags such as codice_2 and codice_3 inform compliant crawlers not to include a page in their search index or not to follow links on that page, respectively. These directives allow website operators to manage which pages appear in search results and help control the transmission of ranking signals.\nJunghoo Cho \"et al.\" made the first study on policies for crawling scheduling. Their data set was a 180,000-pages crawl from the stanford.edu domain, in which a crawling simulation was done with different strategies. The ordering metrics tested were breadth-first, backlink count and partial PageRank calculations. One of the conclusions was that if the crawler wants to download pages with high Pagerank early during the crawling process, then the partial Pagerank strategy is the better, followed by breadth-first and backlink-count. However, these results are for just a single domain. Cho also wrote his PhD dissertation at Stanford on web crawling.\nMarc Najork and Janet Wiener performed an actual crawl on 328 million pages, using breadth-first ordering. They found that a breadth-first crawl captures pages with high Pagerank early in the crawl (but they did not compare this strategy against other strategies). The explanation given by the authors for this result is that \"the most important pages have many links to them from numerous hosts, and those links will be found early, regardless of on which host or page the crawl originates.\"\nAbiteboul designed a crawling strategy based on an algorithm called OPIC (On-line Page Importance Computation). In OPIC, each page is given an initial sum of \"cash\" that is distributed equally among the pages it points to. It is similar to a PageRank computation, but it is faster and is only done in one step. An OPIC-driven crawler downloads first the pages in the crawling frontier with higher amounts of \"cash\". Experiments were carried in a 100,000-pages synthetic graph with a power-law distribution of in-links. However, there was no comparison with other strategies nor experiments in the real Web.\nBoldi \"et al.\" used simulation on subsets of the Web of 40 million pages from the .it domain and 100 million pages from the WebBase crawl, testing breadth-first against depth-first, random ordering and an omniscient strategy. The comparison was based on how well PageRank computed on a partial crawl approximates the true PageRank value. Some visits that accumulate PageRank very quickly (most notably, breadth-first and the omniscient visit) provide very poor progressive approximations.\nBaeza-Yates \"et al.\" used simulation on two subsets of the Web of 3 million pages from the .gr and .cl domain, testing several crawling strategies. They showed that both the OPIC strategy and a strategy that uses the length of the per-site queues are better than breadth-first crawling, and that it is also very effective to use a previous crawl, when it is available, to guide the current one.\nDaneshpajouh \"et al.\" designed a community based algorithm for discovering good seeds. Their method crawls web pages with high PageRank from different communities in less iteration in comparison with crawl starting from random seeds. One can extract good seed from a previously-crawled-Web graph using this new method. Using these seeds, a new crawl can be very effective.\nRestricting followed links.\nA crawler may only want to seek out HTML pages and avoid all other MIME types. In order to request only HTML resources, a crawler may make an HTTP HEAD request to determine a Web resource's MIME type before requesting the entire resource with a GET request. To avoid making numerous HEAD requests, a crawler may examine the URL and only request a resource if the URL ends with certain characters such as .html, .htm, .asp, .aspx, .php, .jsp, .jspx or a slash. This strategy may cause numerous HTML Web resources to be unintentionally skipped.\nSome crawlers may also avoid requesting any resources that have a \"?\" in them (are dynamically produced) in order to avoid spider traps that may cause the crawler to download an infinite number of URLs from a Web site. This strategy is unreliable if the site uses URL rewriting to simplify its URLs.\nURL normalization.\nCrawlers usually perform some type of URL normalization in order to avoid crawling the same resource more than once. The term \"URL normalization\", also called \"URL canonicalization\", refers to the process of modifying and standardizing a URL in a consistent manner. There are several types of normalization that may be performed including conversion of URLs to lowercase, removal of \".\" and \"..\" segments, and adding trailing slashes to the non-empty path component.\nPath-ascending crawling.\nSome crawlers intend to download/upload as many resources as possible from a particular web site. So \"path-ascending crawler\" was introduced that would ascend to every path in each URL that it intends to crawl. For example, when given a seed URL of http://llama.org/hamster/monkey/page.html, it will attempt to crawl /hamster/monkey/, /hamster/, and /. Cothey found that a path-ascending crawler was very effective in finding isolated resources, or resources for which no inbound link would have been found in regular crawling.\nFocused crawling.\nThe importance of a page for a crawler can also be expressed as a function of the similarity of a page to a given query. Web crawlers that attempt to download pages that are similar to each other are called focused crawler or topical crawlers. The concepts of topical and focused crawling were first introduced by Filippo Menczer and by Soumen Chakrabarti \"et al.\"\nThe main problem in focused crawling is that in the context of a Web crawler, we would like to be able to predict the similarity of the text of a given page to the query before actually downloading the page. A possible predictor is the anchor text of links; this was the approach taken by Pinkerton in the first web crawler of the early days of the Web. Diligenti \"et al.\" propose using the complete content of the pages already visited to infer the similarity between the driving query and the pages that have not been visited yet. The performance of a focused crawling depends mostly on the richness of links in the specific topic being searched, and a focused crawling usually relies on a general Web search engine for providing starting points.\nAcademic focused crawler.\nAn example of the focused crawlers are academic crawlers, which crawls free-access academic related documents, such as the \"citeseerxbot\", which is the crawler of CiteSeerX search engine. Other academic search engines are Google Scholar and Microsoft Academic Search etc. Because most academic papers are published in PDF formats, such kind of crawler is particularly interested in crawling PDF, PostScript files, Microsoft Word including their zipped formats. Because of this, general open-source crawlers, such as Heritrix, must be customized to filter out other MIME types, or a middleware is used to extract these documents out and import them to the focused crawl database and repository. Identifying whether these documents are academic or not is challenging and can add a significant overhead to the crawling process, so this is performed as a post crawling process using machine learning or regular expression algorithms. These academic documents are usually obtained from home pages of faculties and students or from publication page of research institutes. Because academic documents make up only a small fraction of all web pages, a good seed selection is important in boosting the efficiencies of these web crawlers. Other academic crawlers may download plain text and HTML files, that contains metadata of academic papers, such as titles, papers, and abstracts. This increases the overall number of papers, but a significant fraction may not provide free PDF downloads.\nSemantic focused crawler.\nAnother type of focused crawlers is semantic focused crawler, which makes use of domain ontologies to represent topical maps and link Web pages with relevant ontological concepts for the selection and categorization purposes. In addition, ontologies can be automatically updated in the crawling process. Dong et al. introduced such an ontology-learning-based crawler using a support-vector machine to update the content of ontological concepts when crawling Web pages.\nRe-visit policy.\nThe Web has a very dynamic nature, and crawling a fraction of the Web can take weeks or months. By the time a Web crawler has finished its crawl, many events could have happened, including creations, updates, and deletions.\nFrom the search engine's point of view, there is a cost associated with not detecting an event, and thus having an outdated copy of a resource. The most-used cost functions are freshness and age.\nFreshness: This is a binary measure that indicates whether the local copy is accurate or not. The freshness of a page \"p\" in the repository at time \"t\" is defined as:\n formula_1\nAge: This is a measure that indicates how outdated the local copy is. The age of a page \"p\" in the repository, at time \"t\" is defined as:\n formula_2\nCoffman \"et al.\" worked with a definition of the objective of a Web crawler that is equivalent to freshness, but use a different wording: they propose that a crawler must minimize the fraction of time pages remain outdated. They also noted that the problem of Web crawling can be modeled as a multiple-queue, single-server polling system, on which the Web crawler is the server and the Web sites are the queues. Page modifications are the arrival of the customers, and switch-over times are the interval between page accesses to a single Web site. Under this model, mean waiting time for a customer in the polling system is equivalent to the average age for the Web crawler.\nThe objective of the crawler is to keep the average freshness of pages in its collection as high as possible, or to keep the average age of pages as low as possible. These objectives are not equivalent: in the first case, the crawler is just concerned with how many pages are outdated, while in the second case, the crawler is concerned with how old the local copies of pages are.\nTwo simple re-visiting policies were studied by Cho and Garcia-Molina:\nIn both cases, the repeated crawling order of pages can be done either in a random or a fixed order.\nCho and Garcia-Molina proved the surprising result that, in terms of average freshness, the uniform policy outperforms the proportional policy in both a simulated Web and a real Web crawl. Intuitively, the reasoning is that, as web crawlers have a limit to how many pages they can crawl in a given time frame, (1) they will allocate too many new crawls to rapidly changing pages at the expense of less frequently updating pages, and (2) the freshness of rapidly changing pages lasts for shorter period than that of less frequently changing pages. In other words, a proportional policy allocates more resources to crawling frequently updating pages, but experiences less overall freshness time from them.\nTo improve freshness, the crawler should penalize the elements that change too often. The optimal re-visiting policy is neither the uniform policy nor the proportional policy. The optimal method for keeping average freshness high includes ignoring the pages that change too often, and the optimal for keeping average age low is to use access frequencies that monotonically (and sub-linearly) increase with the rate of change of each page. In both cases, the optimal is closer to the uniform policy than to the proportional policy: as Coffman \"et al.\" note, \"in order to minimize the expected obsolescence time, the accesses to any particular page should be kept as evenly spaced as possible\". Explicit formulas for the re-visit policy are not attainable in general, but they are obtained numerically, as they depend on the distribution of page changes. Cho and Garcia-Molina show that the exponential distribution is a good fit for describing page changes, while Ipeirotis \"et al.\" show how to use statistical tools to discover parameters that affect this distribution. The re-visiting policies considered here regard all pages as homogeneous in terms of quality (\"all pages on the Web are worth the same\"), something that is not a realistic scenario, so further information about the Web page quality should be included to achieve a better crawling policy.\nPoliteness policy.\nCrawlers can retrieve data much quicker and in greater depth than human searchers, so they can have a crippling impact on the performance of a site. If a single crawler is performing multiple requests per second and/or downloading large files, a server can have a hard time keeping up with requests from multiple crawlers.\nAs noted by Koster, the use of Web crawlers is useful for a number of tasks, but comes with a price for the general community. The costs of using Web crawlers include:\nA partial solution to these problems is the robots exclusion protocol, also known as the robots.txt protocol that is a standard for administrators to indicate which parts of their Web servers should not be accessed by crawlers. This standard does not include a suggestion for the interval of visits to the same server, even though this interval is the most effective way of avoiding server overload. Recently commercial search engines like Google, Ask Jeeves, MSN and Yahoo! Search are able to use an extra \"Crawl-delay:\" parameter in the robots.txt file to indicate the number of seconds to delay between requests.\nThe first proposed interval between successive pageloads was 60 seconds. However, if pages were downloaded at this rate from a website with more than 100,000 pages over a perfect connection with zero latency and infinite bandwidth, it would take more than 2 months to download only that entire Web site; also, only a fraction of the resources from that Web server would be used.\nCho uses 10 seconds as an interval for accesses, and the WIRE crawler uses 15 seconds as the default. The MercatorWeb crawler follows an adaptive politeness policy: if it took \"t\" seconds to download a document from a given server, the crawler waits for 10\"t\" seconds before downloading the next page. Dill \"et al.\" use 1 second.\nFor those using Web crawlers for research purposes, a more detailed cost-benefit analysis is needed and ethical considerations should be taken into account when deciding where to crawl and how fast to crawl.\nAnecdotal evidence from access logs shows that access intervals from known crawlers vary between 20 seconds and 3\u20134 minutes. It is worth noticing that even when being very polite, and taking all the safeguards to avoid overloading Web servers, some complaints from Web server administrators are received. Sergey Brin and Larry Page noted in 1998, \"... running a crawler which connects to more than half a million servers ... generates a fair amount of e-mail and phone calls. Because of the vast number of people coming on line, there are always those who do not know what a crawler is, because this is the first one they have seen.\"\nParallelization policy.\nA parallel crawler is a crawler that runs multiple processes in parallel. The goal is to maximize the download rate while minimizing the overhead from parallelization and to avoid repeated downloads of the same page. To avoid downloading the same page more than once, the crawling system requires a policy for assigning the new URLs discovered during the crawling process, as the same URL can be found by two different crawling processes.\nArchitectures.\nA crawler must not only have a good crawling strategy, as noted in the previous sections, but it should also have a highly optimized architecture.\nShkapenyuk and Suel noted that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While it is fairly easy to build a slow crawler that downloads a few pages per second for a short period of time, building a high-performance system that can download hundreds of millions of pages over several weeks presents a number of challenges in system design, I/O and network efficiency, and robustness and manageability.\nWeb crawlers are a central part of search engines, and details on their algorithms and architecture are kept as business secrets. When crawler designs are published, there is often an important lack of detail that prevents others from reproducing the work. There are also emerging concerns about \"search engine spamming\", which prevent major search engines from publishing their ranking algorithms.\nSecurity.\nWhile most of the website owners are keen to have their pages indexed as broadly as possible to have strong presence in search engines, web crawling can also have unintended consequences and lead to a compromise or data breach if a search engine indexes resources that should not be publicly available, or pages revealing potentially vulnerable versions of software.\nApart from standard web application security recommendations website owners can reduce their exposure to opportunistic hacking by only allowing search engines to index the public parts of their websites (with robots.txt) and explicitly blocking them from indexing transactional parts (login pages, private pages, etc.).\nCrawler identification.\nWeb crawlers typically identify themselves to a Web server by using the User-agent field of an HTTP request. Web site administrators typically examine their Web servers' log and use the user agent field to determine which crawlers have visited the web server and how often. The user agent field may include a URL where the Web site administrator may find out more information about the crawler. Examining Web server log is tedious task, and therefore some administrators use tools to identify, track and verify Web crawlers. Spambots and other malicious Web crawlers are unlikely to place identifying information in the user agent field, or they may mask their identity as a browser or other well-known crawler.\nWeb site administrators prefer Web crawlers to identify themselves so that they can contact the owner if needed. In some cases, crawlers may be accidentally trapped in a crawler trap or they may be overloading a Web server with requests, and the owner needs to stop the crawler. Identification is also useful for administrators that are interested in knowing when they may expect their Web pages to be indexed by a particular search engine.\nCrawling the deep web.\nA vast amount of web pages lie in the deep or invisible web. These pages are typically only accessible by submitting queries to a database, and regular crawlers are unable to find these pages if there are no links that point to them. Google's Sitemaps protocol and mod oai are intended to allow discovery of these deep-Web resources.\nDeep web crawling also multiplies the number of web links to be crawled. Some crawlers only take some of the URLs in codice_4 form. In some cases, such as the Googlebot, Web crawling is done on all text contained inside the hypertext content, tags, or text.\nStrategic approaches may be taken to target deep Web content. With a technique called screen scraping, specialized software may be customized to automatically and repeatedly query a given Web form with the intention of aggregating the resulting data. Such software can be used to span multiple Web forms across multiple Websites. Data extracted from the results of one Web form submission can be taken and applied as input to another Web form thus establishing continuity across the Deep Web in a way not possible with traditional web crawlers.\nPages built on AJAX are among those causing problems to web crawlers. Google has proposed a format of AJAX calls that their bot can recognize and index.\nVisual vs programmatic crawlers.\nThere are a number of \"visual web scraper/crawler\" products available on the web which will crawl pages and structure data into columns and rows based on the users requirements. One of the main difference between a classic and a visual crawler is the level of programming ability required to set up a crawler. The latest generation of \"visual scrapers\" remove the majority of the programming skill needed to be able to program and start a crawl to scrape web data.\nThe visual scraping/crawling method relies on the user \"teaching\" a piece of crawler technology, which then follows patterns in semi-structured data sources. The dominant method for teaching a visual crawler is by highlighting data in a browser and training columns and rows. While the technology is not new, for example it was the basis of Needlebase which has been bought by Google (as part of a larger acquisition of ITA Labs), there is continued growth and investment in this area by investors and end-users.\nList of web crawlers.\nThe following is a list of published crawler architectures for general-purpose crawlers (excluding focused web crawlers), with a brief description that includes the names given to the different components and outstanding features:\nCommercial web crawlers.\nThe following web crawlers are available, for a price::\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33121", "revid": "50691679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33121", "title": "Wings of Desire", "text": "1987 film by Wim Wenders\nWings of Desire (, ; lit.\u2009'The Heaven/Sky over Berlin') is a 1987 romantic fantasy film written by Wim Wenders, Peter Handke and Richard Reitinger, and directed by Wenders. The film is about invisible, immortal angels who populate Berlin and listen to the thoughts of its human inhabitants, comforting the distressed. Even though the city is densely populated, many of the people are isolated or estranged from their loved ones. One of the angels, played by Bruno Ganz, falls in love with a beautiful, lonely trapeze artist, played by Solveig Dommartin. The angel chooses to become mortal so that he can experience human sensory pleasures, ranging from enjoying food to touching a loved one, and so that he can discover human love with the trapeze artist.\nInspired by art depicting angels visible around West Berlin, at the time encircled by the Berlin Wall, Wenders and author Peter Handke conceived of the story and continued to develop the screenplay throughout the French and German co-production. The film was shot by Henri Alekan in both colour and black-and-white, the latter being used to represent the world as seen by the angels. The cast includes Otto Sander, Curt Bois and Peter Falk.\nFor \"Wings of Desire\", Wenders won awards for Best Director at both the Cannes Film Festival and European Film Awards. The film was a critical and financial success, and academics have interpreted it as a statement of the importance of cinema, libraries, the circus, or German unity, containing New Age, religious, secular or other themes.\nIt was followed by a sequel, \"Faraway, So Close!\", released in 1993. \"City of Angels\", a U.S. remake, was released in 1998. In 1990, numerous critics named \"Wings of Desire\" as one of the best films of the 1980s.\nPlot.\nIn a Berlin divided by the Berlin Wall, two angels, Damiel and Cassiel, watch the city, unseen and unheard by its human inhabitants. They observe and listen to the thoughts of Berliners, including a pregnant woman in an ambulance on the way to the hospital, a young prostitute standing by a busy road, and a broken man who feels betrayed by his wife. Their \"raison d'\u00eatre\" is, as Cassiel says, to \"assemble, testify, preserve\" reality. Damiel and Cassiel have always existed as angels; they were in Berlin before it was a city, and before there were any humans.\nAmong the Berliners they encounter in their wanderings is an old man named Homer, who dreams of an \"epic of peace\". Cassiel follows the old man as he looks for the then-demolished Potsdamer Platz in an open field, and finds only the graffiti-covered Wall. Although Damiel and Cassiel are pure observers, visible only to children, and incapable of any interaction with the physical world, Damiel begins to fall in love with a profoundly lonely circus trapeze artist named Marion. She lives by herself in a caravan in West Berlin, until she receives the news that her group, the Circus Alekan, will be closing down. Depressed, she dances alone to a concert by Crime &amp; the City Solution, and drifts through the city.\nMeanwhile, actor Peter Falk arrives in West Berlin to make a film about the city's Nazi past. Falk was once an angel, but, having grown tired of always observing and never experiencing, renounced his immortality to become a participant in the world. Also growing weary of infinity, Damiel longs for the genuineness and limits of human existence. He meets Marion in a dream, and is surprised when Falk senses his presence and tells him about the pleasures of human life.\nDamiel is finally persuaded to shed his immortality. He experiences life for the first time: he bleeds, sees colours, tastes food and drinks coffee. Meanwhile, Cassiel taps into the mind of a young man just about to take his own life by jumping off a building. Cassiel tries to save the young man but is unable to do so, and is left tormented by the experience. Sensing Cassiel's presence, Falk reaches out to him as he had to Damiel, but Cassiel is unwilling to follow their example. Eventually, Damiel meets the trapeze artist Marion at a bar during a concert by Nick Cave, and she greets him and speaks about finally finding a love that is serious and can make her feel complete. The next day, Damiel considers how his time with Marion taught him to feel amazed, and how he has gained knowledge no angel is capable of achieving.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nAfter living and working in the United States for eight years, director Wim Wenders returned to his native West Germany and wished to reconnect to it with a film about his favourite part of it, West Berlin. Planning to make \"Until the End of the World\" in 1985, he realised the project would not be ready for two years, and wishing to return to photography as soon as possible, he considered another project.\nRainer Maria Rilke's poetry partially inspired the story. Wenders claimed angels seemed to dwell in Rilke's poetry, and the director had also jotted \"angels\" in his notes one day, and noted angel-themed artwork in cemeteries and around Berlin. In his treatment, Wenders also considered a backstory in which God exiled his angels to Berlin as punishment for defending humans after 1945, when God had decided to forsake them.\nWenders employed Peter Handke, who wrote much of the dialogue, the poetic narrations, and the film's recurring poem \"Song of Childhood\". Wenders found the names Damiel and Cassiel in an encyclopedia about angels, and also had photographs of Solveig Dommartin, Bruno Ganz and Otto Sander that served as muses. The idea that angels could read minds led to Wenders considering personal dialogue no one would say aloud. Wenders did not view the angel protagonist as representative of himself, instead deciding the angel could be an embodiment of film, and that the purpose of film could be to help people by opening their eyes to possibilities. Handke did not feel able to write a single coherent story, but promised to regularly send notes on ideas during production. Screenwriter Richard Reitinger also assisted Wenders in scripting scenes incorporating Handke's contributions.\nGiven the nature of this arrangement, Wenders would hold daily meetings with his crew, frequently at late hours, to plan the logistics for the following day. French producer Anatole Dauman did not see a large budget as necessary, and the project was funded with 5 million DM.\nCasting.\nWenders believed it would be important for the actors playing the two main angel characters to be familiar and friendly with each other. Ganz and Sander had performed in some of the same stage productions for 20 years. Sander and Ganz also recommended Curt Bois to Wenders and asked Bois to perform. Bois' performance as Homer marked his final feature film in an 80-year career, beginning as a child actor.\nPeter Falk's role was not planned until photography had already begun, with Wenders planning an artist or political official to have an analogous role until assistant Claire Denis suggested the \"Columbo\" star would be familiar to everyone. Falk described the part as \"the craziest thing that I've ever been offered\", but quickly agreed. He was accustomed to the improvisation the newly created role required, and when Wenders and Falk met, they conceived ideas of the character sketching and searching for a hat. Nick Cave and his band were based in West Berlin, with Wenders calling him \"a real Berlin hero\" and deciding \"It was inconceivable for me to make a film in Berlin without showing one of his concerts\".\nFilming.\nThe film was shot by Henri Alekan, whose cinematography represents the angels' point of view in monochrome, as they cannot see colours, and switches to colour to show the human point of view. During filming, Alekan used a very old and fragile silk stocking that had belonged to his grandmother as a filter for the monochromatic sequences, in order to depict the angels' muted view of the world. Wenders felt it was natural that angels without experience of the physical world would not see colour, and also thought black-and-white cinematography by Alekan would provide a novel view of Berlin.\nA challenge in the cinematography was posed by using the camera for the perception of angels, as angels are not restrained in how far they can observe, in any dimension. The story's Circus Alekan is named in the cinematographer's honour.\nFilming took place at actual locations in West Berlin, such as the Siegess\u00e4ule, Hans Scharoun's Berlin State Library, Potsdamerplatz with the disused elevated track of the M-Bahn, the Lohm\u00fchlenbr\u00fccke, the Langenscheidtbr\u00fccke (the motorcycle accident), Oranienstrasse, Goebenstrasse 6 (where Damiel exchanges his breastplate for a loud check jacket), Waldemarstrasse (where Damiel comes to as a human), G\u00fcnzelstrasse U-Bahn station, the Anhalter Bahnhof, Theodor-Wolff-Park (site of the circus), Hochbunker Pallasstrasse (Peter Falk's film set) and the Hotel Esplanade (the concert). Most shots of the Wall are genuine, although the set for the scene in the death strip, in which Damiel announces his decision to become human, was specially built. Some pieces of the recreation were made from inexpensive wood, with one being destroyed by rain during production.\nWith little idea of how to portray the angels and no costume design, Wenders said the filmmakers consulted artwork, experimented, and found the idea of armour during production, and told U.S. filmmaker Brad Silberling they did not decide on overcoats until later. The hairstyle was loosely inspired by a photograph of a Japanese warrior.\nAlthough the circus scenes required extensive and risky acrobatics, Dommartin was able to learn the trapeze and rope moves in a mere eight weeks, and did all the work herself, without a stunt double. During production, the filmmakers called German police after Falk went missing. Falk had been spending hours exploring West Berlin and was discovered in a caf\u00e9.\nPost-production.\nPeter Handke arrived in West Berlin during the editing process, led by Peter Przygodda. Handke believed it bordered on a silent film, aside from some music, and lacked much of the notes he had sent to Wenders during filming. Handke thus proposed adding his writings via voice-over. After Falk left Berlin, he recorded much of his voice-over in a sound studio in Los Angeles. Much of this was improvised, though Wenders still supervised by telephone.\nWith the filming performed in lengthy takes, and the camera used as \"the eye of the angel\", much of the movement was conveyed in the camerawork rather than in editing effects. There was five hours of footage to edit down to the final cut. A pie fight between the stars was filmed for the final scene, but later edited out.\nComposer J\u00fcrgen Knieper assumed harps and violins would suffice for a score for a film about angels, until he saw a cut of the film. Seeing the angels were discontented, he wrote a different score employing a choir, voices and whistling. Laurent Petitgand contributed the circus music, an ensemble work performed with accordions, saxophones and keyboards.\nThemes and interpretations.\nThe concept of angels, spirits or ghosts who help humans on Earth had been common in cinema, from \"Here Comes Mr. Jordan\" (1941) to the 1946 works \"It's a Wonderful Life\" and \"A Matter of Life and Death\". Many earlier U.S. and U.K. films demonstrate high amounts of reverence, while others allow reasonable amounts of fun. Powell and Pressburger's \"A Matter of Life and Death\" presents an early example of spirits being jealous of the lives of humans. The shift from monochrome to colour, to distinguish the angels' reality from that of the mortals, was also used in Powell and Pressburger's film. While \"Wings of Desire\" does not portray Berliners as living in a utopia, academic Roger Cook wrote that the fact that people have pleasure \"gives, as the English title suggests, wings to desire\".\nGod is not mentioned in the film, and is only referred to in the sequel \"Faraway, So Close!\" when the angels state a purpose to connect humans with \"Him\". Scholars Robert Phillip Kolker and Peter Beickene attributed the apparent lack of God to New Age beliefs, remarking Damiel's \"fall\" is similar to the story of Lucifer, though not related to evil. Reviewer Jeffrey Overstreet concurred that \"Wenders had left his church upbringing behind\", and the cinematic angels are \"inventions he could craft to his specifications\", with little regard for biblical beliefs. Overstreet characterized them as \"whimsical metaphors, characters who have lost the joy of sensual human experience\". Nevertheless, Professor Craig Detweiler believed the sky-level view of Berlin and the idea of guardian angels evoke God. Authors Martin Brady and Joanne Leal added that even if Damiel is tempted by seemingly profane things, the atmosphere of Berlin means the human Damiel is still in \"a place of poetry, myth and religion\".\nIn one scene, Damiel and Cassiel meet to share stories in their observations, with their function revealed to be one of preserving the past. Professor Alexander Graf wrote this connects them to cinema, with Wenders noting \"Wings of Desire\" itself depicts or shows places in Berlin that have since been destroyed or altered, including a bridge, Potsdamer Platz and the Wall.\nThe closing titles state: \"Dedicated to all the former angels, but especially to Yasujiro, Fran\u00e7ois and Andrej\" (all references to Wenders' fellow filmmakers Yasujir\u014d Ozu, Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, and Andrei Tarkovsky). These directors had all died before the release of the film, with Kolker and Beickene arguing they were an influence on Wenders: Ozu had taught Wenders order; Truffaut the observation of people, especially youth; and Tarkovsky, a less clear influence on Wenders, consideration of morality and beauty. Identifying directors as angels could tie in with the film characters' function to record.\nAcademic Laura Marcus believed a connection between cinema and print is also established in the angels' affinity for libraries, as Wenders portrays the library as a tool of \"memory, and public space\", making it a miraculous place. The depiction of Damiel, by using a pen or an immaterial pen, to write \"Song of Childhood\", is also tribute to print and literacy, introducing, or as Marcus hypothesized, \"perhaps even releasing, the visual images that follow\". Kolker and Beickene interpreted the use of poetry as part of screenwriter Peter Handke's efforts to elevate language above common rhetoric to the spiritual. Reviewing the poetry, Detweiler remarked that Handke's \"Song of Childhood\" bears parallels to St. Paul's 1 Corinthians 13 (\"When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child ... \"). Professor Terrie Waddell added that the poem established \"centrality of childhood\" as a key theme, noting that the children can see angels and accept them without question, tying them in with the phenomenon of imaginary friends.\nThe film has also been read as a call for German reunification, which followed in 1990. Essayists David Caldwell and Paul Rea saw it as presenting a series of two opposites: East and West, angel and human, male and female. Wenders' angels are not bound by the Wall, reflecting East and West Berlin's shared space, though East Berlin remains primarily black and white. Scholar Martin Jesinghausen believed the film presumed reunification would never happen, and contemplated its statements on divides, including territorial and \"higher\" divides, \"physicality and spirituality, art and reality, black and white and colour\".\nResearcher Helen Stoddart, in discussing the depiction of the circus and trapeze artist Marion in particular, submitted that Marion is the classic circus character, creating an image of danger and then potential. Stoddart argued that Homer and Marion may find the future in what remains of history found in Berlin. Stoddart considered the circular nature of the story, including a parallel between the angel who cannot see the physical (Damiel), and the faux angel (Marion) who can \"see the faces\". Marion also observes that all directions lead to the Wall, and the final French dialogue \"We have embarked\" while the screen states \"To be continued\", suggests \"final movement to a new beginning\".\nWriting in the journal \"Film and Philosophy\", Nathan Wolfson cites Roland Barthes's work\u2014especially \"S/Z\"\u2014as a model to argue that \"This 'angelic' portion of Wings of Desire deliberately invokes in the viewer a set of specific responses. These responses provide the foundation for the transformation that Damiel and Marion participate in. The film prepares the viewer for an analogous transformation, and invites the viewer to participate in this process, through an exploration of authorship and agency.\"\nStyle.\nBritish Film Institute writer Leigh Singer assessed the cinematic style as \"bold\" and artistic in its use of colour, \"existential voiceover\" and \"languorous pacing\". Singer also commented on the use of symbolism and the combinations of diverse pieces of culture, from the poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke to the music of Nick Cave. In Singer's estimation, the cinematography is able to communicate the angels' \"invisible intimacy and empathy\". Professor Terrie Waddell described the \"dialogue and monologue\" as \"lyrical\", in the mould of Rilke's poetry. Scholar Alexander Graf considered how these voice-overs and verbal exchanges are frequently combined with background radio and television sounds, and concluded the \"image and soundtrack\" that comprise the style convey a point of \"blindness\": \"men and women are plagued by their everyday problems; children are, like the angels, in their own dreamy world\".\nProfessor Russell J.A. Kilbourn judged the style as opposed to realism and \"emphatically German\" in looking at particular situations of human life. Authors Martin Brady and Joanne Leal remarked that the storytelling shies away from an entirely narrative format, and the film's writing style is embodied in the Homer character as \"the angel of story-telling\". Perception of people becomes key to the storytelling, with Brady and Leal quoting Handke's vision for a new narrative: \"You have only interpreted and changed the world; what matters is to \"describe\" it\". Psychologist Ryan Niemiec wrote that, by focusing on \"the beauty of each moment\", \"Wings of Desire\" conveys \"awe and wonder\".\nAs Singer observed, \"Wings of Desire\" serves as a \"Symphony of a city\" in capturing a \"wintry, pre-unification Berlin\". Kilbourn said that the place highlighted in the German title \"Der Himmel \u00fcber Berlin\", like the desire referenced in the English title, is of great importance, and that the \"frequent angel's-eye-view shots of East and West Berlin\" allows for \"quasi-objective voyeuristic surveillance\". Observing the angels' trench-coat fashion, sociologist Andrew Greeley wrote it fitted the \"wet, blustery, cold northern Germany\" setting. Looking at the coats and ponytails, Dr. Detweiler found the visualization of the angels \"so cool and stylish\".\nMusic is used in differing ways throughout the story. Musicologist Annette Davison argued that Knieper's score in angel scenes is artistic, with elements of Eastern European and Orthodox Christian music, and Petitgand's music displays a \"slippery\" harmony frequently heard in circus entertainment. When Marion leaves the Circus Alekan, there is an increase in rock music, particularly by Cave and Crime &amp; the City Solution. Davison submitted this symbolizes \"utopian promise of the sensual mortal world\", and that the lyrics echo the plot: Cave's \"The Carny\" suggests a disappearing carnival worker as the Circus Alekan closes, and \"From Her to Eternity\" suggests a desire for a woman's love. Professor Adrian Danks wrote that Cave's rock music symbolized \"the physical, worldly reality of Berlin\", with \"The Carny\" adding a feel of sorrow in the background, while Marion gives \"breathy accompaniment\".\nRelease.\nThe film debuted at the Cannes Film Festival on 17 May 1987. \"Der Himmel \u00fcber Berlin\" subsequently opened in West Germany late in October 1987. With Orion Classics as its U.S. distributor, it opened in New York City as \"Wings of Desire\" on 29 April 1988 with a PG-13 rating. Sander said that it had a release in Japan, and that while angels do not appear in Japanese mythology, Tokyo audiences would approach him after and share their impressions about the characters.\nAfter a videotape printing in Germany in 1988, Kinowelt released a DVD in Germany and Region 2 in 2005. In 2009, The Criterion Collection released the film in Region 1 on DVD and Blu-ray. It later screened at the 65th Berlin International Film Festival in February 2015, to mark Wenders' Honorary Golden Bear.\nThe Wim Wenders Foundation produced a digital 4K restoration using the original black-and-white and colour film stock. This new version of the film premiered on 16 February 2018 during the 68th Berlin International Film Festival at Kino International, as part of the \"Berlinale Classics\" programme.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Der Himmel \u00fcber Berlin\" had 922,718 admissions in Germany. Under the title \"Les Ailes du d\u00e9sir\", it had a further 1,079,432 admissions in France.\nThe film finished its run in North America on 11 May 1989, having grossed $3.2 million, or possibly nearly $4 million, a positive investment for Orion. Critic James Monaco assessed the financial performance as above that of typical art films. In 2000, \"Variety\" calculated that it was 48th in the top 50 highest-grossing foreign language films ever released in the U.S., and one of only three in German, along with \"Das Boot\" and \"Run Lola Run\".\nCritical reception.\n\"Wings of Desire\" received widespread critical acclaim. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, it holds an approval rating of 95% based on 65 reviews, with an average rating of 8.7/10. The website's critics consensus reads, \u201cBeyond ravishing, \"Wings of Desire\" is Wim Wenders' aching and heartbreaking exploration of how love makes us human.\u201d The film received \"Two Thumbs Up\" from Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert on \"Siskel &amp; Ebert &amp; The Movies\", where Siskel credited Wenders for a story that \"praises life as it is lived yet making sense of life's confusions\". In \"New York\", David Denby hailed it as \"extraordinary\", and possibly \"the ultimate German movie\". Desson Howe cited it for \"a soaring vision that appeals to the senses and the spirit.\" Janet Maslin, writing for \"The New York Times\", called it \"enchanting\" in its concept, but \"damagingly overloaded\" in execution. In \"Variety\", David Stratton embraced the visuals, the performances and Knieper's score, adding the film also showcased Wenders' taste for rock music. \"The Washington Post\"'s Rita Kempley credited Wenders and Handke for crafting a \"whimsical realm of myth and philosophical pretense, dense with imagery and sweetened by Ganz's performance\". Dissenting, Pauline Kael remarked, \"It's enough to make moviegoers feel impotent\". \nBy 1990, \"Wings of Desire\" was placed in the top 10 best films of the 1980s by critics David Denby (first), the \"Los Angeles Times\"'s Sheila Benson (fourth), \"The Orange County Register\"'s Jim Emerson (fifth) and Richard Schickel and Richard Corliss (tenth). \"Premiere\" voted it the second greatest film of the 1980s, after \"Raging Bull\". James Monaco awarded it four and a half stars in his 1992 \"Movie Guide\", praising it as \"A rich, mystical near-masterpiece\". In 1998, Ebert added it to his Great Movies list, championing it for \"a mood of reverie, elegy and meditation\". \"Empire\" critic Ian Nathan gave it five stars in his 2006 review, hailing it for its poetry, themes of loneliness, and Ganz's acting style. In 2004, \"The New York Times\" included the film on its list of \"the Best 1,000 Movies Ever Made\". On reflecting on Solveig Dommartin's death in 2007, \"Der Spiegel\" recalled the film as a poetic masterpiece. Reviewing the Criterion DVD in 2009, \"Time Out\" critic Joshua Rothkopf called it an introduction to the art film, but also a product of its time, mentioning the songs.\nJohn Simon of the \"National Review\" had a differing opinion. He described \"Wings of Desire\" as both \"obnoxious\" and as a \"130 minute mess\".\nIt was later ranked 64th in \"Empire\" magazine's \"The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema\" in 2010. In 2011, \"The Guardian\" placed it in the 10 best films ever set in Berlin. The next year, it received 10 votes in the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls of the greatest films ever made. \"Les Inrockuptibles\"'s 2014 review declared it a great film, timeless, and poetic. That year, French critics at \"aVoir-aLire\" also praised its poetry, and said Berlin becomes one of the characters, crediting Alekan, Handke, Cave and Knieper for important contributions. German journalist Michael Sontheimer recommended seeing it to understand how radically Berlin has been altered since the 1980s, particularly looking at the somber images when the human Damiel walks through Berlin. In his \"2015 Movie Guide\", Leonard Maltin awarded it three and a half stars, describing it as \"Haunting\" and \"lyrical\". Jonathan Rosenbaum declared the bulk of the film before Damiel becomes human as \"one of Wenders's most stunning achievements\". In 2017, \"Le Monde\" rated it four stars out of five, citing the aesthetics of its black-and-white photography, poetry and contemplation of history. The German news publication \"Der Tagesspiegel\" recounted the film's memorable imagery in 2016, listing Damiel as an angel and the library scenes. On the 30th anniversary of the Cannes screening, Jessica Ritchey posted on Rogerebert.com that she found it odd to be an atheist and love the film, expressing admiration for the black-and-white photography and the overall message that when the world seems terrible, desire is powerful. On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of based on reviews from critics, with an average rating of . The website's critical consensus reads, \"Beyond ravishing, Wings of Desire is Wim Wenders' aching and heartbreaking exploration of how love makes us human.\" The film ranked 34th in BBC's 2018 list of The 100 greatest foreign language films voted by 209 critics from 43 countries around the world.\nAccolades.\nThe film competed for the Palme d'Or and won for Best Director at the 1987 Cannes Film Festival. In 1988, it won the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Film Critics Association.\nIt was submitted by West Germany for consideration for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, a bid supported by its distribution company. It was not nominated; the academy seldom recognized West German cinema.\nLegacy.\nIn 1993, Wenders made a sequel, \"Faraway, So Close!\", which he found desirable to explore Berlin post-reunification, more so than for the sake of a sequel. In 1998, a U.S. remake directed by Brad Silberling called \"City of Angels\" was released. The setting was moved to Los Angeles and Meg Ryan and Nicolas Cage starred. In 2023, a second American remake was announced to be in the works to be written and directed by Ashley Avis. In Prague, Czech Republic, architect Jean Nouvel designed \"Angel\", a building that features an angel from the film observing the people of the Sm\u00edchov district.\nA stage adaptation of \"Wings of Desire\" was created by the Northern Stage theatre company in Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K. in 2003. This particular adaptation, which used film footage of the city and stories from the community, was adapted and directed by Alan Lyddiard. In 2006, the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and Toneelgroep Amsterdam presented another stage adaptation, created by Gideon Lester and Dirkje Houtman and directed by Ola Mafaalani.\nWenders' story was also an influence on the play \"Angels in America\" by Tony Kushner, in which angels intermingle with troubled mortals. R.E.M.'s music video for \"Everybody Hurts\" also takes cues from the film. \"Wings of Desire\" was possibly Ganz's most remembered role before \"Downfall\" in 2004.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33123", "revid": "32815426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33123", "title": "Wireless Valley", "text": "Wireless Valley is a term that was coined by Professor Ted Rappaport in 1990 when he was a faculty member at Virginia Tech, and was used to describe the Roanoke/Blacksburg, Virginia region and the potential of research to create spin-out companies. In 1990 he and his students founded TSR Technologies, a company that made software-defined cellular and paging intercept and drive test equipment that was sold to Allen Telecom in 1993, and in 1995 Wireless Valley Communications, a company that pioneered the creation of computer-aided wireless network prediction and management software that was sold to Motorola in late 2005. This term was later used as nickname to describe several regional clusters of companies in the information technology sector, in analogy to California's Silicon Valley:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33124", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33124", "title": "Wild Strawberries (film)", "text": "1957 film by Ingmar Bergman\nWild Strawberries is a 1957 Swedish road drama film written and directed by Ingmar Bergman. The original Swedish title is Smultronst\u00e4llet, which literally means \"the wild strawberry patch\" but idiomatically signifies a hidden gem of a place, often with personal or sentimental value, and not widely known. The cast includes Victor Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m in his final screen performance as an old man recalling his past, as well as Bergman regulars Bibi Andersson, Ingrid Thulin, and Gunnar Bj\u00f6rnstrand. Max von Sydow and Gunnel Lindblom also appear in small roles.\nBergman wrote the screenplay while hospitalized. Exploring philosophical themes such as introspection and human existence, \"Wild Strawberries\" received wide positive domestic reception upon release, and won the Golden Bear for Best Film at the 8th Berlin International Film Festival. It is often considered to be one of Bergman's best films, as well as one of the greatest films ever made.\nPlot.\nGrouchy, stubborn, and egotistical Professor Isak Borg is a widowed 78-year-old physician who specialized in bacteriology. Before specializing, he served as a general practitioner in rural Sweden. He sets out on a long car ride from Stockholm to Lund to be awarded the degree of Doctor Jubilaris 50 years after he received his doctorate from Lund University. He is accompanied by his pregnant daughter-in-law Marianne who does not much like her father-in-law and is planning to separate from her husband, Evald, Isak's only son. Evald does not want her to have the baby, their first.\nDuring the trip, Isak is forced by nightmares, daydreams, old age, and impending death to reevaluate his life. He meets a series of hitchhikers, each of whom sets off dreams or reveries into Borg's troubled past. The first group consists of two young men and their companion, a woman named Sara who is adored by both men. Sara is a double for the love of Isak's youth. He reminisces about his childhood at the seaside and his sweetheart Sara, with whom he remembered gathering strawberries, but who instead married his brother. The first group remains with him throughout his journey. Next Isak and Marianne pick up an embittered middle-aged couple, the Almans, whose vehicle had nearly collided with theirs. The pair exchanges such terrible vitriol and venom that Marianne stops the car and demands that they leave. The couple reminds Isak of his own unhappy marriage. In a dream sequence, Isak is asked by Sten Alman, now the examiner, to read \"foreign\" letters on the blackboard. He cannot. So, Alman reads it for him: \"A doctor's first duty is to ask forgiveness,\" from which he concludes, \"You are guilty of guilt.\"\nHe is confronted by his loneliness and aloofness, recognizing these traits in both his elderly mother (whom they stop to visit) and in his middle-aged physician son, and he gradually begins to accept himself, his past, his present, and his approaching death.\nBorg finally arrives at his destination and is promoted to Doctor Jubilaris, but this proves to be an empty ritual. That night, he bids a loving goodbye to his young friends, to whom the once bitter old man whispers in response to a playful declaration of the young girl's love, \"I'll remember.\" As he goes to his bed in his son's home, he is overcome by a sense of peace, and dreams of a family picnic by a lake. Closure and affirmation of life have finally come, and Borg's face radiates joy.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nOrigins.\nBergman's idea for the film originated on a drive from Stockholm to Dalarna during which he stopped in Uppsala, his hometown. Driving by his grandmother's house, he suddenly imagined how it would be if he could open the door and inside find everything just as it was during his childhood. \"So it struck me \u2014 what if you could make a film about this; that you just walk up in a realistic way and open a door, and then you walk into your childhood, and then you open another door and come back to reality, and then you make a turn around a street corner and arrive in some other period of your existence, and everything goes on, lives. That was actually the idea behind \"Wild Strawberries\"\". Later, he would revise the story of the film's genesis. In \"Images: My Life in Film,\" he comments on his own earlier statement: \"That's a lie. The truth is that I am forever living in my childhood.\"\nDevelopment.\nBergman wrote the screenplay of \"Wild Strawberries\" in Stockholm's Karolinska Hospital (the workplace of Isak Borg) in the late spring of 1957; he'd recently been given permission to proceed by producer Carl Anders Dymling on the basis of a short synopsis. He was in the hospital for two months, being treated for recurrent gastric problems and general stress. Bergman's doctor at Karolinska was his good friend Sture Helander who invited him to attend his lectures on psychosomatics. Helander was married to Gunnel Lindblom who was to play Isak's sister Charlotta in the film. Bergman was at a high point of his professional career after a triumphant season at the Malm\u00f6 City Theatre (where he had been artistic director since 1952), in addition to the success of both \"Smiles of a Summer Night\" (1955) and \"The Seventh Seal\" (1957). His private life, however, was in disarray. His third marriage was on the rocks; his affair with Bibi Andersson, which had begun in 1954, was coming to an end; and his relationship with his parents was, after an attempted reconciliation with his mother, at a desperately low ebb.\nCasting and pre-production progressed rapidly. The completed screenplay is dated 31 May. Shooting took place between 2 July 1957 and 27 August 1957. The scenes at the summer house were filmed in Saltsj\u00f6baden, a fashionable resort in the Stockholm archipelago. Part of the nightmare sequence was shot with predawn summer light in Gamla stan, the old part of central Stockholm. Most of the movie was made at SF's studio and on its back lot at R\u00e5sunda in northern Stockholm.\nCasting.\nThe director's immediate choice for the leading role of the old professor was Victor Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m, Bergman's silent film idol and early counselor at Svensk Filmindustri, whom he had directed in \"To Joy\" eight years earlier. \"Victor,\" Bergman remarked, \"was feeling wretched and didn't want to [do it];... he must have been seventy eight. He was misanthropic and tired and felt old. I had to use all my powers of persuasion to get him to play the part.\"\nIn \"Bergman on Bergman,\" he has stated that he only thought of Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m when the screenplay was complete, and that he asked Dymling to contact the famous actor and film director. Yet in \"Images: My Life in Film,\" he claims, \"It is probably worth noting that I never for a moment thought of Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m when I was writing the screenplay. The suggestion came from the film's producer, Carl Anders Dymling. As I recall, I thought long and hard before I agreed to let him have the part.\"\nDuring the shooting, the health of the 78-year-old Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m gave cause for concern. Dymling had persuaded him to take on the role with the words: \"All you have to do is lie under a tree, eat wild strawberries and think about your past, so it's nothing too arduous.\" This was inaccurate and the burden of the film was completely on Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m who is in all but one scene of the film. Initially, Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m had problems with his lines which made him frustrated and angry. He would go off into a corner and beat his head against the wall in frustration, even to the point of drawing blood and producing bruises. He sometimes quibbled over details in the script. To unburden his revered mentor, Bergman made a pact with Ingrid Thulin that if anything went wrong during a scene, she would take the blame on herself. Things improved when they changed filming times so that Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m could get home in time for his customary late afternoon whisky at 5:00. Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m got along particularly well with Bibi Andersson.\nAs usual, Bergman chose his collaborators from a team of actors and technicians with whom he had worked before in the cinema and the theater. As Sara, Bibi Andersson plays both Borg's childhood sweetheart who left him to marry his brother and a charming, energetic young woman who reminds him of that lost love. Andersson, then twenty one years old, was a member in Bergman's famed repertory company. He gave her a small part in his films \"Smiles of a Summer Night\" (1955) and as the jester's wife in \"The Seventh Seal\" (1957). She would continue to work for him in many more films, most notably in \"Persona\" (1966). Ingrid Thulin plays Marianne, the sad, gentle and warm daughter-in-law of Borg. She appeared in other Bergman films as the mistress in \"Winter Light\" (1963) and as one of three sisters in \"Cries and Whispers\" (1972).\nReception.\nCritical reception.\n\"Wild Strawberries\" received strongly positive reviews in Sweden; its acting, script, and photography were common areas of praise. It was among the films that cemented Bergman's international reputation, but American critics were not unanimous in their praise. A number of reviewers found its story puzzling. In \"The New York Times\", Bosley Crowther lauded the performances of Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m and Andersson but wrote, \"This one is so thoroughly mystifying that we wonder whether Mr. Bergman himself knew what he was trying to say.\" The film ranked 7th on Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma's Top 10 Films of the Year List in 1959.\nIn a 1963 interview with \"Cinema\" magazine, director Stanley Kubrick listed the film as his second favourite of all time. It was also listed by Russian filmmaker Andrei Tarkovsky as one of his top ten favorite films. It is now considered one of Bergman's major works. Film critic Derek Malcolm ranked the film at No. 56 on his list of the \"Top 100 Movies\" in 2001. In 2007, the film was ranked at No. 34 by \"The Guardian\"'s readers poll on the list of \"40 greatest foreign films of all time\". In 2009, the film was ranked at No. 59 on Japanese film magazine kinema Junpo's \"Top 100 Non-Japanese Films of All Time\" list.\nIn 1972, the work was ranked 10th, in 2002 it was ranked 27th, and in 2012, it ranked 63rd on the \"Sight &amp; Sound\" critics' poll of the greatest films ever made. That same year the film was voted at number 11 on the 25 best Swedish films of all time list by a poll of 50 film critics and academics conducted by film magazine\u00a0\"FLM\". Its screenplay was listed in \"Total Film\" as one of the 50 best ever written. The film was included in BBC's 2018 list of The 100 greatest foreign language films. In 2022 edition of \"Sight &amp; Sound\"'s \"Greatest films of all time\" list the film ranked 72nd in the director's poll.\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, \"Wild Strawberries\" has an approval rating of 96% based on 45 reviews, with an average score of 8.90/10. The site's critical consensus reads: \"Wild Strawberries\u00a0were never so bittersweet as Ingmar Bergman's beautifully written and filmed look at one man's nostalgic journey into the past.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 88 out of 100 based on 17 critic's reviews, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nThe philosopher Roger Scruton wrote of the film: \"Even now, after ten viewings, I want to see Wild Strawberries again, not for the story only, but for specific snatches of dialogue, specific images and the specific atmosphere which makes this film enter the soul with the evocative force of a play by Ibsen or Strindberg.\"\nAwards and honors.\nThe film won the Golden Bear for Best Film and the FIPRESCI Prize at the 8th Berlin International Film Festival, \"Best Film\" and \"Best Actor\" at the Mar del Plata Film Festival and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Film in 1960. The Film was nominated for a BAFTA Award in Best Film From Any Source category in 1959. It was also nominated for an Academy Award for Original Screenplay, but the nomination was refused by Bergman. In his letter to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Bergman wrote, \"I have found that the \"Oscar\" nomination is one for the motion picture art humiliating institution and ask you to be released from the attention of the jury for the future.\" The film won the Pasinetti Award at 1958 Venice Film Festival. It won the Bodil Award for Best European Film in 1959.\nThe film is included on the Vatican's list of important films, recommended for its portrayal of a man's \"interior journey from pangs of regret and anxiety to a refreshing sense of peace and reconciliation\".\nInfluence.\n\"Wild Strawberries\" influenced the Woody Allen films \"Stardust Memories\" (1980), \"Another Woman\" (1988), \"Crimes and Misdemeanors\" (1989), and \"Deconstructing Harry\" (1997). In \"Stardust Memories\", the film's plot is similar in that the protagonist, filmmaker Sandy Bates (Woody Allen), is attending a viewing of his films, while reminiscing about and reflecting on his life and past relationships and trying to fix and stabilize his current ones, which are infused with flashbacks and dream sequences. In \"Another Woman\", the film's main character, Marion Post (Gena Rowlands), is also accused by friends and relatives of being cold and unfeeling, which forces her to reexamine her life. Allen also borrows several tropes from Bergman's film, such as having Lynn (Frances Conroy), Post's sister-in-law, tell her that her brother Paul (Harris Yulin) hates her and having a former student tell Post that her class changed her life. Allen has Post confront the demons of her past via several dream sequences and flashbacks that reveal important information to a viewer, as in \"Wild Strawberries\". In \"Crimes and Misdemeanors\", Allen made reference to the scene in which Isak watches his family have dinner. In \"Deconstructing Harry\", the plot (a writer going on a long drive to receive an honorary award from his old university, while reflecting upon his life's experiences, with dream sequences) essentially mirrors that of \"Wild Strawberries\".\nSatyajit Ray's 1966 film \"Nayak\" was to some extent inspired by \"Wild Strawberries\".\nYugoslav hard rock and heavy metal band Divlje Jagode (Serbo-Croatian for \"Wild Strawberries\") chose their name after the film. During their short-lived international career, the band adopted the name Wild Strawberries.\nAttempted American remake.\nScreenwriter Bo Goldman sought to remake the film in 1995 as his directorial debut. Gregory Peck would have starred in the titular role of the elderly professor. Despite the support of Martin Scorsese, who agreed to produce, the film was not greenlit.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33125", "revid": "48691047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33125", "title": "Wavelength", "text": "Distance over which a wave's shape repeats\nIn physics and mathematics, wavelength or spatial period of a wave or periodic function is the distance over which the wave's shape repeats. In other words, it is the distance between consecutive corresponding points of the same \"phase\" on the wave, such as two adjacent crests, troughs, or zero crossings. Wavelength is a characteristic of both traveling waves and standing waves, as well as other spatial wave patterns. The inverse of the wavelength is called the \"spatial frequency\". Wavelength is commonly designated by the Greek letter lambda (\"\u03bb\"). For a modulated wave, \"wavelength\" may refer to the carrier wavelength of the signal. The term \"wavelength\" may also apply to the repeating envelope of modulated waves or waves formed by interference of several sinusoids.\nAssuming a sinusoidal wave moving at a fixed wave speed, wavelength is inversely proportional to the frequency of the wave: waves with higher frequencies have shorter wavelengths, and lower frequencies have longer wavelengths.\nWavelength depends on the medium (for example, vacuum, air, or water) that a wave travels through. Examples of waves are sound waves, light, water waves, and periodic electrical signals in a conductor. A sound wave is a variation in air pressure, while in light and other electromagnetic radiation the strength of the electric and the magnetic field vary. Water waves are variations in the height of a body of water. In a crystal lattice vibration, atomic positions vary.\nThe range of wavelengths or frequencies for wave phenomena is called a \"spectrum\". The name originated with the visible light spectrum but now can be applied to the entire electromagnetic spectrum as well as to a sound spectrum or vibration spectrum.\nSinusoidal waves.\nIn linear media, any wave pattern can be described in terms of the independent propagation of sinusoidal components. The wavelength \"\u03bb\" of a sinusoidal waveform traveling at constant speed \"formula_1\" is given by\nformula_2\nwhere formula_1 is called the phase speed (magnitude of the phase velocity) of the wave and formula_4 is the wave's frequency. In a dispersive medium, the phase speed itself depends upon the frequency of the wave, making the relationship between wavelength and frequency nonlinear.\nIn the case of electromagnetic radiation\u2014such as light\u2014in free space, the phase speed is the speed of light, about . Thus the wavelength of a 100\u00a0MHz electromagnetic (radio) wave is about: divided by = 3\u00a0m. The wavelength of visible light ranges from deep red, roughly 700\u00a0nm, to violet, roughly 400\u00a0nm (for other examples, see electromagnetic spectrum).\nFor sound waves in air, the speed of sound is 343\u00a0m/s (at room temperature and atmospheric pressure). The wavelengths of sound frequencies audible to the human ear (20\u00a0Hz\u201320\u00a0kHz) are thus between approximately 17\u00a0m and 17\u00a0mm, respectively. Somewhat higher frequencies are used by bats so they can resolve targets smaller than 17\u00a0mm. Wavelengths in audible sound are much longer than those in visible light.\nStanding waves.\nA standing wave is an undulatory motion that stays in one place. A sinusoidal standing wave includes stationary points of no motion, called nodes, and the wavelength is twice the distance between nodes.\nThe upper figure shows three standing waves in a box. The walls of the box are considered to require the wave to have nodes at the walls of the box (an example of boundary conditions), thus determining the allowed wavelengths. For example, for an electromagnetic wave, if the box has ideal conductive walls, the condition for nodes at the walls results because the conductive walls cannot support a tangential electric field, forcing the wave to have zero amplitude at the wall.\nThe stationary wave can be viewed as the sum of two traveling sinusoidal waves of oppositely directed velocities. Consequently, wavelength, period, and wave velocity are related just as for a traveling wave. For example, the speed of light can be determined from observation of standing waves in a metal box containing an ideal vacuum.\nMathematical representation.\nTraveling sinusoidal waves are often represented mathematically in terms of their velocity \"v\" (in the x direction), frequency \"f\" and wavelength \"\u03bb\" as:\nformula_5\nwhere \"y\" is the value of the wave at any position \"x\" and time \"t\", and \"A\" is the amplitude of the wave. They are also commonly expressed in terms of wavenumber \"k\" (2\u03c0 times the reciprocal of wavelength) and angular frequency \"\u03c9\" (2\u03c0 times the frequency) as:\nformula_6\nin which wavelength and wavenumber are related to velocity and frequency as:\nformula_7\nor\nformula_8\nIn the second form given above, the phase (\"kx\" \u2212 \"\u03c9t\") is often generalized to (k \u22c5 r \u2212 \"\u03c9t\"), by replacing the wavenumber \"k\" with a wave vector that specifies the direction and wavenumber of a plane wave in 3-space, parameterized by position vector r. In that case, the wavenumber \"k\", the magnitude of k, is still in the same relationship with wavelength as shown above, with \"v\" being interpreted as scalar speed in the direction of the wave vector. The first form, using reciprocal wavelength in the phase, does not generalize as easily to a wave in an arbitrary direction.\nGeneralizations to sinusoids of other phases, and to complex exponentials, are also common; see plane wave. The typical convention of using the cosine phase instead of the sine phase when describing a wave is based on the fact that the cosine is the real part of the complex exponential in the wave\nformula_9\nGeneral media.\nThe speed of a wave depends upon the medium in which it propagates. In particular, the speed of light in a medium is less than in vacuum, which means that the same frequency will correspond to a shorter wavelength in the medium than in vacuum, as shown in the figure at right.\nThis change in speed upon entering a medium causes refraction, or a change in direction of waves that encounter the interface between media at an angle. For electromagnetic waves, this change in the angle of propagation is governed by Snell's law.\nThe wave velocity in one medium not only may differ from that in another, but the velocity typically varies with wavelength. As a result, the change in direction upon entering a different medium changes with the wavelength of the wave.\nFor electromagnetic waves the speed in a medium is governed by its \"refractive index\" according to\nformula_10\nwhere \"c\" is the speed of light in vacuum and \"n\"(\"\u03bb\"0) is the refractive index of the medium at wavelength \u03bb0, where the latter is measured in vacuum rather than in the medium. The corresponding wavelength in the medium is\nformula_11\nWhen wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation are quoted, the wavelength in vacuum usually is intended unless the wavelength is specifically identified as the wavelength in some other medium. In acoustics, where a medium is essential for the waves to exist, the wavelength value is given for a specified medium.\nThe variation in speed of light with wavelength is known as dispersion, and is also responsible for the familiar phenomenon in which light is separated into component colours by a prism. Separation occurs when the refractive index inside the prism varies with wavelength, so different wavelengths propagate at different speeds inside the prism, causing them to refract at different angles. The mathematical relationship that describes how the speed of light within a medium varies with wavelength is known as a dispersion relation.\nNonuniform media.\nWavelength can be a useful concept even if the wave is not periodic in space. For example, in an ocean wave approaching shore, shown in the figure, the incoming wave undulates with a varying \"local\" wavelength that depends in part on the depth of the sea floor compared to the wave height. The analysis of the wave can be based upon comparison of the local wavelength with the local water depth.\nWaves that are sinusoidal in time but propagate through a medium whose properties vary with position (an \"inhomogeneous\" medium) may propagate at a velocity that varies with position, and as a result may not be sinusoidal in space. The figure at right shows an example. As the wave slows down, the wavelength gets shorter and the amplitude increases; after a place of maximum response, the short wavelength is associated with a high loss and the wave dies out.\nThe analysis of differential equations of such systems is often done approximately, using the \"WKB method\" (also known as the \"Liouville\u2013Green method\"). The method integrates phase through space using a local wavenumber, which can be interpreted as indicating a \"local wavelength\" of the solution as a function of time and space.\nThis method treats the system locally as if it were uniform with the local properties; in particular, the local wave velocity associated with a frequency is the only thing needed to estimate the corresponding local wavenumber or wavelength. In addition, the method computes a slowly changing amplitude to satisfy other constraints of the equations or of the physical system, such as for conservation of energy in the wave.\nCrystals.\nWaves in crystalline solids are not continuous, because they are composed of vibrations of discrete particles arranged in a regular lattice. This produces aliasing because the same vibration can be considered to have a variety of different wavelengths, as shown in the figure. Descriptions using more than one of these wavelengths are redundant; it is conventional to choose the longest wavelength that fits the phenomenon. The range of wavelengths sufficient to provide a description of all possible waves in a crystalline medium corresponds to the wave vectors confined to the Brillouin zone.\nThis indeterminacy in wavelength in solids is important in the analysis of wave phenomena such as energy bands and lattice vibrations. It is mathematically equivalent to the aliasing of a signal that is sampled at discrete intervals.\nMore general waveforms.\nThe concept of wavelength is most often applied to sinusoidal, or nearly sinusoidal, waves, because in a linear system the sinusoid is the unique shape that propagates with no shape change \u2013 just a phase change and potentially an amplitude change. The wavelength (or alternatively wavenumber or wave vector) is a characterization of the wave in space, that is functionally related to its frequency, as constrained by the physics of the system. Sinusoids are the simplest traveling wave solutions, and more complex solutions can be built up by superposition.\nIn the special case of dispersion-free and uniform media, waves other than sinusoids propagate with unchanging shape and constant velocity. In certain circumstances, waves of unchanging shape also can occur in nonlinear media; for example, the figure shows ocean waves in shallow water that have sharper crests and flatter troughs than those of a sinusoid, typical of a cnoidal wave, a traveling wave so named because it is described by the Jacobi elliptic function of \"m\"th order, usually denoted as \"cn\"(\"x\"; \"m\"). Large-amplitude ocean waves with certain shapes can propagate unchanged, because of properties of the nonlinear surface-wave medium.\nIf a traveling wave has a fixed shape that repeats in space or in time, it is a \"periodic wave\". Such waves are sometimes regarded as having a wavelength even though they are not sinusoidal. As shown in the figure, wavelength is measured between consecutive corresponding points on the waveform.\nWave packets.\nLocalized wave packets, \"bursts\" of wave action where each wave packet travels as a unit, find application in many fields of physics. A wave packet has an \"envelope\" that describes the overall amplitude of the wave; within the envelope, the distance between adjacent peaks or troughs is sometimes called a \"local wavelength\". An example is shown in the figure. In general, the \"envelope\" of the wave packet moves at a speed different from the constituent waves.\nUsing Fourier analysis, wave packets can be analyzed into infinite sums (or integrals) of sinusoidal waves of different wavenumbers or wavelengths.\nLouis de Broglie postulated that all particles with a specific value of momentum \"p\" have a wavelength \"\u03bb\" = \"h\"/\"p\", where \"h\" is the Planck constant. This hypothesis was at the basis of quantum mechanics. Nowadays, this wavelength is called the de Broglie wavelength. For example, the electrons in a CRT display have a De Broglie wavelength of about . To prevent the wave function for such a particle being spread over all space, de Broglie proposed using wave packets to represent particles that are localized in space. The spatial spread of the wave packet, and the spread of the wavenumbers of sinusoids that make up the packet, correspond to the uncertainties in the particle's position and momentum, the product of which is bounded by Heisenberg uncertainty principle.\nInterference and diffraction.\nDouble-slit interference.\nWhen sinusoidal waveforms add, they may reinforce each other (constructive interference) or cancel each other (destructive interference) depending upon their relative phase. This phenomenon is used in the interferometer. A simple example is an experiment due to Young where light is passed through two slits.\nAs shown in the figure, light is passed through two slits and shines on a screen. The path of the light to a position on the screen is different for the two slits, and depends upon the angle \u03b8 the path makes with the screen. If we suppose the screen is far enough from the slits (that is, \"s\" is large compared to the slit separation \"d\") then the paths are nearly parallel, and the path difference is simply \"d\" sin \"\u03b8\". Accordingly, the condition for constructive interference is:\nformula_12\nwhere \"m\" is an integer, and for destructive interference is:\nformula_13\nThus, if the wavelength of the light is known, the slit separation can be determined from the interference pattern or \"fringes\", and \"vice versa\".\nFor multiple slits, the pattern is\nformula_14\nwhere \"q\" is the number of slits, and \"g\" is the grating constant. The first factor, \"I\"1, is the single-slit result, which modulates the more rapidly varying second factor that depends upon the number of slits and their spacing. In the figure \"I\"1 has been set to unity, a very rough approximation.\nThe effect of interference is to \"redistribute\" the light, so the energy contained in the light is not altered, just where it shows up.\nSingle-slit diffraction.\nThe notion of path difference and constructive or destructive interference used above for the double-slit experiment applies as well to the display of a single slit of light intercepted on a screen. The main result of this interference is to spread out the light from the narrow slit into a broader image on the screen. This distribution of wave energy is called diffraction.\nTwo types of diffraction are distinguished, depending upon the separation between the source and the screen: Fraunhofer diffraction or far-field diffraction at large separations and Fresnel diffraction or near-field diffraction at close separations.\nIn the analysis of the single slit, the non-zero width of the slit is taken into account, and each point in the aperture is taken as the source of one contribution to the beam of light (\"Huygens' wavelets\"). On the screen, the light arriving from each position within the slit has a different path length, albeit possibly a very small difference. Consequently, interference occurs.\nIn the Fraunhofer diffraction pattern sufficiently far from a single slit, within a small-angle approximation, the intensity spread \"S\" is related to position \"x\" via a squared sinc function:\nformula_15\nwith\nformula_16\nwhere \"L\" is the slit width, \"R\" is the distance of the pattern (on the screen) from the slit, and \u03bb is the wavelength of light used. The function \"S\" has zeros where \"u\" is a non-zero integer, where are at \"x\" values at a separation proportion to wavelength.\nDiffraction-limited resolution.\nDiffraction is the fundamental limitation on the resolving power of optical instruments, such as telescopes (including radiotelescopes) and microscopes.\nFor a circular aperture, the diffraction-limited image spot is known as an Airy disk; the distance \"x\" in the single-slit diffraction formula is replaced by radial distance \"r\" and the sine is replaced by 2\"J\"1, where \"J\"1 is a first order Bessel function.\nThe resolvable \"spatial\" size of objects viewed through a microscope is limited according to the Rayleigh criterion, the radius to the first null of the Airy disk, to a size proportional to the wavelength of the light used, and depending on the numerical aperture:\nformula_17\nwhere the numerical aperture is defined as formula_18 for \u03b8 being the half-angle of the cone of rays accepted by the microscope objective.\nThe \"angular\" size of the central bright portion (radius to first null of the Airy disk) of the image diffracted by a circular aperture, a measure most commonly used for telescopes and cameras, is:\nformula_19\nwhere \"\u03bb\" is the wavelength of the waves that are focused for imaging, \"D\" the entrance pupil diameter of the imaging system, in the same units, and the angular resolution \"\u03b4\" is in radians.\nAs with other diffraction patterns, the pattern scales in proportion to wavelength, so shorter wavelengths can lead to higher resolution.\nSubwavelength.\nThe term \"subwavelength\" is used to describe an object having one or more dimensions smaller than the length of the wave with which the object interacts. For example, the term \"subwavelength-diameter optical fibre\" means an optical fibre whose diameter is less than the wavelength of light propagating through it.\nA subwavelength particle is a particle smaller than the wavelength of light with which it interacts (see Rayleigh scattering). Subwavelength apertures are holes smaller than the wavelength of light propagating through them. Such structures have applications in extraordinary optical transmission, and zero-mode waveguides, among other areas of photonics.\n\"Subwavelength\" may also refer to a phenomenon involving subwavelength objects; for example, subwavelength imaging.\nAngular wavelength.\nA quantity related to the wavelength is the angular wavelength (also known as reduced wavelength), usually symbolized by \"\u019b\" (\"lambda-bar\" or barred lambda). It is equal to the ordinary wavelength reduced by a factor of 2\u03c0 (\"\u019b\" = \"\u03bb\"/2\u03c0), with SI units of meter per radian. It is the inverse of \"angular wavenumber\" (\"k\" = 2\u03c0/\"\u03bb\"): \"\u019b\"=\"k\"-1. It is usually encountered in quantum mechanics, where it is used in combination with the reduced Planck constant (symbol\u00a0\"\u0127\", h-bar) and the angular frequency (symbol\u00a0\"\u03c9\" = 2\u03c0\"f\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33126", "revid": "8771785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33126", "title": "The Wachowskis", "text": "American filmmakers\nLana Wachowski (born Larry Wachowski, June 21, 1965) and Lilly Wachowski (born Andy Wachowski, December 29, 1967) are American film and television directors, writers and producers. The sisters are both trans women.\nTogether known as the Wachowskis (), the sisters have worked as a writing and directing team through most of their careers. They made their directing debut in 1996 with \"Bound\" and achieved fame with their second film, \"The Matrix\" (1999), a major box-office success for which they won the Saturn Award for Best Director. They wrote and directed its two sequels, \"The Matrix Reloaded\" and \"The Matrix Revolutions\" (both in 2003), and were involved in the writing and production of other works in the \"Matrix\" franchise.\nFollowing the commercial success of the \"Matrix\" series, the Wachowskis wrote and produced the 2005 film \"V for Vendetta\", an adaptation of the graphic novel by Alan Moore and David Lloyd, and in 2008 released the film \"Speed Racer\", a live-action adaptation of the Japanese anime series. Their next film, \"Cloud Atlas\", based on the novel by David Mitchell and co-written and co-directed by Tom Tykwer, was released in 2012. Their film \"Jupiter Ascending\" and the Netflix series \"Sense8\", the latter of which they co-created with J. Michael Straczynski, debuted in 2015; the second season of \"Sense8\" ended the series in 2018 and was Lana's first major project without Lilly.\nSince the series finale of \"Sense8\", the Wachowskis have been working separately on different projects: Lilly directed, wrote, and executive-produced several episodes of Showtime's \"Work in Progress\" (2019) with creators Abby McEnany and Tim Mason, while Lana filmed \"The Matrix Resurrections\", written with Mitchell and Aleksandar Hemon, which was released in December 2021.\nEarly lives and careers.\nLana was born in Chicago in 1965; Lilly was born two and a half years later, in 1967. Their mother, Lynne (n\u00e9e Luckinbill), was a nurse and painter. Their father, Ron Wachowski, was a businessman of Polish descent. Their uncle is an actor and Primetime Emmy Award-winning producer, Laurence Luckinbill. Ron and Lynne died five weeks apart in the late 2010s. Lana and Lilly have two other sisters, Julie and Laura. Julie was assistant coordinator for the film \"Bound\"; she is a novelist and screenwriter.\nThe Wachowskis attended the Kellogg Elementary School in Chicago's Beverly area, and graduated from Whitney Young High School, known for its performing arts and science curriculum, in 1983 and 1985. Former classmates recall them playing \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and working in the school's theater and TV program.\nLana went to Bard College, in New York state; Lilly attended Emerson College, in Boston. Each dropped out before graduating, and they ran a house-painting and construction business in Chicago.\nBeginning in 1993, they wrote several issues of \"Ectokid\" for Marvel Comics' Razorline imprint (created by horror novelist Clive Barker), which were credited to Lana. They also wrote for the series \"Clive Barker's Hellraiser\" and \"Clive Barker's Nightbreed\" for Marvel's Epic Comics imprint.\nFilm and television careers.\nEarly film projects.\nIn the mid-1990s, they went into film writing, including the script for \"Assassins\" in 1994, which was directed by Richard Donner and released in 1995. Warner Bros. bought the script and included two more pictures in the contract. Donner had their script \"totally rewritten\" by Brian Helgeland and the Wachowskis tried unsuccessfully to remove their names from the film. They say the experience gave them the perspective that they should become directors or \"[they will] never survive as writers in this town\".\nTheir next project was the 1996 neo-noir thriller \"Bound\", for which they wrote the script and made their debut as directors. The film was well received for its style and craft, and was noted as one of the first mainstream films to feature a same-sex relationship without it being central to the plot. Taking advantage of the positive buzz, the Wachowskis asked to direct their next picture, \"The Matrix\".\n\"The Matrix\" franchise.\nThey completed \"The Matrix\", a science fiction action film, in 1999. The movie stars Keanu Reeves as Neo, a hacker recruited by a rebellion to aid them in the fight against machines that have taken over the world and placed humanity inside a simulated reality called \"the Matrix\". Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving and Joe Pantoliano also star. The movie was a critical and commercial hit for Warner Bros. It won four Academy Awards, including for \"Best Visual Effects\" for popularizing the bullet time visual effect. \"The Matrix\" came to be a major influence for action movies and has appeared in several \"greatest science fiction films\" lists. In 2012, the film was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress for being \"culturally, historically, and aesthetically significant\".\nAfter its success, the Wachowskis directed two sequels back-to-back, \"The Matrix Reloaded\" and \"The Matrix Revolutions\", both released in 2003. \"The Matrix Reloaded\" received positive critical reception, although not on the level of the original. It became a major box office hit, retaining the spot of the highest-grossing R-rated film for over a decade (until 2016's \"Deadpool\"). \"The Matrix Revolutions\" received a mixed critical reception and performed only moderately in the box office. Although profitable, it was slightly less so compared to the original film.\nDuring production of the first film, the Wachowskis and Spencer Lamm, who ran the film's official website, developed comics based on the setting of the film, which were published free of charge on the website. These and a few short stories were released in three series from 1999 to 2003, with several of them (along with new material) collected in two print volumes in 2003 and 2004. The Wachowskis themselves contributed \"Bits and Pieces\", a prequel to the movie that explains the origins of the Matrix, featuring illustrations by Geof Darrow, the movie's conceptual designer. Other writers and artists that contributed to the series include Neil Gaiman, Dave Gibbons, Paul Chadwick, Ted McKeever, Poppy Z. Brite, and Steve Skroce.\nAfter Lilly Wachowski came out as transgender, she encouraged looking back on her and Lana's works \"through the lens of our transness\", saying that the themes of identity, self-image and transformation are apparent in \"The Matrix\".\nLater collaborations.\nThe Wachowskis' next feature film was \"V for Vendetta\", an adaptation of Alan Moore and David Lloyd's graphic novel of the same name, starring Natalie Portman and Hugo Weaving. They wrote and produced the film with \"Matrix\" producer Joel Silver, who had previously purchased the film rights to the graphic novel. The Wachowskis offered the film to James McTeigue, the first assistant director of \"The Matrix\" trilogy, as his directorial debut. Moore did not participate in the production, as he was disappointed by previous Hollywood adaptations of his work, and disagreed with differences between his graphic novel and the screenplay. Following a statement to the press by Silver that Moore was supposedly excited to learn more about the movie, Moore demanded that Silver retract it, and had his own name removed from the credits when he did not. The film's controversial storyline and themes have been both criticized and praised by sociopolitical groups. It was released in 2005 and was well received critically; it was a box office success but did not rank on the scale of \"The Matrix\" films. The film popularized the image of the Guy Fawkes mask, as the version designed by David Lloyd for the graphic novel and used in the movie was adopted as a symbol by the online hacktivist group Anonymous two years later.\nIn 2006, Silver had the Wachowskis and McTeigue hired to revamp \"The Invasion\" for Warner Bros. The studio was disappointed in the original cut of the film by director Oliver Hirschbiegel and hired the Wachowskis to rewrite a portion of the script and add new action scenes, which McTeigue directed. The film, the fourth adaptation of the novel \"The Body Snatchers\", was released in 2007 and was not a critical or box office success. The Wachowskis and McTeigue are not credited on the film.\nThe Wachowskis returned to directing with \"Speed Racer\" (2008) which starred Emile Hirsch. The film, which was again produced by Silver, was an adaptation of a 1960s Japanese manga series originally called \"Mach GoGoGo\", which had previously been adapted as an anime television series in 1967. The Wachowskis were attracted to the project because the series was the first anime they had watched, and they wanted to make a family-friendly film for their nieces and nephews to enjoy. In an effort to simulate the look of anime in live action, the Wachowskis had cinematographer David Tattersall shoot the movie digitally on a digital backlot with the intention of adding extensive visual effects in post-production. The movie was considered a critical and commercial failure. While its special effects were noted as outstanding, the storyline is considered lacking. It was nominated in the category of \"Worst Prequel, Remake, Rip-off or Sequel\" for the 29th Golden Raspberry Awards. Its box office gross was $93\u00a0million compared to a production budget of $120\u00a0million. Since then, critics periodically have put the film on lists of underrated or cult films.\nThe Wachowskis' next film project was \"Ninja Assassin\", a martial arts film starring Rain, which was released in 2009. It was inspired by Rain's fighting scene in \"Speed Racer\". It was produced by the Wachowskis in their last involvement with Silver, and directed by McTeigue. The screenplay was written by Matthew Sand and J. Michael Straczynski, whom the Wachowskis called six weeks before filming to ask him for a total rewrite completed within a week, because they were dissatisfied with the earlier drafts and were running out of time. \"Ninja Assassin\" received negative reviews and performed lukewarmly in the theaters but respectably on home video.\nTheir next directorial outing was \"Cloud Atlas\", which was adapted from David Mitchell's 2004 novel of the same name and starred an ensemble cast which included Tom Hanks and Halle Berry. \"Cloud Atlas\" was written and directed in collaboration with German filmmaker Tom Tykwer, to whom the Wachowskis had introduced the novel several years earlier. The filmmakers failed to secure funding from a studio (save for $20\u00a0million by Warner Bros.) and the film was produced independently after much trouble. With a budget of over $100\u00a0million it was noted as the most expensive independent movie to that date and the first attempt at a German blockbuster. The movie opened at the 37th annual Toronto International Film Festival in September 2012 to acclaim and received a loud and lengthy standing ovation. In its general release a month later, it received polarized reviews and eventually appeared in both \"Best Film\" and \"Worst Film\" lists. Overall reviews were mixed to positive. The film received many nominations and awards, particularly for its technical aspects, including 10 nominations for the German Film Award, out of which it won five. It also received five Saturn Award nominations, out of which it won two. David Mitchell liked the script of \"Cloud Atlas\", spent some time on the set (including filming a cameo), and had a positive impression about the result. According to the Wachowskis the movie was the hardest of their films to make, the one they are the most proud of, and the one they have been told has touched people's lives the most. They believe \"Cloud Atlas\" will be the film for which they will be remembered.\nThe Wachowskis subsequently produced and directed \"Jupiter Ascending\", an original space opera screenplay they wrote. The film was released in 2015. It stars Channing Tatum and Mila Kunis, and features the Wachowskis' regular collaborators John Gaeta on visual effects and Kym Barrett on costumes. According to \"Deadline\", the financial and critical failure of \"Jupiter Ascending\" caused their business relationship with Warner Bros, that began with \"The Matrix\" franchise, to be terminated.\nTheir next project was the Netflix science fiction drama series \"Sense8\", created and written with J. Michael Straczynski. \"Sense8\" features an international ensemble cast and was shot in multiple cities around the world. The Wachowskis directed most of the episodes of the first season, with the rest being handled by McTeigue, Tykwer, and their go-to visual effects supervisor on their movies, Dan Glass, in his directorial debut. The first season premiered in 2015 to generally positive reviews, particularly for the scale of the production and the presentation of diverse and LGBT characters and themes, winning the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Drama Series. It also received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music. After the first season, Lilly took a break from it, for what turned out to be the remainder of the series. A Christmas special was released on December 23, 2016, with the remainder of the show's second season released in May 2017. Subsequently, the third season was canceled, and \"Sense8\" concluded with a two-hour finale which aired in June 2018.\nIn June 2016, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences invited the Wachowskis to join its ranks. However, in April 2025, Lilly Wachowski said \"I'm not in the Academy. I'm not going to join the Academy\" during an interview.\nSolo projects.\nIn May 2019, it was reported that Lilly would co-write, and co-showrun the eight-episode first season of the drama-comedy series \"Work in Progress\", created by Abby McEnany and Tim Mason for Showtime. The series premiered in December 2019. In January 2020, the series was renewed for a 10-episode second season, with which Lilly would continue to be involved.\nIn August 2019, it was announced that Lana would be returning to write, direct and produce \"The Matrix Resurrections\", the fourth installment of the \"Matrix\" series, with Reeves and Moss also reprising their roles; it marks the first film made by only one of the Wachowskis. Lana wrote the script with David Mitchell and Aleksandar Hemon. The film was released in December 2021.\nIn February 2024, Collider announced that Lilly would direct \"Trash Mountain\", a film about a young gay man returning from Chicago to rural Missouri to deal with the aftermath of his hoarder father's death. The film, Lilly's first directorial effort since \"Jupiter Ascending\", will star Caleb Hearon, be written by Hearon and Ruby Caster and will be produced by Colin Trevorrow, Eddie Vaisman and Julia Lebedev.\nIn April 2024, it was announced that Warner Bros. was developing a new \"Matrix\" installment with Drew Goddard attached to write and direct, for which Lana will serve as an executive producer.\nIn October 2024, Lilly revealed to \"Autostraddle\" that she and her parter Mickey Ray Mahoney had written a queer/trans script titled \"The Hunt\". She also announced her plans to make adaptations of novels authored by trans authors, specifically \"Manhunt\" by Gretchen Felker-Martin and \"Confessions of the Fox\" by Jordy Rosenberg, as well an adaptation of Emily Andras' comic book \"Cosmoknights\".\nIn July 2025, it was announced that Lilly would serve as executive producer for \"Dolls\", a short film directed by Geena Rocero. The film was described as an adaptation of \"The Stepford Wives\" with an all-trans cast.\nStyle and influences.\nJ. Michael Straczynski, who has worked with the Wachowskis on \"Ninja Assassin\" and \"Sense8\", has said that the sisters told him they were reading his column on scriptwriting for the \"Writer's Digest\" magazine, for inspiration and pointers. Straczynski contributed to the magazine from 1981 to 1991.\nIn 1998, in the context of explaining how they got their start in filmmaking, the Wachowskis mentioned Roger Corman's book \"How I Made A Hundred Movies in Hollywood and Never Lost a Dime\", and indicated, with laughter, that they liked his movies, and began by wanting to \"make a low-budget horror movie\". In the same interview they stated that they felt flattered, after their first film, by comparisons others had made between them and the Coen brothers, who had \"made five, maybe six great movies...\" at that time.\nSpeaking to Bernard Weintraub of \"The New York Times\" in April 1999, the Wachowskis mentioned explicitly that they prepared for their first \"Matrix\" production by studying the works of John Woo \"and other Hong Kong filmmakers\", as well as reading and rereading Homer's \"Odyssey\", and studying the works of John Huston, Stanley Kubrick, Fritz Lang, George Lucas, Ridley Scott, and Billy Wilder.\nMark Miller, writing in \"Wired\" in 2003, also listed Homer, Hermann Hesse, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and philosopher Cornel West. In an interview with \"Gadfly\" in 1998 (after their first movie), the Wachowskis reiterated their influence by or enjoyment of Huston (e.g. \"Treasure of the Sierra Madre\") and Wilder (e.g., \"Sunset Boulevard\" and \"Lost Weekend\"), and added to these the impacts of Alfred Hitchcock (e.g. \"Strangers on a Train\" and \"Psycho\"), Roman Polanski (e.g. \"Repulsion\"), and Francis Ford Coppola (the \"Godfather\" movies, and \"The Conversation\").\nKen Wilber has been cited as an influence.\nThe Wachowskis admit to a love for telling multi-part stories. \"Because we grew up on comic books and the Tolkien trilogy, one of the things we're interested in is bringing serial fiction to cinema,\" Lana has said. Lilly says: \"We think movies are fairly boring and predictable. We want to screw with audiences' expectations.\" In terms of themes expressed in their body of work, Lana has cited \"the inexplicable nature of the universe [being] in constant dialogue with our own consciousness and our consciousness actually affect[ing] the inexplicable nature of the universe\", \"interconnectivity and about truth beneath the surface\", \"the paradox of choice and choicelessness\", \"transcendence ... transcending archetypal boxes, stereotypes\", \"race ... an important component\" and \"gender ... it's one of our most significant cultural subjects\".\nThe Wachowskis cited the art of comic book artist Geof Darrow as an influence on the look of \"The Matrix\". Also, they said that \"Ghost in the Shell\", \"Ninja Scroll\", and \"Akira\" were anime that inspired them, saying \"in anime, one thing that they do that we tried to bring to our film was a juxtaposition of time and space in action beats\".\nThe Wachowskis cited Stanley Kubrick's \"\" as a major influence for \"Cloud Atlas\". They first saw the film when they were ten and seven, respectively.\nLana has most been influenced by \"2001: A Space Odyssey\", \"Blade Runner\", \"Ma vie en rose\", and \"My Neighbor Totoro\". Both Wachowskis are fans of the \"Ghost in the Shell\", \"Akira\", \"Wicked City\", \"Ninja Scroll\" and \"Fist of the North Star\" anime films.\nNone of the home video releases of their films feature any deleted scenes. Lana says that despite often having to cut scenes from their movies, they do not want to include deleted scenes in such releases, as this would suggest that their films suffer from incompleteness. They love their finished products and believe them complete. For the same reason, they have not released their films for home video with director's or extended cuts. They also avoid recording audio commentary tracks, having participated only on the track recorded for the LaserDisc of \"Bound\". The sisters say they learned that offering an interpretation of their films means that viewers will be less likely to express their own interpretation.\nFrequent collaborators.\nThe Wachowskis frequently hire the same basic film crew to make their movies. Lana says they do it in part to ensure a positive environment. \"It's like family. Everyone is very respectful of each other,\" says Lana. They used the same practice while selecting the television crew for their Netflix show, \"Sense8\".\nSome of their most notable frequent collaborators are:\nFilm production and comic book publishing.\nDuring \"The Matrix Reloaded\", \"The Matrix Revolutions\", \"The Animatrix\" and \"Enter the Matrix\" production, the Wachowskis created EON Entertainment (not to be confused with Eon Productions), their production company to coordinate and direct all involved partners. It is also where the films were edited together, after the various FX vendors sent their finished work. EON's internal VFX team, ESC, did a number of visual effect shots for the two \"Matrix\" sequels and coordinated the other vendors. ESC was shut down in summer 2004. Anarchos Productions (credited in \"Cloud Atlas\" as Anarchos Pictures) is their production company that has been billed for all their films starting with \"V for Vendetta\" up to the first season of \"Sense8\". In the second season and following Lilly's break from the show, Anarchos is replaced by Venus Castina Productions, a production company created by Lana Wachowski and her wife Karin Winslow. Venus Castina is an epithet of the Roman goddess Venus, who in this form, was supposedly associated with \"the yearnings of feminine souls locked up in male bodies\". In the \"Sense8\" series finale, the real book \"Venus Castina: Famous Female Impersonators Celestial and Human\" makes an appearance as the unlikely object that brought a lesbian couple together; according to Lana and the actresses that portray the couple, the duo have been based on Lana and Karin.\n\"Kinowerks\" is their pre- and post-production and effects studio, based in the Ravenswood neighborhood of Chicago. It has been acclaimed for its green-friendly design, including solar panels, a planted roof, countertops and floors made of recycled materials, plug-in car stations, a water reuse and filtration system, skylights, and a pneumatic elevator. Roger Ebert was invited to watch a restored print of \"The Godfather\" in the \"Kinowerks\" facilities and met the Wachowskis, but he was oblivious to the fact the studio belonged to them. According to the \"Chicago Tribune\"'s Christopher Pirelli, the facility is very low-key: \"an industrial building that appears neither old nor especially new\" and \"It could be an upscale dentist's office\" while the \"inside is rather unexpected\" and has numerous mementos of past film projects. On October 22, 2018, the Wachowskis announced their plans to close and list \"Kinowerks\" for $5\u00a0million.\nIn 2003, they created Burlyman Entertainment and released comic books based on \"The Matrix\" as well as two original bi-monthly series:\nUnrealized projects.\nThe Wachowskis' first script was a thriller called \"Carnivore\". It has been described as \"a Corman-style, low-budget horror movie that dealt with cannibalism or, more specifically, rich people being eaten by cannibals\". The writing was well received and the script achieved notice for the duo; however, interest in making the movie was low, for executives told them: \"This is a bad idea. I can't make this. I'm rich.\" Years later, on April 6, 1999, a week after \"The Matrix\" opened in American theaters, \"Variety\" reported Trimark was looking to buy the script and were in talks with George A. Romero to direct it with production scheduled to begin in August. In April 2001, news of the Wachowskis producing it for Lionsgate and looking for a director surfaced again, and in August 2003 a second time, with their go-to cinematographer Bill Pope rumored to be making his directorial debut with it. The film ultimately went unproduced.\nAnother two of their earliest scripts which were never produced were \"Plastic Man\", based on the DC Comics superhero of the same name and \"Vertical Run\" based on the book of the same name by Joseph R. Garber.\nAfter completing \"The Matrix\", the Wachowskis were looking to make an animated adaptation of Frank Miller's \"Hard Boiled\" graphic novel. The comic was drawn by Geof Darrow, the conceptional designer of \"The Matrix\" and later its sequels. The project didn't move forward because Miller didn't want it to be an animated film.\nIn November 2000, \"Variety\" reported the Wachowskis would produce, co-create and direct second unit on a new \"Conan the Barbarian\" movie for Warner Bros. which was to be written and directed by John Milius and which could see Arnold Schwarzenegger make an appearance. The Wachowskis were planning to juggle their pre-production involvement on the movie and work on \"The Matrix\" sequels at the same time. In January 2004 it was reported that development on \"King Conan: Crown of Iron\" had stalled for years because of the Wachowskis' involvement in \"The Matrix\" sequels and now that the movies were complete they decided to abandon the project of their own volition because of the frequent clashes they had experienced with Milius concerning the tone and direction of the movie. Lana once suggested \"Conan the Barbarian\" as her favorite movie based on comics, to which Lilly also responded enthusiastically.\nIn 2008, the Wachowskis were producing for Madhouse an animated film based on their comic book company's \"Shaolin Cowboy\", titled \"Shaolin Cowboy in The Tomb of Doom\". The feature is co-directed by the comic book's creator Geof Darrow and Seiji Mizushima, a Japanese director. When the American financiers backed out, the film was left half-finished and in need of $3\u00a0million. Darrow does not believe that the required amount of money to finish it will be found.\nIn December 2009, Arianna Huffington tweeted pictures of herself on the set of \"a Wachowskis movie on Iraq from the perspective of the future\". \"CHUD.com\" reported what the Wachowskis were doing was camera tests and shooting of test footage on the Red digital camera for a future movie, but not shooting the movie itself. In March 2010, Jesse Ventura said he had also shot for the project right before Huffington. Both of them were dressed as people from roughly 100 years in the future and they were asked to improvise without a script about the Iraq War. In May 2010, \"Deadline\" reported the movie was going to be a hard-R story that would begin in the future but move back to the then-current war in Iraq and center on the homosexual relationship between an American soldier and an Iraqi. The Wachowskis completed the script and were searching for funding to direct it. In July 2010, the movie was reported to have begun casting under the codename \"CN9\" (or \"CN-9\"), and in August 2010 the full name was revealed as \"Cobalt Neural 9\". In September 2010, \"Vulture\" posted additional details about the script and revealed the movie would be told in found footage-style from the perspective of digital archaeologists from the future. An estimated $20\u00a0million budget was reported although they were told a studio would \"never, ever\" finance it but perhaps the Wachowskis could do it themselves. In December 2010, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" wrote that Salman Rushdie and Cornel West had also shot talking head sequences along with the previously reported involvement of Huffington and Ventura but the Wachowskis were looking into other movies because of troubles financing it. In September 2012, Aleksandar Hemon wrote about the making of \"Cloud Atlas\" and recalled he too was one of the people the Wachowskis had invited to interview in December 2009, to help inspire the script of \"Cobalt Neural 9\". The last update on the film was in October 2012, when the Wachowskis were asked about it and they responded they were still keen to make it, because they had invested both financially ($5\u00a0million) and emotionally into it, even if that ends up being in a different form than film.\nIn December 2010, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" wrote that the Wachowskis were planning to direct for Warner Bros. a script of theirs called \"Hood\", which was a modern adaptation of the Robin Hood legend. The Wachowskis were said to be reaching out to actors, including Will Smith.\nPersonal lives.\nLilly married Alisa Blasingame in 1991. In 2016, Lilly mentioned having a boyfriend. In 2019, she said Mickey Ray Mahoney was now her partner and that they had moved in together. Mahoney is an adjunct professor at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and a trans man.\nLana married Thea Bloom in 1993. Following the release of \"The Matrix\", Lana began attending the Los Angeles BDSM club The Dungeon, where she met Karin Winslow, who worked there as a dominatrix under the name Ilsa Strix. Bloom divorced Lana in 2002 after discovering the relationship. Lana and Karin made their first public appearance together at the premiere of \"The Matrix Reloaded\" in 2003, and married in 2009. Winslow is a board member of the Chicago House and Social Service Agency.\nRaised by a \"hardcore atheist\" father and an \"ex-Catholic turned Shamanist\" mother, the duo once described their religious beliefs as non-denominational. Lana is a vegetarian. During the Democratic Party presidential primaries of 2016, \"The Advocate\" posted a video message of Lana talking about why she would be supporting Bernie Sanders.\nLana's transition.\nRumors that Lana Wachowski was transitioning spread in the early 2000s, though neither sister spoke directly on the subject at the time. In 2003, \"Gothamist\" reported the possible transition. In a 2007 interview, Joel Silver, the producer of numerous Wachowski films, said that the rumors concerning the transition were \"all untrue\", saying that \"they just don't do interviews, so people make things up.\" Crew members working on \"Speed Racer\" said similar things.\nLana publicly revealed her transition after \"Speed Racer\"'s release in 2008 and by at least December 2010, after which trade magazines and newspapers began to refer to her as \"Lana Wachowski\", and to the duo as \"Andy and Lana Wachowski\". On some documents her name is shown as Laurenca Wachowski. In July 2012, Lana made her first public appearance after transitioning, in a video discussing the creative process behind \"Cloud Atlas\". Lana is the first major Hollywood director to come out as transgender.\nIn a September 2012 interview with Aleksandar Hemon of \"The New Yorker\", Lana described an incident in third grade at her Catholic school where she was hesitant to join the boys' line and unconsciously accepted herself as belonging to the girls' line.\nIn October 2012, Lana Wachowski received the Human Rights Campaign's Visibility Award. In her acceptance speech, she revealed that once during her youth, she had considered suicide because of her feelings of confusion about her gender identity. Her acceptance speech was one of the longest public appearances by either of the reclusive sisters. Lana said that, although she and Lilly had not publicly commented on her transitioning during the previous decade, it was not because she was ashamed of it, nor had she kept it a secret from her family and friends. Rather, she stated, the two are generally shy about the news media and prefer to maintain their privacy. Comparing media exposure to losing one's virginity as an irreversible event that only happens once, the Wachowskis had tried to stay out of the public eye. They feared losing their privacy and the ability to go to public places without being noticed and harassed as celebrities.\nExplaining her decision to appear at the HRC event, Lana said: \nThere are some things we do for ourselves, but there are some things we do for others. I am here because when I was young, I wanted very badly to be a writer, I wanted to be a filmmaker, but I couldn't find anyone like me in the world and it felt like my dreams were foreclosed simply because my gender was less typical than others. If I can be that person for someone else, then the sacrifice of my private civic life may have value.\nIn February 2014, Lana received the Freedom Award from Equality Illinois at their annual gala in Chicago.\nLilly's transition.\nIn March 2016, Lilly Wachowski also came out as a transgender woman, issuing a statement to the \"Windy City Times\" after a visit from a reporter from the \"Daily Mail\" newspaper who had attempted to get an interview with her about it. In that article, she said, \"I am one of the lucky ones. Having the support of my family and the means to afford doctors and therapists has given me the chance to actually survive this process. Transgender people without support, means and privilege do not have this luxury. And many do not survive.\"\nHer first public appearance since beginning transitioning was a few weeks later, at the 27th GLAAD Media Awards, where she accepted an award for her Netflix series \"Sense8\" for Outstanding Drama Series. She said, \"I didn't feel obligated to be here, but I wanted to do something. And it's serendipitous that the awards were a couple of weeks later and our show was up for an award.\"\nGaming.\nThe Wachowskis are self-proclaimed gamers. As teens, they spent their weekends in the attic playing \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". They liken the process of their gaming sessions to their process of filmmaking. Along with some of their friends, they wrote a 350-page role-playing game of their own called \"High Adventure\".\nOn the video game front, they had been exchanging letters with Hideo Kojima and met him during a \"Famitsu\" interview in late 1999. \"Metal Gear Solid\" was the first video game they played after finishing work on \"The Matrix\". Candidates for an adaptation of the first \"Matrix\" movie to video game form included Kojima, Bungie and Shiny Entertainment, whose \"Messiah\" PC game impressed them. Shiny's David Perry, who ultimately had his company develop and collaborate with them on the \"Enter the Matrix\" and \"\" video games, was impressed with their familiarity with the medium; this proved helpful during development. The Wachowskis owned both a PlayStation 2 and Xbox video game console and played several games such as \"Splinter Cell\" and \"Halo 2\". They reportedly destroyed their Xbox during a \"Halo\" deathmatch. Actor Collin Chou recounts an instance of visiting their office and finding them playing video games on the floor. Lilly is a fan of the \"Death Jr.\" PlayStation Portable game.\nAsked about their feelings about turning the tightly controlled \"Matrix\" saga to the unpredictable form of an MMORPG with \"The Matrix Online\", the duo appeared enthusiastic about the nature and possibilities of video games:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The \"vagaries of an MMO where unpredictable player behavior is the rule,\" is the reason for doing it. Our films were never intended for a passive audience. There are enough of those kinds of films being made. We wanted our audience to have to work, to have to think, to have to actually participate to enjoy them. This may be because while we enjoy movies, we also spend a lot of time (as in crack-den amounts of time) gaming.\nGaming engages your mind actively whereas most genre films (the films we tend to watch) are designed to provoke as little thinking as possible. Consider why the films in which everyone knows exactly what is going to happen are the films that make the most money.\nYet the fact that \"The Matrix\" films are three of the most successful adult films in history (despite of what much of the media would have us believe), suggests that there are other people like us. Those are the people, the people who thought about it, who worked at it, who we ultimately made the trilogy for and it now makes perfect sense to us that they should inherit the storyline. For us, the idea of watching our baby evolve inside the virtual bubble-world of this new radically developing medium, which has in our opinion the potential of combining the best attributes of films and games, of synthesizing reality TV with soap opera, RPGs and [\"Mortal Kombat\"], is fantastically exciting.\nWorks.\nMusic videos.\n\"The Art of the Matrix\" book credits them for including their screenplay and additional art. The Wachowskis also wrote an introduction to the 2005 published \"Vol. 2: Tag\" trade paperback of \"Ex Machina\" comic book, being big fans of it. Additionally Lana Wachowski wrote the introduction to the 2012 published \"No Straight Lines: Four Decades of Queer Comics\" collection of LGBTQ comic book stories.\nAdditionally classifying themselves as \"lifelong rabid Bulls fans\" they created a revamped introductory animation for Chicago Bulls to open the 2006\u20132007 regular season.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33127", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33127", "title": "Wisconsin", "text": "U.S. state\nWisconsin is a state in the Upper Midwest and Great Lakes regions of the United States. It borders Minnesota to the west, Iowa to the southwest, Illinois to the south, Lake Michigan to the east, Michigan to the northeast, and Lake Superior to the north. With a population of about 6 million and an area of about 65,500 square miles, Wisconsin is the 20th-largest state by population and the 23rd-largest by area. It has 72 counties. The state's most populous city is Milwaukee. Its capital and second-most populous city is Madison; other urban areas include Green Bay and the Fox Cities.\nWisconsin's geography is diverse, with dense forests in the north (including Chequamegon\u2013Nicolet National Forest), rugged unglaciated hills in the western Driftless Area, and wooded plains, lowlands, and farms stretching from the interior east to Lake Michigan. Wisconsin has the third-longest Great Lakes coastline, after Ontario and Michigan. At the time of European contact, the area was inhabited by Algonquian and Siouan nations, and today it is home to eleven federally recognized tribes. Originally part of the Northwest Territory, it was admitted as a state in 1848. During the 19th and early 20th centuries, many European settlers entered the state, mostly from Germany and Scandinavia. Wisconsin remains a center of German American and Scandinavian American culture, particularly in its cuisine, with foods such as bratwurst and kringle.\nWisconsin is one of the nation's leading dairy producers and is known as \"America's Dairyland\"; it is particularly famous for its cheese. The state is also famous for its breweries, with beer in Milwaukee a longstanding industry. Wisconsin has some of the nation's most permissive alcohol laws and is known for its drinking culture. Its economy is dominated by manufacturing, healthcare, information technology, and agriculture\u2014specifically dairy, cranberries, and ginseng. Tourism is also a major contributor to its economy. The gross domestic product in 2020 was $348\u00a0billion. Wisconsin is home to one UNESCO World Heritage Site, comprising two of the most significant buildings designed by Wisconsin-born architect Frank Lloyd Wright: his studio at Taliesin and his Jacobs I House. Politically, it is considered a swing state in national and statewide elections; the Republican Party was founded in Wisconsin in 1854.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Wisconsin\" originates from the name given to the Wisconsin River by one of the Algonquian-speaking Native American groups living in the region at the time of European colonization. The French explorer Jacques Marquette was the first European to reach the Wisconsin River, arriving in 1673 and calling the river (likely \u14a3\u1505\u146f\u1424\u14ef\u18d9 \"meskowsin\") in his journal. Subsequent French writers changed the spelling from to , and over time this became the name for both the Wisconsin River and the surrounding lands. English speakers anglicized the spelling from to \"Wisconsin\" when they began to arrive in large numbers during the early 19th century. The legislature of Wisconsin Territory made the current spelling official in 1845.\nThe Algonquian word for Wisconsin and its original meaning have both grown obscure. While interpretations vary, most implicate the river and the red sandstone that lines its banks. One leading theory holds that the name originated from the Miami word , meaning 'it lies red', a reference to the setting of the Wisconsin River as it flows through the reddish sandstone of the Wisconsin Dells. Other theories include claims that the name originated from one of a variety of Ojibwa words meaning 'red stone place', 'where the waters gather', or 'great rock'. More recently, University of Wisconsin-Green Bay lecturer and Menominee elder Napos Turney suggested the origin of the name may be the Menominee word \"W\u0113sk\u014dhsaeh\", meaning \"good place\".\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nWisconsin has been home to a wide variety of cultures over the past 14,000 years. The first people arrived around 10,000 BCE during the Wisconsin Glaciation. These early inhabitants, called Paleo-Indians, hunted now-extinct ice age animals such as the Boaz mastodon, a prehistoric mastodon skeleton unearthed along with spear points in southwest Wisconsin. After the ice age ended around 8000 BCE, people in the subsequent Archaic period lived by hunting, fishing, and gathering food from wild plants. Agricultural societies emerged gradually over the Woodland period between 1000 BCE to 1000 CE. Toward the end of this period, Wisconsin was the heartland of the \"Effigy Mound culture\", which built thousands of animal-shaped mounds across the landscape. Later, between 1000 and 1500 CE, the Mississippian and Oneota cultures built substantial settlements including the fortified village at Aztalan in southeast Wisconsin. The Oneota may be the ancestors of the modern Iowa and Ho-Chunk nations who shared the Wisconsin region with the Menominee at the time of European contact. Other Native American groups living in Wisconsin when Europeans first settled included the Ojibwe, Sauk, Meskwaki, Kickapoo, and Potawatomi, who migrated to Wisconsin from the east between 1500 and 1700.\nEuropean settlements.\nThe first European to visit what became Wisconsin was probably the French explorer Jean Nicolet. He canoed west from Georgian Bay through the Great Lakes in 1634, and it is traditionally assumed that he came ashore near Green Bay at Red Banks. Pierre Radisson and M\u00e9dard des Groseilliers visited Green Bay again in 1654\u20131666 and Chequamegon Bay in 1659\u20131660, where they traded for fur with local Native Americans. In 1673, Jacques Marquette and Louis Jolliet became the first to record a journey on the Fox-Wisconsin Waterway all the way to the Mississippi River near Prairie du Chien. Frenchmen like Nicholas Perrot continued to ply the fur trade across Wisconsin through the 17th and 18th centuries, but the French made no permanent settlements in Wisconsin before Great Britain won control of the region following the French and Indian War in 1763. Even so, French traders continued to work in the region after the war, and some, beginning with Charles de Langlade in 1764, settled in Wisconsin permanently, rather than returning to British-controlled Canada.\nThe British gradually took over Wisconsin during the French and Indian War, taking control of Green Bay in 1761 and gaining control of all of Wisconsin in 1763. Like the French, the British were interested in little but the fur trade. One notable event in the fur trading industry in Wisconsin occurred in 1791, when two free African Americans set up a fur trading post among the Menominee at present-day Marinette. The first permanent settlers, mostly French Canadians, some Anglo-New Englanders and a few African American freedmen, arrived in Wisconsin while it was under British control. Charles de Langlade is generally recognized as the first settler, establishing a trading post at Green Bay in 1745, and moving there permanently in 1764. Settlement began at Prairie du Chien around 1781. The French residents at the trading post in what is now Green Bay, referred to the town as \"La Baye\". However, British fur traders referred to it as \"Green Bay\", because the water and the shore assumed green tints in early spring. The old French title was gradually dropped, and the British name of \"Green Bay\" eventually stuck. The region coming under British rule had virtually no adverse effect on the French residents as the British needed the cooperation of the French fur traders and the French fur traders needed the goodwill of the British. During the French occupation of the region licenses for fur trading had been issued scarcely and only to select groups of traders, whereas the British, in an effort to make as much money as possible from the region, issued licenses for fur trading freely, both to British and to French residents. The fur trade in what is now Wisconsin reached its height under British rule, and the first self-sustaining farms in the state were established as well. From 1763 to 1780, Green Bay was a prosperous community which produced its own foodstuff, built graceful cottages and held dances and festivities.\nJoseph Roi built the Tank Cottage in Green Bay in 1776. Located in Heritage Hill State Historical Park, it is the oldest standing building from Wisconsin's early years and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nU.S. territory.\nWisconsin became a territorial possession of the United States in 1783 after the American Revolutionary War. In 1787, it became part of the Northwest Territory. As territorial boundaries subsequently developed, it was then part of Indiana Territory from 1800 to 1809, Illinois Territory from 1809 to 1818, and Michigan Territory from 1818 to 1836. However, the British remained in control until after the War of 1812, the outcome of which finally established an American presence in the area. Under American control, the economy of the territory shifted from fur trading to lead mining. The prospect of easy mineral wealth drew immigrants from throughout the U.S. and Europe to the lead deposits at Mineral Point, Dodgeville, and nearby areas. Some miners found shelter in the holes they had dug, and earned the nickname \"badgers\", leading to Wisconsin's identity as the \"Badger State\". The sudden influx of white miners prompted tension with the local Native American population. The Winnebago War of 1827 and the Black Hawk War of 1832 culminated in the forced removal of Native Americans from most parts of the state.\nFollowing these conflicts, Wisconsin Territory was created by an act of the United States Congress on April 20, 1836. By fall of that year, the best prairie groves of the counties surrounding what is now Milwaukee were occupied by farmers from the New England states.\nStatehood.\nThe Great Lakes, via the Erie Canal, facilitated the travel of both Yankee settlers and European immigrants to Wisconsin Territory. Yankees from New England and upstate New York seized a dominant position in law and politics, enacting policies that marginalized the region's earlier Native American and French-Canadian residents. Yankees also speculated in real estate, platted towns such as Racine, Beloit, Burlington, and Janesville, and established schools, civic institutions, and Congregationalist churches. At the same time, many Germans, Irish, Norwegians, and other immigrants also settled in towns and farms across the territory, establishing Catholic and Lutheran institutions.\nThe growing population allowed Wisconsin to gain statehood on May 29, 1848, as the 30th state. Between 1840 and 1850, Wisconsin's non-Indian population had swollen from 31,000 to 305,000. More than a third of residents (110,500) were foreign born, including 38,000 Germans, 28,000 British immigrants from England, Scotland, and Wales, and 21,000 Irish. Another third (103,000) were Yankees from New England and western New York state. Only about 63,000 residents in 1850 had been born in Wisconsin.\nNelson Dewey, the first governor of Wisconsin, was a Democrat. Dewey oversaw the transition from the territorial to the new state government. He encouraged the development of the state's infrastructure, particularly the construction of new roads, railroads, canals, and harbors, as well as the improvement of the Fox and Wisconsin Rivers. During his administration, the State Board of Public Works was organized. Dewey, an abolitionist, was the first of many Wisconsin governors to advocate against the spread of slavery into new states and territories.\nCivil War era and economic growth.\nPolitics in early Wisconsin were defined by the greater national debate over slavery. A free state from its foundation, Wisconsin became a center of northern abolitionism. The debate became especially intense in 1854 after Joshua Glover, a runaway slave from Missouri, was captured in Racine. Glover was taken into custody under the Federal Fugitive Slave Law, but a mob of abolitionists stormed the prison where Glover was held and helped him escape to Canada. In a trial stemming from the incident, the Wisconsin Supreme Court ultimately declared the Fugitive Slave Law unconstitutional. The Republican Party, founded on March 20, 1854, by anti-slavery expansion activists in Ripon, Wisconsin, grew to dominate state politics in the aftermath of these events.\nDuring the American Civil War, around 91,000 troops from Wisconsin fought for the Union. A number of Wisconsin regiments were distinguished, including three that served in the celebrated \"Iron Brigade\"\u2014 the 2nd Wisconsin, 6th Wisconsin, and 7th Wisconsin. The 8th Wisconsin, another hard-fighting regiment, was often accompanied into battle by its mascot, Old Abe, a bald eagle.\nWisconsin's economy also diversified during the early years of statehood. While lead mining diminished, agriculture became a principal occupation in the southern half of the state. Railroads were built across the state to help transport grains to market, and industries like J.I. Case &amp; Company in Racine were founded to build agricultural equipment. Wisconsin briefly became one of the nation's leading producers of wheat during the 1860s. Meanwhile, the lumber industry dominated in the heavily forested northern sections of Wisconsin, and sawmills sprang up in cities like La Crosse, Eau Claire, and Wausau. These economic activities had dire environmental consequences. By the close of the 19th century, intensive agriculture had devastated soil fertility, and lumbering had deforested most of the state. These conditions forced both wheat agriculture and the lumber industry into a precipitous decline.\nBeginning in the 1890s, farmers in Wisconsin shifted from wheat to dairy production to make more sustainable and profitable use of their land. Many immigrants carried cheese-making traditions that, combined with the state's suitable geography and dairy research led by Stephen Babcock at the University of Wisconsin, helped the state build a reputation as \"America's Dairyland\". Meanwhile, conservationists including Aldo Leopold helped re-establish the state's forests during the early 20th century, paving the way for a more renewable lumber and paper milling industry as well as promoting recreational tourism in the northern woodlands. Manufacturing also boomed in Wisconsin during the early 20th century, driven by an immense immigrant workforce arriving from Europe. Industries in cities like Milwaukee ranged from brewing and food processing to heavy machine production and tool-making, leading Wisconsin to rank 8th among U.S. states in total product value by 1910.\nProgressive era and World Wars.\nThe early 20th century was notable for the emergence of progressive politics championed by Robert M. La Follette, who served as governor from 1901 to 1906 and U.S. senator from 1906 to 1925. Between 1901 and 1914, Progressive Republicans in Wisconsin created the nation's first comprehensive statewide primary election system, the first effective workplace injury compensation law, and the first state income tax, making taxation proportional to actual earnings.\nDuring World War I, due to the neutrality of Wisconsin and many of its Republicans, Progressives, and Conservatives, including Germans and Scandinavians who were a significant proportion of the state's population, Wisconsin began to be accused of being the \"Traitor State\" by many \"hyper patriots.\"\nAs the war raged on in Europe, La Follette led the antiwar movement in Wisconsin and steered a group of progressive senators in blocking a bill by President Woodrow Wilson that would have armed merchant ships with guns. Many Wisconsin politicians, such as Emanuel L. Philipp and Irvine Lenroot, were accused of having divided loyalties. Even with outspoken opponents to the war, at the onset of the war, many Wisconsinites would abandon neutrality. Businesses, labor and farms all enjoyed prosperity from the war. With over 118,000 going into military service, Wisconsin was the first state to report for the national drafts conducted by the U.S. military. As governor, Philipp was successful in combating anti-German hysteria in the state.\nThe progressive Wisconsin Idea also promoted the statewide expansion of the University of Wisconsin through the UW\u2013Extension system at this time. In 1932, UW economics professors John R. Commons and Harold Groves helped Wisconsin create the United States' first unemployment compensation program. Other Wisconsin Idea scholars at the university generated the plan that became the New Deal's Social Security Act of 1935, with Wisconsin expert Arthur J. Altmeyer playing a key role.\nAfter La Follette died, his sons Philip and Robert Jr. took over the Wisconsin Republican Party, later founding the Wisconsin Progressive Party as a successor to their father's Progressive Party. It gained momentum in the mid-1930s with support from President Franklin D. Roosevelt and progressive Democrats, winning offices statewide and in Congress. The party declined after Philip, facing scandal and accusations of authoritarianism, lost reelection in 1938, to Julius P. Heil and left politics to serve in World War II. The National Progressives of America, an organization Philip had hoped would precede a national realignment, then faltered, and the Wisconsin Progressives eventually voted to dissolve.\nMid-20th century to present.\nIn World War II's immediate aftermath, Wisconsinites were divided over issues such as the creation of the United Nations, support for the European recovery, and the growth of the Soviet Union's power. But when Europe divided into Communist and capitalist camps, and with the Progressive Party's collapse, Robert La Follette Jr. rejoined the Republican Party of Wisconsin to run in the 1946 Senate election. He narrowly lost to Joseph McCarthy in the Republican primary. After the Chinese Communist Revolution of 1949, public opinion began to continue move toward support for the protection of democracy and capitalism against Communist expansion.\nWisconsin took part in several political extremes in the mid- to late 20th century, ranging from the anti-communist crusades of Senator McCarthy in the 1950s, to the founding of Earth Day by environmental advocate Gaylord Nelson in 1970. During radical protests against the Vietnam War at UW-Madison, an attack by anarchists culminated in the Sterling Hall bombing in August 1970. The state undertook welfare reform under Republican Governor Tommy Thompson during the 1990s. Its economy also underwent further transformations toward the end of the 20th century, as heavy industry and manufacturing declined in favor of a service economy based on medicine, education, agribusiness, and tourism.\nIn 2011, Wisconsin became the focus of some controversy when newly elected governor Scott Walker proposed and then passed and enacted 2011 Wisconsin Act 10, which made large changes in the areas of collective bargaining, compensation, retirement, health insurance, and sick leave of public sector employees, among other changes. A series of major protests by union supporters took place that year in protest to the changes, and Walker survived a recall election held the next year in 2012, becoming the first governor in U.S. history to do so. Also in 2012, Congressman Paul Ryan became the first Wisconsinite to appear on a major party ticket, as Republican nominee Mitt Romney's running mate in the 2012 United States presidential election. Ryan was elected Speaker of the House in 2015.\nSince 2023, five University of Wisconsin branch campuses have closed, one has gone entirely online, and one has stopped using several of its buildings. Many have expressed concern about the Wisconsin Idea's future since these closures.\nGeography.\nWisconsin is in the Midwestern United States and is part of both the Great Lakes region and the Upper Midwest. The state has a total area of . Wisconsin is bordered by Lake Superior and Michigan to the north; by Lake Michigan to the east; by Illinois to the south; and by Iowa to the southwest and Minnesota to the northwest. A border dispute with Michigan was settled by two cases, both Wisconsin v. Michigan, in 1934 and 1935. The state's boundaries include the Mississippi River and St. Croix River in the west, and the Menominee River and Montreal River in the northeast.\nLying between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River, Wisconsin has a wide variety of geographical features. The state is divided into five distinct regions. In the north, the Lake Superior Lowland occupies a belt of land along Lake Superior. Just to the south, the Northern Highland has massive mixed hardwood and coniferous forests including the Chequamegon\u2013Nicolet National Forest, as well as thousands of glacial lakes, and the state's highest point, Timms Hill. In the middle of the state, the Central Plain has some unique sandstone formations like the Dells of the Wisconsin River in addition to rich farmland. The Eastern Ridges and Lowlands region in the southeast is home to many of Wisconsin's largest cities. The ridges include the Niagara Escarpment that stretches from New York, the Black River Escarpment and the Magnesian Escarpment. In the southwest, the Western Upland is a rugged landscape with a mix of forest and farmland, including many bluffs on the Mississippi River, and the Baraboo Range. This region is part of the Driftless Area, which also includes parts of Iowa, Illinois, and Minnesota. Overall, 46% of Wisconsin's land area is covered by forest.\nWisconsin has geologic formations and deposits that vary in age from over three billion years to several thousand years, with most rocks being millions of years old. The oldest geologic formations were created over 600 million years ago during the Precambrian, the majority below the glacial deposits. Much of the Baraboo Range consists of Baraboo Quartzite and other Precambrian metamorphic rock. This area was not covered by glaciers during the most recent ice age, the Wisconsin Glaciation. Langlade County has a soil rarely found outside the county called Antigo silt loam.\nThe state has more than 12,000 named rivers and streams, totaling in length. It has over 15,000 named lakes, totaling about . Lake Winnebago is the largest inland lake, with over , and of shoreline. Along the two Great Lakes, Wisconsin has over of shoreline (over , not counting minor islands and indentations). Many of the named islands in Wisconsin are in the Great Lakes; many surround the Door Peninsula in Lake Michigan or are part of the Apostle Islands in Lake Superior. The Mississippi River and inland lakes and rivers contain the rest of Wisconsin's islands.\nAreas under the protection of the National Park Service include the Apostle Islands National Lakeshore, Ice Age National Scenic Trail, and portions of the Saint Croix National Scenic Riverway and North Country National Scenic Trail. There are an additional 18 National Natural Landmarks in the state that include dune and swales, swamps, bogs, and old-growth forests. Wisconsin has 50 state park units, covering more than in state parks and state recreation areas maintained by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. The Division of Forestry manages a further in Wisconsin's state forests.\nClimate.\nMost of Wisconsin is classified as warm-summer humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\"), while southern and southwestern portions are classified as hot-summer humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa\"). The highest temperature ever recorded in the state was in the Wisconsin Dells, on July 13, 1936, where it reached 114\u00a0\u00b0F (46\u00a0\u00b0C). The lowest temperature ever recorded in Wisconsin was in the village of Couderay, where it reached \u221255\u00a0\u00b0F (\u221248\u00a0\u00b0C) on both February 2 and 4, 1996. Wisconsin also receives a large amount of regular snowfall averaging around in the southern portions with up to annually in the Lake Superior snowbelt each year.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCities.\nWisconsin has three types of municipality: cities, villages, and towns. Cities and villages are incorporated urban areas. Towns are unincorporated minor civil divisions of counties with limited self-government.\nOver two-thirds of Wisconsin residents live in urban areas. Milwaukee, in southeastern Wisconsin, is the state's most populous city, with approximately 580,000 people. The Milwaukee metropolitan area accounts for 1.57 million of the state's residents. With a population of nearly 280,000, the state capital of Madison is consistently ranked as one of the most livable cities in both the state and country and is the fastest-growing city in Wisconsin. The Madison metropolitan area in southern Wisconsin has about 680,000 residents.\nMedium-size cities dot the state. The largest of these is Green Bay in northeastern Wisconsin, with approximately 320,000 people in the metro area. Other metropolitan cities in the state include Appleton, Racine, Oshkosh, Eau Claire, Janesville, Wausau, La Crosse, Sheboygan, and Fond du Lac. Furthermore, another 12 cities function as centers of micropolitan statistical areas which typically anchor a network of working farms surrounding them. As of 2011, there were 12 cities in Wisconsin with a population of 50,000 or more, accounting for 73% of the state's employment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Wisconsin was 5,822,434 on July 1, 2019, a 2.4% increase since the 2010 United States census. This includes a natural increase since the last census of 150,659 people (i.e., 614,771 births minus 464,112 deaths) and a decrease due to net migration of 12,755 people. Immigration resulted in a net increase of 59,251 people, and migration from within the U.S. resulted in a net decrease of 72,006 people.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 4,775 homeless people in Wisconsin.\nIn 2022, the five largest European ancestry groups were: German (36%), Irish (10.2%), Polish (7.9%), English (6.7%), and Norwegian (6.3%). German is the most common ancestry in every county in the state, except Menominee, Trempealeau, and Vernon. Wisconsin has the highest percentage of residents of Polish ancestry of any state. According to the 2022 American Community Survey, 7.6% of Wisconsin's population were of Hispanic or Latino origin (of any race). The largest Hispanic ancestry groups were Mexican (5.1%), Puerto Rican (1.1%), Central American (0.4%), and Cuban (0.1%), with 0.9% reporting other Hispanic or Latino origins.\nSince its founding, Wisconsin has been ethnically heterogeneous. Following the period of French fur traders, the next wave of settlers were miners, many of whom were Cornish, who settled the southwestern area of the state. The next wave was dominated by \"Yankees\", migrants of English descent from New England and upstate New York; in the early years of statehood, they dominated the state's heavy industry, finance, politics, and education. Between 1850 and 1900, the immigrants were mostly Germans, Scandinavians (the largest group being Norwegian), Irish, and Poles. In the 20th century, a number of African Americans and Mexicans settled in Milwaukee; and after the end of the Vietnam War came an influx of Hmongs.\nThe various ethnic groups settled in different areas of the state. Although German immigrants settled throughout the state, the largest concentration was in Milwaukee. Norwegian immigrants settled in lumbering and farming areas in the north and west. Irish, Italian, and Polish immigrants settled primarily in urban areas. Menominee County is the only county in the eastern United States with a Native American majority.\nAfrican Americans came to Milwaukee, especially from 1940 on. 86% of Wisconsin's African-American population live in four cities: Milwaukee, Racine, Beloit, Kenosha, with Milwaukee home to nearly three-fourths of the state's black Americans. In the Great Lakes region, only Detroit and Cleveland have a higher percentage of African-American residents.\nAbout 33% of Wisconsin's Asian population is Hmong, with significant communities in Milwaukee, Wausau, Green Bay, Sheboygan, Appleton, Madison, La Crosse, Eau Claire, Oshkosh, and Manitowoc. 61,629 people in Wisconsin, or around 1% of the population, identify as Hmong.\nOf the residents of Wisconsin, 71.7% were born in Wisconsin, 23.0% were born in a different US state, 0.7% were born in Puerto Rico, U.S. Island areas, or born abroad to American parent(s), and 4.6% were foreign born.\nIn 2018, the countries of origin for Wisconsin's immigrants came from Mexico, India, China, Laos and the Philippines.\n\"Note: Births in table add to over 100%, because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.\"\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to Public Religion Research Institute's 2022 \"American Values Survey\", those identifying with a religion or spiritual tradition were approximately 75% of the state's population. 69% of Wisconsinites self-identified as Christian. Specifically, 25% of respondents identified as Mainline Protestant, 12% as Evangelical Protestant, 4% as other Protestants, and 27% as Catholic. Roughly 25% of the population were unaffiliated with any religious body. Small minorities of Jews (1%), Hindus (1%), Buddhists (1%), Jehovah's Witnesses (1%), Unitarian Universalists (1%), Muslims (&lt;1%), Mormons (&lt;1%), and other faiths exist according to this study.\nChristianity is the predominant religion in Wisconsin. Per the Association of Religion Data Archives' 2020 study, Catholicism was the single-largest denomination with 1,237,342 adherents, followed by the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America with 316,245 members and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod with 209,788 adherents. 276,904 adhered to nondenominational Christianity.\nCrime.\nStatewide FBI Crime statistics for 2009 include 144 murders/non-negligent manslaughter; 1,108 rapes; 4,850 robberies; 8,431 aggravated assaults; and 147,486 property crimes. Wisconsin also publishes its own statistics through the Bureau of Justice Information and Analysis. The state reported 14,603 violent crimes in 2009, with a clearance rate (% solved) of 50%. The state reported 4,633 sexual assaults in 2009, with an overall clearance rate for sexual assaults of 57%.\nEconomy.\nIn 2023, Wisconsin's gross state product was $413.966\u00a0billion, making it 21st among U.S. states. The economy of Wisconsin is driven by manufacturing, agriculture, and tourism. The per capita personal income was $61,475 in 2022 and was $66,596 when adjusted by regional price parity. In 2024, the state's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate has hovered at 3.0%, lower than the U.S. average. Since 2009, Wisconsin's minimum wage has been $7.25, the same as the federal rate.\nEight corporations based in Wisconsin are listed on the \"Fortune\" 500. In 2024, the list included Northwestern Mutual, Fiserv, ManpowerGroup, Rockwell Automation, and WEC Energy Group (all based in Milwaukee), as well as Kohl's (based in Menomonee Falls), American Family Insurance (based in Madison), and Oshkosh Corporation (based in Oshkosh).\nManufacturing.\nAs of 2015, the number of manufacturing jobs in the state was approximately 500,000, similar to the figure in 1970. However, it declined as a share of the state's gross state product between 2000 and 2016 from about 21.5% to 18.5%, a proportion that is eighth among all states. Similarly, as a share of total employment, manufacturing declined from 28% in 1970 to 14% in 2015. The state's economic output from manufacturing was $48.9\u00a0billion in 2008, making it the tenth largest among states in manufacturing gross domestic product.\nMajor Wisconsin companies in manufacturing include the Kohler Company; Mercury Marine; Rockwell Automation; Johnson Controls; John Deere; Briggs &amp; Stratton; Milwaukee Electric Tool Company; Miller Electric; Caterpillar Inc.; Joy Global; Oshkosh Corporation; Harley-Davidson; Case IH; S. C. Johnson &amp; Son; Ashley Furniture; Ariens; and Evinrude Outboard Motors.\nWisconsin has a significant lumber industry, being a major producer of paper and packaging. Wisconsin ranks first nationwide in the production of paper products; the lower Fox River from Lake Winnebago to Green Bay has 24 paper mills along its stretch.\nA large part of the state's manufacturing sector includes commercial food processing, including well-known brands such as Oscar Mayer, Tombstone frozen pizza, Johnsonville brats, and Usinger's sausage. Kraft Foods alone employs more than 5,000 people in the state. Milwaukee is a major producer of beer and was formerly headquarters for Miller Brewing Company\u2014the nation's second-largest brewer\u2014until it merged with Coors. Formerly, Schlitz, Blatz, and Pabst were cornerstone breweries in Milwaukee.\nThe development and manufacture of healthcare devices and software is a growing sector of the state's economy, with key players such as GE Healthcare, Epic Systems, and TomoTherapy.\nAgriculture.\nWisconsin produces about a quarter of America's cheese, leading the nation in cheese production. It is second in milk production, after California, and third in per-capita milk production, behind California and Vermont. Wisconsin is second in butter production, producing about one-quarter of the nation's butter. Wisconsin requires cheese and butter makers to hold a license for production, being the only state in the US to require certification for either.\nThe state ranks first nationally in the production of corn for silage, cranberries, ginseng, and snap beans for processing. It grows more than half the national crop of cranberries. and 97% of the nation's ginseng. Wisconsin is also a leading producer of oats, potatoes, carrots, tart cherries, maple syrup, and sweet corn for processing.\nThe significance of the state's agricultural production is exemplified by the depiction of a Holstein cow, an ear of corn, and a wheel of cheese on Wisconsin's state quarter design. The state annually selects an \"Alice in Dairyland\" to promote the state's agricultural products around the world. The prominence of the dairy industry in Wisconsin has led to Wisconsin being known as \"America's Dairyland\", which was made the official state slogan in 1940.\nTourism.\nAccording to the Department of Tourism, tourism in Wisconsin generated $20.9 billion in total economic impact in 2021 and is the state's third-largest sector. Festivals such as Summerfest and the EAA AirVenture Oshkosh draw international attention, along with hundreds of thousands of visitors annually. Notable attractions across the state include the Harley-Davidson Museum, Lambeau Field, Milwaukee Art Museum, Chazen Museum of Art, Henry Vilas Zoo, National Railroad Museum, and Wisconsin State Capital. Other tourist destinations include Taliesin, the studio of architect Frank Lloyd Wright; House on the Rock, a complex of architecturally distinct rooms; and the Circus World Museum, located in the Ringling brothers' hometown of Baraboo.\nThe Dells of the Wisconsin River, a gorge noted for its rock formations in south-central Wisconsin, annually attracts more than four million visitors between water tours of the scenery and numerous theme parks in the region. Nearby Devil's Lake State Park is one of the most visited of Wisconsin's state parks due to its proximity to the Dells and its own scenery.\nThe Door Peninsula, which extends off the eastern coast of the state, contains Door County, a popular destination for boaters due to the large number of natural harbors and boat launches on both the Green Bay and Lake Michigan sides of the peninsula. The area draws more than two million visitors yearly to its quaint villages, seasonal cherry picking, and fish boils.\nGiven the large number of lakes and rivers in the state, water recreation is popular. In the Northwoods Lake Country, what had been an industrial area focused on timber has largely been transformed into a vacation destination. Popular interest in the environment and environmentalism, added to traditional interests in hunting and fishing, has attracted a large urban audience within driving range. Lake Geneva in southeastern Wisconsin is similarly popular for water recreation.\nEnergy.\nWisconsin has no production of oil, gas, or coal. Its in-state electrical generation is mostly from coal. Other important electricity sources are natural gas and nuclear.\nThe state has a mandate that ten percent of its electrical energy come from renewable sources by the end of 2015. This goal has been met, but not with in-state sources. As of 2014[ [update]], a third of that ten percent comes from out-of-state sources, mostly wind-generated electricity from Minnesota and Iowa. The state has agnostic policies for developing wind power in state.\nTaxation.\nWisconsin collects personal income taxes which range from 4% to 7.65% based on five income brackets. The state sales and use tax rate is 5.0%. Fifty-nine counties have an additional sales/use tax of 0.5%.\nThe most common property tax assessed on Wisconsin residents is the real property tax, or their residential property tax. Wisconsin does not impose a property tax on vehicles, but does levy an annual registration fee. Property taxes are the most important tax revenue source for Wisconsin's local governments, as well as major methods of funding school districts, vocational-technical colleges, special purpose districts and tax incremental finance districts. Equalized values are based on the full market value of all taxable property in the state, except for agricultural land. To provide property tax relief for farmers, the value of agricultural land is determined by its value for agricultural uses, rather than for its possible development value. Equalized values are used to distribute state aid payments to counties, municipalities, and technical colleges. Assessments prepared by local assessors are used to distribute the property tax burden within individual municipalities.\nWisconsin does not assess a tax on intangible property. Wisconsin does not collect inheritance taxes. Until January 1, 2008, Wisconsin's estate tax was decoupled from the federal estate tax laws; therefore the state imposed its own estate tax on certain large estates.\nThere are no toll roads in Wisconsin; highway construction and maintenance are funded in part by motor fuel tax revenues, and the remaining balance is drawn from the State General Fund. Non-highway road construction and maintenance are funded by local governments (municipalities or counties).\nCulture.\nResidents of Wisconsin are referred to as Wisconsinites. The traditional prominence of references to dairy farming and cheesemaking in Wisconsin's rural economy (the state's license plates have read \"America's Dairyland\" since 1940) have led to the nickname (sometimes used pejoratively among non-residents) of \"cheeseheads\", and to the creation of \"cheesehead hats\" made of yellow foam in the shape of a wedge of cheese.\nNumerous ethnic festivals are held throughout Wisconsin to celebrate the heritage of its citizens. Such festivals include Summerfest, Oktoberfest, Polish Fest, Festa Italiana, Irish Fest, Bastille Days, Syttende Mai (Norwegian Constitution Day), Brat(wurst) Days in Sheboygan, Polka Days, Cheese Days in Monroe and Mequon, African World Festival, Indian Summer, Arab Fest, Wisconsin Highland Games, and many others.\nArchitecture.\nWith the immigration of northern Europeans into Wisconsin and the upper Midwest, they brought the techniques of building log homes with them.\nThe Milwaukee Art Museum is known for its Quadracci Pavilion created by Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava. The Quadracci Pavilion contains a movable, wing-like Burke \"brise soleil\" that opens up for a wingspan of during the day, folding over the tall, arched structure at night or during inclement weather.\nFrank Lloyd Wright, an architect known as the pioneer of Prairie School architecture and the Usonian home concept, was raised in Wisconsin. Wright's home and studio in the 20th century was at Taliesin, south of Spring Green, Wisconsin. Taliesin and the Usonian Jacobs I House in Madison are listed as UNESCO World Heritage Sites as part of \"The 20th-Century Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright\". Other notable works of Wright in Wisconsin include the Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church in Wauwatosa, First Unitarian Society of Madison, and Johnson Wax Headquarters. Monona Terrace in Madison, a convention center designed by Taliesin architect Anthony Puttnam, is based on a 1930s design by Wright.\nAlcohol.\nDrinking has long been considered a significant part of Wisconsin culture, and the state ranks at or near the top of national measures of per-capita alcohol consumption, consumption of alcohol per state, and proportion of drinkers. Consumption per-capita per-event, however, ranks low among the nation; number of events (number of times alcohol is involved) is significantly higher or highest, but consumption at each event smaller, marking Wisconsin's consumption as frequent and moderate. Factors such as cultural identification with the state's heritage of German immigration, the long-standing presence of major breweries in Milwaukee, and a cold climate are often associated with the prevalence of drinking in Wisconsin.\nMany large breweries were founded in Wisconsin, largely in Milwaukee, which gained the epithet \"Brew City\" before the turn of the century. Miller Brewing Company, Pabst Brewing Company, Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company, and Jacob Leinenkugel Brewing Company all began as local businesses before entering national markets. Several other popular craft brews include Ale Asylum, Capital, Sprecher, and New Glarus, the latter being well known for the Spotted Cow Farmhouse Ale only sold in Wisconsin.\nIn Wisconsin, the legal drinking age is 21, except when accompanied by a parent, guardian, or spouse who is at least 21 years old. Age requirements are waived for possessing alcohol when employed by a brewer, brewpub, wholesaler, or producer of alcohol fuel. The minimum legal age to purchase alcohol is 21, with no exceptions. The Absolute Sobriety law states that any person not of legal drinking age (currently 21) may not drive after consuming alcohol. DUI offenses were lowered to BAC 0.08 in 2003 as a result of federal government pressure.\nCuisine.\nWisconsin's cuisine is famous for its cheese as well as other dairy products. Colby cheese was first created in Wisconsin in 1885 (named after Colby, Wisconsin), and brick cheese was first created in the state in 1877. The state is the only producer of Limburger cheese in the United States. Cheese curds are a popular variant that can be eaten separately cold as a snack, or covered in batter and fried as an appetizer, often served with ranch dressing as a dipping sauce. Hot and spicy cheese bread is a popular type of bread created and sold in Madison.\nWisconsin is the nation's top producer of cheese, the state's official dairy product. It is also a leading producer of cranberries, the state's official fruit, and ginseng. Dane County Farmers' Market in Madison is the nation's largest producers-only farmer's market.\nThe Friday night fish fry, often battered and fried perch or walleye, is traditional throughout Wisconsin, while in northeast Wisconsin and Door County the fish boil is more popular. The supper club is another common phenomenon of Wisconsin culinary heritage and often a destination for fish frys; other fried food are common side dishes, along with condiments of tartar sauce and cole slaw or crimson slaw, a variety of cole slaw that incorporates Wisconsin cranberries. Beer cheese soup is usually made from a variety of beer and cheddar or Colby cheese with sausage, potatoes, and green onions.\nBooyah is a stew common to Wisconsin, commonly using meat and a mirepoix of vegetables cooked together in a \"booyah kettle\" over low heat for several days.\nThe southeastern city of Racine is known for its kringle, a sweet flaky pastry often served as a dessert. The recipe was brought by Danish immigrants to the region in the 1800s and became the official state pastry of Wisconsin in 2013. The Wisconsin State Fair is known for its giant cream puffs.\nThe butter burger originated in Wisconsin, most likely in Solly's Grille in Glendale. Culver's is a midwestern fast casual food restaurant chain originally from Sauk City and currently headquartered in Prairie du Sac known for serving butter burgers, fried cheese curds, and frozen custard. La Croix Sparkling Water originates from La Crosse.\nMusic.\nMilwaukee hosts Summerfest, dubbed \"The World's Largest Music Festival\", every year The festival is held at the lakefront Henry Maier Festival Park just south of downtown, as are a summer-long array of ethnic musical festivals. The Wisconsin Area Music Industry hosts an annual awards show for top Wisconsin artists. The Mile of Music in Appleton is an annual all-original music festival of varying styles. It focuses on undiscovered touring musicians and bands. Other music festivals include Hoofbeat country fest, Country Jam USA, the Hodag Country Festival, Lifest, Porterfield Country Music Festival, Country Thunder USA in Twin Lakes, and Country USA.\nRecreation.\nThe varied landscape of Wisconsin makes the state a popular vacation destination for outdoor recreation. Winter events include skiing, ice fishing and snowmobile derbies. Wisconsin is situated on two Great Lakes and has many inland lakes of varied size; the state contains of water, more than all but three other states\u2014Alaska, Michigan, and Florida. The Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Marine Sanctuary was established in 2021 in the waters of Lake Michigan off Wisconsin and is the site of a large number of historically significant shipwrecks.\nOutdoor activities are popular in Wisconsin, especially hunting and fishing. One of the most prevalent game animals is the whitetail deer. Each year in Wisconsin, well over 600,000 deer-hunting licenses are sold. In 2008, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources projected the pre-hunt deer population to be between 1.5 and 1.7\u00a0million.\nSports.\nWisconsin is represented by major league teams in three sports: football, baseball, and basketball. Lambeau Field, located in Green Bay, Wisconsin, is home to the National Football League's Green Bay Packers. The Packers have been part of the NFL since the league's second season in 1921 and are the smallest city franchise in the NFL, and the only one owned by shareholders statewide. The Milwaukee Brewers, the state's only major league baseball team, have played in American Family Field in Milwaukee since 2001. Before the Brewers, Milwaukee had two prior Major League teams. The first team, also called the Brewers, played only one season in 1901 before becoming the St. Louis Browns. Milwaukee was also the home of the now-Atlanta Braves franchise when they moved from Boston from 1953 to 1965, winning the World Series in 1957. The Milwaukee Bucks of the National Basketball Association play home games at the Fiserv Forum.\nThe state also has minor league teams in hockey (Milwaukee Admirals) and baseball (the Wisconsin Timber Rattlers, based in Appleton and the Beloit Sky Carp of the High-A minor leagues). In addition to these affiliated minor league teams, Wisconsin has two American Association of Professional Baseball teams, being the Milwaukee Milkmen based in Franklin, and the Lake Country DockHounds based in Oconomowoc. Wisconsin is also home to nine Northwoods League teams. The Madison Mallards, the La Crosse Loggers, the Lakeshore Chinooks, the Eau Claire Express, the Fond du Lac Dock Spiders, the Green Bay Rockers, the Kenosha Kingfish, the Wausau Woodchucks, and the Wisconsin Rapids Rafters all play in a collegiate all-star summer league. In addition to the Packers, Green Bay is also the home to an indoor football team, the Green Bay Blizzard of the IFL. The state is home to the seven-time MISL/MASL Champion Milwaukee Wave. Wisconsin is also home to Forward Madison FC, which is a professional soccer team that plays in the USL League One. The Northern Elite Football League consists of many amateur semi-pro teams from Wisconsin.\nWisconsin also has many college sports programs, including the NCAA Division I Wisconsin Badgers, Milwaukee Panthers, and Green Bay Phoenix. The Marquette Golden Eagles of the Big East Conference, the state's other major collegiate program, is known for its men's basketball team. Many other schools in the University of Wisconsin system compete in the Wisconsin Intercollegiate Athletic Conference at the Division III level. The conference is one of the most successful in the nation, claiming 107 NCAA national championships in 15 different sports as of March 30, 2015.\nThe Milwaukee Mile, an oval track opened in 1903, is the oldest operating motorsports venue in the world, having hosted the IndyCar Series and NASCAR Xfinity Series. Road America near Elkhart Lake hosts races in the IndyCar Series, IMSA SportsCar Championship, Sports Car Club of America GT World Challenge America and Trans-Am Series and the MotoAmerica Superbike Championship as of 2024. The World Championship Snowmobile Derby is held at Eagle River, Wisconsin. The world championship off-road racing event is held at Crandon International Off-Road Raceway.\nWisconsin is home to the nation's oldest operating velodrome in Kenosha where races have been held every year since 1927.\nSheboygan is home to Whistling Straits golf club which has hosted PGA Championships in 2004, 2010 and 2015 and the Ryder Cup golf competition between USA and Europe in 2020. The Greater Milwaukee Open, later named the U.S. Bank Championship in Milwaukee, was a PGA Tour tournament from 1968 to 2009 held annually in Brown Deer. In 2017, Erin Hills, a golf course in Erin, Wisconsin, approximately 30 miles northwest of Milwaukee, hosted the U.S. Open.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe Constitution of Wisconsin outlines the structure and function of state government, which is organized into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial. The Wisconsin Blue Book is the primary published reference about the government and politics of the state. Re-published every two years, copies are available from state legislators. The law of the Menominee also applies within the Menominee Indian Reservation.\nState government.\nThe executive branch is headed by the Governor of Wisconsin. The current governor, Tony Evers, assumed office on January 7, 2019. The Wisconsin Constitution grants the governor a veto on bills passed by the state legislature as well as a line-item veto on appropriation bills. A lieutenant governor succeeds the governor in the event of any removal from office and performs any duties assigned by the governor. The current lieutenant governor is Sara Rodriguez. The other elected constitutional offices in the executive branch are the secretary of state (Sarah Godlewski), treasurer (John Leiber), attorney general (Josh Kaul), and the non-partisan superintendent of public instruction (Jill Underly).\nThe Wisconsin State Legislature is Wisconsin's legislative branch. The Legislature is a bicameral body consisting of the Wisconsin State Assembly and the Wisconsin State Senate. The Assembly has 99 members, and the Senate has 33 members. All 99 members of the Wisconsin Assembly are elected in a two-year term cycle without term limits. Similarly, all 33 members of the Wisconsin Senate are elected in a four-year cycle, also without term limits. Half of the Senate is elected every two years. Members of both houses of the Legislature vote within their ranks to select presiding officers, such as the Speaker of the Assembly and the President of the Senate. Legislators in both the Senate and the Assembly receive an annual salary of $55,141. Over two years, each legislator is allotted $66,008 to cover general office expenses, printing, postage and district mailings.\nWisconsin's court system has four levels: municipal courts, circuit courts, the Court of Appeals, and the Supreme Court. Municipal courts typically handle cases involving local ordinance matters. The circuit courts are Wisconsin's trial courts, they have original jurisdiction in all civil and criminal cases within the state. Challenges to circuit court rulings are heard by the Wisconsin Court of Appeals, consisting of sixteen judges who typically sit in three-judge panels. As the state's highest appellate court, the Wisconsin Supreme Court may hear both appeals from lower courts and original actions. In addition to deciding cases, the Supreme Court is responsible for administering the state's court system and regulating the practice of law in Wisconsin.\nFederal representation.\nFollowing the 2020 census reapportionment, Wisconsin has eight seats in the U.S. House of Representatives. As of the 119th United States Congress, six federal representatives are Republicans while two are Democrats. Gwen Moore is the most senior member of the Wisconsin delegation to the U.S. House of Representatives, while the least senior is Tony Wied. Wisconsin's senior U.S. senator, Ron Johnson, is a Republican, while its junior, Tammy Baldwin, is a Democrat.\nWisconsin is under the appellate jurisdiction of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, which includes district courts for the Eastern District of Wisconsin and Western District of Wisconsin.\nPolitics.\nWisconsin is considered a swing state at the federal level, being won by either the Democratic or Republican nominees. Republican Donald Trump won the state by 0.87% in the 2024 presidential election; it had the closest margin of any state in that election. Democrat Joe Biden won the state by a narrow margin of 0.63% in 2020; Trump won Wisconsin in 2016 by a similarly narrow margin of 0.77%, the first time the state voted for a Republican presidential nominee since 1984. Wisconsin was part of the blue wall, a group of states the Democratic Party won in each presidential election from 1992 to 2012. Since achieving statehood in 1848, Wisconsin has been won by Republican presidential candidates 26 times, Democrats 18 times, and once by the Progressive Party.\nAt the statewide level, Wisconsin is competitive, with control regularly alternating between the two parties. Following the 2014 general elections, the governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general, and treasurer were all Republicans, while the secretary of state was a Democrat. However, in 2018, Democrats won all constitutional statewide offices on the ballot, the first time this happened in Wisconsin since 1982. Among Wisconsin's 46 governors, 32 were Republicans, 12 were Democrats, one was a Whig, and two were Wisconsin Progressive Party members.\nIn a 2020 study, Wisconsin was ranked as the 25th easiest state for citizens to vote in. Some have argued the state has experienced democratic backsliding since 2011. Some political scientists classify Wisconsin as a hybrid regime; the state's House of Representative and legislature elections are considered to be free but not fair, with districts undergoing \"extreme partisan gerrymanders\" to entrench Republicans \"beyond electoral rotation\". The Wisconsin Supreme Court overturned the legislative gerrymander in the 2023 ruling of \"Clarke v. Wisconsin Elections Commission.\"\nDuring the American Civil War, Wisconsin was a historically Republican state; in fact, it is the state that gave birth to the Republican Party, although ethno-religious issues in the late 19th century caused a brief split in the coalition. The Bennett Law campaign of 1890 controversially required English as the sole medium of instruction in all schools, and Germans switched to the Democratic Party because the Republican Party supported the law.\nWisconsin's political history is broad in scope, encompassing Robert La Follette and the Progressive movement to prominent anti-communist Joseph McCarthy. From the early 20th century, the Socialist Party of America had a base in Milwaukee. The phenomenon was referred to as \"sewer socialism\" because the elected officials were more concerned with public works and reform than with revolution (although revolutionary socialism existed in the city as well). Its influence faded in the late 1950s largely because of the red scare and racial tensions. The first socialist mayor of a large city in the United States was Emil Seidel, elected mayor of Milwaukee in 1910; the city elected three more socialist mayors in Daniel Hoan, Frank P. Zeidler, and Henry Maier. Socialist newspaper editor Victor Berger was repeatedly elected as a U.S. Representative.\nThrough the first half of the 20th century, Wisconsin's politics were dominated by Robert La Follette and his sons, originally of the Republican Party and later of the Wisconsin Progressive Party. Since 1945, the state has maintained a close balance between Republicans and Democrats. Wisconsin Congressman Paul Ryan was the Republican vice-presidential nominee in the 2012 election, alongside Mitt Romney, and later served as 54th speaker of the House of Representatives.\nInternational relations.\nWisconsin has sister-state relationships with Hesse in Germany, Chiba Prefecture in Japan, Jalisco in Mexico, Heilongjiang in China, and Nicaragua. A Mexican consulate opened in Milwaukee on July 1, 2016.\nEducation.\nWisconsin, along with Michigan and Minnesota, was among the Midwestern leaders in the emergent American state university movement following the American Civil War. By the start of the 20th century, education in the state advocated the \"Wisconsin Idea\", which emphasized service to the people of the state. The \"Wisconsin Idea\" exemplified the Progressive movement within colleges and universities at the time.\nThe Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction is the state education and public library management agency in the state. The department is led by the State Superintendent of Public Instruction, a non-partisan, constitutional officer elected every four years in the spring primary, six months after the previous year's presidential election.\nPublic post-secondary education in Wisconsin consists of two organizations. The University of Wisconsin System comprises the state's two tier 1 research universities as classified by the Carnegie Foundation: the flagship University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison, and the University of Wisconsin\u2013Milwaukee. The system has eleven other comprehensive universities and ten two-year branch campuses. It is one of the largest public higher education systems in the country, enrolling more than 160,000 students each year and employing approximately 41,000 faculty and staff statewide. The 16-campus Wisconsin Technical College System awards two-year associate degrees, one- and two-year technical diplomas, and short-term technical diplomas and certificates. It also provides training and technical assistance to Wisconsin's business and industry community.\nCarroll University was Wisconsin's first institution of higher education. It was chartered by the territorial legislature on January 31, 1846, and temporarily suspended operations during the Civil War. Beloit College is the state's oldest continuously operated college, chartered on February 2, 1846. Marquette University is a tier 2 research university and Wisconsin's largest private university by enrollment. It became the world's first coeducational Catholic university in 1909. Other private colleges and universities include Alverno College, Carthage College, Concordia University Wisconsin, Edgewood University, Lakeland University, Lawrence University, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee School of Engineering, Ripon College, St. Norbert College, Wisconsin Lutheran College, and Viterbo University.\nTransportation.\nWisconsin is served by eight commercial service airports, in addition to a number of general aviation airports. Milwaukee Mitchell International Airport is the largest airport located in Wisconsin, categorized as a medium-hub primary commercial service facility. Dane County Regional Airport and Appleton International Airport are classified as small-hub primary commercial airports that service the Madison and Fox Cities areas.\nWisconsin is served by multiple intercity bus operators, which provide service to 71 stops and 53 cities. The following carriers provide scheduled bus service: Amtrak Thruway, Badger Bus, Flixbus, Greyhound Lines, Indian Trails, Jefferson Lines, Lamers Bus Lines, Megabus, Van Galder Bus Company, and Wisconsin Coach Lines.\nWisconsin is served by eight Interstate Highways, consisting of five primary routes and three auxiliary routes. The first part of this system was constructed in 1956, and its most recent expansion took place in 2015, with the addition of I-41 to the system. Wisconsin's longest Interstate Highway is I-94. There are also fourteen United States Numbered Highways in the state of Wisconsin, which were designated beginning in 1926 and ending in the mid-1930s. There are also several business routes, usually maintained by local governments. The Wisconsin Department of Transportation maintains 158 state trunk highways, ranging from two-lane rural roads to limited-access freeways. These highways are paid for by the state's Transportation Fund, which is considered unique among state highway funds because it is kept entirely separate from the general fund, therefore, revenues received from transportation services are required to be used on transportation. The majority of state highway funding comes from gas taxes and vehicle registration fees.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAmtrak provides daily passenger rail service between Milwaukee and Chicago through the \"Hiawatha\". The \"Borealis\" provides daily service to Chicago and Saint Paul, Minnesota, and is supplemental to the long-distance cross-country \"Empire Builder\", both with stops in several cities across Wisconsin. Commuter rail provider Metra's Union Pacific North (UP-N) line has its northern terminus in Kenosha, the only Metra line and station in the state of Wisconsin. The Hop, a modern streetcar system in Milwaukee, began service in 2018. The 2.1 mile (3.4\u00a0km) initial line runs from Milwaukee Intermodal Station to Burns Commons.\nState symbols.\nWisconsin is traditionally known as the \"Badger State\" due to its early history in lead mining. Many of the state's first settlers were drawn by the prospect of mining in southwest Wisconsin, a mineral-rich region which had been contested between Native Americans and the U.S. Some of the miners lived burrowed within hillsides either due to lack of time or finances to build above-ground structures during the winter. Similar to the American badger using its claws to dig holes, the miners were nicknamed \"badgers\". The University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison adopted the badger as a mascot in 1889 after the nickname; the badger was named Wisconsin's state animal in 1957.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"See additional books at History of Wisconsin\""}
{"id": "33129", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33129", "title": "Summerfest", "text": "Annual music festival in Wisconsin, United States\nSummerfest is an annual music festival held in downtown Milwaukee, Wisconsin. First held in 1968, Summerfest is located at Henry Maier Festival Park, adjacent to Lake Michigan and Milwaukee's Third Ward business district. Summerfest is known as \"The World's Largest Music Festival\", a title certified by Guinness World Records in 1999.\nThe 75 acre (30 ha) park hosts Summerfest from late June until early July (including the Fourth of July). It was announced in 2021 that the festival would move to a three weekend schedule to allow for more Friday and Saturday event days. The performers include local and nationally known music talent from various genres, performing throughout the grounds from noon to midnight, including the 23,000-capacity American Family Insurance Amphitheater. Since 2004, nearly $150 million has been invested into Henry Maier Festival Park, including permanent stages, bars, production space, VIP amenities and other infrastructure.\nSummerfest also showcases a wide variety of food from many Milwaukee-area restaurants. Other Summerfest attractions include shopping vendors, fireworks (including \"The Big Bang\" on opening night), family activities, and more. Summerfest is operated by Milwaukee World Festival, Inc. a non-profit organization, which is governed by a volunteer board of directors.\nIn its 50+ year history, Summerfest has hosted a variety of well-known artists, including Paul McCartney, the Rolling Stones, Aretha Franklin, The Jackson 5, Eric Clapton, Tina Turner, Metallica, Whitney Houston, Dolly Parton, Johnny Cash, Stevie Wonder, Kenny Chesney, Aerosmith, Cher, Bruno Mars, Arctic Monkeys, Lady Gaga, Usher, and Dave Matthews Band.\nIn 2024 Summerfest welcomed SZA, Tyler Childers, Lil Uzi Vert, Maroon 5, Kane Brown, AJR, Ivan Cornejo, Goo Goo Dolls, Bryson Tiller, Cold War Kids, Mario, Alison Wonderland, En Vogue, The All-American Rejects, REO Speedwagon, Ethel Cain, Key Glock, and many others. \nDon Smiley served as president and chief executive officer of Summerfest from 2004 until his retirement in December 2023. He was succeeded in both roles by Sarah Smith Pancheri.\nCommunity engagement.\nAligned with Summerfest's non-profit mission, the festival made significant contributions to the community in 2024, providing over 26,000 meals for Wisconsinites struggling with food insecurity through Feeding America Eastern Wisconsin, over $13,500 worth of hygiene products donated to Milwaukee and Waukesha County schools through the United Way, and over 4,000 books for Next Door's community literacy initiatives. The festival also integrated over 70 local community organizations into the festival through performances and events such as Direct Supply Seniorfest Day and Children's Fest Day presented by Shorewest, Realtors. \nEconomic impact.\nIn 2023, Summerfest commissioned an economic impact study through Oxford Economics which claimed that Summerfest generated a total economic impact of $160.3 million for the city of Milwaukee and supported 3,400 total part-time and full-time jobs. For the state of Wisconsin, Summerfest generated $188.7 million in economic impact, along with $14.4 million in state and local taxes.\nAdmission promotions.\nSummerfest offers more ways than ever to access the festival via free or discounted admission, while giving back to the community. On select days, fans are encouraged to donate non-perishable food items, hygiene supplies, or books to get into the festival and enjoy the fun, while supporting the local community. \nLet the Music Play grant program.\nSince its inception in 2019, the Let the Music Play grant program has supported over 40 organizations and hundreds of music students annually. The program is open to non-profit organizations and schools through music-based programming and represent the variety of music-based activities taking place in the greater Milwaukee community. \nBMO Empower grant program.\nThe BMO EMpower grant program is a long-term platform that helps support minority-owned businesses through BMO's partnership with Summerfest. \nThese grants are part of BMO's EMpower program, a more than $40 billion commitment to address key barriers faced by minority businesses, communities and families in the United States. In 2024, 11 minority small business owners received funding, along with business banking-related educational opportunities, to support their work as vendors during Summerfest. \nPower Up with Purpose.\nThe \"Power Up with Purpose\" program allows fans the opportunity to gain front row, pit access to Generac Power Stage headliners during the festival, while supporting Veterans Community Project in Milwaukee, WI.All proceeds will benefit Veterans Community Project (VCP), a nationally recognized nonprofit organization dedicated to ending Veteran homelessness.\nHistory.\nSummerfest was conceived in the 1960s by then-mayor Henry W. Maier. Inspired by his visit to Oktoberfest in Munich, Germany, Maier envisioned a similar ethnic-themed festival in Milwaukee, and in 1962 formed a panel of business and civic leaders to study the feasibility of a large-scale summer festival. By the middle of the decade, the panel drew up a proposal for a 10-day multi-event festival with the proposed name of \"Milwaukee World Festival,\" which was changed briefly in 1966 to \"Juli Spa\u00df\" (German for \"July Fun\") and then to \"Summerfest\".\nThe inaugural Summerfest was held in July 1968 at 35 different locations throughout the city (including Milwaukee County Stadium and Milwaukee Arena), and its events ranged from concerts to a film festival, an air show, and even a pageant. The first Summerfest, produced by Dee Robb and Con Merten was regarded as a success; the second event in 1969, was less successful, as it was plagued by additional venues, inclement weather, and severe financial debt.\nIn 1970, a permanent central location was decided upon, and Summerfest moved to a former Nike missile site on the lakefront, where it continues to be held to this day. Also that year, Summerfest introduced its red \"smiley face\" logo, an insignia that has become synonymous with the event. The logo was designed by local graphic artists Noel Spangler and Richard D. Grant.\nIt was also in 1970 that Henry Jordan, former Green Bay Packers defensive tackle, became executive director of Summerfest, a title he held during the event's early years until his death in 1977. After a few other businessmen were hired by the board for the executive director's job, Elizabeth \"Bo\" Black, who was formerly Henry Jordan's secretary, became executive director in 1984 after a ten-year lobbying effort.\nThe event has not been without its controversy. On December 9, 2002, Lee Gates commented in the \"Milwaukee Journal Sentinel\" about the lack of opportunity to play at Summerfest. \"I don't get the credit I deserve here. I've been playing 50-something years. There's discrimination at Summerfest. I shouldn't need to have a CD out to be paid $700 at Summerfest. If they want you to have CDs, they should pay you like they pay the professional people.\"\nSummerfest celebrated its 40th anniversary in 2007. The event's history was the subject of \"Summerfest Stories\", a documentary that aired in June 2007 on Milwaukee Public Television.\nIn 2015, Milwaukee World Festival, Inc and ReverbNation announced a three-year agreement to use the online service as an audition to give musicians a chance to perform. Summerfest wanted to provide an opportunity for performers to get a chance to be one of the 800+ acts and allow new talent to be seen by over 900,000 people that attend.\n2020 saw the COVID-19 pandemic as grounds for scrapping the concert part &amp; moving others online.\nAttendance.\nSummerfest attendance since 1995\nSummerfest attendance peaked in 2001 (12 days over 2 weeks) at 1,000,563 attendees. In 2010 Summerfest officials announced a new 11-day schedule for the 2011 festival. Summerfest was closed in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021 (409,386 attendees), the event was revised to 9 days (3 weekends) instead of 11 days (over 2 weeks), and it occurred in September rather than during the summer months. Summerfest returned to the June/July summer months in 2022 (445,611 attendees), but continued the 3 weekend format. Citing analyzed available data, patron surveys and the event landscape Milwaukee World Festival ultimately determined the best possible path forward for Summerfest was to transition to a 3 weekend format. \nThe festival reported 555,925 fans during Summerfest 2024, despite rain impacting six of the nine festival days (2024 saw the most rain since Summerfest 2000). In fulfillment of Milwaukee World Festival, Inc.'s (MWF) nonprofit mission, 21% of those patrons who attended the festival gained access via one of the 14 free admission promotions.\nStages and other venues.\nThe Summerfest grounds include seven permanent stages and two pavilions that can be converted to stages (Johnson Controls World Sound Stage and the South Pavilion).\nConcert history year by year.\nSummerfest has been most famous for its music since the first festival in 1968, when acts such as Ronnie Dove, The New Colony Six, The Robbs and Up With People performed. Since then, musical acts from Bob Dylan, The Jackson 5, Frank Sinatra, Prince, Whitney Houston, Janet Jackson, The Jonas Brothers, Fleetwood Mac, Maroon 5, Fun, Britney Spears, Stevie Ray Vaughan, Cher, Tina Turner, and James Taylor to Christina Aguilera, Diana Ross, Roy Orbison, Liza Minnelli, Kanye West, Kid Cudi, Stevie Wonder, Mary J. Blige, Wiz Khalifa, Imagine Dragons, Nine Inch Nails, The Ramones, Billie Eilish, Willie Nelson, The Rolling Stones, and Paul McCartney have graced the Summerfest stages. Acts with Milwaukee and Wisconsin connections have had a prominent history at Summerfest, most notably the BoDeans, The Gufs, Danny Gokey, and Violent Femmes.\nThe concerts have been mostly civil events, with two notable exceptions. In 1970, a performance by the late-arriving Sly &amp; the Family Stone nearly resulted in a riot. In 1973, a performance by Humble Pie &amp; Jo Jo Gunne resulted in a riot, a bonfire, and about 300 arrests. As a result of the latter concert, organizers shied away from rock bands for several years, and established guidelines for \"family-friendly\" acts and a ban on alcohol brought in by patrons. This was properly managed when Henry Jordan found the experienced managers, Joel Gast and Lou Volpano, to manage entertainment in-house, eliminating Cleveland's Jules Belkin Promotions, who were hired by Board Members Bernie Samson and Steve Marcus. Also at that time local manager Volpano was hired specifically to improve production and book international superstars on what was a mere Local Rock Stage, where then the Ramones, UFO, and Judas Priest headlined \nLive comedy acts have also been a part of Summerfest's history, even before a regular \"Comedy Showcase\" was first established in 1975. Bob Hope was the main headliner at Summerfest 1969, performing two shows at Milwaukee County Stadium. George Carlin (opening for Arlo Guthrie) performed his \"Seven Words You Can Never Say on Television\" routine at the 1972 event and was subsequently arrested for violating obscenity laws. Prior to his arrest, he discarded a bag of cocaine to avoid further imprisonment.\nSince 1975, comedy acts ranging from David Brenner and Henny Youngman to Jay Leno and Jon Stewart have performed at the event. Sandra Bernhard did TV and radio promos for its 1986 season when she was a performer there. Lewis Black has also become a frequent performer at Summerfest.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33130", "revid": "1319756726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33130", "title": "Werner Heisenberg", "text": "German theoretical physicist (1901\u20131976)\nWerner Karl Heisenberg (; ; 5 December 1901 \u2013 1 February 1976) was a German theoretical physicist, one of the main pioneers of the theory of quantum mechanics and a principal scientist in the German nuclear program during World War II.\nHeisenberg published his \"Umdeutung\" paper in 1925, a major reinterpretation of old quantum theory. In the subsequent series of papers with Max Born and Pascual Jordan, during the same year, his matrix formulation of quantum mechanics was substantially elaborated. He is known for the uncertainty principle, which he published in 1927. He received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1932 \"for the creation of quantum mechanics\".\nHeisenberg also made contributions to the theories of the hydrodynamics of turbulent flows, the atomic nucleus, ferromagnetism, cosmic rays, and subatomic particles. He introduced the concept of a wave function collapse. He was also instrumental in planning the first West German nuclear reactor in Karlsruhe, together with a research reactor in Munich, in 1957.\nFollowing World War II, Heisenberg was appointed Director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics, which soon thereafter was renamed the Max Planck Institute for Physics. He was director until it was moved to Munich in 1958. He was Director of the Max Planck Institute for Physics and Astrophysics from 1960 to 1970.\nHeisenberg was also President of the German Research Council, Chairman of the Commission for Atomic Physics, Chairman of the Nuclear Physics Working Group, and President of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.\nEarly life and education.\nEarly years.\nWerner Karl Heisenberg was born in W\u00fcrzburg, Germany, to Kaspar Ernst August Heisenberg, and his wife, Annie Wecklein. His father was a secondary school teacher of classical languages who became Germany's only \"ordentlicher Professor\" (ordinarius professor) of medieval and modern Greek studies in the university system.\nHeisenberg was raised and lived as a Lutheran Christian. In his late teenage years, Heisenberg read Plato's \"Timaeus\" while hiking in the Bavarian Alps. He recounted philosophical conversations with his fellow students and teachers about understanding the atom while receiving his scientific training in Munich, G\u00f6ttingen and Copenhagen. Heisenberg later stated that \"My mind was formed by studying philosophy, Plato and that sort of thing\" and that \"Modern physics has definitely decided in favor of Plato. In fact the smallest units of matter are not physical objects in the ordinary sense; they are forms, ideas which can be expressed unambiguously only in mathematical language\".\nIn 1919 Heisenberg arrived in Munich as a member of the \"Freikorps\" to fight the Bavarian Soviet Republic established a year earlier. Five decades later he recalled those days as youthful fun, like \"playing cops and robbers and so on; it was nothing serious at all\"; his duties were restricted to \"seizing bicycles or typewriters from 'red' administrative buildings\", and guarding suspected \"red\" prisoners.\nUniversity studies.\nFrom 1920 to 1923, he studied physics and mathematics at the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich under Arnold Sommerfeld and Wilhelm Wien and at the Georg-August University of G\u00f6ttingen with Max Born and James Franck and mathematics with David Hilbert. He received his doctorate in 1923 at Munich under Sommerfeld.\nIn June 1922, Sommerfeld took Heisenberg to G\u00f6ttingen to attend the Bohr Festival, because Sommerfeld had a sincere interest in his students and knew of Heisenberg's interest in Niels Bohr's theories on atomic physics. At the event, Bohr was a guest lecturer and gave a series of comprehensive lectures on quantum atomic physics and Heisenberg met Bohr for the first time, which had a lasting effect on him.\nHeisenberg's doctoral thesis, the topic of which was suggested by Sommerfeld, was on turbulence; the thesis discussed both the stability of laminar flow and the nature of turbulent flow. The problem of stability was investigated by the use of the Orr\u2013Sommerfeld equation, a fourth-order linear differential equation for small disturbances from laminar flow. He briefly returned to this topic after World War II.\nAt G\u00f6ttingen, under Born, he completed his habilitation in 1924 with a \"Habilitationsschrift\" (habilitation thesis) on the anomalous Zeeman effect.\nIn his youth he was a member and Scoutleader of the \"Neupfadfinder\", a German Scout association and part of the German Youth Movement. In August 1923 Robert Honsell and Heisenberg organized a trip to Finland with a Scout group of this association from Munich.\nPersonal life.\nHeisenberg enjoyed classical music and was an accomplished pianist; playing for others was a prominent part of his social life. During the late 1920s and early 1930s he would often play music and dance at the Berlin home of his aristocratic student Carl Friedrich von Weizs\u00e4cker, during which time he carried on a courtship with Carl's high-school-age sister Adelheid, which led to him being unwelcome at their home for a time.\nYears later, his interest in music also led to meeting his future wife. In January 1937, Heisenberg met Elisabeth Schumacher (1914\u20131998) at a private music recital. Schumacher was the daughter of a well-known Berlin economics professor, and her brother was the economist E. F. Schumacher, author of \"Small Is Beautiful\". Heisenberg and Schumacher were married on 29 April. Fraternal twins Maria and Wolfgang were born in January 1938, whereupon Wolfgang Pauli congratulated Heisenberg on his \"pair creation\"\u2014a wordplay on a process from elementary particle physics, pair production. They had five more children over the next 12 years: Barbara, Christine, Jochen, Martin and Verena. In 1939 he bought a summer home for his family in Urfeld am Walchensee, in southern Germany.\nOne of Heisenberg's sons, Martin Heisenberg, became a neurobiologist at the University of W\u00fcrzburg, while another son, Jochen Heisenberg, became a physics professor at the University of New Hampshire.\nAcademic career.\nG\u00f6ttingen, Copenhagen and Leipzig.\nFrom 1924 to 1927, Heisenberg was a Privatdozent at G\u00f6ttingen, meaning he was qualified to teach and examine independently, without having a chair. From 17 September 1924 to 1 May 1925, under an International Education Board Rockefeller Foundation fellowship, Heisenberg went to do research with Niels Bohr, director of the Institute of Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen. On 7 June, after weeks of failing to alleviate a severe bout of hay fever with aspirin and cocaine, Heisenberg retreated to the pollen-free North Sea island of Helgoland to focus on quantum mechanics. His seminal paper, \"\u00dcber quantentheoretische Umdeutung kinematischer und mechanischer Beziehungen\" (\"Quantum theoretical re-interpretation of kinematic and mechanical relations\") also called the \"Umdeutung\" (reinterpretation) paper, was published in September 1925. He returned to G\u00f6ttingen and, with Max Born and Pascual Jordan over a period of about six months, developed the matrix mechanics formulation of quantum mechanics. On 1 May 1926, Heisenberg began his appointment as a university lecturer and assistant to Bohr in Copenhagen. It was in Copenhagen, in 1927, that Heisenberg developed his uncertainty principle, while working on the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics. On 23 February, Heisenberg wrote a letter to fellow physicist Wolfgang Pauli, in which he first described his new principle. In his paper on the principle, Heisenberg used the word \"Ungenauigkeit\" (imprecision), not uncertainty, to describe it.\nIn 1927, Heisenberg was appointed \"ordentlicher Professor\" (professor ordinarius) of theoretical physics and head of the department of physics at the University of Leipzig; he gave his inaugural lecture there on 1 February 1928. In his first paper published from Leipzig, Heisenberg used the Pauli exclusion principle to solve the mystery of ferromagnetism.\nAt 25 years old, Heisenberg gained the title of the youngest full-time professor in Germany and professorial chair of the Institute for Theoretical Physics at the University of Leipzig. He gave lectures that were attended by physicists like Edward Teller and Robert Oppenheimer, who would later work on the Manhattan Project for the United States. \nDuring Heisenberg's tenure at Leipzig, the high quality of the doctoral students and post-graduate and research associates who studied and worked with him is clear from the acclaim that many later earned. They included Erich Bagge, Felix Bloch, Ugo Fano, Siegfried Fl\u00fcgge, William Vermillion Houston, Friedrich Hund, Robert S. Mulliken, Rudolf Peierls, George Placzek, Isidor Isaac Rabi, Fritz Sauter, John C. Slater, Edward Teller, John Hasbrouck van Vleck, Victor Frederick Weisskopf, Carl Friedrich von Weizs\u00e4cker, Gregor Wentzel, and Clarence Zener.\nIn early 1929, Heisenberg and Pauli submitted the first of two papers laying the foundation for relativistic quantum field theory. Also in 1929, Heisenberg went on a lecture tour of China, Japan, India, and the United States. In the spring of 1929, he was a visiting lecturer at the University of Chicago, where he lectured on quantum mechanics.\nIn 1928, the British mathematical physicist Paul Dirac had derived his relativistic wave equation of quantum mechanics, which implied the existence of positive electrons, later to be named positrons. In 1932, from a cloud chamber photograph of cosmic rays, the American physicist Carl David Anderson identified a track as having been made by a positron. In mid-1933, Heisenberg presented his theory of the positron. His thinking on Dirac's theory and further development of the theory were set forth in two papers. The first, \"Bemerkungen zur Diracschen Theorie des Positrons\" (\"Remarks on Dirac's theory of the positron\") was published in 1934, and the second, \"Folgerungen aus der Diracschen Theorie des Positrons\" (\"Consequences of Dirac's Theory of the Positron\"), was published in 1936. In these papers Heisenberg was the first to reinterpret the Dirac equation as a \"classical\" field equation for any point particle of spin \u0127/2, itself subject to quantization conditions involving anti-commutators. Thus reinterpreting it as a (quantum) field equation accurately describing electrons, Heisenberg put matter on the same footing as electromagnetism: as being described by relativistic quantum field equations which allowed the possibility of particle creation and destruction. (Hermann Weyl had already described this in a 1929 letter to Albert Einstein.)\nMatrix mechanics and the Nobel Prize.\nHeisenberg's \"Umdeutung\" paper that established modern quantum mechanics has puzzled physicists and historians. His methods assume that the reader is familiar with Kramers-Heisenberg transition probability calculations. The main new idea, non-commuting matrices, is justified only by a rejection of unobservable quantities. It introduces the non-commutative multiplication of matrices by physical reasoning, based on the correspondence principle, despite the fact that Heisenberg was not then familiar with the mathematical theory of matrices. The path leading to these results has been reconstructed by MacKinnon, and the detailed calculations are worked out by Aitchison and coauthors.\nIn Copenhagen, Heisenberg and Hans Kramers collaborated on a paper on dispersion, or the scattering from atoms of radiation whose wavelength is larger than the atoms. They showed that the successful formula Kramers had developed earlier could not be based on Bohr orbits, because the transition frequencies are based on level spacings which are not constant. The frequencies which occur in the Fourier transform of the classical sharp series orbits, by contrast, are equally spaced. But these results could be explained by a semi-classical virtual state model: the incoming radiation excites the valence, or outer, electron to a virtual state from which it decays. In a subsequent paper, Heisenberg showed that this virtual oscillator model could also explain the polarization of fluorescent radiation.\nThese two successes, and the continuing failure of the Bohr\u2013Sommerfeld model to explain the outstanding problem of the anomalous Zeeman effect, led Heisenberg to use the virtual oscillator model to try to calculate spectral frequencies. The method proved too difficult to immediately apply to realistic problems, so Heisenberg turned to a simpler example, the anharmonic oscillator.\nThe dipole oscillator consists of a simple harmonic oscillator, which is thought of as a charged particle on a spring, perturbed by an external force, like an external charge. The motion of the oscillating charge can be expressed as a Fourier series in the frequency of the oscillator. Heisenberg solved for the quantum behavior by two different methods. First, he treated the system with the virtual oscillator method, calculating the transitions between the levels that would be produced by the external source.\nHe then solved the same problem by treating the anharmonic potential term as a perturbation to the harmonic oscillator and using the perturbation methods that he and Born had developed. Both methods led to the same results for the first and the very complicated second-order correction terms. This suggested that behind the very complicated calculations lay a consistent scheme.\nSo Heisenberg set out to formulate these results without any explicit dependence on the virtual oscillator model. To do this, he replaced the Fourier expansions for the spatial coordinates with matrices, matrices which corresponded to the transition coefficients in the virtual oscillator method. He justified this replacement by an appeal to Bohr's correspondence principle and the Pauli doctrine that quantum mechanics must be limited to observables.\nOn 9 July, Heisenberg gave Born this paper to review and submit for publication. When Born read the paper, he recognized the formulation as one which could be transcribed and extended to the systematic language of matrices, which he had learned from his study under Jakob Rosanes at Breslau University. Born, with the help of his assistant and former student Pascual Jordan, began immediately to make the transcription and extension, and they submitted their results for publication; the paper was received for publication just 60 days after Heisenberg's paper. A follow-on paper was submitted for publication before the end of the year by all three authors.\nUp until this time, matrices were seldom used by physicists; they were considered to belong to the realm of pure mathematics. Gustav Mie had used them in a paper on electrodynamics in 1912 and Born had used them in his work on the lattice theory of crystals in 1921. While matrices were used in these cases, the algebra of matrices with their multiplication did not enter the picture as they did in the matrix formulation of quantum mechanics.\nIn 1928, Albert Einstein nominated Heisenberg, Born, and Jordan for the Nobel Prize in Physics. The announcement of the Nobel Prize in Physics for 1932 was delayed until November 1933. It was at that time announced that Heisenberg had won the Prize for 1932 \"for the creation of quantum mechanics, the application of which has, , led to the discovery of the allotropic forms of hydrogen\".\nInterpretation of quantum theory.\nThe development of quantum mechanics, and the apparently contradictory implications in regard to what is \"real\" had profound philosophical implications, including what scientific observations truly mean. In contrast to Albert Einstein and Louis de Broglie, who were realists who believed that particles had an objectively true momentum and position at all times (even if both could not be measured), Heisenberg was an anti-realist, arguing that direct knowledge of what is \"real\" was beyond the scope of science. In his book \"The Physicist's Conception of Nature\", Heisenberg argued that ultimately one only can speak of the \"knowledge\" (numbers in tables) which describes something about particles but they can never have any \"true\" access to the particles themselves:We can no longer speak of the behaviour of the particle independently of the process of observation. As a final consequence, the natural laws formulated mathematically in quantum theory no longer deal with the elementary particles themselves but with our knowledge of them. Nor is it any longer possible to ask whether or not these particles exist in space and time objectively ...\nWhen we speak of the picture of nature in the exact science of our age, we do not mean a picture of nature so much as a \"picture of our relationships with nature\". ...Science no longer confronts nature as an objective observer, but sees itself as an actor in this interplay between man and nature. The scientific method of analysing, explaining and classifying has become conscious of its limitations, which arise out of the fact that by its intervention science alters and refashions the object of investigation. In other words, method and object can no longer be separated.\n\"SS\" investigation.\nShortly after the discovery of the neutron by James Chadwick in 1932, Heisenberg submitted the first of three papers on his neutron-proton model of the nucleus. After Adolf Hitler came to power in 1933, Heisenberg was attacked in the press as a \"White Jew\" (i.e. an Aryan who acts like a Jew). Supporters of \"Deutsche Physik\", or German Physics (also known as Aryan Physics), launched vicious attacks against leading theoretical physicists, including Arnold Sommerfeld and Heisenberg. From the early 1930s onward, the anti-Semitic and anti-theoretical physics movement \"Deutsche Physik\" had concerned itself with quantum mechanics and the theory of relativity. As applied in the university environment, political factors took priority over scholarly ability, even though its two most prominent supporters were the Nobel Laureates in Physics Philipp Lenard and Johannes Stark.\nThere had been many failed attempts to have Heisenberg appointed as a professor at a number of German universities. His attempt to be appointed as successor to Arnold Sommerfeld failed because of opposition by the \"Deutsche Physik\" movement. On 1 April 1935, the eminent theoretical physicist Sommerfeld, Heisenberg's doctoral advisor at the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit\u00e4t M\u00fcnchen, achieved emeritus status. However, Sommerfeld stayed in his chair during the selection process for his successor, which took until 1 December 1939. The process was lengthy due to academic and political differences between the Munich Faculty's selection and that of the Reich Education Ministry and the supporters of \"Deutsche Physik\".\nIn 1935, the Munich Faculty drew up a list of candidates to replace Sommerfeld as ordinarius professor of theoretical physics and head of the Institute for Theoretical Physics at the University of Munich. The three candidates had all been former students of Sommerfeld: Heisenberg, who had received the Nobel Prize in Physics; Peter Debye, who had received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1936; and Richard Becker. The Munich Faculty was firmly behind these candidates, with Heisenberg as their first choice. However, supporters of \"Deutsche Physik\" and elements in the REM had their own list of candidates, and the battle dragged on for over four years. During this time, Heisenberg came under vicious attack by the \"Deutsche Physik\" supporters. One attack was published in \"Das Schwarze Korps\", the newspaper of the \"SS\", headed by Heinrich Himmler. In this, Heisenberg was called a \"White Jew\" who should be made to \"disappear\". These attacks were taken seriously, as Jews were violently attacked and incarcerated. Heisenberg fought back with an editorial and a letter to Himmler, in an attempt to resolve the matter and regain his honour.\nAt one point, Heisenberg's mother visited Himmler's mother. The two women knew each other, as Heisenberg's maternal grandfather and Himmler's father were rectors and members of a Bavarian hiking club. Eventually, Himmler settled the Heisenberg affair by sending two letters, one to SS Gruppenf\u00fchrer Reinhard Heydrich and one to Heisenberg, both on 21 July 1938. In the letter to Heydrich, Himmler said Germany could not afford to lose or silence Heisenberg, as he would be useful for teaching a generation of scientists. To Heisenberg, Himmler said the letter came on the recommendation of his family and he cautioned Heisenberg to make a distinction between professional physics research results and the personal and political attitudes of the involved scientists.\nWilhelm M\u00fcller replaced Sommerfeld at the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich. M\u00fcller was not a theoretical physicist, had not published in a physics journal, and was not a member of the German Physical Society. His appointment was considered a travesty and detrimental to educating theoretical physicists.\nThe three investigators who led the SS investigation of Heisenberg had training in physics. Indeed, Heisenberg had participated in the doctoral examination of one of them at the Universit\u00e4t Leipzig. The most influential of the three was Johannes Juilfs. During their investigation, they became supporters of Heisenberg as well as his position against the ideological policies of the \"Deutsche Physik\" movement in theoretical physics and academia.\nGerman nuclear weapons program.\nPre-war work on physics.\nIn mid-1936, Heisenberg presented his theory of cosmic-ray showers in two papers. Four more papers appeared in the next two years.\nIn December 1938, the German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann sent a manuscript to \"The Natural Sciences\" reporting they had detected the element barium after bombarding uranium with neutrons, leading Hahn to conclude that a \"bursting\" of the uranium nucleus had occurred; simultaneously, Hahn communicated these results to his friend Lise Meitner, who had in July of that year fled, first to the Netherlands, then to Sweden. Meitner, and her nephew Otto Robert Frisch, correctly interpreted Hahn's and Strassmann's results as being nuclear fission. Frisch confirmed this experimentally on 13 January 1939.\nIn June and July 1939, Heisenberg traveled to the United States visiting Samuel Abraham Goudsmit at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. However, Heisenberg refused an invitation to emigrate to the United States. He did not see Goudsmit again until six years later, when Goudsmit was the chief scientific advisor to the American Operation Alsos at the close of World War II.\nMembership in the Uranverein.\nThe German nuclear weapons program, known as \"Uranverein\", was formed on 1 September 1939, the day World War II began in Europe. The \"Heereswaffenamt\" (HWA, Army Ordnance Office) had squeezed the \"Reichsforschungsrat\" (RFR, Reich Research Council) out of the \"Reichserziehungsministerium\" (REM, Reich Ministry of Education) and started the formal German nuclear energy project under military auspices. The project had its first meeting on 16 September 1939. The meeting was organized by Kurt Diebner, advisor to the HWA, and held in Berlin. The invitees included Walther Bothe, Siegfried Fl\u00fcgge, Hans Geiger, Otto Hahn, Paul Harteck, Gerhard Hoffmann, Josef Mattauch and Georg Stetter. A second meeting was held soon thereafter and included Heisenberg, Klaus Clusius, Robert D\u00f6pel and Carl Friedrich von Weizs\u00e4cker. The \"Kaiser-Wilhelm Institut f\u00fcr Physik\" (KWIP, Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics) in Berlin-Dahlem, was placed under HWA authority, with Diebner as the administrative director, and the military control of the nuclear research commenced. During the period when Diebner administered the KWIP under the HWA program, considerable personal and professional animosity developed between Diebner and Heisenberg's inner circle, which included Karl Wirtz and Carl Friedrich von Weizs\u00e4cker.\nAt a scientific conference on 26\u201328 February 1942 at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics, called by the Army Weapons Office, Heisenberg presented a lecture to Reich officials on energy acquisition from nuclear fission. The lecture, entitled \"Die theoretischen Grundlagen f\u00fcr die Energiegewinnung aus der Uranspaltung\" (\"The theoretical basis for energy generation from uranium fission\") was, as Heisenberg wrote after the Second World War in a letter to Samuel Goudsmit, \"adapted to the intelligence level of a Reich Minister\". Heisenberg lectured on the enormous energy potential of nuclear fission, stating that 250 million electron volts could be released through the fission of an atomic nucleus. Heisenberg stressed that pure U-235 had to be obtained to achieve a chain reaction. He explored various ways of obtaining isotope U in its pure form, including uranium enrichment and an alternative layered method of normal uranium and a moderator in a machine. This machine, he noted, could be used in practical ways to fuel vehicles, ships and submarines. Heisenberg stressed the importance of the Army Weapons Office's financial and material support for this scientific endeavour.\nA second scientific conference followed. Lectures were heard on problems of modern physics with decisive importance for the national defense and economy. The conference was attended by Bernhard Rust, the Reich Minister of Science, Education and National Culture. At the conference, Reich Minister Rust decided to take the nuclear project away from the Kaiser Wilhelm Society, and give it to the Reich Research Council.\nIn April 1942 the army returned the Physics Institute to the Kaiser Wilhelm Society, naming Heisenberg as Director at the Institute. Peter Debye was still director of the institute, but had gone on leave to the United States after he had refused to become a German citizen when the HWA took administrative control of the KWIP. Heisenberg still also had his department of physics at the University of Leipzig where work had been done for the \"Uranverein\" by Robert D\u00f6pel and his wife Klara D\u00f6pel.\nOn 4 June 1942, Heisenberg was summoned to report to Albert Speer, Germany's Minister of Armaments, on the prospects for converting the Uranverein's research toward developing nuclear weapons. During the meeting, Heisenberg told Speer that a bomb could not be built before 1945, because it would require significant monetary resources and number of personnel.\nAfter the Uranverein project was placed under the leadership of the Reich Research Council, it focused on nuclear power production and thus maintained its \"kriegswichtig\" (importance for the war) status; funding therefore continued from the military. The nuclear power project was broken down into the following main areas: uranium and heavy water production, uranium isotope separation and the \"Uranmaschine\" (uranium machine, i.e., nuclear reactor). The project was then essentially split up between a number of institutes, where the directors dominated the research and set their own research agendas. The point in 1942, when the army relinquished its control of the German nuclear weapons program, was the zenith of the project relative to the number of personnel. About 70 scientists worked for the program, with about 40 devoting more than half their time to nuclear fission research. After 1942, the number of scientists working on applied nuclear fission diminished dramatically. Many of the scientists not working with the main institutes stopped working on nuclear fission and devoted their efforts to more pressing war-related work.\nIn September 1942, Heisenberg submitted his first paper of a three-part series on the scattering matrix, or S-matrix, in elementary particle physics. The first two papers were published in 1943 and the third in 1944. The S-matrix described only the states of incident particles in a collision process, the states of those emerging from the collision, and stable bound states; there would be no reference to the intervening states. This was the same precedent as he followed in 1925 in what turned out to be the foundation of the matrix formulation of quantum mechanics through only the use of observables.\nIn February 1943, Heisenberg was appointed to the Chair for Theoretical Physics at the \"Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universit\u00e4t\" (today, the Humboldt-Universit\u00e4t zu Berlin). In April, his election to the \"Preu\u00dfische Akademie der Wissenschaften\" (Prussian Academy of Sciences) was approved. That same month, he moved his family to their retreat in as Allied bombing increased in Berlin. In the summer, he dispatched the first of his staff at the \"Kaiser-Wilhelm Institut f\u00fcr Physik\" to Hechingen and its neighboring town of Haigerloch, on the edge of the Black Forest, for the same reasons. From 18\u201326 October, he travelled to German-occupied Netherlands. In December 1943, Heisenberg visited German-occupied Poland.\nFrom 24 January to 4 February 1944, Heisenberg travelled to occupied Copenhagen, after the German army confiscated Bohr's Institute of Theoretical Physics. He made a short return trip in April. In December, Heisenberg lectured in neutral Switzerland. The United States Office of Strategic Services sent agent Moe Berg to attend the lecture carrying a pistol, with orders to shoot Heisenberg if his lecture indicated that Germany was close to completing an atomic bomb.\nIn January 1945, Heisenberg, with most of the rest of his staff, moved from the \"Kaiser-Wilhelm Institut f\u00fcr Physik\" to the facilities in the Black Forest.\nPost-Second World War.\n1945: Alsos Mission.\nThe Alsos Mission was an Allied effort to determine whether the Germans had an atomic bomb program and to exploit German atomic-related facilities, research, material resources, and scientific personnel for the benefit of the US. Personnel on this operation generally swept into areas that had just come under control of the Allied military forces, but sometimes they operated in areas still under control by German forces. Berlin had been a location of many German scientific research facilities. To limit casualties and loss of equipment, many of these facilities were dispersed to other locations in the latter years of the war. The \"Kaiser-Wilhelm-Institut f\u00fcr Physik\" (KWIP, Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics) had been bombed so it had mostly been moved in 1943 and 1944 to Hechingen and its neighbouring town of Haigerloch, on the edge of the Black Forest, which eventually became included in the French occupation zone. This allowed the American task force of the Alsos Mission to take into custody a large number of German scientists associated with nuclear research.\nOn 30 March, the Alsos Mission reached Heidelberg, where important scientists were captured including Walther Bothe, Richard Kuhn, Philipp Lenard, and Wolfgang Gentner. Their interrogation revealed that Otto Hahn was at his laboratory in Tailfingen, while Heisenberg and Max von Laue were at Heisenberg's laboratory in Hechingen, and that the experimental natural uranium reactor that Heisenberg's team had built in Berlin had been moved to Haigerloch. Thereafter, the main focus of the Alsos Mission was on these nuclear facilities in the W\u00fcrttemberg area. Heisenberg was smuggled out from Urfeld, on 3 May 1945, in an alpine operation in territory still under control by elite German forces. He was taken to Heidelberg, where, on 5 May, he met Goudsmit for the first time since the Ann Arbor visit in 1939. Germany surrendered just two days later. Heisenberg would not see his family again for eight months, as he was moved across France and Belgium and flown to England on 3 July 1945.\n1945: Reaction to Hiroshima.\nNine of the prominent German scientists who published reports in \"Nuclear Physics Research Reports\" as members of the \"Uranverein\" were captured by Operation Alsos and incarcerated in England under Operation Epsilon. Ten German scientists, including Heisenberg, were held at Farm Hall in England. The facility had been a safe house of the British foreign intelligence MI6. During their detention, their conversations were recorded. Conversations thought to be of intelligence value were transcribed and translated into English. The transcripts were released in 1992. On 6 August 1945, the scientists at Farm Hall learned from media reports that the US had dropped an atomic bomb in Hiroshima, Japan. At first, there was disbelief that a bomb had been built and dropped. In the weeks that followed, the German scientists discussed how the United States might have built the bomb.\nThe Farm Hall transcripts reveal that Heisenberg, along with other physicists interned at Farm Hall including Otto Hahn and Carl Friedrich von Weizs\u00e4cker, were glad the Allies had won World War II. Heisenberg told other scientists that he had never contemplated a bomb, only an atomic pile to produce energy. The morality of creating a bomb for the Nazis was also discussed. Only a few of the scientists expressed genuine horror at the prospect of nuclear weapons, and Heisenberg himself was cautious in discussing the matter. On the failure of the German nuclear weapons program to build an atomic bomb, Heisenberg remarked, \"We wouldn't have had the moral courage to recommend to the government in the spring of 1942 that they should employ 120,000 men just for building the thing up.\"\nWhen in 1992 the transcripts were declassified, German physicist analyzed the transcripts, as well as the documentation of Uranverein. When the German scientists heard about the Hiroshima bomb, Heisenberg admitted that he had never calculated the critical mass of an atomic bomb before. When he subsequently attempted to calculate the mass, he made serious calculation errors. Edward Teller and Hans Bethe saw the transcript, and drew the conclusion that Heisenberg had done it for the first time as he made similar errors as they had. Only a week later Heisenberg gave a lecture about the physics of the bomb. He correctly recognized many essential aspects, including the efficiency of the bomb, although he still underestimated it. For Popp, this is proof that Heisenberg did not spend time on a nuclear weapon during the war; on the contrary, he avoided even thinking about it.\nPost-war research career.\nExecutive positions at German research institutions.\nOn 3 January 1946, the ten Operation Epsilon detainees were transported to Alswede in Germany. Heisenberg settled in G\u00f6ttingen, which was in the British zone of Allied-occupied Germany. Heisenberg immediately began to promote scientific research in Germany. Following the Kaiser Wilhelm Society's dissolution by the Allied Control Council and the establishment of the Max Planck Society in the British zone, Heisenberg became the director of the Max Planck Institute for Physics. Max von Laue was appointed vice director, while Karl Wirtz, Carl Friedrich von Weizs\u00e4cker and Ludwig Biermann joined to help Heisenberg establish the institute. Heinz Billing joined in 1950 to promote the development of electronic computing. The core research focus of the institute was cosmic radiation. The institute held a colloquium every Saturday morning.\nHeisenberg together with Hermann Rein was instrumental in the establishment of the Forschungsrat (research council). Heisenberg envisaged this council to promote the dialogue between the newly founded Federal Republic of Germany and the scientific community, based in Germany. Heisenberg was appointed president of the \"Forschungsrat\". In 1951, the organization was fused with the Notgemeinschaft der Deutschen Wissenschaft (Emergency Association of German Science) and that same year renamed the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foundation). Following the merger, Heisenberg was appointed to the presidium.\nIn 1958, the Max-Planck-Institut f\u00fcr Physik was moved to Munich, expanded, and renamed Max-Planck-Institut f\u00fcr Physik und Astrophysik (MPIFA). In the interim, Heisenberg and the astrophysicist Ludwig Biermann were co-directors of MPIFA. Heisenberg also became an \"ordentlicher Professor\" (ordinarius professor) at the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit\u00e4t M\u00fcnchen. Heisenberg was the sole director of MPIFA from 1960 to 1970. Heisenberg resigned his directorship of the MPIFA on 31 December 1970.\nPromotion of international scientific cooperation.\nIn 1951, Heisenberg agreed to become the scientific representative of the Federal Republic of Germany at the UNESCO conference, with the aim of establishing a European laboratory for nuclear physics. Heisenberg's aim was to build a large particle accelerator, drawing on the resources and technical skills of scientists across the Western Bloc. On 1 July 1953 Heisenberg signed the convention that established CERN on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany. Although he was asked to become CERN's founding scientific director, he declined. Instead, he was appointed chair of CERN's science policy committee and went on to determine the scientific program at CERN.\nIn December 1953, Heisenberg became the president of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. During his tenure as president 550 Humboldt scholars from 78 nations received scientific research grants. Heisenberg resigned as president shortly before his death.\nResearch interests.\nIn 1946, the German scientist Heinz Pose, head of Laboratory V in Obninsk, wrote a letter to Heisenberg inviting him to work in the USSR. The letter lauded the working conditions in the USSR and the available resources, as well as the favorable attitude of the Soviets towards German scientists. A courier hand delivered the recruitment letter, dated 18 July 1946, to Heisenberg; Heisenberg politely declined. In 1947, Heisenberg presented lectures in Cambridge, Edinburgh and Bristol. Heisenberg contributed to the understanding of the phenomenon of superconductivity with a paper in 1947 and two papers in 1948, one of them with Max von Laue.\nIn the period shortly after World War II, Heisenberg briefly returned to the subject of his doctoral thesis, turbulence. Three papers were published in 1948 and one in 1950. In the post-war period Heisenberg continued his interests in cosmic-ray showers with considerations on multiple production of mesons. He published three papers in 1949, two in 1952, and one in 1955.\nIn late 1955 to early 1956, Heisenberg gave the Gifford Lectures at St Andrews University, in Scotland, on the intellectual history of physics. The lectures were later published as \"Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science\". During 1956 and 1957, Heisenberg was the chairman of the \"Arbeitskreis Kernphysik\" (Nuclear Physics Working Group) of the \"Fachkommission II \"Forschung und Nachwuchs\"\" (Commission II \"Research and Growth\") of the \"Deutsche Atomkommission\" (DAtK, German Atomic Energy Commission). Other members of the Nuclear Physics Working Group in both 1956 and 1957 were: Walther Bothe, Hans Kopfermann (vice-chairman), Fritz Bopp, Wolfgang Gentner, Otto Haxel, Willibald Jentschke, Heinz Maier-Leibnitz, Josef Mattauch, Wolfgang Riezler, Wilhelm Walcher and Carl Friedrich von Weizs\u00e4cker. Wolfgang Paul was also a member of the group during 1957.\nIn 1957, Heisenberg was a signatory of the G\u00f6ttinger Manifest, taking a public stand against the Federal Republic of Germany arming itself with nuclear weapons. Heisenberg, like Pascual Jordan, thought politicians would ignore this statement by nuclear scientists. But Heisenberg believed that the G\u00f6ttinger Manifest would \"influence public opinion\" which politicians would have to take into account. He wrote to Walther Gerlach: \"We will probably have to keep coming back to this question in public for a long time because of the danger that public opinion will slacken.\" In 1961 Heisenberg signed the Memorandum of T\u00fcbingen alongside a group of scientists who had been brought together by Carl Friedrich von Weizs\u00e4cker and Ludwig Raiser. A public discussion between scientists and politicians ensued. As prominent politicians, authors and socialites joined the debate on nuclear weapons, the signatories of the memorandum took a stand against \"the full-time intellectual nonconformists\".\nFrom 1957 onwards, Heisenberg was interested in plasma physics and the process of nuclear fusion. He also collaborated with the International Institute of Atomic Physics in Geneva. He was a member of the Institute's scientific policy committee, and for several years was the Committee's chair. He was one of the eight signatories of the Memorandum of T\u00fcbingen which called for the recognition of the Oder\u2013Nei\u00dfe line as the official border between Germany and Poland and spoke against a possible nuclear armament of West Germany.\nIn 1973, Heisenberg gave a lecture at Harvard University on the historical development of the concepts of quantum theory. On 24 March 1973 Heisenberg gave a speech before the Catholic Academy of Bavaria, accepting the Romano Guardini Prize. An English translation of his speech was published under the title \"Scientific and Religious Truth\", a quotation from which appears in a later section of this article.\nPhilosophy and worldview.\nHeisenberg admired Eastern philosophy and saw parallels between it and quantum mechanics, describing himself as in \"complete agreement\" with the book \"The Tao of Physics\". Heisenberg even went as far to state that after conversations with Rabindranath Tagore about Indian philosophy \"some of the ideas that seemed so crazy suddenly made much more sense\". Regarding the laws of nature he remarked that \"the concept of 'the law of nature' cannot be completely objective, the word 'law' being a purely human principle\".\nRegarding the philosophy of Ludwig Wittgenstein, Heisenberg disliked \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\" but he liked \"very much the later ideas of Wittgenstein and his philosophy about language.\"\nHeisenberg, a devout Christian, wrote: \"We can console ourselves that the good Lord God would know the position of the [subatomic] particles, thus He would let the causality principle continue to have validity\", in his last letter to Albert Einstein. Einstein continued to maintain that quantum physics must be incomplete because it implies that the universe is indeterminate at a fundamental level.\nIn lectures given in the 1950s and later published as \"Physics and Philosophy\", Heisenberg contended that scientific advances were leading to cultural conflicts. He stated that modern physics is \"part of a general historical process that tends toward a unification and a widening of our present world\".\nWhen Heisenberg accepted the Romano Guardini Prize in 1974, he gave a speech, which he later published under the title \"Scientific and Religious Truth\". He mused:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the history of science, ever since the famous trial of Galileo, it has repeatedly been claimed that scientific truth cannot be reconciled with the religious interpretation of the world. Although I am now convinced that scientific truth is unassailable in its own field, I have never found it possible to dismiss the content of religious thinking as simply part of an outmoded phase in the consciousness of mankind, a part we shall have to give up from now on. Thus in the course of my life I have repeatedly been compelled to ponder on the relationship of these two regions of thought, for I have never been able to doubt the reality of that to which they point.\u2014\u200a\nHeisenberg referred to nature as \"God's second book\" (the first being the Bible) and believed that \"Physics is reflection on the divine\nideas of Creation; therefore physics is divine service\". This was because \"God created the world in accordance with his ideas of creation\" and humans can understand the world because \"Man was created as the spiritual image of God\".\nPolitical stance.\nHeisenberg never participated in explicit National Socialist propaganda. However, he fully supported Nazi Germany's project of European \"renewal\", which corresponded with his German-imperialist convictions. The Dutch physicist Hendrik Casimir recalled hearing from Heisenberg in 1943 that German world domination was a historical necessity due to the weakness of Western liberal democracy and the alternative of Soviet Communism. According to the British-German physicist Rudolf Peierls, while visiting England in 1947 Heisenberg told a colleague who had been forced to emigrate from Germany that after another fifty years in power the Nazis \"would have become quite decent\". The Austrian-Swedish physicist Lise Meitner quoted Heisenberg's 1948 reply to being confronted with German atrocities: \"Unfortunately, every spiritual upheaval has always been accompanied by great cruelty\".\nHeisenberg, who did not leave Germany during the Nazi rule, was also unwilling to emigrate after the war. Responding to an offer of permanent endowed employment at Yale University in 1951 conveyed by Gregory Breit, he stated he would have considered it only if World War III had broken out and the Soviet Union had occupied G\u00f6ttingen.\nAutobiography and death.\nIn his late sixties, Heisenberg penned his autobiography for the mass market. In 1969 the book was published in Germany, in early 1971 it was published in English and in the years thereafter in a string of other languages. Heisenberg initiated the project in 1966, when his public lectures increasingly turned to the subjects of philosophy and religion. Heisenberg had sent the manuscript for a textbook on the unified field theory to Hirzel Verlag and John Wiley &amp; Sons for publication. This manuscript, he wrote to one of his publishers, was the preparatory work for his autobiography. He structured his autobiography in themes, covering: 1) The goal of exact science, 2) The problematic of language in atomic physics, 3) Abstraction in mathematics and science, 4) The divisibility of matter or Kant's antinomy, 5) The basic symmetry and its substantiation, and 6) Science and religion.\nHeisenberg wrote his memoirs as a chain of conversations, covering the course of his life. The book became a popular success, but was regarded as troublesome by historians of science. In the preface Heisenberg wrote that he had abridged historical events, to make them more concise. At the time of publication, it was reviewed by Paul Forman in the journal \"Science\" with the comment \"Now here is a memoir in the form of rationally reconstructed dialogue. And the dialogue as Galileo well knew, is itself a most insidious literary device: lively, entertaining, and especially suited for insinuating opinions while yet evading responsibility for them.\" Few scientific memoirs had been published, but Konrad Lorenz and Adolf Portmann had penned popular books that conveyed scholarship to a wide audience. Heisenberg worked on his autobiography and published it with the Piper Verlag in Munich. Heisenberg initially proposed the title \"Gespr\u00e4che im Umkreis der Atomphysik\" (\"Conversations on Atomic Physics\"). The autobiography was published eventually under the title \"Der Teil und das Ganze\" (\"The Part and the Whole\"). The 1971 English translation was published under the title \"Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conversations\".\nHeisenberg died of kidney cancer at his home, on 1 February 1976. The next evening, his colleagues and friends walked in remembrance from the Institute of Physics to his home, lit a candle and placed it in front of his door. Heisenberg is buried in Munich Waldfriedhof.\nIn 1980 his widow, Elisabeth Heisenberg, published \"Das politische Leben eines Unpolitischen\" (\"The Political Life of an Apolitical Person\"), in which she characterized Heisenberg as \"first and foremost, a spontaneous person, thereafter a brilliant scientist, next a highly talented artist, and only in the fourth place, from a sense of duty, homo politicus\".\nHonors and awards.\nHeisenberg was awarded a number of honors:\nResearch reports on nuclear physics.\nThe following reports were published in \"Kernphysikalische Forschungsberichte\" (\"Research Reports in Nuclear Physics\"), an internal publication of the German \"Uranverein\". The reports were classified Top Secret, they had very limited distribution, and the authors were not allowed to keep copies. The reports were confiscated under the Allied Operation Alsos and sent to the United States Atomic Energy Commission for evaluation. In 1971, the reports were declassified and returned to Germany. The reports are available at the Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Center and the American Institute of Physics.\nIn popular culture.\nHeisenberg's surname is used as the primary alias for Walter White (played by Bryan Cranston), the lead character in AMC's crime drama series \"Breaking Bad\", throughout White's transformation from a high-school chemistry teacher into a meth cook and a drug kingpin. In the spin-off prequel series \"Better Call Saul\", a German character named Werner directs the construction of the meth lab belonging to antagonist Gus Fring that Walt cooks in for much of \"Breaking Bad\".\nHeisenberg was the target of an assassination by spy Moe Berg in the film \"The Catcher Was a Spy\", based on real events. Heisenberg is also credited with building the atomic bomb used by the Axis in the Amazon TV series adaptation of the novel \"The Man in the High Castle\" by Philip K. Dick. Atomic bombs in this universe are referred to as Heisenberg Devices.\nThe 2015 TV film \"Kampen om Tungtvannet\" (\"The Heavy Water War: Stopping Hitler's Atomic Bomb\") directed by Per-Olav S\u00f8rensen, extensively features Werner Heisenberg and his career, including his nuclear research under the Nazis. \nDaniel Craig portrayed Heisenberg in the 2002 film \"Copenhagen,\" an adaptation of Michael Frayn's play. Matthias Schweigh\u00f6fer portrayed Heisenberg in the 2023 biopic \"Oppenheimer\".\nHeisenberg is the namesake of \"Resident Evil Village\" secondary antagonist Karl Heisenberg. Heisenberg's research on ferromagnetism served as inspiration for the character's magnetic abilities.\nIn the television series \"\", the \"Heisenberg compensator\" is an essential component of transporter technology to ensure the integrity of transported matter. The compensator counteracts effects of the applied characteristics identified in Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. To accurately isolate matter prior to its entry into the transporter buffer, all particles must be located, their velocity observed, and tracked; the compensators allow this to happen.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33131", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33131", "title": "Wireless telegraphy", "text": "Method of communication\nWireless telegraphy or radiotelegraphy is the transmission of text messages by radio waves, analogous to electrical telegraphy using cables. Before about 1910, the term \"wireless telegraphy\" was also used for other experimental technologies for transmitting telegraph signals without wires. In radiotelegraphy, information is transmitted by pulses of radio waves of two different lengths called \"dots\" and \"dashes\", which spell out text messages, usually in Morse code. In a manual system, the sending operator taps on a switch called a telegraph key which turns the transmitter on and off, producing the pulses of radio waves. At the receiver the pulses are audible in the receiver's speaker as beeps, which are translated back to text by an operator who knows Morse code.\nRadiotelegraphy was the first means of radio communication. The first practical radio transmitters and receivers invented in 1894\u20131895 by Guglielmo Marconi used radiotelegraphy. It continued to be the only type of radio transmission during the first few decades of radio, called the \"wireless telegraphy era\" up until World War I, when the development of amplitude modulation (AM) radiotelephony allowed sound (audio) to be transmitted by radio. Beginning about 1908, powerful transoceanic radiotelegraphy stations transmitted commercial telegram traffic between countries at rates up to 200 words per minute.\nRadiotelegraphy was used for long-distance person-to-person commercial, diplomatic, and military text communication throughout the first half of the 20th century. It became a strategically important capability during the two world wars since a nation without long-distance radiotelegraph stations could be isolated from the rest of the world by an enemy cutting its submarine telegraph cables. Radiotelegraphy remains popular in amateur radio. It is also taught by the military for use in emergency communications. However, by the 1950s commercial radiotelegraphy was replaced by radioteletype networks and is obsolete.\nPrinciples.\nWireless telegraphy or radiotelegraphy, commonly called CW (continuous wave), ICW (interrupted continuous wave) transmission, or on-off keying, and designated by the International Telecommunication Union as emission type A1A or A2A, is a radio communication method. It was transmitted by several different modulation methods during its history. The primitive spark-gap transmitters used until 1920 transmitted damped waves, which had very wide bandwidth and tended to interfere with other transmissions. This type of emission was banned by 1934, except for some legacy use on ships. The vacuum tube (valve) transmitters which came into use after 1920 transmitted code by pulses of unmodulated sinusoidal carrier wave called continuous wave (CW), which is still used today. To receive CW transmissions, the receiver requires a circuit called a beat frequency oscillator (BFO). The third type of modulation, frequency-shift keying (FSK) was used mainly by radioteletype networks (RTTY). Morse code radiotelegraphy was gradually replaced by radioteletype in most high volume applications by World War II.\nIn manual radiotelegraphy the sending operator manipulates a switch called a telegraph key, which turns the radio transmitter on and off, producing pulses of unmodulated carrier wave of different lengths called \"dots\" and \"dashes\", which encode characters of text in Morse code. At the receiving location, Morse code is audible in the receiver's earphone or speaker as a sequence of buzzes or beeps, which is translated back to text by an operator who knows Morse code. With automatic radiotelegraphy teleprinters at both ends use a code such as the International Telegraph Alphabet No. 2 and produced typed text.\nRadiotelegraphy is obsolete in commercial radio communication, and its last civilian use, requiring maritime shipping radio operators to use Morse code for emergency communications, ended in 1999 when the International Maritime Organization switched to the satellite-based GMDSS system. However it is still used by amateur radio operators, and military services require signalmen to be trained in Morse code for emergency communication. A CW coastal station, KSM, still exists in California, run primarily as a museum by volunteers, and occasional contacts with ships are made. In a minor legacy use, VHF omnidirectional range (VOR) and NDB radio beacons in the aviation radio navigation service still transmit their one to three letter identifiers in Morse code.\nRadiotelegraphy is popular amongst radio amateurs world-wide, who commonly refer to it as continuous wave, or just CW. A 2021 analysis of over 700 million communications logged by the Club Log blog, and a similar review of data logged by the American Radio Relay League, both show that wireless telegraphy is the 2nd most popular mode of amateur radio communication, accounting for nearly 20% of contacts. This makes it more popular than voice communication, but not as popular as the FT8 digital mode, which accounted for 60% of amateur radio contacts made in 2021. Since 2003, knowledge of Morse code and wireless telegraphy has no longer been required to obtain an amateur radio license in many countries, it is, however, still required in some countries to obtain a licence of a different class. As of 2021, licence Class A in Belarus and Estonia, or the General class in Monaco, or Class 1 in Ukraine require Morse proficiency to access the full amateur radio spectrum including the high frequency (HF) bands. Further, CEPT Class 1 licence in Ireland, and Class 1 in Russia, both of which require proficiency in wireless telegraphy, offer additional privileges: a shorter and more desirable call sign in both countries, and the right to use a higher transmit power in Russia.\nHistory.\nLandline telegraph networks.\nEfforts to find a way to transmit telegraph signals without wires grew out of the success of electric telegraph networks, the first instant telecommunication systems. Developed beginning in the 1830s, a number of systems using different schemes for transmitting text over wires competed.9-12 A Morse telegraph line was a person-to-person text message system consisting of multiple telegraph offices linked by an overhead wire supported on telegraph poles. To send a message, an operator at one office would tap on a switch called a telegraph key, creating pulses of electric current which spelled out a message in Morse code.14-15 When the key was pressed, it would connect a battery to the telegraph line, sending current down the wire. At the receiving office, the current pulses would operate a telegraph sounder, a device that would make a \"click\" sound when it received each pulse of current. The operator at the receiving station who knew Morse code would translate the clicking sounds to text and write down the message. The ground was used as the return path for current in the telegraph circuit, to avoid having to use a second overhead wire.\nBy the 1860s, the telegraph was the standard way to send most urgent commercial, diplomatic and military messages,15-17 and industrial nations had built continent-wide telegraph networks, with submarine telegraph cables allowing telegraph messages to bridge oceans. However installing and maintaining a telegraph line linking distant stations was very expensive, and wires could not reach some locations such as ships at sea. Inventors realized if a way could be found to send electrical impulses of Morse code between separate points without a connecting wire, it could revolutionize communications.\nInvention of the wireless telegraph.\nFrom the 1830s inventors had experimented with a series of unsuccessful technologies to transmit \"wireless telegraphy\": magnetic induction systems, ground conduction, conduction through bodies of water, and light beam systems. \nThe successful solution to this problem was the discovery of radio waves in 1887 by Heinrich Hertz, and the development of practical radiotelegraphy transmitters and receivers by about 1899.\nOver several years starting in 1894, the Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi worked on adapting the newly discovered phenomenon of radio waves to communication, turning what was essentially a laboratory experiment up to that point into a useful communication system, building the first radiotelegraphy system using them. Preece and the General Post Office (GPO) in Britain at first supported and gave financial backing to Marconi's experiments conducted on Salisbury Plain from 1896. Preece had become convinced of the idea through his experiments with wireless induction. However, the backing was withdrawn when Marconi formed the Wireless Telegraph &amp; Signal Company. GPO lawyers determined that the system was a telegraph under the meaning of the Telegraph Act and thus fell under the Post Office monopoly. This did not seem to hold back Marconi. After Marconi sent wireless telegraphic signals across the Atlantic Ocean in 1901, the system began being used for regular communication including ship-to-shore and ship-to-ship communication.\nWith this development, wireless telegraphy came to mean \"radiotelegraphy\", Morse code transmitted by radio waves. The first radio transmitters, primitive spark gap transmitters used until World War I, could not transmit voice (audio signals). Instead, the operator would send the text message on a telegraph key, which turned the transmitter on and off, producing short (\"dot\") and long (\"dash\") pulses of radio waves, groups of which comprised the letters and other symbols of the Morse code. At the receiver, the signals could be heard as musical \"beeps\" in the earphones by the receiving operator, who would translate the code back into text. By 1910, communication by what had been called \"Hertzian waves\" was being universally referred to as \"radio\", and the term wireless telegraphy has been largely replaced by the more modern term \"radiotelegraphy\".\nModulation methods.\nDamped waves.\nThe primitive spark-gap transmitters used until the 1920s transmitted by a modulation method called damped wave. As long as the telegraph key was pressed, the transmitter would produce a string of transient pulses of radio waves which repeated at an audio rate, usually between 50 and several thousand hertz. In a receiver's earphone, this sounded like a musical tone, rasp or buzz. Thus the Morse code \"dots\" and \"dashes\" sounded like beeps. Damped wave had a large frequency bandwidth, meaning that the radio signal was not a single frequency but occupied a wide band of frequencies. Damped wave transmitters had a limited range and interfered with the transmissions of other transmitters on adjacent frequencies.\nContinuous waves.\nAfter 1905 new types of radiotelegraph transmitters were invented which transmitted code using a new modulation method: continuous wave (CW) (designated by the International Telecommunication Union as emission type A1A). As long as the telegraph key was pressed, the transmitter produced a continuous sinusoidal wave of constant amplitude. Since all the radio wave's energy was concentrated at a single frequency, CW transmitters could transmit further with a given power, and also caused virtually no interference to transmissions on adjacent frequencies. The first transmitters able to produce continuous wave were the arc converter (Poulsen arc) transmitter, invented by Danish engineer Valdemar Poulsen in 1903, and the Alexanderson alternator, invented 1906\u20131912 by Reginald Fessenden and Ernst Alexanderson. These slowly replaced the spark transmitters in high power radiotelegraphy stations.\nHowever, the radio receivers used for damped wave could not receive continuous wave. Because the CW signal produced while the key was pressed was just an unmodulated carrier wave, it made no sound in a receiver's earphones. To receive a CW signal, some way had to be found to make the Morse code carrier wave pulses audible in a receiver.\nThe beat frequency oscillator (BFO).\nThis problem was solved by Reginald Fessenden in 1901. In his \"heterodyne\" receiver, the incoming radiotelegraph signal is mixed in the receiver's detector crystal or vacuum tube with a constant sine wave generated by an electronic oscillator in the receiver called a beat frequency oscillator (BFO). The frequency of the oscillator formula_1 is offset from the radio transmitter's frequency formula_2. In the detector the two frequencies subtract, and a beat frequency (heterodyne) at the difference between the two frequencies is produced: formula_3. If the BFO frequency is near enough to the radio station's frequency, the beat frequency is in the audio frequency range and can be heard in the receiver's earphones. During the \"dots\" and \"dashes\" of the signal, the beat tone is produced, while between them there is no carrier so no tone is produced. Thus the Morse code is audible as musical \"beeps\" in the earphones.\nThe BFO was rare until the invention in 1913 of the first practical electronic oscillator, the vacuum tube feedback oscillator by Edwin Armstrong. After this time BFOs were a standard part of radiotelegraphy receivers. Each time the radio was tuned to a different station frequency, the BFO frequency had to be changed also, so the BFO oscillator had to be tunable. In later superheterodyne receivers from the 1930s on, the BFO signal was mixed with the constant intermediate frequency (IF) produced by the superheterodyne's detector. Therefore, the BFO could be a fixed frequency.\nContinuous-wave vacuum tube transmitters replaced the other types of transmitter with the availability of power tubes after World War I because they were cheap. CW became the standard method of transmitting radiotelegraphy by the 20s, damped wave spark transmitters were banned by 1930 and CW continues to be used today. Even today most communications receivers produced for use in shortwave communication stations have BFOs.\nIndustry.\nThe International Radiotelegraph Union was unofficially established at the first International Radiotelegraph Convention in 1906, and was merged into the International Telecommunication Union in 1932. When the United States entered World War I, private radiotelegraphy stations were prohibited, which put an end to several pioneers' work in this field. By the 1920s, there was a worldwide network of commercial and government radiotelegraphic stations, plus extensive use of radiotelegraphy by ships for both commercial purposes and passenger messages. The transmission of sound (radiotelephony) began to displace radiotelegraphy by the 1920s for many applications, making possible radio broadcasting. Wireless telegraphy continued to be used for private person-to-person business, governmental, and military communication, such as telegrams and diplomatic communications, and evolved into radioteletype networks. The ultimate implementation of wireless telegraphy was telex, using radio signals, which was developed in the 1930s and was for many years the only reliable form of communication between many distant countries. The most advanced standard, CCITT R.44, automated both routing and encoding of messages by short wave transmissions.\nToday, due to more modern text transmission methods, Morse code radiotelegraphy for commercial use has become obsolete. On shipboard, the computer and satellite-linked GMDSS system have largely replaced Morse as a means of communication.\nRegulation.\nContinuous wave (CW) radiotelegraphy is regulated by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) as emission type A1A.\nThe US Federal Communications Commission issues a lifetime commercial Radiotelegraph Operator License. This requires passing a simple written test on regulations, a more complex written exam on technology, and demonstrating Morse reception at 20 words per minute plain language and 16 wpm code groups. (Credit is given for amateur extra class licenses earned under the old 20 wpm requirement.)\nReferences and notes.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33132", "revid": "50256818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33132", "title": "William Shockley", "text": "American applied physicist (1910\u20131989)\nWilliam Bradford Shockley (February 13, 1910 \u2013 August 12, 1989) was an American applied physicist. He was the manager of a research group at Bell Labs that included John Bardeen and Walter Brattain. The three scientists were jointly awarded the 1956 Nobel Prize in Physics \"for their researches on semiconductors and their discovery of the transistor effect.\"\nPartly as a result of Shockley's attempts to commercialize a new transistor design in the 1950s and 1960s, California's Silicon Valley became a hotbed of electronics innovation. He recruited brilliant employees, but quickly alienated them with his autocratic and erratic management; they left and founded major companies in the industry.\nIn his later life, while he was a professor of electrical engineering at Stanford University and afterward, Shockley became known as a racist and a eugenicist.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education.\nWilliam Bradford Shockley was born on February 13, 1910, in London to American parents, and was raised in the family's hometown of Palo Alto, California, from the age of 3. His father, William Hillman Shockley, was a mining engineer who speculated in mines for a living and spoke eight languages. His mother, May Bradford, grew up in the American West, graduated from Stanford University, and became the first female U.S. deputy mining surveyor.\nShockley was homeschooled up to the age of eight, due to his parents' dislike of public schools as well as Shockley's habit of violent tantrums. Shockley learned a little physics at a young age from a neighbor who was a Stanford physics professor. Shockley spent two years at Palo Alto Military Academy, then briefly enrolled in the Los Angeles Coaching School to study physics and later graduated from Hollywood High School in 1927.\nShockley obtained a B.S. from Caltech in 1932 and a Ph.D. from MIT in 1936. The title of his doctoral thesis was \"Electronic Bands in Sodium Chloride\", a topic suggested by his thesis advisor, John C. Slater.\nCareer and research.\nShockley was one of the first recruits to Bell Laboratories by Mervin Kelly, who became director of research at the company in 1936 and focused on hiring solid-state physicists. Shockley joined a group headed by Clinton Davisson in Murray Hill, New Jersey. Executives at Bell Labs had theorized that semiconductors may offer solid-state alternatives to the vacuum tubes used throughout Bell's nationwide telephone system. Shockley conceived a number of designs based on copper-oxide semiconductor materials, and with Walter Brattain's unsuccessful attempt to create a prototype in 1939.\nShockley published a number of fundamental papers on solid-state physics in \"Physical Review\". In 1938, he received his first patent, \"Electron Discharge Device\", on electron multipliers.When World War II broke out, Shockley's prior research was interrupted and he became involved in radar research in Manhattan (New York City). Also at Bell, early in 1942 Shockley did the first known pioneering applied work on Delay-line memory, which was 100 times less expensive than the competing electronic memory of vacuum tube technology and approximately as rapid. https:// This technology was incorporated inside the ENIAC computer by 1945.\nIn May 1942, he took leave from Bell Labs to become a research director at Columbia University's Anti-Submarine Warfare Operations Group. This involved devising methods for countering the tactics of submarines with improved convoying techniques, optimizing depth charge patterns, and so on. Shockley traveled frequently to the Pentagon and Washington to meet high-ranking officers and government officials.\nIn 1944, he organized a training program for B-29 bomber pilots to use new radar bomb sights. In late 1944, he took a three-month tour to bases around the world to assess the results. For this project, Secretary of War Robert Patterson awarded Shockley the Medal for Merit on October 17, 1946. In July 1945, the War Department asked Shockley to prepare a report on the question of probable casualties from an invasion of the Japanese mainland. Shockley concluded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If the study shows that the behavior of nations in all historical cases comparable to Japan's has in fact been invariably consistent with the behavior of the troops in battle, then it means that the Japanese dead and ineffectives at the time of the defeat will exceed the corresponding number for the Germans. In other words, we shall probably have to kill at least 5 to 10 million Japanese. This might cost us between 1.7 and 4 million casualties including 400,000 to 800,000 killed.\nThis report influenced the decision of the United States to drop atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which preceded the surrender of Japan.\nShockley was the first physicist to propose a log-normal distribution to model the creation process for scientific research papers.\nInvention of the transistor.\nShortly after the war ended in 1945, Bell Labs formed a solid-state physics group, led by Shockley and chemist Stanley Morgan, which included John Bardeen, Walter Brattain, physicist Gerald Pearson, chemist Robert Gibney, electronics expert Hilbert Moore, and several technicians. Their assignment was to seek a solid-state alternative to fragile glass vacuum tube amplifiers. First attempts were based on Shockley's ideas about using an external electrical field on a semiconductor to affect its conductivity. These experiments failed every time in all sorts of configurations and materials. The group was at a standstill until Bardeen suggested a theory that invoked surface states that prevented the field from penetrating the semiconductor. The group changed its focus to study these surface states and they met almost daily to discuss the work. The group had excellent rapport and freely exchanged ideas.\nBy the winter of 1946, they had enough results that Bardeen submitted a paper on the surface states to \"Physical Review\". Brattain started experiments to study the surface states through observations made while shining a bright light on the semiconductor's surface. This led to several more papers (one of them co-authored with Shockley), which estimated the density of the surface states to be more than enough to account for their failed experiments. The pace of the work picked up significantly when they started to surround point contacts between the semiconductor and the conducting wires with electrolytes. Moore built a circuit that allowed them to vary the frequency of the input signal easily. Finally they began to get some evidence of power amplification when Pearson, acting on a suggestion by Shockley, put a voltage on a droplet of glycol borate placed across a p\u2013n junction.\nBell Labs' attorneys soon discovered Shockley's field effect principle had been anticipated and devices based on it patented in 1930 by Julius Lilienfeld, who filed his MESFET-like patent in Canada on October 22, 1925. Although the patent appeared \"breakable\" (it could not work) the patent attorneys based one of its four patent applications only on the Bardeen-Brattain point contact design. Three others (submitted first) covered the electrolyte-based transistors with Bardeen, Gibney and Brattain as the inventors.\nShockley's name was not on any of these patent applications. This angered Shockley, who thought his name should also be on the patents because the work was based on his field effect idea. He even made efforts to have the patent written only in his name, and told Bardeen and Brattain of his intentions.\nShockley, angered by not being included on the patent applications, secretly continued his own work to build a different sort of transistor based on junctions instead of point contacts; he expected this kind of design would be more likely to be commercially viable. The point contact transistor, he believed, would prove to be fragile and difficult to manufacture. Shockley was also dissatisfied with certain parts of the explanation for how the point contact transistor worked and conceived of the possibility of minority carrier injection.\nOn February 13, 1948, another team member, John N. Shive, built a point contact transistor with bronze contacts on the front and back of a thin wedge of germanium, proving that holes could diffuse through bulk germanium and not just along the surface as previously thought. Shive's invention sparked Shockley's invention of the junction transistor. A few months later he invented an entirely new, considerably more robust, type of transistor with a layer or 'sandwich' structure. This structure went on to be used for the vast majority of all transistors into the 1960s, and evolved into the bipolar junction transistor. Shockley later described the workings of the team as a \"mixture of cooperation and competition\". He also said that he kept some of his own work secret until his \"hand was forced\" by Shive's 1948 advance. Shockley worked out a rather complete description of what he called the \"sandwich\" transistor, and a first proof of principle was obtained on April 7, 1949.\nMeanwhile, Shockley worked on his book, \"Electrons and Holes in Semiconductors\", which was published as a 558-page treatise in 1950. The tome included Shockley's critical ideas of drift and diffusion and the differential equations that govern the flow of electrons in solid state crystals. Shockley's diode equation is also described. This seminal work became the reference text for other scientists working to develop and improve new variants of the transistor and other devices based on semiconductors.\nThis resulted in his invention of the bipolar junction transistor, which was announced at a press conference on July 4, 1951.\nThe ensuing publicity generated by the \"invention of the transistor\" often thrust Shockley to the fore, much to the chagrin of Bardeen and Brattain. Bell Labs management, however, consistently presented all three inventors as a team. Though Shockley would correct the record where reporters gave him sole credit for the invention, he eventually infuriated and alienated Bardeen and Brattain, and he essentially blocked the two from working on the junction transistor. Bardeen began pursuing a theory for superconductivity and left Bell Labs in 1951. Brattain refused to work with Shockley further and was assigned to another group. Neither Bardeen nor Brattain had much to do with the development of the transistor beyond the first year after its invention.\nShockley left Bell Labs around 1953 and took a job at Caltech.\nShockley Semiconductor.\nIn 1956, Shockley started Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory in Mountain View, California, which was close to his elderly mother in Palo Alto, California. The company, a division of Beckman Instruments, Inc., was the first establishment working on silicon semiconductor devices in what came to be known as Silicon Valley.\nShockley recruited brilliant employees to his company, but alienated them by undermining them relentlessly. \"He may have been the worst manager in the history of electronics\", according to his biographer Joel Shurkin. Shockley was autocratic, domineering, erratic, hard-to-please, and increasingly paranoid. In one well-known incident, he demanded lie detector tests to find the \"culprit\" after a company secretary suffered a minor cut. In late 1957, eight of Shockley's best researchers, who would come to be known as the \"traitorous eight\", resigned after Shockley decided not to continue research into silicon-based semiconductors. They went on to form Fairchild Semiconductor, a loss from which Shockley Semiconductor never recovered; it was purchased by Clevite in 1960, then sold to ITT in 1968, and shortly after, officially closed \nOver the course of the next 20 years, more than 65 new enterprises would end up having employee connections back to Fairchild.\nA group of about thirty colleagues have met on and off since 1956 to reminisce about their time with Shockley, \"the man who brought silicon to Silicon Valley\", as the group's organizer said in 2002.\nRacist and eugenicist views.\nAfter Shockley left his role as Director of Shockley Semiconductor in April 1960, he joined Stanford University, where he was appointed Alexander M. Poniatoff Professor of Engineering and Applied Science in 1963, a position he held until his retirement in 1975.\nIn the last two decades of his life, Shockley, who had no degree in genetics, became widely known for his extreme views on race and human intelligence, and his advocacy of eugenics. As described by his \"Los Angeles Times\" obituary, \"He went from being a physicist with impeccable academic credentials to amateur geneticist, becoming a lightning rod whose views sparked campus demonstrations and a cascade of calumny.\" He thought his work was important to the future of humanity and he also described it as the most important aspect of his career. He argued that a higher rate of reproduction among purportedly less intelligent people was having a dysgenic effect, and argued that a drop in average intelligence would lead to a decline in civilization. He also claimed that black people were genetically and intellectually inferior to white people.\nShockley's biographer Joel Shurkin notes that for much of Shockley's life in the racially segregated United States of the time, he had almost no contact with black people. In a debate with psychiatrist Frances Cress Welsing and on \"Firing Line\" with William F. Buckley Jr., Shockley argued, \"My research leads me inescapably to the opinion that the major cause of the American Negro's intellectual and social deficits is hereditary and racially genetic in origin and, thus, not remediable to a major degree by practical improvements in the environment.\"\nShockley was one of the race theorists who received money from the Pioneer Fund, and at least one donation to him came from its founder, the eugenicist Wickliffe Draper. Shockley proposed that individuals with IQs below 100 should be paid to undergo voluntary sterilization, $1,000 for each of their IQ points under 100. This proposal led to the University of Leeds to withdraw its offer of an honorary degree to him. Anthropologist and far-right activist Roger Pearson defended Shockley in a self-published book co-authored with Shockley. In 1973, University of Wisconsin\u2013Milwaukee professor Edgar G. Epps argued that \"William Shockley's position lends itself to racist interpretations\". The Southern Poverty Law Center describes Shockley as a white nationalist who failed to produce evidence for his eugenic theories amidst \"near-universal acknowledgement that his work was that of a racist crank\". The science writer Angela Saini describes Shockley as having been \"a notorious racist.\"\nShockley insisted that he was not a racist. He wrote that his findings do not support white supremacy, instead claiming that East Asians and Jews fare better than whites intellectually. In 1973, Edgar Epps wrote that \"I am pleased that Professor Shockley is not an Aryan supremacist, but I would remind him that a theory espousing hereditary superiority of Orientals or Jews is just as racist in nature as the Aryan supremacy doctrine\".\nShockley's advocacy of eugenics triggered protests. In one incident, the science society Sigma Xi, fearing violence, canceled a 1968 convocation in Brooklyn where Shockley was scheduled to speak.\nIn Atlanta in 1981, Shockley filed a libel suit against the \"Atlanta Constitution\" after a science writer, Roger Witherspoon, compared Shockley's advocacy of a voluntary sterilization program to Nazi human experimentation. The suit took three years to go to trial. Shockley won the suit but he only received one dollar in damages and he did not receive any punitive damages. Shockley's biographer Joel Shurkin, a science writer on the staff of Stanford University during those years, sums this statement up by saying that it was defamatory, but Shockley's reputation was not worth much by the time the trial reached a verdict. Shockley taped his telephone conversations with reporters, transcribed them, and sent the transcripts to the reporters by registered mail. At one point, he toyed with the idea of making the reporters take a simple quiz on his work before he would discuss the subject matter of it with them. His habit of saving all of his papers (including laundry lists) provides abundant documentation on his life for researchers.\nShockley was a candidate for the Republican nomination in the 1982 United States Senate election in California. He ran on a single-issue platform of opposing the \"dysgenic threat\" that he alleged African-Americans and other groups posed. He came in eighth place in the primary, receiving 8,308 votes and 0.37% of the vote. According to Shurkin, by this time, \"His racism destroyed his credibility. Almost no one wanted to be associated with him, and many of those who were willing did him more harm than good\".\nFoundation for Research and Education on Eugenics and Dysgenics.\nFoundation for Research and Education on Eugenics and Dysgenics (FREED) was a non-profit organization founded in March 1970 in the United States formed to support the research of Shockley, who was the president of the foundation and R. Travis Osborne, a member. The foundation released newsletter 'FREED' and research papers at Stanford University.\nThe organization was founded according to its mission \"solely for scientific and educational purposes related to human population and quality problems\".\nFrom 1969 to 1976, the Pioneer Fund allocated about $2.5 million (adjusted-for-inflation in 2023) to support Shockley's endeavors. This funding was distributed through grants to Stanford University for the exploration of \"research into the factors which affect genetic potential\" and also directly to FREED.&lt;ref name=\"fighting-hate/extremist\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nVia FREED, Shockley promoted his concept of a \"Voluntary Sterilization Bonus Plan\", proposing to compensate economically disadvantaged women for undergoing sterilization procedures.\nIn 1970, Shockley listed former senator of Alaska Ernest Gruening as a director of FREED.\nPersonal life.\nAt age 23 and while still a student, Shockley married Jean Bailey in August 1933. The couple had two sons and a daughter. Shockley separated from her in 1953. He married Emily Lanning, a psychiatric nurse, in 1955; she helped him with some of his theories. Although one of his sons earned a PhD at Stanford University and his daughter graduated from Radcliffe College, Shockley believed his children \"represent a very significant regression ... my first wife \u2013 their mother \u2013 had not as high an academic-achievement standing as I had\".\nShockley was an accomplished rock climber, going often to the Shawangunks in the Hudson River Valley. His 1953 route known as \"Shockley's Ceiling\", is one of the classic climbing routes in the area. Mountain Project, a web-based climbing guidebook, reports that the route's name has been changed to \"The Ceiling\" due to Shockley's eugenics controversies. A 1996 guidebook notes that the original party on this route avoided the ceiling in question. The guidebook lists this variation as \"Shockley's Without.\" He was popular as a speaker, lecturer, and amateur magician. He once \"magically\" produced a bouquet of roses at the end of his address before the American Physical Society.\nShockley was also known in his early years for elaborate practical jokes. He had a longtime hobby of raising ant colonies.\nShockley donated sperm to the Repository for Germinal Choice, a sperm bank founded by Robert Klark Graham in hopes of spreading humanity's best genes. The bank, called by the media the \"Nobel Prize sperm bank\", claimed to have three Nobel Prize-winning donors, though Shockley was the only one to publicly acknowledge his involvement. However, Shockley's controversial views brought the Repository for Germinal Choice a degree of notoriety and may have discouraged other Nobel Prize winners from donating sperm.\nShockley was unhappy in his life and was often psychologically and sometimes physically abusive toward his sons. On one occasion, he reportedly played Russian roulette on himself as part of a suicide attempt.\nShockley died of prostate cancer on August 12, 1989, in Stanford, California, at the age of 79. At the time of his death, he was estranged from most of his friends and family, except his second wife, the former Emmy Lanning (1913\u20132007). His children reportedly learned of his death by reading his obituary in the newspaper. He is buried at Alta Mesa Memorial Park in Palo Alto, California.\nPatents.\nShockley was granted over 90 US patents. Some notable ones are:\nNotes.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33133", "revid": "48969406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33133", "title": "Walter Brattain", "text": "American solid-state physicist (1902\u20131987)\nWalter Houser Brattain ( ; February 10, 1902 \u2013 October 13, 1987) was an American solid-state physicist who shared the 1956 Nobel Prize in Physics with John Bardeen and William Shockley for their invention of the point-contact transistor. Brattain devoted much of his life to research on surface states.\nEarly life and education.\nWalter Houser Brattain was born on February 10, 1902, in Amoy (now Xiamen), China, to American parents, Ross R. Brattain and Ottilie Houser. His father was of Scottish descent, while his mother's parents were both immigrants from Stuttgart, Germany. Ross was a teacher at the Ting-Wen Institute, a private school for Chinese boys. Ottilie was a gifted mathematician. Both were graduates of Whitman College. Ottilie and baby Walter returned to the United States in 1903, and Ross followed shortly afterward. The family lived for several years in Spokane, Washington, then settled on a cattle ranch near Tonasket, Washington, in 1911.\nBrattain attended high school in Washington, spending one year at Queen Anne High School, two years at Tonasket High School, and one year at Moran School for Boys. He then attended Whitman College, where he studied under Benjamin H. Brown (physics) and Walter A. Bratton (mathematics). He received his B.S. in 1924 with a double major in physics and mathematics. Brattain and his classmates Walker Bleakney, Vladimir Rojansky, and E. John Workman would all go on to have distinguished careers, later becoming known as \"the four horsemen of physics\". Brattain's brother Robert, who followed him at Whitman College, also became a physicist.\nBrattain obtained an M.A. from the University of Oregon in 1926 and a Ph.D. from the University of Minnesota in 1929. At Minnesota, he had the opportunity to study the new field of quantum mechanics under John Van Vleck. His thesis, supervised by John T. Tate, was titled \"Efficiency of Excitation by Electron Impact and Anomalous Scattering in Mercury Vapor.\"\nCareer and research.\nFrom 1928 to 1929, Brattain worked for the National Bureau of Standards in Washington, D.C., where he helped to develop piezoelectric frequency standards. In August 1929, he joined Joseph A. Becker at Bell Laboratories as a research physicist. The two men worked on the heat-induced flow of charge carriers in copper oxide rectifiers. Brattain was able to attend a lecture by Arnold Sommerfeld. Some of their subsequent experiments on thermionic emission provided experimental validation for the Sommerfeld theory. They also did work on the surface state and work function of tungsten and the adsorption of thorium atoms. Through his studies of rectification and photo-effects on the semiconductor surfaces of cuprous oxide and silicon, Brattain discovered the photo-effect at the free surface of a semiconductor. This work was considered by the Nobel Committee to be one of his chief contributions to solid-state physics.\nAt the time, the telephone industry was heavily dependent on the use of vacuum tubes to control electron flow and amplify current. Vacuum tubes were neither reliable nor efficient, and Bell Labs wanted to develop an alternative technology. As early as the 1930s Brattain worked with William Shockley on the idea of a semiconductor amplifier that used copper oxide, an early and unsuccessful attempt at creating a field-effect transistor. Other researchers at Bell and elsewhere were also experimenting with semiconductors, using materials such as germanium and silicon, but the pre-war research effort was somewhat haphazard and lacked strong theoretical grounding.\nDuring World War II, both Brattain and Shockley were separately involved in research on magnetic detection of submarines with the National Defense Research Committee at Columbia University. Brattain's group developed magnetometers sensitive enough to detect anomalies in the Earth's magnetic field caused by submarines. As a result of this work, in 1944, Brattain patented a design for a magnetometer head.\nIn 1945, Bell Labs reorganized and created a group specifically to do fundamental research in solid-state physics, relating to communications technologies. Creation of the sub-department was authorized by the vice-president for research, Mervin Kelly. An interdisciplinary group, it was co-led by Shockley and Stanley O. Morgan. The new group was soon joined by John Bardeen. Bardeen was a close friend of Brattain's brother Robert, who had introduced John and Walter in the 1930s. They often played bridge and golf together. Bardeen was a quantum physicist, Brattain a gifted experimenter in materials science, and Shockley, the leader of their team, was an expert in solid-state physics.\nInvention of the transistor.\nAccording to theories of the time, Shockley's field-effect transistor, a cylinder coated thinly with silicon and mounted close to a metal plate, should have worked. He ordered Brattain and Bardeen to find out why it wouldn't. During November and December, the two men carried out a variety of experiments, attempting to determine why Shockley's device wouldn't amplify. Bardeen was a brilliant theorist; Brattain, equally importantly, \"had an intuitive feel for what you could do in semiconductors\". Bardeen theorized that the failure to conduct might be the result of local variations in the surface state which trapped the charge carriers. Brattain and Bardeen eventually managed to create a small level of amplification by pushing a gold metal point into the silicon, and surrounding it with distilled water. Replacing silicon with germanium enhanced the amplification, but only for low frequency currents.\nOn December 16, Brattain devised a method of placing two gold leaf contacts close together on a germanium surface. Brattain reported: \"Using this double point contact, contact was made to a germanium surface that had been anodized to 90 volts, electrolyte washed off in H2O and then had some gold spots evaporated on it. The gold contacts were pressed down on the bare surface. Both gold contacts to the surface rectified nicely... One point was used as a grid and the other point as a plate. The bias (D.C.) on the grid had to be positive to get amplification\"\nAs described by Bardeen, \"The initial experiments with the gold spot suggested immediately that holes were being introduced into the germanium block, increasing the concentration of holes near the surface. The names emitter and collector were chosen to describe this phenomenon. The only question was how the charge of the added holes was compensated. Our first thought was that the charge was compensated by surface states. Shockley later suggested that the charge was compensated by electrons in the bulk and suggested the junction transistor geometry... Later experiments carried out by Brattain and me showed that very likely both occur in the point-contact transistor.\"\nOn December 23, 1947, Brattain, Bardeen, and Shockley demonstrated the first working transistor to their colleagues at Bell Labs. Amplifying small electrical signals and supporting the processing of digital information, the transistor is \"the key enabler of modern electronics.\"\nConvinced by the 1947 demonstration that a major breakthrough was being made, Bell Labs focused intensively on what it now called the \"Surface States Project\". Initially, strict secrecy was observed. Carefully restricted internal conferences within Bell Labs shared information about the work of Brattain, Bardeen, Shockley and others who were engaged in related research. Patents were registered, recording the invention of the point-contact transistor by Bardeen and Brattain. There was considerable anxiety over whether Ralph Bray and Seymour Benzer, studying resistance in germanium at Purdue University, might make a similar discovery and publish before Bell Labs.\nOn June 30, 1948, Bell Labs held a press conference to publicly announce their discovery. They also adopted an open policy in which new knowledge was freely shared with other institutions. By doing so, they avoided classification of the work as a military secret, and made possible widespread research and development of transistor technology. Bell Labs organized several symposia, open to university, industry and military participants, which were attended by hundreds of scientists in September 1951, April 1952, and 1956. Representatives from international as well as domestic companies attended.\nShockley believed and stated that he should have received all the credit for the invention of the transistor. He actively excluded Bardeen and Brattain from new areas of research, in particular the junction transistor, which Shockley patented. Shockley's theory of the junction transistor was an \"impressive achievement\", pointing the way to future solid-state electronics, but it would be several years before its construction would become practically possible.\nBrattain transferred to another research group within Bell Labs, working with C. G. B. Garrett, and P. J. Boddy. He continued to study the surface properties of solids and the \"transistor effect,\" so as to better understand the various factors underlying semiconductor behavior. Describing it as \"an intolerable situation,\" Bardeen left Bell Labs in 1951 to go to the University of Illinois, where he eventually won a second Nobel Prize for his theory of superconductivity. Shockley left Bell Labs in 1953 and went on to form Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory.\nIn 1956, the three men were jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics by King Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden \"for their researches on semiconductors and their discovery of the transistor effect.\" Bardeen and Brattain were included for the discovery of the point-contact transistor; Shockley for the development of the junction transistor. Walter Brattain is credited as having said, when told of the award, \"I certainly appreciate the honor. It is a great satisfaction to have done something in life and to have been recognized for it in this way. However, much of my good fortune comes from being in the right place, at the right time, and having the right sort of people to work with.\" Each of the three gave a lecture. Brattain spoke on \"Surface Properties of Semiconductors\", Bardeen on \"Semiconductor Research Leading to the Point Contact Transistor\", and Shockley on \"Transistor Technology Evokes New Physics\".\nOther work.\nBrattain later collaborated with P. J. Boddy and P. N. Sawyer on several papers on electrochemical processes in living matter. He became interested in blood clotting after his son required heart surgery. He also collaborated with Whitman chemistry professor David Frasco, using phospholipid bilayers as a model to study the surface of living cells and their absorption processes.\nTeaching.\nBrattain taught at Harvard University as a visiting lecturer in 1952 and at Whitman College as a visiting lecturer in 1962 and 1963, and a visiting professor beginning in 1963. Upon formally retiring from Bell Laboratories in 1967, he continued to teach at Whitman, becoming an adjunct professor in 1972. He retired from teaching in 1976 but continued to be a consultant at Whitman.\nAt Whitman, the Walter Brattain Scholarships are awarded on a merit basis to \"entering students who have achieved high academic excellence in their college preparatory work.\" All applicants for admission are considered for the scholarship, which is potentially renewable for four years.\nPersonal life and death.\nBrattain married twice. His first wife was chemist Keren Gilmore. They were married in 1935 and had a son, William, in 1943. Keren died on April 10, 1957. The following year, Brattain married Emma Jane (Kirsch) Miller, a mother of three children.\nBrattain died of Alzheimer's disease on October 13, 1987, in Seattle, Washington, at the age of 85. He is buried at City Cemetery in Pomeroy, Washington.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33134", "revid": "28979433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33134", "title": "World music", "text": "Non-Western traditional music\nWorld music is an English phrase for styles of music from non-English speaking countries, including quasi-traditional, intercultural, and traditional music. World music's broad nature and elasticity as a musical category pose obstacles to a universal definition, but its ethic of interest in the culturally exotic is encapsulated in \"Roots\" magazine's description of the genre as \"local music from out there.\"\nThere are several conflicting definitions for world music. Music that does not follow \"North American or British pop and folk traditions\" was given the term \"world music\" by music industries in Europe and North America. The term was popularized in the 1980s as a marketing category for non-Western traditional music. It has grown to include subgenres such as ethnic fusion (Clannad, Ry Cooder, Enya) and worldbeat.\nLexicology.\nThe term \"world music\" has been credited to ethnomusicologist Robert E. Brown, who coined it in the early 1960s at Wesleyan University in Connecticut, where he developed undergraduate through doctoral programs in the discipline. To enhance the learning process (John Hill), he invited more than a dozen visiting performers from Africa and Asia and began a world music concert series. The term became current in the 1980s as a marketing/classificatory device in the media and the music industry.\nForms.\nExamples of popular forms of world music include the various forms of non-European classical music (e.g. Chinese guzheng music, Indian raga music, Tibetan chants), Eastern European folk music (e.g. the village music of the Balkans, The Mystery of the Bulgarian Voices), Nordic folk music, Latin music, Indonesian music, and the many forms of folk and tribal music of the Middle East, Africa, Asia, Oceania, Central and South America.\nThe broad category of world music includes isolated forms of ethnic music from diverse geographical regions. These dissimilar strains of ethnic music are commonly categorized together by virtue of their indigenous roots. Over the 20th century, the invention of sound recording, low-cost international air travel, and common access to global communication among artists and the general public have given rise to a related phenomenon called \"crossover\" music. Musicians from diverse cultures and locations could readily access recorded music from around the world, see and hear visiting musicians from other cultures and visit other countries to play their own music, creating a melting pot of stylistic influences. While communication technology allows greater access to obscure forms of music, the pressures of commercialization also present the risk of increasing musical homogeneity, the blurring of regional identities, and the gradual extinction of traditional local music-making practices.\nHybrid examples.\nSince the music industry established this term, the fuller scope of what an average music consumer defines as \"world\" music in today's market has grown to include various blends of ethnic music tradition, style and interpretation, and derivative world music genres have been coined to represent these hybrids, such as ethnic fusion and worldbeat. Good examples of hybrid, world fusion are the Irish-West African meld of Afro Celt Sound System, the pan-cultural sound of AO Music and the jazz / Finnish folk music of V\u00e4rttin\u00e4, each of which bear tinges of contemporary, Western influence\u2014an increasingly noticeable element in the expansion genres of world music. Worldbeat and ethnic fusion can also blend specific indigenous sounds with more blatant elements of Western pop. Good examples are Paul Simon's album \"Graceland\", on which South African mbaqanga music is heard; Peter Gabriel's work with Pakistani Sufi singer Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan; the Deep Forest project, in which vocal loops from West Africa are blended with Western, contemporary rhythmic textures and harmony structure; and the work of Mango, who combined pop and rock music with world elements.\nDepending on style and context, world music can sometimes share the new-age music genre, a category that often includes ambient music and textural expressions from indigenous roots sources. Good examples are Tibetan bowls, Tuvan throat singing, Gregorian chant or Native American flute music. World music blended with new-age music is a sound loosely classified as the hybrid genre 'ethnic fusion'. Examples of ethnic fusion are Nicholas Gunn's \"Face-to-Face\" from \"Beyond Grand Canyon,\" featuring authentic Native American flute combined with synthesizers, and \"Four Worlds\" from \"The Music of the Grand Canyon\", featuring spoken word from Razor Saltboy of the Navajo Indian Nation.\nWorld fusion.\nThe subgenre world fusion is often mistakenly assumed to refer exclusively to a blending of Western jazz fusion elements with world music. Although such a hybrid expression falls easily into the world fusion category, the suffix \"fusion\" in the term world fusion should not be assumed to mean jazz fusion. Western jazz combined with strong elements of world music is more accurately termed \"world fusion jazz\", \"ethnic jazz\" or \"non-Western jazz\". World fusion and global fusion are nearly synonymous with the genre term \"worldbeat\", and though these are considered subgenres of popular music, they may also imply universal expressions of the more general term \"world music\". In the 1970s and 1980s, fusion in the jazz music genre implied a blending of jazz and rock music, which is where the misleading assumption is rooted.\nPrecursors.\nMillie Small released \"My Boy Lollipop\" in 1964. Small's version was a hit, reaching number 2 both in the UK Singles Chart and in the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100. In the 1960s, Miriam Makeba and Hugh Masekela had popular hits in the USA. In 1969 Indian musician Ravi Shankar played sitar at the Woodstock festival.\nIn the 1970s, Manu Dibango's funky track \"Soul Makossa\" (1972) became a hit, and Osibisa released \"Sunshine Day\" (1976). Fela Kuti created Afrobeat and Femi Kuti, Seun Kuti and Tony Allen followed Fela Kuti's funky music. Salsa musicians such as Jos\u00e9 Alberto \"El Canario\", Ray Sep\u00falveda, Johnny Pacheco, Fania All-Stars, Ray Barretto, Rub\u00e9n Blades, Gilberto Santa Rosa, Roberto Roena, Bobby Valent\u00edn, Eddie Palmieri, H\u00e9ctor Lavoe and Willie Col\u00f3n developed Latin music.\nThe 1979 American ensemble Libana was incorporated by founder Susan Robbins, specifically to represent world folk traditions through chants, dance, storytelling, and musical performance. Initially consisting of 25 women, it honed down to 6 \"core\" members who able to travel the world, all of whom toured in America, Canada, Bulgaria, India, Greece, and Morocco. Libana has performed music of divergent cultural expressions, of the Mediterranean, the Balkans, the Middle East, Europe, Africa, Asia and South America. Libana musicians use instruments such as guitars, hammered dulcimers, ouds, ba\u011flamas, pan flutes, charangos, djembes, davuls, frame drums, double bass, clarinets, dumbeks, accordions, and naqarehs. They continue to be active as of 2024.\nThe Breton musician Alan Stivell pioneered the connection between traditional folk music, modern rock music and world music with his 1972 album \"Renaissance of the Celtic Harp\". Around the same time, Stivell's contemporary, Welsh singer-songwriter Meic Stevens popularised Welsh folk music. Neo-traditional Welsh language music featuring a fusion of modern instruments and traditional instruments such as the pibgorn and the Welsh harp has been further developed by Bob Delyn a'r Ebillion.\nPopular genres.\nAlthough it primarily describes traditional music, the world music category also includes popular music from non-Western urban communities (e.g. South African \"township\" music) and non-European music forms that have been influenced by other so-called third-world musics (e.g. Afro-Cuban music).\nThe inspiration of Zimbabwe's Thomas Mapfumo in blending the Mbira (finger Piano) style onto the electric guitar, saw a host of other Zimbabwean musicians refining the genre, none more successfully than The Bhundu Boys. The Bhundu Jit music hit Europe with some force in 1986, taking Andy Kershaw and John Peel fully under its spell.\nFor many years, Paris has attracted numerous musicians from former colonies in West and North Africa. This scene is aided by the fact that there are many concerts and institutions that help to promote the music.\nAlgerian and Moroccan music have an important presence in the French capital. Hundreds of thousands of Algerian and Moroccan immigrants have settled in Paris, bringing the sounds of Amazigh (Berber), ra\u00ef, and Gnawa music.\nThe West African music community is also very large, integrated by people from Senegal, Mali, Ivory Coast, and Guinea.\nUnlike musical styles from other regions of the globe, the American music industry tends to categorize Latin music as its own genre and defines it as any music from Spanish- and Portuguese- speaking countries.\nWestern.\nThe most common name for this form of music is also \"folk music\", but is often called \"contemporary folk music\" or \"folk revival music\" to make the distinction. The transition was somewhat centered in the US and is also called the American folk music revival. Fusion genres such as folk rock and others also evolved within this phenomenon.\n1987 industry meeting.\nOn 29 June 1987, a meeting of interested parties gathered to capitalize on the marketing of non-Western folk music. Paul Simon had released the world music-influenced album \"Graceland\" in 1986. The concept behind the album had been to express his own sensibilities using the sounds he had fallen in love with while listening to artists from Southern Africa, including Ladysmith Black Mambazo and Savuka. This project and the work of Peter Gabriel and Johnny Clegg among others had, to some degree, introduced non-Western music to a wider audience. They saw this as an opportunity.\nIn an unprecedented move, all of the world music labels coordinated together and developed a compilation cassette for the cover of the music magazine \"NME\". The overall running time was 90 minutes, each package containing a mini-catalog showing the other releases on offer.\nBy the time of a second meeting it became clear that a successful campaign required its own dedicated press officer. The press officer would be able to juggle various deadlines and sell the music as a concept\u2014not just to national stations, but also regional DJs keen to expand their musical variety. DJs were a key resource as it was important to make \"world music\" important to people outside London\u2014most regions after all had a similarly heritage to tap into. A cost-effective way of achieving all this would be a leafleting campaign.\nThe next step was to develop a world music chart, gathering together selling information from around fifty shops, so that it would finally be possible to see which were big sellers in the genre\u2014so new listeners could see what was particularly popular. It was agreed that the \"NME\" could again be involved in printing the chart and also \"Music Week\" and the London listings magazine \"City Limits\". It was also suggested that Andy Kershaw might be persuaded to do a run down of this chart on his show regularly.\nRelationship to immigration and multiculturalism.\nIn most wealthy industrialized countries, large amounts of immigration from other regions has been ongoing for many decades. This has introduced non-Western music to Western audiences not only as \"exotic\" imports, but also as local music played by fellow citizens. But the process is ongoing and continues to produce new forms. In the 2010s several musicians from immigrant communities in the West rose to global popularity, such as Haitian-American Wyclef Jean, Somali-Canadian K'naan, Tamil-Briton M.I.A., often blending the music of their heritage with hip-hop or pop. Cuban-born singer-songwriter Addys Mercedes started her international career from Germany mixing traditional elements of Son with pop.\nOnce, an established Western artist might collaborate with an established African artist to produce an album or two. Now, new bands and new genres are built from the ground up by young performers. For example, the Punjabi-Irish fusion band Delhi 2 Dublin is from neither India nor Ireland, but Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Country for Syria, an Istanbul based music collective, blends American country music with the music of Syrian refugees and local Turkish music. Musicians and composers also work collectively to create original compositions for various combinations of western and non western instruments.\nThe introduction of non-western music into western culture created a fusion that influenced both parties. (Feld 31) With the quick demand for new music came the technicalities of ownership. As Feld states in page 31: \"This complex traffic in sounds money and media is rooted in the nature of revitalization through appropriation.\" There are collaborations between African and American popular music artists that raise questions on who is benefiting from said collaborations.(Feld 31) Feld mentions the example of \"That was your mother\". Alton Rubin and his band the Twisters collaborated with Paul Simon on the song that possessed a zydeco feel, signature of Dopsie's band. Even though Paul Simon wrote and sang the lyrics with them, the whole copyright is attributed to Paul and not to the band as well. (Feld 34) Because of crossovers like this one, where there was a disproportional gain when covering non-western music. Feld states that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nImmigration also heavily influences world music, providing a variety of options for the wider public. In the 1970s Punjabi music was greatly popular in the UK because of its growing Punjabi diaspora. (Schreffler 347) Bhangra music was also greatly covered by its diaspora in cities like New York and Chicago. (Schreffler 351) For a more mainstream integration, the Punjabi music scene integrated collaborations with rappers and started gaining more recognition. One of these successful attempts was a remix of the song \"Mundi\u0101n ton Bach ke\" called \"Beware of the Boys\" by Panjabi MC featuring Jay Z. (Schreffler 354) Collaborations between outsider artists provided an integration of their music, even with foreign instrumentation, into the popular music scene.\nImmigration, being a great part of music exportation, plays a big role in cultural identity. Immigrant communities use music to feel as if they are home and future generations it plays the role of educating or giving insight into what their culture is about. In Punjabi culture, music became the carrier of culture around the world. (Schreffler 355)\nRadio programs.\nWorld music radio programs today often play African hip hop or reggae artists, crossover Bhangra and Latin American jazz groups, etc. Common media for world music include public radio, webcasting, the BBC, NPR, and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. By default, non-region-specific or multi-cultural world music projects are often listed under the generic category of world music.\nExamples of radio shows that feature world music include \"The Culture Cafe\" on WWUH West Hartford, \"World of Music\" on Voice of America, \"Transpacific Sound Paradise\" on WFMU, \"The Planet\" on Australia's ABC Radio National, DJ Edu presenting \"D.N.A: DestiNation Africa\" on BBC Radio 1Xtra, Adil Ray on the BBC Asian Network, Andy Kershaw's show on BBC Radio 3 and Charlie Gillett's show on the BBC World Service.\nEthnomusicological Perspective.\nEthnomusicology scholars have examined the \"world music\" concept as more than a musical label, arguing that it reflects global power relationships between Western and non-Western traditions . Kofi Agawu discusses that the term continues to uphold colonial hierarchies by framing African and other non-Western musical traditions as secondary to Western classical music. Many diverse local styles are grouped into one broad, marketable category . Timothy Rice notes that \"world music\" blurs the line between academic study and commercial use, since the same piece can be treated as an ethnographic subject, a cultural symbol, or a global product depending on its context . Deborah Wong adds that even listening is political. Using a label such as \"world music\" can amplify some voices while muting others, shaping how power and identity influence musical spaces . Melonee Burnim highlights that researchers and performers have a responsibility to respect and prioritize the perspectives of the communities who created it, rather than studying or performing for their own purposes . Steven Feld connects these idea to issues with ownership and profit. Global music circulation often benefits Western entities more than the community where the sound comes from . As a whole, these scholars suggest that \"world music\" is a reflection of ongoing changes with regards to ethical responsibility and cultural exchange.\nAwards.\nThe BBC Radio 3 Awards for World Music was an award given to world music artists between 2002 and 2008, sponsored by BBC Radio 3. The award was thought up by \"fRoots\" magazine's editor Ian Anderson, inspired by the BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards. Award categories included: Africa, Asia/Pacific, Americas, Europe, Mid East and North Africa, Newcomer, Culture Crossing, Club Global, Album of the Year, and Audience Award. Initial lists of nominees in each category were selected annually by a panel of several thousand industry experts. Shortlisted nominees were voted on by a twelve-member jury, which selected the winners in every category except for the Audience Award category. These jury members were appointed and presided over by the BBC. The annual awards ceremony was held at the BBC Proms and winners were given an award called a \"Planet\". In March 2009, the BBC made a decision to axe the BBC Radio 3 Awards for World Music.\nIn response to the BBC's decision to end its awards program, the British world music magazine \"Songlines\" launched the Songlines Music Awards in 2009 \"to recognise outstanding talent in world music\".\nThe WOMEX Awards were introduced in 1999 to honor the high points of world music on an international level and to acknowledge musical excellence, social importance, commercial success, political impact and lifetime achievement. Every October at the WOMEX event, the award figurine\u2014an ancient mother goddess statue dating back about 6000 years to the Neolithic age\u2014is presented in an award ceremony to a worthy member of the world music community.\nFestivals.\nMany festivals are identified as being \"world music\"; here's a small representative selection:\nAustralia\nBangladesh\nBelgium\nCanada\nCroatia\nFrance\nGermany\nGhana\nHungary\nIceland\nIndia\nIndonesia\nIran\nItaly\nNorth Macedonia\nMalaysia\nMali\nMorocco\nNew Zealand\nNigeria\nPoland\nPortugal\nRomania\nSerbia\nSpain \nSpain's most important world music festivals are:\nSweden\nTanzania\nTurkey\nUganda\nUkraine\nUnited Kingdom\nUnited States\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33135", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33135", "title": "Wu-Tang Clan", "text": "American hip hop collective\nWu-Tang Clan are an American hip hop collective formed in Staten Island, New York City, in 1992. Its members include RZA, GZA, Method Man, Raekwon, Ghostface Killah, Inspectah Deck, U-God, Masta Killa, and, until his death in 2004, Ol' Dirty Bastard. Close affiliate Cappadonna later became an official member. They are credited for revitalizing East Coast hip hop and are considered one of the greatest hip hop groups of all time.\nAfter signing to Steve Rifkind's label Loud Records in 1992, Wu-Tang Clan released their debut album \"Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers)\" in 1993; initially receiving positive reviews, it has since garnered widespread critical acclaim and is widely considered to be one of the greatest hip hop albums of all time. Members of the group released solo albums between 1994 and 1996. In 1997, the group released their second album, \"Wu-Tang Forever\". It debuted atop the \"Billboard\" 200 and was nominated for Best Rap Album at the 1998 Grammy Awards. The group later released the albums \"The W\" (2000), \"Iron Flag\" (2001), \"8 Diagrams\" (2007), and \"A Better Tomorrow\" (2014), to less popularity. The only copy of their seventh album, \"Once Upon a Time in Shaolin\" (2015), was purchased for $2 million by former hedge fund manager Martin Shkreli.\nWu-Tang Clan has introduced and launched the careers of a number of affiliated artists and groups, collectively known as the Wu-Tang Killa Bees.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nIn the late 1980s, cousins Robert Diggs, Gary Grice, and Russell Jones formed a group named Force of the Imperial Master, also known as the All in Together Now Crew. Each member recorded under an alias: Diggs as Prince Rakeem or The Scientist, Grice as The Genius, and Jones as The Specialist. The group never signed to a major label, but caught the attention of the New York City rap scene and was recognized by rapper Biz Markie. By 1991, The Genius and Prince Rakeem were signed to separate record labels. The Genius released \"Words from the Genius\" (1991) on Cold Chillin' Records and Prince Rakeem released \"Ooh I Love You Rakeem\" (1991) on Tommy Boy Records. Both were soon dropped by their labels. They then adopted new monikers; The Genius became GZA (pronounced \"jizza\"), and Prince Rakeem became RZA (pronounced \"rizza\"). The Specialist also took on a new name and became known as Ol' Dirty Bastard.\nRZA began collaborating with Dennis Coles, later known as Ghostface Killah, another rapper from the Stapleton Houses in Staten Island. The duo decided to create a hip hop group whose ethos would be a blend of \"Eastern philosophy picked up from kung fu movies, Five-Percent Nation teachings picked up on the New York streets, and comic books\". Wu-Tang Clan assembled in late 1992, with RZA as the \"de facto\" leader and the group's producer. RZA and Ol' Dirty Bastard adopted the name for the group after the film \"Shaolin and Wu Tang\". The group developed backronyms for the name (as hip hop pioneers such as KRS-One and Big Daddy Kane did with their names), including \"We Usually Take All Niggas' Garments\", \"Witty Unpredictable Talent And Natural Game\", and \"Wisdom of the Universe, and the Truth of Allah for the Nation of the Gods\".\n1992\u201396: \"Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers)\" and solo albums.\nWu-Tang Clan became known in 1993 following the release of the independent single \"Protect Ya Neck\", which helped gain the group a sizable underground following. Though there was some difficulty in finding a record label that would sign the Wu-Tang Clan while still allowing each member to record solo albums with other labels, Loud/RCA finally agreed, releasing their debut album, \"Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers)\", in November 1993. The album loosely adopted a Shaolin vs. Wu-Tang theme, dividing the album into Shaolin and Wu-Tang sections. The album received critical acclaim, and to date is regarded as one of the greatest hip hop albums of all time. The success of their debut album established the group as a creative and influential force in the 1990s, allowing individual members to negotiate solo contracts. RZA spoke on the Wu-Tang Clan's unorthodox business model:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We reinvented the way hip hop was structured, and what I mean is, you have a group signed to a label, yet the infrastructure of our deal was like anyone else's [...] We still could negotiate with any label we wanted, like Meth went with Def Jam, Rae stayed with Loud, Ghost went with Sony, GZA went with Geffen Records, feel me? [...] And all these labels still put \"Razor Sharp Records\" on the credits [...] Wu Tang was a financial movement. So what do you wanna diversify...? [...] Your assets?\u2014\u200a\nIn 1994, RZA founded the group Gravediggaz with Prince Paul, Frukwan (both of Stetsasonic) and Poetic. In August of the same year, the group released \"6 Feet Deep\", which became one of the best known works to emerge from the horrorcore subgenre.\nRZA held the role of primary producer for the first wave of the group members' solo albums, producing out of his basement studio in Staten Island. In November 1994, Method Man's debut album, \"Tical\", was released. RZA's hands-on approach to \"Tical\" extended beyond his merely creating the beats to devising song concepts and structures. The track \"All I Need\" from \"Tical\" was the winner of the \"Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group\" at the 1995 Grammy Awards. Ol' Dirty Bastard's debut album, \"\", was released in March 1995, and is considered a hip hop classic. Raekwon's debut studio album, \"Only Built 4 Cuban Linx...\", was released in August 1995. It featured all but one member of the Wu-Tang Clan, and featured the debut of Cappadonna, who later joined the group. The album is also credited with reviving the mafioso rap subgenre. GZA's debut album, \"Liquid Swords\", was released in November 1995. \"Liquid Swords\" features guest appearances from every Wu-Tang Clan member, and is linked together by excerpts from the 1980 movie \"Shogun Assassin\". Ghostface Killah released his first solo album, \"Ironman\", in October 1996. \"Ironman\" was critically acclaimed and is widely considered to be one of the best of Wu-Tang solo albums.\n1997\u20132000: \"Wu-Tang Forever\", diversification and second string of solo albums.\nWu-Tang Clan re-assembled and released their second studio album, \"Wu-Tang Forever\", in June 1997; it debuted at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200. The album's lead single, \"Triumph\", is over five minutes long, features nine verses (one from each member plus Cappadonna and excluding Ol' Dirty Bastard who appeared on the intro and bridge), and no hook or a repeated phrase. The album was produced by RZA and his prot\u00e9g\u00e9s True Master and 4th Disciple. The group's lyrics differed significantly from those of \"36 Chambers\", with many verses written in a dense stream of consciousness form heavily influenced by the teachings of the Five-Percent Nation. \"Wu-Tang Forever\" was nominated for Best Rap Album at the 1998 Grammy Awards, losing to Puff Daddy; Ol' Dirty Bastard infamously protested the loss by interrupting Shawn Colvin's acceptance speech for Song of the Year.\nKillah Priest, a close associate of the group, released \"Heavy Mental\" in March 1998. That same month, Cappadonna released his debut album \"The Pillage\". Affiliated groups Sunz of Man and Killarmy also released well-received albums, followed by \"\"\u2014a compilation album released in 1998, showcasing these and more Wu-affiliated artists, and including new solo tracks from the group members themselves. \"The Swarm\" sold well and was certified gold. There was also a long line of releases from secondary affiliates such as Popa Wu, Shyheim, GP Wu, and Wu-Syndicate. Second albums from Gravediggaz and Killarmy, as well as a greatest hits album and a b-sides compilation, were also released.\nThe second round of solo albums from Wu-Tang Clan members included second albums from the five members who had already released albums, as well as debuts from all the remaining members, with the exception of Masta Killa. In the space of two years, RZA's \"Bobby Digital In Stereo\", Method Man's ' and \"Blackout!\" (with Redman), GZA's \"Beneath the Surface\", Ol' Dirty Bastard's \"Nigga Please\", U-God's \"Golden Arms Redemption\", Raekwon's \"Immobilarity\", Ghostface Killah's \"Supreme Clientele\" and Inspectah Deck's \"Uncontrolled Substance\" were all released (seven of them being released in the space of seven months between June 1999 and January 2000). RZA also composed the score for the film ', directed by Jim Jarmusch, while he and other Wu-Tang members contributed music to a companion \"music inspired by the film\" album.\nThe frequent release of Wu-Tang Clan content between 1997 and 2000 was considered by some critics to have resulted in an oversaturation that was responsible for the group's decline in popularity.\n2000\u201301: \"The W\" and \"Iron Flag\".\nThe group reconvened again for their third album, \"The W\". Despite his incarceration in California for violating the terms of his probation, Ol' Dirty Bastard was on the song \"Conditioner\", featuring Snoop Dogg. Ol' Dirty Bastard's vocals were recorded via prison telephones.\"The W\" was released in November 2000, and was mostly well received by critics, and included the single \"Gravel Pit\". The album reached platinum status.\nIn 2001, Wu-Tang Clan released their fourth album, \"Iron Flag\". While originally featured on the cover of \"Iron Flag\", Cappadonna was airbrushed out of the artwork and largely absent from the album entirely. This may be related to tension that arose within the group when it was revealed that Cappadonna's manager was, or had been, a police informant, a revelation that also brought on the manager's subsequent firing. Cappadonna continued collaborating and touring with the group in the following years.\n2004: Issues and resurgence.\nIn early 2004, U-God allegedly left the group. A DVD titled \"Rise of a Fallen Soldier\" was released detailing his problems, which were mostly with his treatment by RZA, who he claimed had hindered his success as a solo artist. U-God formed a group of young proteg\u00e9s called the Hillside Scramblers with whom he released the album \"U-Godzilla Presents the Hillside Scramblers\" in March 2004. The dispute culminated in a heated phone conversation between RZA and U-God on live radio, which ultimately saw the two reconcile. He has since returned to the group.\nIn 2004, the group embarked on a short European tour before coming together as a complete group for the first time in several years to headline the Rock the Bells festival in California. The concert was released on CD under the name '. On October 26, 2004, the group released a greatest hits album, '.\nDeath of Ol' Dirty Bastard.\nOl' Dirty Bastard's career was tumultuous. His run-ins with the law were well publicized\u2014he was arrested several times for offenses including assault, shoplifting, wearing body armor after being convicted of a felony, and possession of cocaine, and he missed multiple court dates. In April 2001, he was sentenced to two to four years in prison. Once released from prison, he signed a million-dollar contract with Roc-A-Fella Records.\nOn November 13, 2004, Ol' Dirty Bastard collapsed at Wu-Tang's recording studio in New York City, and was pronounced dead later that night. Wu-Tang Clan paid him homage a number of times: in August 2006, one of his sons came out at a Wu-Tang concert at Webster Hall and rapped \"Brooklyn Zoo\", along with his mother, and during a concert at the Hammerstein Ballroom the Clan brought his mother out on stage for a sing-along to \"Shimmy Shimmy Ya\".\n2005\u201310: Solo albums and \"8 Diagrams\".\nIn 2005, RZA released a book titled \"The Wu-Tang Manual\". In the same year, U-God's second album, \"Mr. Xcitement\" and a collaboration between GZA and producer DJ Muggs, entitled \"Grandmasters\" were also released.\nOn March 28, 2006, Ghostface Killah released \"Fishscale\", to much critical acclaim and some commercial success. The entire group, including Cappadonna and the late Ol' Dirty Bastard, appeared on the track \"9 Milli Bros\". The same year, Ghostface Killah released \"More Fish\".\nOn June 25, 2006, Inspectah Deck released an album entitled \"The Resident Patient\". Also released in 2006 were Masta Killa's second studio album, \"Made in Brooklyn\", and Method Man's \".\" Ghostface Killah released his seventh full-length album, \"The Big Doe Rehab\", in December 2007.\nIn 2007, Wu-Tang Clan released their fifth album, \"8 Diagrams,\" on Steve Rifkind's new label SRC Records. This album marked the inclusion of Cappadonna as an official member of the group. In an interview with MTV.com, Ghostface Killah stated that he was upset with RZA for starting the \"8 Diagrams\" project while he was in the middle of writing and recording \"The Big Doe Rehab\", as well as giving \"8 Diagrams\" the same release date as \"The Big Doe Rehab\", for which RZA rescheduled a release date one week later. The outcome of \"8 Diagrams\" received mixed views from both fans and critics, and is regarded as being RZA's most experimental work to date. Raekwon and Ghostface Killah were unhappy with the album, and proposed recording a group album titled \"Shaolin Vs. Wu-Tan\" without RZA production. That album would eventually become Raekwon's fifth solo album \"Shaolin vs. Wu-Tang\".\nIn 2008, RZA released \"Digi Snacks,\" under the name Bobby Digital. The album included lesser-known Wu-Tang Clan affiliates such as Freemurder, Killa Sin, Black Knights, and others. In the same year, GZA released the album \"Pro Tools\". In September 2008, RZA announced that he had signed a deal with digital music company The Orchard to release the Wu-Tang Clan's back catalogue worldwide digitally, for the first time. In addition to forthcoming material, the Wu-Tang Clan's catalogue includes 13 previous releases that have been previously unavailable digitally, including recordings by the group as a whole, U-God, Wu-Syndicate, Killarmy, Shyheim, West Coast Killa Beez, Black Knights and others, and would be available online beginning September 23. RZA said: \"The time is right to bring some older Wu material to the masses digitally. Our fans have been dedicated and patient and they're hungry to hear the music that has set us apart from so many others. Hip-hop is alive in Wu Music, and with The Orchard, we've got a solid partner that understands our audience and is committed to doing all they can to help us reach the fans. I'm definitely looking forward to working with them to see what else we all come up with. There's much more to come\".\nIn 2009, U-God released his third solo album, \"Dopium\", which features guest appearances from several Wu-Tang Clan members, and affiliates, among others, and was met with mostly lukewarm reviews. \"Wu-Tang Chamber Music\" was released in the same year, a side project executively produced by RZA, featuring live instrumentation from a Brooklyn soul band The Revelations. The album features appearances from five Wu-Tang Clan members, along with AZ, Kool G Rap, Cormega, Havoc, Sean Price, and M.O.P. Its first single, \"Harbor Masters\" featured Ghostface Killah, Inspectah Deck, and AZ. RZA spoke about the album to Billboard.com: \"I think the \"Chamber Music\" title is very fitting. This music is totally in the chamber, or in the mind-frame of Wu-Tang like in the [\"Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers)\"] days. But it's not a Wu-Tang album. The whole Clan's not on this album. But it couldn't be in any other category but Wu-Tang\".\nRaekwon's \"Only Built 4 Cuban Linx... Pt. II\" was released in September 2009, which features guest appearances from several big-name artists, and Clan members, with Ghostface being the most prominent, and also production from RZA, Dr. Dre, Pete Rock, and J Dilla, among others. The album was initially intended to be released on Dr. Dre's Aftermath Records. The album debuted at number 4 on the \"Billboard\" 200 and at number 2 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, and has been praised by most music critics. Several weeks later, Ghostface Killah released \"\".\nTalk of the album \"Shaolin vs. Wu-Tang\" re-surfaced in July 2009; originally planned as a Wu-Tang album without RZA's input. The project evolved to include RZA only vocally, with no contribution to production. Raekwon stated \"[It'll] be alter egos challenging each other, really allowing RZA to fall back on the production and allowing us to give him a flashback memory to the things we know we need from the abbot [RZA]. We want him to be involved [with the album as an MC], but the concept was for him not to be involved production-wise\". Speaking to MTV.com, Method Man revealed his, Ghostface Killah's and Raekwon's plans to record a separate album as a trio: \"I don't want to say it's written in stone, but it's in discussion. I want some feedback from the fans to see how they would take that. RZA produced tracks, some other outside producers, of course, and we gonna have Wu-Tang members on the album, but it'll be a Rae, Ghost and Meth album\". Soon after, Ghostface Killah cemented the details: the record, featuring other Wu-Tang Clan members, was to consist primarily of him, Method Man, and Raekwon. The title, as announced in three separate trailers (directed by Rik Cordero) promoting the upcoming release, is \"Wu-Massacre\". Speaking on their willingness to complete the album, Ghostface Killah estimated the release date of the album to be the end of 2009 or January 2010. It was then announced that the album would be pushed back from December to March 30, 2010; the single, \"Meth vs. Chef Part II\", was released after the announcement. Produced by Mathematics, it is an update of the song \"Meth vs. Chef\" from Method Man's first solo album, \"Tical\", featuring verses by only Method Man and Raekwon. It had been confirmed by Raekwon that \"Shaolin vs. Wu-Tang\" would in fact be his next solo album and that \"Wu-Massacre\" is a separate album, while the rapper stated that he himself had petitioned to have \"Wu-Massacre\"'s release date postponed in order to yield more studio time.\nOn February 25, 2011, \"Wu Tang Live At The Palladium NYC\" was released through the group's official Facebook page as a collectors digital download. This included exclusive, unreleased freestyles. It was limited to 100 downloads before the page was disabled after this figure was reached.\n2011\u2013present: \"A Better Tomorrow\", and \"Once Upon a Time in Shaolin\".\n\"A Better Tomorrow\".\nOn June 29, 2011, Raekwon announced that the group were working on a new studio album, still in early stages. Ghostface Killah later said that the album would be released in May 2012.\nMembers went back and forth on the issue. While GZA hinted that a new album was unlikely, the RZA said a new Wu-Tang Clan album might happen after all, on the occasion of the group's 20th anniversary, though Raekwon doubted it.\nOn January 9, 2013, work on the sixth Wu-Tang Clan album was announced via the group's official Facebook page. In early March 2013 Method Man announced that the Clan was working on a sixth studio album and it would be released during 2013 in celebration of their 20-year anniversary since \"36 Chambers\". Cappadonna has said the album is in recording process taking place in New York, Los Angeles and the Wu mansion in New Jersey. RZA has also said he had talked to Adrian Younge about working on a song for the album. On April 11, 2013, it was announced via a press release that their upcoming sixth studio album would be titled, \"A Better Tomorrow\" and was set to be released in July 2013. During late April 2013, the Clan performed at the 2013 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival. On May 17, an unreleased Wu-Tang song titled \"Execution in Autumn\" was released for purchase through RZA's record label Soul Temple Records. They performed at the 2013 HOT 97 Summer Jam at MetLife Stadium in New Jersey, twenty years after they performed at the first annual Summer Jam concert. On June 5, 2013, the first promotional single \"Family Reunion\" featuring Masta Killah, Method Man, Ghostface Killah and RZA was released via the Soul Temple Records website.\nIn June 2013 RZA said so far every member of the Clan except Raekwon and GZA had put in work on the \"A Better Tomorrow\" album and that recording was being done at the Wu-Mansion, and the Wu-Mansion West. Unreleased verses from Ol' Dirty Bastard will also be featured on the album. He also stated he was hoping to release the album in November 2013. In July 2013 Cappadonna indicated the album was half way finished. Once November 2013 arrived, RZA gave an update on the album, saying that not every member had been significantly working on the album. He gave credit to Method Man, Cappadonna, U-God and Masta Killa for working hard on the album, while saying he needed more effort from Ghostface, Raekwon and GZA. Shortly after Method Man stated that Raekwon had not worked on the album at all, and Ghostface had only recorded two songs for the album so far. In late November, RZA suggested that the album was approximately six weeks from completion. In January 2014, the group posted a message on their Facebook page, saying: \"The new Wu album 'A Better Tomorrow' coming soon.\" After several disputes between Raekwon and RZA about the direction of the group and album, they reconciled, with the latter agreeing to record verses for \"A Better Tomorrow\". On October 3, 2014, it was announced that the album will arrive December 2, 2014, courtesy of a new deal with Warner Bros. Records. The album was released late 2014.\n\"Once Upon a Time in Shaolin\".\nIn March 2014 it was reported that in addition to work on \"A Better Tomorrow\", a Wu-Tang Clan compilation album entitled \"The Wu \u2013 Once Upon A Time In Shaolin\" had been recorded, with Wu-Tang-affiliated producer Cilvaringz as the primary producer instead of RZA. The album, a double album consisting of 31 tracks, was not given a conventional commercial release and only one copy has been produced; the copy toured in museums, art galleries and music festivals before being sold at a high price to a single individual. In August 2014, a reporter from \"Forbes\" traveled to Marrakesh to meet Cilvaringz and hear a 51-second snippet of a song from the album, which featured Cher. The snippet was subsequently put on their website. The album is encased in a handcrafted silver-and-nickel box made by British-Moroccan artist Yahya and features never-before-heard music recorded over years. RZA stated he has been receiving multiple million dollar offers for the album. Despite the album's exclusivity it made an appearance in electronic dance music producer Skrillex's music video for his song \"Fuck That\" even though he did not purchase the project. The album was sold through Paddle8, an online auction house, for $2 million to Martin Shkreli. When the FBI arrested Martin Shkreli on December 17, 2015, they did not seize the Wu-Tang Clan album. Following the victory of Republican candidate Donald Trump in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, Shkreli broadcast excerpts from the album on streaming platforms Periscope and Hitbox.tv.\nIn July 2021, it was announced that the album had been again sold by the US government for an undisclosed amount (later revealed as $4 million USD), following Shkreli handing it over to the FBI in 2018 after being convicted of defrauding investors. The new owner of the album is the PleasrDAO group.\n\"The Saga Continues\".\nOn August 25, 2017, Wu-Tang Clan released the song, \"People Say\", which featured Redman. RZA announced that the song would be part of an upcoming album, titled \"The Saga Continues\". The album was released on October 13 under the name \"Wu-Tang\", as U-God was absent from it. The Saga Continues was primarily produced by Mathematics, and debuted at number 15 on the Billboard 200.\nLas Vegas residency and \"Black Samson, the Bastard Swordsman\".\nIn December 2023, it was announced that Wu-Tang Clan would host \"Wu-Tang Clan: The Saga Continues\u2026 The Las Vegas Residency\" at The Theater at Virgin Hotels in Paradise, Nevada; in the process, they became the first hip-hop act to ever receive an artist residency. The collective started performing at the residency in February 2024.\nOn February 6, 2025, Wu-Tang Clan announced that they would release a new joint project with producer and tour DJ Mathematics, titled \"Black Samson, the Bastard Swordsman\", on April 12 of the same year, in coincidence with Record Store Day. The distribution of the album, which was inspired by Blaxploitation movies and marked the first release to feature the entire formation of the collective since 2014, would be initially limited to 5,000 2xLP copies sold at participating Record Store Day retailers.\nFinal Tour.\nOn February 24, 2025 the group announced their final tour, \"\" with performance dates across North America from June through July of 2025. The final concert was held in Philadelphia on July 18, 2025.\nArtistry.\nProduction.\nRZA's production was described by AllMusic as \"consisting of stark, booming beats and chilling samples (heavily drawing from vintage soul records as well as kung fu movies),\" summarizing it as \"lean, menacing.\" According to RZA, he tries to have no more than 20\u201325% sampling on a record, something starkly different from many other major hip hop groups. He uses \"the sampler more like a painter's palette than a Xerox. Then again, I might use it as a Xerox if I find rare beats that nobody had in their crates yet\". He played much of the piano, with Bill Evans and Thelonious Monk as major influences; he created the piano part to \"Da Mystery of Chessboxin'\" after watching the Thelonious Monk documentary, \"Straight, No Chaser\".\nRZA's production technique, specifically the manner of chopping up and/or speeding or slowing soul samples, has been picked up by producers including Kanye West and Just Blaze. West's take on RZA's style briefly flooded the rap market with what was dubbed \"chipmunk soul\", the pitch bending of a vocal sample to where it sounded as though the singer had inhaled helium. Several producers copied the style, creating other offshoots. West has admitted that his style was distinctly influenced by RZA's production and RZA has acknowledged his influence in an issue of \"Scratch\" magazine, saying he wished he had produced \"Jesus Walks\" and \"Breathe\", two 2004 hits produced by Kanye West and Just Blaze, respectively. Kanye West commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Wu-Tang? Me and my friends talk about this all the time... We think Wu-Tang had one of the biggest impacts as far as a movement. From slang to style of dress, skits, the samples. Similar to the [production] style I use, RZA has been doing that.\nLyrics.\nRaekwon's \"Only Built 4 Cuban Linx...\" helped (with the likes of Kool G Rap) popularize mafioso rap, which remained widespread for more than half a decade. The landmark album touted a lifestyle patterned on drug dealing, regrets of living in harsh conditions, and partying (including popularizing the Cristal brand of champagne) which Nas, Mobb Deep, Notorious B.I.G., Jay-Z, and other popular artists all borrowed and/or expanded upon these themes at points in their respective careers.\nThe Wu-Tang Clan's slang has long been a staple of their music, wherein members would blend Five Percenter terms, Kung Fu /oriental words, and comic book and street terms to create their own nicknames for actions, people, places, and things (such as the christening of Staten Island as \"Shaolin Land\" and money as \"C.R.E.A.M.\"). RZA noted in \"The Wu-Tang Manual\", that Raekwon was the resident \"slang-master\" of a great deal of the slang used by the group.\nSyndication.\nVideo games.\nAll nine original members of the group were featured in the game ', released for the PlayStation on October 31, 1999, as well as a special collector's edition controller. Ghostface Killah and Method Man play themselves in all three games in the Def Jam series \"Def Jam Vendetta\", ', and \"\". The video games also feature Wu-Tang affiliate Redman.\nMethod Man is an avid fan of video games himself and has publicly stated that he loves playing \"SOCOM\" online with other PlayStation 2 users, and is part of an online clan (\"KMA/Kiss My Ass\"). His \"SOCOM II\" name is \"ICU\". He has a fellow \"SOCOM\" player featured on a skit on his album \"4:21... The Day After\".\nIn \"Army of Two\", main character Salem talks about Wu-Tang asking his teammate Rios who the best member is. Salem says it's RZA but he says Ghostface Killah is pretty good himself. In the ending cut scene, a reference is made when Salem says \"Survey says?\" and Rios replies \"You're dead\". The exchange referenced the lyric, \"And the survey says? / You're dead!\" from \"Wu-Tang Clan Ain't Nuthin' Ta F' Wit\", from the album \"Enter the Wu-Tang Clan (36 Chambers)\".\nSeveral tracks by Clan members and affiliates such as Method Man, Ghostface, Cappadonna, Trife, DJ Mathematics and others were featured in the 2006 game \"Saints Row\".\n\"Afro Samurai\", based on the TV series, was released in January 2009 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360. Its soundtrack, like the show, was produced by RZA.\nIn June 2025, the group announced cooperative action RPG \"Wu-Tang: Rise of the Deceiver.\"\nClothing line.\nOliver \"Power\" Grant was one of the first to move from music to clothes. The Clan's executive producer, Grant began making clothes in the early 1990s, with little success. But in 1995, after the platinum success of \"Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers)\", manufacturers who earlier wouldn't extend Power credit saw the potential. He opened four Wu Wear stores, in New York City, Los Angeles, Atlanta and Norfolk, Virginia. The line was carried in Macy's, Rich's, and d.e.m.o, among others. Power says he earned $10 million in 1998.\nMethod Man was unhappy with the decision to bring Wu-Tang into the fashion world with Wu Wear, despite the brand being a major money-maker for the group. \"When Wu-Wear started making shoes and sneakers and pants, it was shoddy material. I never rocked that shit.\"\n\"I'm going to bring out Dirty Wear,\" declared ODB. \"A set of ready-worn clothes: 'Dirty Wear, for the girl who likes to wear her panties three days in a row.'\"\nIn 1999, Nike released a Wu-Tang Clan themed dunk high. The shoes were produced in low quantities. Their rarity and popularity makes them very sought after, with reseller prices as much as $7,500.\nA partnership between Wu-Tang and the Alife NYC clothing group took place in 2007 through 2008 for an exclusive series of custom sneakers, T-shirts, hoodies and other accessories for men and women. The collection was named \"A Wu-Tang Life\".\nTelevision.\nDocumentaries.\n\"Wu-Tang Revealed\", a GZA-directed documentary, promised to show behind the scenes of the Clan, has yet to be released.\n\"U-God: Rise of a Fallen Soldier\" details U-God's side of the struggle between him and RZA circa 2004\u20132005.\nGerald K. Barclay directed the Wu-Tang documentary, entitled \"Wu: The Story of the Wu-Tang Clan\", which premiered on BET on November 13, 2008. The documentary was released on DVD on November 18, 2008.\nOn November 10, 2009, a documentary on Ol' Dirty Bastard was released, entitled \"Dirty: The Official ODB Biography\". The documentary features interviews and stories from his family members, Wu-Tang members, and affiliates, as well as old interviews with Ol' Dirty, and live performances.\n\"Wu Tang Saga\", starring Cappadonna and featuring footage of the Clan dating back to the early nineties through their most recent tours was released on February 25, 2010.\nIn May 2019, Showtime premiered the four-episode documentary series \"\". The documentary was created by Sacha Jenkins and tells a story of the New York-based hip-hop group Wu-Tang Clan from their earliest times to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the group. The series features interviews from all living members of the Wu-Tang Clan. A 7-track EP was released on May 17, 2019, one week after the documentary premiered.\nOn September 16, 2025, German television broadcaster NDR released the documentary \"Evil-E. - Eva Ries und der Wu-Tang Clan\", revolving around the story of the group's longtime manager Eva Ries and her role in its rise to fame. The documentary contains many exclusive interviews and long-lost original footage from touring and recording sessions.\n\"Wu-Tang: An American Saga\".\nOn September 4, 2019, Hulu released \"\", a fictionalized account of the formation of the Wu-Tang Clan. The drama web series was created by RZA and Alex Tse. In January 2020, Hulu renewed the series for a second season. In November 2021, the series was renewed for a third and final season which premiered on February 15, 2023 and concluded on April 5, 2023.\nCollaborators.\nThe Wu-Tang Clan has a wide range of collaborators and associates. Close collaborators to individual members or the group as a whole include or have included mainly East Coast\u2013based artists, including Redman, Mobb Deep, Busta Rhymes, Erick Sermon, Nas, Pete Rock, and others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33137", "revid": "47614224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33137", "title": "Western film (genre)", "text": ""}
{"id": "33138", "revid": "49709", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33138", "title": "Werner Herzog", "text": "German director, producer, screenwriter (born 1942)\nWerner Herzog (; n\u00e9 Stipeti\u0107; born 5 September 1942) is a German filmmaker, actor, opera director, and author. Regarded as a pioneer of New German Cinema, his films often feature ambitious protagonists with impossible dreams, people with unusual talents in obscure fields, or individuals in conflict with nature. His style involves avoiding storyboards, emphasizing improvisation, and placing his cast and crew into real situations mirroring those in the film on which they are working.\nIn 1961, when Herzog was 19, he started work on his first film, \"Herakles\". He has since produced, written, and directed the feature films \"Aguirre, the Wrath of God\" (1972), \"The Enigma of Kaspar Hauser\" (1974), \"Heart of Glass\" (1976), \"Stroszek\" (1977), \"Nosferatu the Vampyre\" (1979), \"Fitzcarraldo\" (1982), \"Cobra Verde\" (1987), \"Invincible\" (2001), and \"\" (2009) as well as the documentary films \"Lessons of Darkness\" (1992), \"Little Dieter Needs to Fly\" (1997), \"My Best Fiend\" (1999), \"Grizzly Man\" (2005), \"Encounters at the End of the World\" (2007), \"Cave of Forgotten Dreams\" (2010), and \"Into the Abyss\" (2011). He has also published over 12 books of prose and directed many operas.\nFrench filmmaker Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut once called Herzog \"the most important film director alive\". American film critic Roger Ebert said that Herzog \"has never created a single film that is compromised, shameful, made for pragmatic reasons, or uninteresting. Even his failures are spectacular\". He was named one of the world's 100 most influential people by \"Time\" in 2009.\nEarly life and background.\nHerzog was born Werner Stipeti\u0107 in Munich, German Reich, on 5 September 1942, the son of Elisabeth Stipeti\u0107 and Dietrich Herzog. His mother was Austrian with Croatian ancestry, while his father was German. When he was two weeks old, his mother took refuge in the remote Bavarian village of Sachrang in the Chiemgau Alps, after the house next to theirs was destroyed during an Allied bombing raid in World War II. \nAlongside his older brother Till and younger half-brother Lucki, he grew up without running water, a flushing toilet, or a telephone. Herzog recounted that his family had \"no toys\" and \"no tools\" and said that there was a sense of anarchy, as all the fathers of the village's children were absent. He never saw films, and did not even know cinema existed until a traveling projectionist came by the one-room schoolhouse in Sachrang.\nWhen Herzog was 12, he moved back to Munich with his family. His father had abandoned the family early in his youth, but he later adopted his father's surname (which is German for \"duke\"), as he thought it sounded more impressive for a filmmaker. Herzog once told journalist Brandon Kosters that cave paintings were his \"very first intellectual fascination independent of my family or independent of school. A fascination that I developed myself when I was 12 or 13 years, and it has never left me completely,\" and this inspired later film projects. Herzog made his first phone call when he was 17. Two years later, he started work on his first film, \"Herakles\". \nHerzog says that when he eventually met his father again, \"fairly late in life\", his mother had to translate Werner's German into the Bavarian language, which his father spoke, so the two could communicate. Herzog, aged 13, was told by a bullying music teacher to sing in front of his class at school in what Herzog described as an effort \"to break my back.\" When he adamantly refused, he was almost expelled. The incident scarred him for life. For several years, Herzog avoided music entirely; he didn't listen to it, sing it, or study any instrument. But when he turned 18, he threw himself into it with sudden, intense devotion.\nAt an early age, he experienced a dramatic phase in which he converted to Catholicism, which lasted only a few years. He started to embark on long journeys, some on foot. Around this time, he knew he would be a filmmaker and learned the basics from a few pages in an encyclopedia that provided him with \"everything I needed to get myself started\" as a filmmaker\u2014that, and the 35 mm camera he stole from the Munich Film School. In the commentary for \"Aguirre, the Wrath of God\", he says, \"I don't consider it theft. It was just a necessity. I had some sort of natural right for a camera, a tool to work with\".\nDuring Herzog's last years of high school, no production company was willing to take on his projects, so he worked night shifts as a welder in a steel factory to earn the funds for his first featurettes. When he finished school, but before he formally graduated, he followed his girlfriend to Manchester, England, where he spent several months and learned to speak English. He found the language classes pointless and \"fled\". After graduating from high school, he was intrigued by the post-independence Congo, but in attempting to travel there, reached only the south of Sudan before falling seriously ill. While already making films, he had a brief stint at the University of Munich, where he studied history and literature. Herzog subsequently moved to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to study at Duquesne University.\nCareer.\nEarly and mid-career: 1962\u20132005.\nHerzog, along with Rainer Werner Fassbinder, Wim Wenders, and Volker Schl\u00f6ndorff, led the beginning of the New German Cinema, which included documentarians who filmed on low budgets and were influenced by the French New Wave. He developed a habit of casting professional actors alongside people from the locality in which he was shooting. His films, \"usually set in distinct and unfamiliar landscapes, are imbued with mysticism.\" Herzog says his youthful experience with Catholicism is evident in \"something of a religious echo in my work\".\nIn 1971, while Herzog was location scouting for \"Aguirre, the Wrath of God\" in Peru, he narrowly avoided taking LANSA Flight 508. Herzog's reservation was cancelled due to a last-minute change in itinerary. The plane was later struck by lightning and disintegrated, but one survivor, Juliane Koepcke, lived after a free fall. Long haunted by the event, nearly 30 years later, he made a documentary film, \"Wings of Hope\" (1998), which explored the story of the sole survivor.\nHerzog and his films have been nominated for and won many awards. His first major award was the Silver Bear Extraordinary Prize of the Jury for his first feature film \"Signs of Life\" (\"Nosferatu the Vampyre\" was also nominated for Golden Bear in 1979). Herzog won the Best Director award for \"Fitzcarraldo\" at the 1982 Cannes Film Festival. In 1975, his movie \"The Enigma of Kaspar Hauser\" won the \"Grand Prix Sp\u00e9cial du Jury\" (also known as the \"Silver Palm\") and the Prize of the Ecumenical Jury at the Cannes Festival. Other films directed by Herzog nominated for Golden Palm are: \"Woyzeck\" (1979) and \"Where the Green Ants Dream\" (1984). \nHis films have been nominated at many other festivals around the world: C\u00e9sar Awards (\"Aguirre, the Wrath of God\"), Emmy Awards (\"Little Dieter Needs to Fly\"), European Film Awards (\"My Best Fiend\") and Venice Film Festival (\"Scream of Stone\" and \"The Wild Blue Yonder\"). In 1987, Herzog and his half-brother Lucki Stipeti\u0107 won the Bavarian Film Award for Best Producing for the film \"Cobra Verde\". In 2002, he won the Dragon of Dragons Honorary Award at the Krak\u00f3w Film Festival.\nHerzog once promised to eat his shoe if Errol Morris completed a film project on pet cemeteries that he had been working on, to challenge and motivate Morris, as he perceived Morris to be incapable of following up on the projects he conceived. In 1978, when the film \"Gates of Heaven\" premiered, Herzog cooked and publicly ate his shoe; the event was later incorporated into a short documentary, \"Werner Herzog Eats His Shoe\" (1980), by Les Blank. Herzog suggested that he hoped the act would serve to encourage anyone having difficulty bringing a project to fruition.\nIn the winter of 1974, German-French writer Lotte H. Eisner, a friend and mentor of Herzog's since the late 1950s, fell gravely ill. Herzog walked from Munich to Paris, believing that she would not die if he did so. During these travels, which took him three weeks, he kept a diary that was eventually published as \"Of Walking in Ice\". Eight years later, the 87-year-old Eisner allegedly complained to Herzog of her infirmities and told him, \"I am saturated with life. There is still this spell upon me that I must not die\u2014can you lift it?\". He says that he agreed to do so, and she died eight days later.\nWerner Herzog moved to Los Angeles with his wife in the late 1990s. He said of the city, \"Wherever you look is an immense depth, a tumult that resonates with me. New York [City] is more concerned with finance than anything else. It doesn't create culture, only consumes it; most of what you find in New York comes from elsewhere. Things actually get done in Los Angeles. Look beyond the glitz and glamour of Hollywood and a wild excitement of intense dreams opens up; it has more horizons than any other place. There is a great deal of industry in the city and a real working class; I also appreciate the vibrant presence of the Mexicans.\"\nLater directorial career: 2006 onwards.\nHerzog was honored at the 49th San Francisco International Film Festival, receiving the 2006 Film Society Directing Award. Four of his films have been shown at the San Francisco International Film Festival: \"Wodaabe \u2013 Herdsmen of the Sun\" in 1990, \"Bells from the Deep\" in 1993, \"Lessons of Darkness\" in 1993, and \"The Wild Blue Yonder\" in 2006.\n\"Grizzly Man\", a documentary directed by Herzog, was awarded the Alfred P. Sloan Prize at the 2005 Sundance Film Festival. He seemed to attract danger even in more suburban settings. In 2006, Herzog was shot with an air rifle in the abdomen while on Skyline Drive in Los Angeles. He had been giving an interview on \"Grizzly Man\" to Mark Kermode of the BBC. Herzog continued the interview without seeking medical treatment, stating \"it's not significant\". It was later revealed that the shooter was a crazed fan. Regarding the incident, Herzog later said, \"I seem to attract the clinically insane.\" In a 2021 episode of \"Diminishing Returns\" podcast covering Herzog's film \"Stroszek\", presenter Dallas Campbell called this incident a hoax, claiming to be friends with the director of the piece and that the incident was \"set up\". \nHerzog's April 2007 appearance at the Ebertfest in Champaign, Illinois, earned him the Golden Thumb Award, and an engraved glockenspiel given by a young film maker inspired by his films. \"Encounters at the End of the World\", set in Antarctica, won the award for Best Documentary at the 2008 Edinburgh International Film Festival and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature, Herzog's first Oscar nomination. In 2009, Herzog became the only filmmaker in recent history to enter two films in competition in the same year at the Venice Film Festival. Herzog's \"\" was entered into the festival's official competition schedule, and his \"My Son, My Son, What Have Ye Done?\" entered the competition as a \"surprise film\". Herzog also provided the narration for the short film \"Plastic Bag\", directed by Ramin Bahrani, which was the opening-night film in the Corto Cortissimo section of the festival.\nHerzog completed a documentary called \"Cave of Forgotten Dreams\" in 2010, which shows his journey into the Chauvet Cave in France. Although generally skeptical of 3D film as a format, Herzog premiered the film at the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival in three dimensional form and had its European premiere at the 2011 Berlinale. Also in 2010, Herzog co-directed with Dimitry Vasuykov \"\", which portrays the life of fur trappers and their families in the Siberian part of the Taiga; it premiered at the 2010 Telluride Film Festival.\nHerzog has narrated many of his documentary films.\nIn 2011, Herzog competed with Ridley Scott to make a film based on the life of British explorer Gertrude Bell. In 2012, it was confirmed that Herzog would start production on his long-in-development project in March 2013 in Morocco with Naomi Watts to play Gertrude Bell along with Robert Pattinson to play T. E. Lawrence and Jude Law to play Henry Cadogan. The film was completed in 2014 with a different cast: Nicole Kidman as Gertrude Bell, James Franco as Henry Cadogan, Damian Lewis as Charles Doughty-Wylie, and Robert Pattinson as a 22-year-old archaeologist T. E. Lawrence.\" Queen of the Desert\" had its world premiere at the 2015 Berlin International Film Festival.\nIn 2015, Herzog shot a feature film, \"Salt and Fire\", in Bolivia, starring Veronica Ferres, Michael Shannon, and Gael Garc\u00eda Bernal. It is described as a \"highly explosive drama inspired by a short story by Tom Bissell\".\nActing and other endeavours.\nDissatisfied with the way film schools are run, in 2009, Herzog founded his own Rogue Film School. For the students, Herzog has said, \"I prefer people who have worked as bouncers in a sex club, or have been wardens in the lunatic asylum. You must live life in its very elementary forms. The Costa Ricans have a very nice word for it: \"pura vida\". It doesn't mean just purity of life, but the raw, stark-naked quality of life. And that's what makes young people more into a filmmaker than academia.\" Notable alumni include Keirda Bahruth, Nir Sa'ar, Bob Baldori, Sean Gill, Frederick Kroetsch, and George Hickenlooper.\nHerzog was selected to be the president of the jury at the 60th Berlin International Film Festival in 2010.\nIn 2010, he expanded his reach by performing a voiceover for an animated television program for the first time, appearing in \"The Boondocks\" in its third-season premiere episode \"It's a Black President, Huey Freeman\". In the episode, he played a fictional cameo of himself filming a documentary about the series' cast of characters and their actions during the 2008 election of Barack Obama.\nContinuing with voice work, Herzog played Walter Hotenhoffer (formerly known as Augustus Gloop) in \"The Simpsons\" episode \"The Scorpion's Tale\", which aired in March 2011. The next year, he also appeared in the eighth-season episode of \"American Dad!\", called \"Ricky Spanish\". He lent his voice to a recurring character during the fourth season of the Adult Swim animated series \"Metalocalypse\". In 2015, he voiced a guest character Old Reptile, an affiliate of Shrimply Pibbles' for Adult Swim's \"Rick and Morty\".\nHe appeared in person opposite Tom Cruise as the villain Zec Chelovek in the 2012 action film \"Jack Reacher\". Herzog gained attention in 2013 when he released a 35-minute public service announcement-style documentary, \"From One Second to the Next\", demonstrating the danger of texting while driving and financed by AT&amp;T, Sprint, Verizon, and T-Mobile as part of their It Can Wait driver safety campaign. The film, which documents four stories in which texting and driving led to tragedy or death, initially received more than 1.7 million YouTube views and was subsequently distributed to over 40,000 high schools. In July 2013, Herzog contributed to an art installation entitled \"Hearsay of the Soul\", for the Whitney Biennial, which was later acquired as a permanent exhibit by the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles. In late 2013, he voiced some of the English-language dub of Hayao Miyazaki's \"The Wind Rises\".\nIn 2019, Herzog joined the cast of the Disney+ live-action \"Star Wars\" television series \"The Mandalorian\", portraying The Client, a character with nebulous connections to the Empire. Herzog accepted the role after being impressed with the screenplay, although he said he had never seen any of the \"Star Wars\" films.\nIn June 2022, Herzog published his debut novel, titled \"The Twilight World\", telling the story of Hiroo Onoda, a Japanese soldier who had refused to surrender for decades while hiding in the jungle of a Philippine island. Herzog had met Onoda in Tokyo more than two decades before, and the two had discussed the jungle; Herzog used jungles as settings of many of his important works. Herzog said his novel was a fictional account of Onoda's ordeal of being stranded in a jungle fighting a war that had officially ended. He has said, \"Most details are factually correct; some are not\".\nFilm theory.\nStyle.\nHerzog's films have received considerable critical acclaim and achieved popularity on the art house circuit. They have also been the subject of controversy in regard to their themes and messages, especially the circumstances surrounding their creation. A notable example is \"Fitzcarraldo\", in which the obsessiveness of the central character was reflected by the director during the making of the film. \"Burden of Dreams\", a documentary filmed during the making of \"Fitzcarraldo\", explored Herzog's efforts to make the film in harsh conditions. Herzog's diaries during the making of \"Fitzcarraldo\" were published as \"Conquest of the Useless: Reflections from the Making of Fitzcarraldo.\" Mark Harris of \"The New York Times\" wrote in his review: \"The movie and its making are both fables of daft aspiration, investigations of the blurry border between having a dream and losing one's mind.\"\nHerzog has said that our civilization is \"starving for new images\". In a 1982 interview with Roger Ebert, he explained, \"We do not have adequate images for our kind of civilization...We are surrounded by images that are worn out, and I believe that unless we discover new images, we will die out.\" He has said it is his mission to help us discover new images: \"I am trying to make something that has not been made before.\" He is proud of never using storyboards and often improvising large parts of the script. He explains this technique in the commentary track to \"Aguirre, the Wrath of God\".\nIn 1999, before a public dialogue with critic Roger Ebert at the Walker Art Center, Herzog read a new manifesto, which he dubbed Minnesota Declaration: Truth and Fact in Documentary Cinema. Subtitled \"Lessons of Darkness\", after his film of that name, the 12-point declaration began: \"Cinema Verit\u00e9 is devoid of verit\u00e9. It reaches a merely superficial truth, the truth of accountants.\" Herzog explained, \"There are deeper strata of truth in cinema, and there is such a thing as poetic, ecstatic truth. It is mysterious and elusive, and can be reached only through fabrication and imagination and stylization\" and \"facts sometimes have a strange and bizarre power that makes their inherent truth seem unbelievable.\" Ebert later wrote of its significance: \"For the first time, it fully explained his theory of 'ecstatic truth.'\" In 2017, Herzog wrote a six-point addendum to the manifesto, prompted by a question about \"truth in an age of alt-facts\".\nHis treatment of subjects has been characterized as Wagnerian in its scope, but film theory has in recent years focused on the concept of the ecstatic and the nomadic character of his film. The plot of \"Fitzcarraldo\" is based on the building of an opera house and his later film \"Invincible\" (2001) touches on the character of Siegfried. Herzog's documentary \"The Transformation of the World into Music\" goes behind the scenes of the Bayreuth Festival. Herzog has directed several operas, including Mozart's \"The Magic Flute\", Beethoven's \"Fidelio\", and Wagner's \"Parsifal.\"\nTeaching.\nCritical of film schools, Herzog has taught three cinema workshops. From 2009 to 2016, he organized the Rogue Film School, in which young directors spent a few days with him in evocative locations. What exactly goes on at the rogue film school has been clouded in secrecy, but director and writer Kristoffer Hegnsvad report from his stay there in his book \"Werner Herzog \u2013 Ecstatic Truth and Other Useless Conquests\": \"The first thing you notice is his enormous presence. His self-confidence sends shockwaves through a room every time he opens his mouth or make eye contact; he adopts a stance of exalted calm, as though he has achieved some kind of mastery \u2013 not just over his own mind, but over the capriciousness of the world.\" Lessons ranged from \"How does music function in film?\" to \"The creation of your own shooting permits\".\nIn 2018, he held \"Filming in Peru with Werner Herzog\", a 12-day workshop in the Amazonian rainforest, close to the locations for \"Fitzcarraldo\", for new filmmakers from around the world. Each made a short film under Herzog's supervision. Herzog was enthusiastic, and said of the resulting films, \"the best 10 of them are better than the selections for best short film at the Academy Awards\". Herzog is also on the website MasterClass, where he presents a course on filmmaking, entitled \"Werner Herzog teaches filmmaking\". In a discussion with Errol Morris at the Toronto Film Festival, Morris, who was influenced by Herzog's early films, joked that he considered himself one of the first students of the Rogue Film School. Regarding Herzog's influence on him, Morris quoted Gabriel Garc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez's reaction to reading Kafka for the first time: \"I didn't know you were allowed to do that.\"\nPersonal life.\nHerzog has been married three times and has three children. In 1967, he married Martje Grohmann. They had a son named Rudolph Amos Achmed, born 1973. They divorced in 1985. He later began dating Austrian-German actress Eva Mattes. They had a daughter named Hanna Mattes, born 1980, before splitting up. He married Christine Maria Ebenberger in 1987, and they had a son named Simon, born 1989. They divorced in 1997. Herzog moved to Los Angeles in 1996 and married Russian-American photographer Elena Pisetski in 1999.\nHerzog is a voracious reader. As required reading for the Rogue Film School, he has listed J. A. Baker's \"The Peregrine\", Virgil's \"Georgics\", and Ernest Hemingway's \"The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber\". Suggested reading includes the \"Poetic Edda\" as translated from Old Norse by Lee M. Hollander, Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo's \"Historia verdadera de la conquista de la Nueva Espa\u00f1a\" (\"The True History of the Conquest of New Spain\"), and the 888-page report published by the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.\nHerzog has been described as an atheist. In addition to standard German and his native Bavarian, he speaks English, French, Greek, Italian and Spanish. He can also read Latin and Ancient Greek.\nFilmography.\nSince 1962, Herzog has directed 20 fiction feature films, seven fiction short films, and 34 documentary feature films, as well as eight documentary short films and episodes of two television series. He has also been the screenwriter or co-writer for all his films and for four others, and has appeared as an actor in 26 film or television productions.\nStage works.\n Opera \nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n Theatre \n Concerts \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33139", "revid": "50984309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33139", "title": "World Wide Web", "text": "Linked hypertext system on the Internet\nThe World Wide Web (also known as WWW, W3, or simply the Web) is an information system that enables content sharing over the Internet through user-friendly ways meant to appeal to users beyond IT specialists and hobbyists. It allows documents and other web resources to be accessed over the Internet according to specific rules of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP).\nThe Web was invented by English computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee while at CERN in 1989 and opened to the public in 1993. It was conceived as a \"universal linked information system\". Documents and other media content are made available to the network through web servers and can be accessed by programs such as web browsers. Servers and resources on the World Wide Web are identified and located through a character string called uniform resource locator (URL).\nThe original and still very common document type is a web page formatted in Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). This markup language supports plain text, images, embedded video and audio contents, and scripts (short programs) that implement complex user interaction. The HTML language also supports hyperlinks (embedded URLs), which provide immediate access to other web resources. Web navigation, or web surfing, is the common practice of following such hyperlinks across multiple websites. Web applications are web pages that function as application software. The information on the Web is transferred across the Internet using HTTP. Multiple web resources with a common theme and usually a common domain name make up a website. A single web server may provide multiple websites, while some websites, especially the most popular ones, may be provided by multiple servers. Website content is provided by a myriad of companies, organisations, government agencies, and individual users; and comprises an enormous amount of educational, entertainment, commercial, and government information.\nThe Web has become the world's dominant information systems platform. It is the primary tool that billions of people worldwide use to interact with the Internet.\nHistory.\nThe Web was invented by English computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee while working at CERN. He was motivated by the problem of storing, updating, and finding documents and data files in that large and constantly changing organisation, as well as distributing them to collaborators outside CERN. In his design, Berners-Lee dismissed the common tree structure approach, used for instance in the existing CERNDOC documentation system and in the Unix filesystem, as well as approaches that relied on tagging files with keywords, as in the VAX/NOTES system. Instead, he adopted concepts he had put into practice with his private ENQUIRE system (1980), built at CERN. When he became aware of Ted Nelson's hypertext model (1965), in which documents can be linked in unconstrained ways through hyperlinks associated with \"hot spots\" embedded in the text, it helped to confirm the validity of his concept.\nThe model was later popularised by Apple's HyperCard system. Unlike Hypercard, Berners-Lee's new system from the outset was meant to support links between multiple databases on independent computers, and to allow simultaneous access by many users from any computer on the Internet. He also specified that the system should eventually handle other media besides text, such as graphics, speech, and video. Links could refer to mutable data files, or even fire up programs on their server computer. He also conceived \"gateways\" that would allow access through the new system to documents organised in other ways (such as traditional computer file systems or the Usenet). Finally, he insisted that the system should be decentralised, without any central control or coordination over the creation of links.\nBerners-Lee submitted a proposal to CERN in May 1989, without giving the system a name. He got a working system implemented by the end of 1990, including a browser called WorldWideWeb (which became the name of the project and of the network) and an HTTP server running at CERN. As part of that development, he defined the first version of the HTTP protocol, the basic URL syntax, and implicitly made HTML the primary document format. The technology was released outside CERN to other research institutions starting in January 1991, and then to the whole Internet on 23 August 1991. The Web was a success at CERN and began to spread to other scientific and academic institutions. Within the next two years, there were 50 websites created.\nCERN made the Web protocol and code available royalty free on 30 April 1993, enabling its widespread use. After the NCSA released the Mosaic web browser later that year, the Web's popularity grew rapidly as thousands of websites sprang up in less than a year. Mosaic was a graphical browser that could display inline images and submit forms that were processed by the HTTPd server. Marc Andreessen and Jim Clark founded Netscape the following year and released the Navigator browser, which introduced Java and JavaScript to the Web. It quickly became the dominant browser. Netscape became a public company in 1995, which triggered a frenzy for the Web and started the dot-com bubble. Microsoft responded by developing its own browser, Internet Explorer, starting the browser wars. By bundling it with Windows, it became the dominant browser for 14 years.\nBerners-Lee founded the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) which created XML in 1996 and recommended replacing HTML with stricter XHTML. In the meantime, developers began exploiting an IE feature called XMLHttpRequest to make Ajax applications and launched the Web 2.0 revolution. Mozilla, Opera, and Apple rejected XHTML and created the WHATWG which developed HTML5. In 2009, the W3C conceded and abandoned XHTML. In 2019, it ceded control of the HTML specification to the WHATWG.\nThe World Wide Web has been central to the development of the Information Age and is the primary tool billions of people use to interact on the Internet.\nNomenclature.\nTim Berners-Lee states that \"World Wide Web\" is officially spelled as three separate words, each capitalised, with no intervening hyphens. Use of the www prefix has been declining, especially when web applications sought to brand their domain names and make them easily pronounceable. As the mobile web grew in popularity, services like Gmail.com, Outlook.com, Myspace.com, Facebook.com and Twitter.com are most often mentioned without adding \"www.\" (or, indeed, \".com\") to the domain.\nIn English, \"www\" is usually read as \"double-u double-u double-u\". Some users pronounce it \"dub-dub-dub\", particularly in New Zealand. Stephen Fry, in his \"Podgrams\" series of podcasts, pronounces it \"wuh wuh wuh\". The English writer Douglas Adams once quipped in \"The Independent on Sunday\" (1999): \"The World Wide Web is the only thing I know of whose shortened form takes three times longer to say than what it's short for\".\nFunction.\nThe terms \"Internet\" and \"World Wide Web\" are often used without much distinction. However, the two terms do not mean the same thing. The Internet is a global system of computer networks interconnected through telecommunications and optical networking. In contrast, the World Wide Web is a global collection of documents and other resources, linked by hyperlinks and URIs. Web resources are accessed using HTTP or HTTPS, which are application-level Internet protocols that use the Internet transport protocols.\nViewing a web page on the World Wide Web normally begins either by typing the URL of the page into a web browser or by following a hyperlink to that page or resource. The web browser then initiates a series of background communication messages to fetch and display the requested page. In the 1990s, using a browser to view web pages\u2014and to move from one web page to another through hyperlinks\u2014came to be known as 'browsing,' 'web surfing' (after channel surfing), or 'navigating the Web'. Early studies of this new behaviour investigated user patterns in using web browsers. One study, for example, found five user patterns: exploratory surfing, window surfing, evolved surfing, bounded navigation, and targeted navigation.\nThe following example demonstrates the functioning of a web browser when accessing a page at the URL &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;http://example.org/home.html&lt;/samp&gt;. The browser resolves the server name of the URL (&lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;example.org&lt;/samp&gt;) into an Internet Protocol address using the globally distributed Domain Name System (DNS). This lookup returns an IP address such as \"203.0.113.4\" or \"2001:db8:2e::7334\". The browser then requests the resource by sending an HTTP request across the Internet to the computer at that address. It requests service from a specific TCP port number that is well known for the HTTP service, so that the receiving host can distinguish an HTTP request from other network protocols it may be servicing. HTTP normally uses port number 80 and, for HTTPS, it normally uses port number 443. The content of the HTTP request can be as simple as two lines of text:\nGET /home.html HTTP/1.1\nHost: example.org\nThe computer receiving the HTTP request delivers it to the web server software listening for requests on port 80. If the web server can fulfil the request, it sends an HTTP response back to the browser indicating success:\nHTTP/1.1 200 OK\nContent-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8\nFollowed by the content of the requested page. Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) for a basic web page might look like this:\n&lt;html&gt;\n &lt;head&gt;\n &lt;title&gt;Example.org \u2013 The World Wide Web&lt;/title&gt;\n &lt;/head&gt;\n &lt;body&gt;\n &lt;p&gt;The World Wide Web, abbreviated as WWW and commonly known ...&lt;/p&gt;\n &lt;/body&gt;\n&lt;/html&gt;\nThe web browser parses the HTML and interprets the markup (&lt;title&gt;, &lt;p&gt; for paragraph, and such) that surrounds the words to format the text on the screen. Many web pages use HTML to reference the URLs of other resources such as images, other embedded media, scripts that affect page behaviour, and Cascading Style Sheets that affect page layout. The browser makes additional HTTP requests to the web server for these other Internet media types. As it receives its content from the web server, the browser progressively renders the page onto the screen as specified by its HTML and these additional resources.\nHTML.\nHypertext Markup Language (HTML) is the standard markup language for creating web pages and web applications. With Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) and JavaScript, it forms a triad of cornerstone technologies for the World Wide Web.\nWeb browsers receive HTML documents from a web server or from local storage and render the documents into multimedia web pages. HTML describes the structure of a web page semantically and originally included cues for the appearance of the document.\nHTML elements are the building blocks of HTML pages. With HTML constructs, images and other objects such as interactive forms may be embedded into the rendered page. HTML provides a means to create structured documents by denoting structural semantics for text such as headings, paragraphs, lists, links, quotes, and other items. HTML elements are delineated by \"tags\", written using angle brackets. Tags such as and directly introduce content into the page. Other tags, such as , surround and provide information about document text and may include other tags as sub-elements. Browsers do not display the HTML tags, but use them to interpret the content of the page.\nHTML can embed programs written in a scripting language such as JavaScript, which affects the behaviour and content of web pages. Inclusion of CSS defines the look and layout of content. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), maintainer of both the HTML and the CSS standards, has encouraged the use of CSS over explicit presentational HTML since 1997.[ [update]]\nLinking.\nMost web pages contain hyperlinks to other related pages and perhaps to downloadable files, source documents, definitions, and other web resources. In the underlying HTML, a hyperlink looks like this:\n&lt;a href=\"http://example.org/home.html\"&gt;Example.org Homepage&lt;/a&gt;.\nSuch a collection of useful, related resources interconnected via hypertext links is dubbed a \"web\" of information. Publication on the Internet created what Tim Berners-Lee first called the \"WorldWideWeb\" (in its original CamelCase, which was subsequently discarded) in November 1990.\nThe hyperlink structure of the web is described by the webgraph: the nodes of the web graph correspond to the web pages (or URLs), the directed edges between them to the hyperlinks. Over time, many web resources pointed to by hyperlinks disappear, relocate, or are replaced with different content. This makes hyperlinks obsolete, a phenomenon referred to in some circles as link rot, and the hyperlinks affected by it are often called \"dead\" links. The ephemeral nature of the Web has prompted many efforts to archive websites. The Internet Archive, active since 1996, is the best known of such efforts.\nwww prefix.\nMany hostnames used for the World Wide Web begin with \"www\" because of the long-standing practice of naming Internet hosts according to the services they provide. The hostname of a web server is often \"www\", in the same way that it may be \"ftp\" for an FTP server, and \"news\" or \"nntp\" for a Usenet news server. These hostnames appear as Domain Name System (DNS) or subdomain names, as in \"www.example.com\". The use of \"www\" is not required by any technical or policy standard and many websites do not use it; the first web server was \"nxoc01.cern.ch\". According to Paolo Palazzi, who worked at CERN along with Tim Berners-Lee, the popular use of \"www\" as subdomain was accidental; the World Wide Web project page was intended to be published at www.cern.ch while info.cern.ch was intended to be the CERN home page; however the DNS records were never switched, and the practice of prepending \"www\" to an institution's website domain name was subsequently copied. Many established websites still use the prefix, or they employ other subdomain names such as \"www2\", \"secure\" or \"en\" for special purposes. Many such web servers are set up so that both the main domain name (e.g., example.com) and the \"www\" subdomain (e.g., www.example.com) refer to the same site; others require one form or the other, or they may map to different websites. The use of a subdomain name is useful for load balancing incoming web traffic by creating a CNAME record that points to a cluster of web servers. Since, currently, only a subdomain can be used in a CNAME, the same result cannot be achieved by using the bare domain root.\nWhen a user submits an incomplete domain name to a web browser in its address bar input field, some web browsers automatically try adding the prefix \"www\" to the beginning of it and possibly \".com\", \".org\" and \".net\" at the end, depending on what might be missing. For example, entering \"microsoft\" may be transformed to \"http://www.microsoft.com/\" and \"openoffice\" to \"http://www.openoffice.org\". This feature started appearing in early versions of Firefox, when it still had the working title 'Firebird' in early 2003, from an earlier practice in browsers such as Lynx. It is reported that Microsoft was granted a US patent for the same idea in 2008, but only for mobile devices.\nScheme specifiers.\nThe scheme specifiers \"codice_1\" and \"codice_2\" at the start of a web URI refer to Hypertext Transfer Protocol or HTTP Secure, respectively. They specify the communication protocol to use for the request and response. The HTTP protocol is fundamental to the operation of the World Wide Web, and the added encryption layer in HTTPS is essential when browsers send or retrieve confidential data, such as passwords or banking information. Web browsers usually automatically prepend http:// to user-entered URIs, if omitted.\nPages.\nA \"web page\" (also written as \"webpage\") is a document that is suitable for the World Wide Web and web browsers. A web browser displays a web page on a monitor or mobile device.\nThe term \"web page\" usually refers to what is visible, but may also refer to the contents of the computer file itself, which is usually a text file containing hypertext written in HTML or a comparable markup language. Typical web pages provide hypertext for browsing to other web pages via hyperlinks, often referred to as \"links\". Web browsers will frequently have to access multiple web resource elements, such as reading style sheets, scripts, and images, while presenting each web page.\nOn a network, a web browser can retrieve a web page from a remote web server. The web server may restrict access to a private network, such as a corporate intranet. The web browser uses the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) to make such requests to the web server.\nA \"static\" web page is delivered exactly as stored, as web content in the web server's file system. In contrast, a \"dynamic\" web page is generated by a web application, usually driven by server-side software. Dynamic web pages are used when each user may require completely different information, for example, bank websites, web email, etc.\nStatic page.\nA \"static web page\" (sometimes called a \"flat page/stationary page\") is a web page that is delivered to the user exactly as stored, in contrast to dynamic web pages which are generated by a web application.\nConsequently, a static web page displays the same information for all users, from all contexts, subject to modern capabilities of a web server to negotiate content-type or language of the document where such versions are available and the server is configured to do so.\nDynamic pages.\nA \"server-side dynamic web page\" is a web page whose construction is controlled by an application server processing server-side scripts. In server-side scripting, parameters determine how the assembly of every new web page proceeds, including the setting up of more client-side processing.\nA \"client-side dynamic web page\" processes the web page using JavaScript running in the browser. JavaScript programs can interact with the document via Document Object Model, or DOM, to query page state and alter it. The same client-side techniques can then dynamically update or change the DOM in the same way.\nA dynamic web page is then reloaded by the user or by a computer program to change some variable content. The updated information could come from the server, or from changes made to that page's DOM. This may or may not truncate the browsing history or create a saved version to go back to, but a \"dynamic web page update\" using Ajax technologies will neither create a page to go back to nor truncate the web browsing history forward of the displayed page. Using Ajax technologies, the end user gets \"one dynamic page\" managed as a single page in the web browser while the actual web content rendered on that page can vary. The Ajax engine sits only on the browser requesting parts of its DOM, \"the\" DOM, for its client, from an application server.\nDynamic HTML, or DHTML, is the umbrella term for technologies and methods used to create web pages that are not static web pages, though it has fallen out of common use since the popularisation of AJAX, a term which is now itself rarely used. Client-side scripting, server-side scripting, or a combination of these make for the dynamic web experience in a browser.\nJavaScript is a scripting language that was initially developed in 1995 by Brendan Eich, then of Netscape, for use within web pages. The standardised version is ECMAScript. To make web pages more interactive, some web applications also use JavaScript techniques such as Ajax (asynchronous JavaScript and XML). Client-side script is delivered with the page that can make additional HTTP requests to the server, either in response to user actions such as mouse movements or clicks, or based on elapsed time. The server's responses are used to modify the current page rather than creating a new page with each response, so the server needs only to provide limited, incremental information. Multiple Ajax requests can be handled at the same time, and users can interact with the page while data is retrieved. Web pages may also regularly poll the server to check whether new information is available.\nWebsite.\nA \"website\" is a collection of related web resources including web pages, multimedia content, typically identified with a common domain name, and published on at least one web server. Notable examples are wikipedia.org, google.com, and amazon.com.\nA website may be accessible via a public Internet Protocol (IP) network, such as the Internet, or a private local area network (LAN), by referencing a uniform resource locator (URL) that identifies the site.\nWebsites can have many functions and can be used in various fashions; a website can be a personal website, a corporate website for a company, a government website, an organisation website, etc. Websites are typically dedicated to a particular topic or purpose, ranging from entertainment and social networking to providing news and education. All publicly accessible websites collectively constitute the World Wide Web, while private websites, such as a company's website for its employees, are typically a part of an intranet.\nWeb pages, which are the building blocks of websites, are documents, typically composed in plain text interspersed with formatting instructions of Hypertext Markup Language (HTML, XHTML). They may incorporate elements from other websites with suitable markup anchors. Web pages are accessed and transported with the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), which may optionally employ encryption (HTTP Secure, HTTPS) to provide security and privacy for the user. The user's application, often a web browser, renders the page content according to its HTML markup instructions onto a display terminal.\nHyperlinking between web pages conveys to the reader the site structure and guides the navigation of the site, which often starts with a home page containing a directory of the site web content. Some websites require user registration or subscription to access content. Examples of subscription websites include many business sites, news websites, academic journal websites, gaming websites, file-sharing websites, message boards, web-based email, social networking websites, websites providing real-time price quotations for different types of markets, as well as sites providing various other services. End users can access websites on a range of devices, including desktop and laptop computers, tablet computers, smartphones, and smart TVs.\nBrowser.\nA \"web browser\" (commonly referred to as a \"browser\") is a software user agent for accessing information on the World Wide Web. To connect to a website's server and display its pages, a user needs to have a web browser program. This is the program that the user runs to download, format, and display a web page on the user's computer.\nIn addition to allowing users to find, display, and move between web pages, a web browser will usually have features like keeping bookmarks, recording history, managing cookies (see below), and home pages and may have facilities for recording passwords for logging into websites.\nThe most popular browsers are Chrome, Safari, Edge, Samsung Internet and Firefox.\nServer.\nA \"Web server\" is server software, or hardware dedicated to running said software, that can satisfy World Wide Web client requests. A web server can, in general, contain one or more websites. A web server processes incoming network requests over HTTP and several other related protocols.\nThe primary function of a web server is to store, process and deliver web pages to clients. The communication between client and server takes place using the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). Pages delivered are most frequently HTML documents, which may include images, style sheets and scripts in addition to the text content.\nA user agent, commonly a web browser or web crawler, initiates communication by making a request for a specific resource using HTTP and the server responds with the content of that resource or an error message if unable to do so. The resource is typically a real file on the server's secondary storage, but this is not necessarily the case and depends on how the web server is implemented.\nWhile the primary function is to serve content, full implementation of HTTP also includes ways of receiving content from clients. This feature is used for submitting web forms, including uploading of files.\nMany generic web servers also support scripting using Active Server Pages (ASP), PHP (Hypertext Preprocessor), or other scripting languages. This means that the behaviour of the web server can be scripted in separate files, while the actual server software remains unchanged. Usually, this function is used to generate HTML documents dynamically (\"on-the-fly\") as opposed to returning static documents. The former is primarily used for retrieving or modifying information from databases. The latter is typically much faster and more easily cached but cannot deliver dynamic content.\nWeb servers can also frequently be found embedded in devices such as printers, routers, webcams and serving only a local network. The web server may then be used as a part of a system for monitoring or administering the device in question. This usually means that no additional software has to be installed on the client computer since only a web browser is required (which now is included with most operating systems).\nOptical Networking.\nOptical networking is a sophisticated infrastructure that utilises optical fibre to transmit data over long distances, connecting countries, cities, and even private residences. The technology uses optical microsystems like tunable lasers, filters, attenuators, switches, and wavelength-selective switches to manage and operate these networks.\nThe large quantity of optical fibre installed throughout the world at the end of the twentieth century set the foundation of the Internet as it is used today. The information highway relies heavily on optical networking, a method of sending messages encoded in light to relay information in various telecommunication networks.\nThe Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) was one of the first iterations of the Internet, created in collaboration with universities and researchers in 1969. However, access to the ARPANET was limited to researchers, and in 1985, the National Science Foundation founded the National Science Foundation Network (NSFNET), a program that provided supercomputer access to researchers.\nLimited public access to the Internet led to pressure from consumers and corporations to privatise the network. In 1993, the US passed the National Information Infrastructure Act, which dictated that the National Science Foundation must hand over control of the optical capabilities to commercial operators.\nThe privatisation of the Internet and the release of the World Wide Web to the public in 1993 led to an increased demand for Internet capabilities. This spurred developers to seek solutions to reduce the time and cost of laying new fibre and increase the amount of information that can be sent on a single fibre, to meet the growing needs of the public.\nIn 1994, Pirelli S.p.A.'s optical components division introduced a wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) system to meet growing demand for increased data transmission. This four-channel WDM technology allowed more information to be sent simultaneously over a single optical fibre, effectively boosting network capacity.\nPirelli wasn't the only company that developed a WDM system; another company, the Ciena Corporation (Ciena), created its own technology to transmit data more efficiently. David Huber, an optical networking engineer and entrepreneur Kevin Kimberlin founded Ciena in 1992. Drawing on laser technology from Gordon Gould and William Culver of Optelecom, Inc., the company focused on utilising optical amplifiers to transmit data via light. Under chief executive officer Pat Nettles, Ciena developed a dual-stage optical amplifier for dense wavelength-division multiplexing (DWDM), patented in 1997 and deployed on the Sprint network in 1996.\nCookie.\nAn \"HTTP cookie\" (also called \"web cookie\", \"Internet cookie\", \"browser cookie\", or simply \"cookie\") is a small piece of data sent from a website and stored on the user's computer by the user's web browser while the user is browsing. Cookies were designed to be a reliable mechanism for websites to remember stateful information (such as items added in the shopping cart in an online store) or to record the user's browsing activity (including clicking particular buttons, logging in, or recording which pages were visited in the past). They can also be used to remember arbitrary pieces of information that the user previously entered into form fields, such as names, addresses, passwords, and credit card numbers.\nCookies perform essential functions in the modern web. Perhaps most importantly, \"authentication cookies\" are the most common method used by web servers to know whether the user is logged in or not, and which account they are logged in with. Without such a mechanism, the site would not know whether to send a page containing sensitive information or require the user to authenticate themselves by logging in. The security of an authentication cookie generally depends on the security of the issuing website and the user's web browser, and on whether the cookie data is encrypted. Security vulnerabilities may allow a cookie's data to be read by a hacker, used to gain access to user data, or used to gain access (with the user's credentials) to the website to which the cookie belongs (see cross-site scripting and cross-site request forgery for examples).\nTracking cookies, and especially third-party tracking cookies, are commonly used as ways to compile long-term records of individuals' browsing histories \u2013 a potential privacy concern that prompted European and U.S. lawmakers to take action in 2011. European law requires that all websites targeting European Union member states gain \"informed consent\" from users before storing non-essential cookies on their device.\nGoogle Project Zero researcher Jann Horn describes ways cookies can be read by intermediaries, like Wi-Fi hotspot providers. When in such circumstances, he recommends using the browser in private browsing mode (widely known as Incognito mode in Google Chrome).\nSearch engine.\nA \"web search engine\" or \"Internet search engine\" is a software system that is designed to carry out \"web search\" (\"Internet search\"), which means to search the World Wide Web in a systematic way for particular information specified in a web search query. The search results are generally presented in a line of results, often referred to as search engine results pages (SERPs). The information may be a mix of web pages, images, videos, infographics, articles, research papers, and other types of files. Some search engines also mine data available in databases or open directories. Unlike web directories, which are maintained only by human editors, search engines also maintain real-time information by running an algorithm on a web crawler. Internet content that is not capable of being searched by a web search engine is generally described as the deep web.\nIn 1990, Archie, the world's first search engine, was released. The technology was originally an index of File Transfer Protocol (FTP) sites, which was a method for moving files between a client and a server network. This early search tool was superseded by more advanced engines like Yahoo! in 1995 and Google in 1998.\nDeep web.\nThe deep web, \"invisible web\", or \"hidden web\" are parts of the World Wide Web whose contents are not indexed by standard web search engines. The opposite term to the deep web is the surface web, which is accessible to anyone using the Internet. Computer scientist Michael K. Bergman is credited with coining the term \"deep web\" in 2001 as a search indexing term.\nThe content of the deep web is hidden behind HTTP forms, and includes many very common uses such as web mail, online banking, and services that users must pay for, and which is protected by a paywall, such as video on demand, some online magazines and newspapers, among others.\nThe content of the deep web can be located and accessed by a direct URL or IP address and may require a password or other security access past the public website page.\nCaching.\nA web cache is a server computer located either on the public Internet or within an enterprise that stores recently accessed web pages to improve response time for users when the same content is requested within a certain time after the original request. Most web browsers also implement a browser cache by writing recently obtained data to a local data storage device. HTTP requests by a browser may ask only for data that has changed since the last access. Web pages and resources may contain expiration information to control caching to secure sensitive data, such as in online banking, or to facilitate frequently updated sites, such as news media. Even sites with highly dynamic content may permit basic resources to be refreshed only occasionally. Website designers find it worthwhile to collate resources such as CSS data and JavaScript into a few site-wide files so that they can be cached efficiently. Enterprise firewalls often cache Web resources requested by one user for the benefit of many users. Some search engines store cached content of frequently accessed websites.\nSecurity.\nFor criminals, the Web has become a venue to spread malware and engage in a range of cybercrime, including (but not limited to) identity theft, fraud, espionage, and intelligence gathering. Web-based vulnerabilities now outnumber traditional computer security concerns, and as measured by Google, about one in ten web pages may contain malicious code. Most web-based attacks take place on legitimate websites, and most, as measured by Sophos, are hosted in the United States, China and Russia. The most common of all malware threats is SQL injection attacks against websites. Through HTML and URIs, the Web was vulnerable to attacks like cross-site scripting (XSS) that came with the introduction of JavaScript and were exacerbated to some degree by Web 2.0 and Ajax web design that favours the use of scripts. In one 2007 estimate, 70% of all websites are open to XSS attacks on their users. Phishing is another common threat to the Web. In February 2013, RSA (the security division of EMC) estimated the global losses from phishing at $1.5\u00a0billion in 2012. Two of the well-known phishing methods are Covert Redirect and Open Redirect.\nProposed solutions vary. Large security companies like McAfee already design governance and compliance suites to meet post-9/11 regulations, and some, like Finjan Holdings have recommended active real-time inspection of programming code and all content regardless of its source. Some have argued that for enterprises to see Web security as a business opportunity rather than a cost centre, while others call for \"ubiquitous, always-on digital rights management\" enforced in the infrastructure to replace the hundreds of companies that secure data and networks. Jonathan Zittrain has said users sharing responsibility for computing safety is far preferable to locking down the Internet.\nPrivacy.\nEvery time a client requests a web page, the server can identify the request's IP address. Web servers usually log IP addresses in a log file. Also, unless set not to do so, most web browsers record requested web pages in a viewable \"history\" feature, and usually cache much of the content locally. Unless the server-browser communication uses HTTPS encryption, web requests and responses travel in plain text across the Internet and can be viewed, recorded, and cached by intermediate systems. Another way to hide personally identifiable information is by using a virtual private network. A VPN encrypts traffic between the client and VPN server, and masks the original IP address, lowering the chance of user identification.\nWhen a web page asks for, and the user supplies, personally identifiable information\u2014such as their real name, address, e-mail address, etc. web-based entities can associate current web traffic with that individual. If the website uses HTTP cookies, username, and password authentication, or other tracking techniques, it can relate other web visits, before and after, to the identifiable information provided. In this way, a web-based organisation can develop and build a profile of the individual people who use its site or sites. It may be able to build a record for an individual that includes information about their leisure activities, their shopping interests, their profession, and other aspects of their demographic profile. These profiles are of potential interest to marketers, advertisers, and others. Depending on the website's terms and conditions and the local laws that apply, information from these profiles may be sold, shared, or passed to other organisations without the user being informed. For many ordinary people, this means little more than some unexpected emails in their inbox or some uncannily relevant advertising on a future web page. For others, it can mean that time spent indulging an unusual interest can result in a deluge of further targeted marketing that may be unwelcome. Law enforcement, counterterrorism, and espionage agencies can also identify, target, and track individuals based on their interests or proclivities on the Web.\nSocial networking sites usually try to get users to use their real names, interests, and locations, rather than pseudonyms, as their executives believe that this makes the social networking experience more engaging for users. On the other hand, uploaded photographs or unguarded statements can be identified with an individual, who may regret this exposure. Employers, schools, parents, and other relatives may be influenced by aspects of social networking profiles, such as text posts or digital photos, that the posting individual did not intend for these audiences. Online bullies may make use of personal information to harass or stalk users. Modern social networking websites allow fine-grained control of the privacy settings for each posting, but these can be complex and not easy to find or use, especially for beginners. Photographs and videos posted onto websites have caused particular problems, as they can add a person's face to an online profile. With modern and potential facial recognition technology, it may then be possible to relate that face with other, previously anonymous, images, events, and scenarios that have been imaged elsewhere. Due to image caching, mirroring, and copying, it is difficult to remove an image from the World Wide Web.\nStandards.\nWeb standards include many interdependent standards and specifications, some of which govern aspects of the Internet, not just the World Wide Web. Even when not web-focused, such standards directly or indirectly affect the development and administration of websites and web services. Considerations include the interoperability, accessibility and usability of web pages and websites.\nWeb standards, in the broader sense, consist of the following:\nWeb standards are not fixed sets of rules but are constantly evolving sets of finalised technical specifications of web technologies. Web standards are developed by standards organisations\u2014groups of interested and often competing parties chartered with the task of standardisation\u2014not technologies developed and declared to be a standard by a single individual or company. It is crucial to distinguish those specifications that are under development from the ones that already reached the final development status (in the case of W3C specifications, the highest maturity level).\nAccessibility.\nThere are methods for accessing the Web in alternative mediums and formats to facilitate use by individuals with disabilities. These disabilities may be visual, auditory, physical, speech-related, cognitive, neurological, or some combination. Accessibility features also help people with temporary disabilities, like a broken arm, or ageing users as their abilities change. The Web is receiving information as well as providing information and interacting with society. The World Wide Web Consortium claims that it is essential that the Web be accessible, so it can provide equal access and equal opportunity to people with disabilities. Tim Berners-Lee once noted, \"The power of the Web is in its universality. Access by everyone regardless of disability is an essential aspect.\" Many countries regulate web accessibility as a requirement for websites. International co-operation in the W3C Web Accessibility Initiative led to simple guidelines that web content authors as well as software developers can use to make the Web accessible to persons who may or may not be using assistive technology.\nInternationalisation.\nThe W3C Internationalisation Activity assures that web technology works in all languages, scripts, and cultures. Beginning in 2004 or 2005, Unicode gained ground and eventually in December 2007 surpassed both ASCII and Western European as the Web's most frequently used character map. Originally allowed resources to be identified by URI in a subset of US-ASCII. allows more characters\u2014any character in the Universal Character Set\u2014and now a resource can be identified by IRI in any language.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33141", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33141", "title": "World wide web", "text": ""}
{"id": "33143", "revid": "50981004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33143", "title": "Wireless LAN", "text": "Computer network that links devices using wireless communication within a limited area\nA wireless LAN (WLAN) is a wireless computer network that links two or more devices using wireless communication to form a local area network (LAN) within a limited area such as a home, school, computer laboratory, campus, or office building. This gives users the ability to move around within the area and remain connected to the network. Through a gateway, a WLAN can also provide a connection to the wider Internet.\nWireless LANs based on the IEEE 802.11 standards are the most widely used computer networks in the world. These are commonly called Wi-Fi, which is a trademark belonging to the Wi-Fi Alliance. They are used for home and small office networks that link together laptop computers, printers, smartphones, Web TVs and gaming devices through a wireless network router, which in turn may link them to the Internet. Hotspots provided by routers at restaurants, coffee shops, hotels, libraries, and airports allow consumers to access the internet with portable wireless devices.\nHistory.\nNorman Abramson, a professor at the University of Hawai\u02bbi, developed the world's first wireless computer communication network, ALOHAnet. The system became operational in 1971 and included seven computers deployed over four islands to communicate with the central computer on the Oahu island without using phone lines.\nWireless LAN hardware initially cost so much that it was only used as an alternative to cabled LAN in places where cabling was difficult or impossible. Early development included industry-specific solutions and proprietary protocols, but at the end of the 1990s these were replaced by technical standards, primarily the various versions of IEEE 802.11 (in products using the Wi-Fi brand name). \nBeginning in 1991, a European alternative known as HiperLAN/1 was pursued by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) with a first version approved in 1996. This was followed by a HiperLAN/2 functional specification with ATM influences accomplished February 2000. Neither European standard achieved the commercial success of 802.11, although much of the work on HiperLAN/2 has survived in the physical specification (PHY) for IEEE 802.11a, which is nearly identical to the PHY of HiperLAN/2.\nIn 2009, 802.11n was added to 802.11. It operates in both the 2.4\u00a0GHz and 5\u00a0GHz bands at a maximum data transfer rate of 600\u00a0Mbit/s. Most newer routers are \"dual-band\" and able to utilize both wireless bands. This allows data communications to avoid the crowded 2.4\u00a0GHz band, which is also shared with Bluetooth devices and microwave ovens. The 5\u00a0GHz band also has more channels than the 2.4\u00a0GHz band, permitting a greater number of devices to share the space. Not all WLAN channels are available in all regions.\nA HomeRF group formed in 1997 to promote a technology aimed at residential use, but it disbanded in January 2003.\nArchitecture.\nStations.\nAll components that can connect into a wireless medium in a network are referred to as stations. All stations are equipped with wireless network interface controllers. Wireless stations fall into two categories: wireless access points (WAPs) and clients. WAPs are base stations for the wireless network. They transmit and receive radio frequencies for wireless-enabled devices to communicate with. Wireless clients can be mobile devices such as laptops, personal digital assistants, VoIP phones and other smartphones, or non-portable devices such as desktop computers, printers, and workstations that are equipped with a wireless network interface.\nService set.\nThe basic service set (BSS) is a set of all stations that can communicate with each other at PHY layer. Every BSS has an identification (ID) called the BSSID, which is the MAC address of the access point servicing the BSS.\nThere are two types of BSS: Independent BSS (also referred to as IBSS), and infrastructure BSS. An independent BSS (IBSS) is an ad hoc network that contains no access points, which means they cannot connect to any other basic service set. In an IBSS the STAs are configured in ad hoc (peer-to-peer) mode.\nAn extended service set (ESS) is a set of connected BSSs. Access points in an ESS are connected by a distribution system. Each ESS has an ID called the SSID which is a 32-byte (maximum) character string.\nA distribution system (DS) connects access points in an extended service set. The concept of a DS can be used to increase network coverage through roaming between cells. DS can be wired or wireless. Current wireless distribution systems are mostly based on WDS or Mesh protocols, though other systems are in use.\nTypes of wireless LANs.\nThe IEEE 802.11 has two basic modes of operation: \"infrastructure\" and \"ad hoc\" mode. In ad hoc mode, mobile units communicate directly peer-to-peer. In infrastructure mode, mobile units communicate through a wireless access point (WAP) that also serves as a bridge to other networks such as a local area network or the Internet.\nSince wireless communication uses a more open medium for communication in comparison to wired LANs, the 802.11 designers also included encryption mechanisms: Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), which is no longer considered secure, and Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA, WPA2, WPA3), to secure wireless computer networks. Many access points will also offer Wi-Fi Protected Setup, a quick, but no longer considered secure, method of joining a new device to an encrypted network.\nInfrastructure.\nMost Wi-Fi networks are deployed in \"infrastructure mode\". In infrastructure mode, wireless clients, such as laptops and smartphones, connect to the WAP to join the network. The WAP usually has a wired network connection and may have permanent wireless connections to other WAPs.\nWAPs are usually fixed and provide service to their client nodes within range. Some networks will have multiple WAPs using the same SSID and security arrangement. In that case, connecting to any WAP on that network joins the client to the network, and the client software will try to choose the WAP that gives the best service, such as the WAP with the strongest signal.\nPeer-to-peer.\nAn ad hoc network is a network where stations communicate only peer-to-peer (P2P). There is no base and no one gives permission to talk. This is accomplished using the Independent Basic Service Set (IBSS). A Wi-Fi Direct network is a different type of wireless network where stations communicate peer-to-peer. In a peer-to-peer network wireless devices within range of each other can discover and communicate directly without involving central access points.\nIn a Wi-Fi P2P group, the group owner operates as an access point and all other devices are clients. There are two main methods to establish a group owner in the Wi-Fi Direct group. In one approach, the user sets up a P2P group owner manually. This method is also known as \"autonomous group owner\" (\"autonomous GO\"). In the second method, called \"negotiation-based group creation\", two devices compete based on the group owner intent value. The device with higher intent value becomes a group owner and the second device becomes a client. Group owner intent value can depend on whether the wireless device performs a cross-connection between an infrastructure WLAN service and a P2P group, available power in the wireless device, whether the wireless device is already a group owner in another group or a received signal strength of the first wireless device.\nIEEE 802.11 defines the PHY and medium access control (MAC) layers based on carrier-sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA). This is in contrast to Ethernet which uses carrier-sense multiple access with collision detection (CSMA/CD). The 802.11 specification includes provisions designed to minimize collisions because mobile units have to contend with the hidden node problem where two mobile units may both be in range of a common access point, but out of range of each other.\nBridge.\nA bridge can be used to connect networks, typically of different types. A wireless Ethernet bridge allows the connection of devices on a wired Ethernet network to a wireless network. The bridge acts as the connection point to the wireless LAN.\nWireless distribution system.\nA wireless distribution system (WDS) enables the wireless interconnection of access points in an IEEE 802.11 network. It allows a wireless network to be expanded using multiple access points without the need for a wired backbone to link them, as is traditionally required. The notable advantage of a WDS over some other solutions is that it preserves the MAC addresses of client packets across links between access points. \nAn access point can be either a main, relay, or remote base station. A main base station is typically connected to the wired Ethernet. A relay base station relays data between remote base stations, wireless clients or other relay stations to either a main or another relay base station. A remote base station accepts connections from wireless clients and passes them to relay or main stations.\nBecause data is forwarded wirelessly, consuming wireless bandwidth, throughput in this method is halved for wireless clients not connected to a main base station. Connections between base stations are done at layer-2 and do not involve or require layer-3 IP addresses. WDS capability may also be referred to as repeater mode because it appears to bridge and accept wireless clients at the same time (unlike traditional bridging).\nAll base stations in a WDS must be configured to use the same radio channel and share WEP keys or WPA keys if they are used. They can be configured to different service set identifiers. WDS also requires that every base station be configured to forward to others in the system as mentioned above.\nRoaming.\nThere are two definitions for wireless LAN roaming:\nCommon issues.\nWLAN signals often extends beyond the boundaries of a building and can create coverage where it is unwanted, offering a channel through which non-residents or other unauthorized people could compromise a system and retrieve personal data. To prevent this it is usually sufficient to enforce the use of authentication, encryption, or VPN that requires a password for network connectivity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33144", "revid": "4460044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33144", "title": "Wireless personal area network", "text": ""}
{"id": "33145", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33145", "title": "Wireless community projects", "text": ""}
{"id": "33149", "revid": "1255878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33149", "title": "World Wide Web Consortium", "text": "International standards organization\nThe World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) is the main international standards organization for the World Wide Web. Founded in 1994 by Tim Berners-Lee, the consortium is made up of member organizations that maintain full-time staff working together in the development of technical standards for the World Wide Web. As of May\u00a02025,[ [update]] W3C has 350 members. The organization has been led by CEO Seth Dobbs since October 2023. W3C also engages in education and outreach, develops software and serves as an open forum for discussion about the Web.\nHistory.\nThe World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) was founded in 1994 by Tim Berners-Lee after he left the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in October 1994. It was founded at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Laboratory for Computer Science with support from the European Commission, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, which had pioneered the ARPANET, the most direct predecessor to the modern Internet. It was located in Technology Square until 2004, when it moved, with the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, to the Stata Center.\nThe organization tries to foster compatibility and agreement among industry members in the adoption of new standards defined by the W3C. Incompatible versions of HTML are offered by different vendors, causing inconsistency in how web pages are displayed. The consortium tries to get all those vendors to implement a set of core principles and components that are chosen by the consortium.\nIt was originally intended that CERN host the European branch of W3C; however, CERN wished to focus on particle physics, not information technology. In April 1995, the French Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation became the European host of W3C, with Keio University Research Institute at SFC becoming the Asian host in September 1996. Starting in 1997, W3C created regional offices around the world. As of September 2009, it had eighteen World Offices covering Australia, the Benelux countries (Belgium, Netherlands and Luxembourg), Brazil, China, Finland, Germany, Austria, Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Israel, Italy, South Korea, Morocco, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, and, as of 2016, the United Kingdom and Ireland.\nIn October 2012, W3C convened a community of major web players and publishers to establish a MediaWiki wiki that seeks to document open web standards called the WebPlatform and WebPlatform Docs.\nIn January 2013, Beihang University became the Chinese host.\nIn 2022 the W3C WebFonts Working Group won an Emmy Award from the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences for standardizing font technology for custom downloadable fonts and typography for web and TV devices.\nOn 1 January 2023, it reformed as a public-interest 501(c)(3) non-profit organization. In October 2023, Seth Dobbs was named as the organization's chief executive officer.\nIn October 2025, the W3C unveiled a new logo, signaling positive changes and updated its tagline to \"making the web work \u2014 for everyone\". This reflects its evolution into a nonprofit organization and continued focus on global accessibility, collaboration, innovation, privacy, security and the future of web standards.\nSpecification maturation.\nW3C develops technical specifications for HTML5, CSS, SVG, WOFF, the Semantic Web Stack, XML, and other technologies. Sometimes, when a specification becomes too large, it is split into independent modules that can mature at their own pace. Subsequent editions of a module or specification are known as levels and are denoted by the first integer in the title (e.g. CSS3 is Level 3). Subsequent revisions on each level are denoted by an integer following a decimal point (for example, CSS2.1 is Revision 1).\nThe W3C standard formation process is defined within the W3C process document, outlining four maturity levels through which each new standard or recommendation must progress.\nWorking draft (WD).\nAfter enough content has been gathered from 'editor drafts' and discussion, it may be published as a working draft (WD) for review by the community. A WD document is the first form of a standard that is publicly available. Commentary by virtually anyone is accepted, though no promises are made with regard to action on any particular element commented upon.\nAt this stage, the standard document may have significant differences from its final form. As such, anyone who implements WD standards should be ready to significantly modify their implementations as the standard matures.\nCandidate recommendation (CR).\nA candidate recommendation is a version of a more mature standard than the WD. At this point, the group responsible for the standard is satisfied that the standard meets its goal. The purpose of the CR is to elicit aid from the development community on how implementable the standard is.\nThe standard document may change further, but significant features are mostly decided at this point. The design of those features can still change due to feedback from implementers.\nProposed recommendation (PR).\nA proposed recommendation is the version of a standard that has passed the prior two levels. The users of the standard provide input. At this stage, the document is submitted to the W3C Advisory Council for final approval.\nWhile this step is important, it rarely causes any significant changes to a standard as it passes to the next phase.\nW3C recommendation (REC).\nThis is the most mature stage of development. At this point, the standard has undergone extensive review and testing, under both theoretical and practical conditions. The standard is now endorsed by the W3C, indicating its readiness for deployment to the public, and encouraging more widespread support among implementers and authors.\nRecommendations can sometimes be implemented incorrectly, partially, or not at all, but many standards define two or more levels of conformance that developers must follow if they wish to label their product as W3C-compliant.\nLater revisions.\nA recommendation may be updated or extended by separately-published, non-technical errata or editor drafts until sufficient substantial edits accumulate for producing a new edition or level of the recommendation. Additionally, the W3C publishes various kinds of informative notes which are to be used as references.\nCertification.\nUnlike the Internet Society and other international standards bodies, the W3C does not have a certification program. The W3C has decided, for now, that it is not suitable to start such a program, owing to the risk of creating more drawbacks for the community than benefits.\nAdministration.\nIn January 2023, after 28 years of being jointly administered by the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (located in Stata Center) in the United States, the European Research Consortium for Informatics and Mathematics (ERCIM; in Sophia Antipolis, France), Keio University (in Japan) and Beihang University (in China), the W3C incorporated as a legal entity, becoming a public-interest not-for-profit organization.\nThe W3C has a staff team of 70\u201380 worldwide as of 2015[ [update]]. W3C is run by a management team which allocates resources and designs strategy, led by CEO Jeffrey Jaffe (as of March 2010), former CTO of Novell. It also includes an advisory board that supports strategy and legal matters and helps resolve conflicts. The majority of standardization work is done by external experts in the W3C's various working groups.Antpolis\nMembership.\nThe Consortium is governed by its membership. The list of members is available to the public. Members include businesses, nonprofit organizations, universities, governmental entities, and individuals.\nMembership requirements are transparent except for one requirement: An application for membership must be reviewed and approved by the W3C. Many guidelines and requirements are stated in detail, but there is no final guideline about the process or standards by which membership might be finally approved or denied.\nThe cost of membership is given on a sliding scale, depending on the character of the organization applying and the country in which it is located. Countries are categorized by the World Bank's most recent grouping by gross national income per capita.\nCriticism.\nIn 2012 and 2013, the W3C started considering adding DRM-specific Encrypted Media Extensions (EME) to HTML5, which was criticised as being against the openness, interoperability, and vendor neutrality that distinguished websites built using only W3C standards from those requiring proprietary plug-ins like Flash. On 18 September 2017, the W3C published the EME specification as a recommendation, leading to the Electronic Frontier Foundation's resignation from W3C. As feared by the opponents of EME, , none of the widely used Content Decryption Modules used with EME are available for licensing without a per-browser licensing fee.\nStandards.\nW3C/Internet Engineering Task Force standards (over Internet protocol suite):\nJava packages.\nThe standard library packages in the Java programming language provide interfaces for the Document Object Model (DOM). \nThe standard library packages provide interfaces for the Simple API for XML (SAX).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33153", "revid": "50218277", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33153", "title": "Whisky", "text": "Distilled alcoholic beverage\nWhisky or whiskey is a type of liquor made from fermented grain mash. Various grains (which may be malted) are used for different varieties, including barley, corn, rye, and wheat. Whisky is typically aged in wooden casks, commonly of charred white oak. Uncharred white oak casks previously used for the aging of port, rum, or sherry may be employed during storage to impart a unique flavour and colour.\nWhisky is a strictly regulated spirit worldwide with many classes and types. The typical unifying characteristics of the different classes and types are the fermentation of grains, distillation, and aging in wooden barrels.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"whisky\" (or \"whiskey\") is an anglicisation of the Classical Gaelic word (or ) meaning \"water\" (now written as in Modern Irish, and in Scottish Gaelic). This Gaelic word shares its ultimate origins with Germanic \"water\" and Slavic \"voda\" of the same meaning. Distilled alcohol was known in Latin as (\"water of life\"). This was translated into Middle Irish as , which became () in Irish and in Scottish Gaelic. Early forms of the word in English included \"uskebeaghe\" (1581), \"usquebaugh\" (1610), \"usquebath\" (1621), and \"usquebae\" (1715).\nNames and spellings.\nMuch is made of the word's two spellings: \"whisky\" and \"whiskey\". There are two schools of thought on the issue. One is that the spelling difference is simply a matter of regional language convention for the spelling of a word, indicating that the spelling varies depending on the intended audience or the background or personal preferences of the writer (like the difference between \"color\" and \"colour\"; or \"recognize\" and \"recognise\"), and the other is that the spelling should depend on the style or origin of the spirit being described. There is general agreement that when quoting the proper name printed on a label, one should not alter its spelling.\nThe spelling \"whiskey\" is common in Ireland and the United States, while \"whisky\" is used in all other whisky-producing countries. In the US, the usage has not always been consistent. From the late eighteenth century to the mid-twentieth century, American writers used both spellings interchangeably until the introduction of newspaper style guides. Since the 1960s, American writers have increasingly used \"whiskey\" as the accepted spelling for aged grain spirits made in the US and \"whisky\" for aged grain spirits made outside the US. However, some prominent American brands, such as George Dickel, Maker's Mark, and Old Forester (all made by different companies), use the \"whisky\" spelling on their labels, and the \"Standards of Identity for Distilled Spirits\", the legal regulations for spirit in the US, also use the \"whisky\" spelling throughout.\nScotch.\nWhisky made in Scotland is simply called \"whisky\" within Scotland. Elsewhere and in the regulations of the Scotch Whisky Association (SWA) that govern its production, it is commonly called \"Scotch whisky\" or simply \"Scotch\" (especially in North America). It is legally required that Scotch whisky be distilled and matured in oak casks in Scotland for a minimum of three years, under strict regulations that protect its designation and quality.\nHistory.\nEarly distilling.\nIt is possible that distillation was practised by the Babylonians in Mesopotamia in the 2nd millennium BC, with perfumes and aromatics being distilled, but this is subject to uncertain and disputed interpretations of evidence.\nThe earliest certain chemical distillations were by Greeks in Alexandria in the 1st century AD, but these were not distillations of alcohol. The medieval Arabs adopted the distillation technique of the Alexandrian Greeks, and written records in Arabic begin in the 9th century, but again these were not distillations of alcohol. Distilling technology passed from the medieval Arabs to the medieval Latins, with the earliest records in Latin in the early 12th century.\nThe earliest records of the distillation of alcohol are in Italy in the 13th century, where alcohol was distilled from wine. An early description of the technique was given by Ramon Llull (1232\u20131315). Its use spread through medieval monasteries, largely for medicinal purposes, such as the treatment of colic and smallpox.\nIreland and Scotland.\nThe practice of distillation had spread to Ireland by the 12th century and Scotland by the 15th in the century, as did the common European practice of distilling \"aqua vitae\", a spirit alcohol, primarily for medicinal purposes. The practice of medicinal distillation eventually passed from a monastic setting to the secular via professional medical practitioners of the time, the Guild of Barber-Surgeons. The earliest mention of whiskey in Ireland comes from the \"Annals of Clonmacnoise\", which attributes the death of a chieftain in 1405 to \"taking a surfeit of aqua vitae\" at Christmas. In Scotland, the first evidence of whisky production comes from an entry in the \"Exchequer Rolls\" for 1495 where malt is sent \"To Friar John Cor, by order of the king, to make \"aquavitae\"\", enough to make about 500 bottles.\nJames IV of Scotland (r. 1488\u20131513) reportedly had a great liking for Scotch whisky, and in 1506 the town of Dundee purchased a large amount of whisky from the Guild of Barber-Surgeons, which held the monopoly on production at the time. \nAt this time, the distillation process was still in its infancy; whisky was not aged in barrels, and as a result, it had a sharp, unrefined flavor and a high alcohol content. It was consumed without dilution and lacked the smoother, more balanced characteristics that aging would later introduce. Over time, both production methods and consumer tastes evolved, leading to the development of the more refined and palatable whisky.\n18th century.\nIn 1707, the Acts of Union merged England and Scotland into the Kingdom of Great Britain, and thereafter taxes on distilled spirits rose dramatically. Following parliament's divisive malt tax of 1725, most of Scotland's distillation was either shut down or forced underground. Scotch whisky was hidden under altars, in coffins, and in any available space to avoid the governmental excisemen or revenuers. Scottish distillers, operating out of homemade stills, took to distilling whisky at night when the darkness hid the smoke from the stills. At one point, it was estimated that over half of Scotland's whisky output was illegal.\nIn America, whisky was used as currency during the American Revolution; George Washington operated a large distillery at Mount Vernon. Given the distances and primitive transportation network of colonial America, farmers often found it easier and more profitable to convert corn to whisky and transport it to market in that form. It also was a highly coveted trade good, and when an additional excise tax was levied against it in 1791, the Whiskey Rebellion erupted.\n19th century.\nThe drinking of Scotch whisky was introduced to India in the nineteenth century. The first distillery in India was built by Edward Dyer at Kasauli in the late 1820s. The operation was soon shifted to nearby Solan (close to the British summer capital Shimla), as there was an abundant supply of fresh spring water there.\nIn 1823, the UK passed the Excise Act, legalizing distillation (for a fee), and this put a practical end to the large-scale production of Scottish moonshine.\nIn 1831, Aeneas Coffey patented the Coffey still, allowing for a cheaper and more efficient distillation of whisky. In 1850, Andrew Usher began producing a blended whisky that mixed traditional pot still whisky with that from the new Coffey still. The new distillation method was scoffed at by some Irish distillers, who clung to their traditional pot stills. Many Irish contended that the new product was, in fact, not whisky at all.\nin the 1830s and 1840s, the city of Saint Paul, Minnesota was formed around a bootleg whiskey distillery ran by Pierre Parrant inside a cave that served the soldiers at Fort Snelling and the indigenous fighters who opposed them in the Dakota War of 1862. \nBy the 1880s, the French brandy industry was devastated by the phylloxera pest that ruined much of the grape crop; as a result, whisky became the primary liquor in many markets.\n20th century.\nDuring the Prohibition era in the United States lasting from 1920 to 1933, all alcohol sales were banned in the country. The federal government made an exemption for whisky prescribed by a doctor and sold through licensed pharmacies, such as Walgreens.\nProduction.\nAlthough specific methods may vary among distilleries, whisky production broadly comprises four primary stages: grain preparation, fermentation, distillation, and maturation (aging). This process is typically followed by the two additional stages of bottling and marketing.\nGrain preparation.\nTo initiate whisky production, grains are processed to convert their starches into fermentable sugars, which can then be subjected to fermentation and distillation. This process involves malting, milling and mashing the grains. \nMalting.\nMalt production begins with the soaking of grains in water tanks for a period of three days. The soaked grains are then transferred to large containers where germination occurs, initiating the metabolic process that converts starches into sugars. This process is subsequently halted by drying the grains with hot air, a procedure also known as \"kilning\", at the end of which the product is malt. In the production of Scotch whisky, the air used for kilning is heated by burning peat bricks in a furnace, imparting the characteristic smoky flavour to the malt.\nMilling.\nFollowing the malting process, the grains are transferred to a dressing machine, which separates the sprouts from the seeds. The grains are then conveyed to a mill for grinding.\nMashing.\nThe extraction of sugars to be converted into alcohol is achieved through a process known as mashing. During mashing, the diastase enzyme is activated, which facilitates the conversion of starches and dextrins into sugars. The ground malt is introduced into a \"mashtun\", a large vat containing hot water, and is agitated for approximately thirty minutes or more. The water is then drained from the mashtun, which is subsequently refilled with hot water. This procedure is typically repeated between one and three times. Once complete, the resulting liquid, known as \"wort\", which contains the extracted sugars, is separated from the mash, cooled, and transferred to the \"washbacks\", or fermenting vats.\nFermentation.\nDuring fermentation, a specific strain of yeast, \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" (commonly known as \"brewer's yeast\"), is introduced to the sugary wort, which provides the necessary nutrients for its asexual reproduction. The yeast metabolizes the sugars, producing alcohol, carbon dioxide, and congeners, which can influence the flavour profile of the whisky, either enhancing or suppressing desirable characteristics. The fermenting vats are maintained within a controlled temperature range, typically between which is optimal for yeast activity. Distillers ensure consistency by using the same yeast strain to achieve uniformity in the final whiskey product. Fermentation continues for two days or longer until the alcohol content of the liquid reaches between 5% and 10%. \nOnce fermentation is complete, and the yeast ceases to be active, the resulting liquid is referred to as \"wash\" or \"distiller's beer\". Even though the wash is alcoholic it is still organic, which makes it susceptible to contamination by microorganisms that cause rot. Consequently, it is promptly transferred to the still for boiling to mitigate this risk.\nDistillation.\nThe decision to transfer either the entire wash or only the most liquid portion into the still is at the discretion of the distiller, and each choice affects the flavour profile of the final product in distinct ways. Following the transfer of the wash, the still is heated to a temperature sufficient to evaporate the alcohol while remaining low enough to prevent the evaporation of water. Alcohol vapour ascends through the still and is directed to the condenser, which consists of copper tubes or plates, where it condenses back into a liquid form known as the \"distilled spirit\". This distilled spirit is meticulously monitored during its extraction. The initial and final portions of the distillate are deemed undesirable and are therefore redirected back into the still. Only the middle portion, considered the most desirable, is collected in the \"spirits receiver\". \nAt this stage, the distilled spirit is clear and has an ethanol content ranging from 70% to 80% ABV. It is typically diluted before being transferred to casks for maturation, though some distilleries sell it as is at 'cask strength'. \nA still for making whisky is usually made of copper, since it removes sulfur-based compounds from the alcohol that would make it unpleasant to drink. Modern stills are made of stainless steel with copper innards (piping, for example, will be lined with copper along with copper plate inlays along still walls). The simplest standard distillation apparatus is commonly known as a pot still, consisting of a single heated chamber and a vessel to collect purified alcohol.\nColumn stills are frequently used in the production of grain whisky and are the most commonly used type of still in the production of bourbon and other American whiskeys. Column stills behave like a series of single pot stills, formed in a long vertical tube. Whereas a single pot still charged with wine might yield a vapour enriched to 40\u201360% alcohol, a column still can achieve a vapour alcohol content of 95.6%; an azeotropic mixture of alcohol and water.\nMaturation (Aging).\nWhiskies do not mature in the bottle, only in the cask, so the \"age\" of a whisky is only the time between distillation and bottling. This reflects how much the cask has interacted with the whisky, changing its chemical makeup and taste. Whiskies that have been bottled for many years may have a rarity value, but are not older and not necessarily better than a more recent whisky that matured in wood for a similar time. After a decade or two, additional aging in a barrel does not necessarily improve a whisky, and excessive aging will even affect it negatively. The minimum aging period required for whisky varies by country. In the United States, the minimum aging requirement is typically 2 years, while in Scotland, Ireland, Japan, and Canada, it is generally 3 years.\nWhile aging in wooden casks, especially American oak and French oak casks, whisky undergoes six processes that contribute to its colour and final flavour: extraction, evaporation, oxidation, concentration, filtration, and colouration. Extraction in particular results in whisky acquiring a number of compounds, including aldehydes and acids such as vanillin, vanillic acid, and syringaldehyde. The casks used for aging bourbon whiskey are required to be new (and charred); after being used for this purpose, these casks are typically exported for use in the aging of other whiskies elsewhere. Distillers will sometimes age their whisky in barrels previously used to age other spirits, such as port, rum or sherry, to impart particular flavours. The size of the barrel also has an effect on the flavour development of the whisky, smaller barrels will contribute more to the whisky due to the higher wood surface to whisky ratio.\nDuring maturation, up to of whisky may evaporate from the cask over a 4 year period. This portion is called the \"angel's share\" by distillers.\nPackaging.\nMost whiskies are sold at or near an alcoholic strength of 40% abv, which is the statutory minimum in some countries \u2013 although the strength can vary, and cask-strength whisky may have as much as twice that alcohol percentage. Enthusiasts often prefer cask strength whisky for its concentrated flavours and customizable dilution experience.\nExports.\nThe UK exports more whisky than the rest of the world combined. In 2022, whisky exports from Scotland were valued at \u00a36.25 billion, making up a quarter of all UK food and drink export revenues. In 2012, the US was the largest market for Scotch whisky (\u00a3655 million), followed by France (\u00a3535 million). It is also one of the UK's overall top five manufacturing export earners and it supports around 42,000 jobs. Principal whisky producing areas include Speyside and the Isle of Islay, where there are nine distilleries providing a major source of employment. In many places, the industry is closely linked to tourism, with many distilleries also functioning as attractions worth \u00a330 million GVA each year.\nIn 2011, 70% of Canadian whisky was exported, with about 60% going to the US, and the rest mostly to Europe and Asia. 15 million cases of Canadian whisky were sold in the US in 2011.\nTypes.\nWhisky or whisky-like products are produced in most grain-growing areas. They differ in base product, alcoholic content, and quality.\nMalts and grains are combined in various ways:\nNational varieties.\nAmerican.\nAmerican whiskey is distilled from a fermented mash of cereal grain. It must have the taste, aroma, and other characteristics commonly attributed to whiskey.\nSome types of whiskey listed in the United States federal regulations are:\nThese types of American whiskey must be distilled to no more than 80% alcohol by volume, and barrelled at no more than 125 proof. Only water may be added to the final product; the addition of colouring or flavouring is prohibited. These whiskeys must be aged in new charred-oak containers, except for corn whiskey, which does not have to be aged. If it is aged, it must be in uncharred oak barrels or in used barrels. Corn whiskey is usually unaged and sold as a legal version of moonshine.\nThere is no minimum aging period required for a spirit to legally be called whiskey. If one of these whiskey types reaches two years aging or beyond, it is additionally designated as \"straight\", e.g., \"straight rye whiskey\". A whiskey that fulfils all above requirements but derives from less than 51% of any one specific grain can be called simply a \"straight whiskey\" without naming a grain.\nUS regulations recognize other whiskey categories, including:\nAnother important labelling in the marketplace is Tennessee whiskey, which includes brands such as Jack Daniel's, George Dickel, Collier and McKeel, and Benjamin Prichard's. The main difference defining a Tennessee whiskey is that it must be filtered through sugar maple charcoal before aging, known as the Lincoln County Process. (Benjamin Prichard's, which is not so filtered, was grandfathered in when the requirement was introduced in 2017.) The rest of the distillation process of Tennessee Whiskey is identical to bourbon whiskey. Whiskey sold as \"Tennessee whiskey\" is defined as bourbon under NAFTA and at least one other international trade agreement, and is similarly required to meet the legal definition of bourbon under Canadian law.\nAustralian.\nAustralian whiskies have won global whisky awards and medals, including the World Whiskies Awards and Jim Murray's Whisky Bible \"Liquid Gold Awards\".\nCanadian.\nBy Canadian law, Canadian whiskies must be produced and aged in Canada, be distilled from a fermented mash of cereal grain, be aged in wood barrels with a capacity limit of for not less than three years, and \"possess the aroma, taste and character generally attributed to Canadian whisky\". The terms \"Canadian Whisky\", \"Rye Whisky\", and \"Canadian Rye Whisky\" are legally indistinguishable in Canada and do not require any specific grain in their production and are often blends of two or more grains. Canadian whiskies may contain caramel and flavouring in addition to the distilled mash spirits, and there is no maximum limit on the alcohol level of the distillation. The minimum bottling proof is 40% ABV. To be exported under one of the \"Canadian Whisky\" designations, a whisky cannot contain more than 9.09% imported spirits.\nCanadian whiskies are available throughout the world and are a culturally significant export. Well known brands include Crown Royal, Canadian Club, Seagram's, and Wiser's among others. The historic popularity of Canadian whisky in the United States is partly a result of rum runners illegally importing it into the country during the period of American Prohibition.\nDanish.\nDenmark began producing whisky early in 1974. The first Danish single malt to go on sale was Lille Gadeg\u00e5rd from Bornholm, in 2005. Lille Gadeg\u00e5rd is a winery as well, and uses its own wine casks to mature whisky.\nThe second Danish distilled single malt whisky for sale was Edition No.1 from the Braunstein microbrewery and distillery. It was distilled in 2007, using water from the Greenlandic ice sheet, and entered the market in March 2010.\nAnother distillery is Stauning Whisky, based in Jutland.\nNyborg Destilleri, from the island Funen (Fyn) in the center of Denmark, produces organic whisky and other organic spirits. The distillery was established in 2009, and in 2020 they launched their first 10 year old whisky.\nEnglish.\nDistillers operated in London, Liverpool, and Bristol until the late 19th century, after which production of English single malt whisky ceased until 2003. There are currently 61 distilleries producing Malt and Grain English whisky and 20 brands of English whisky. An English whisky Geographical indication is currently awaiting approval but meets opposition..\nFinnish.\nIn 2005, there were two working distilleries in Finland and a third one under construction. Whisky retail sales in Finland are controlled solely by the state alcohol monopoly Alko and advertising of strong alcoholic beverages is banned.\nFrench.\nThe distilleries producing French whisky include Glann ar Mor and Warenghem in Brittany, Guillon in the Champagne region, and Grallet-Dupic in Lorraine. Buckwheat whisky is produced by Distillerie des Menhirs in Plomelin, Brittany. In 2022, there were around 100 whisky producers in France. \nThe first French whisky was produced at Warenghem distillery in 1987, who then introduced the first single malt French whisky in 1998.\nAccording to a study in 2016, the French are the largest consumers of single malt whisky in the world, especially Scotch.\nGerman.\nGerman whisky production is a relatively recent phenomenon having only started in the early 1990s. The styles produced resemble those made in Ireland, Scotland and the United States: single malts, blends, wheat, and bourbon-like styles. There is no standard spelling of German whiskies with distilleries using both \"whisky\" and \"whiskey\". In 2008 there were 23 distilleries in Germany producing whisky.\nIndian.\nDistilled alcoholic beverages that are labelled as \"whisky\" in India were commonly blends based on neutral spirits that are distilled from fermented molasses/grain with only a small portion consisting of traditional malt whisky, usually about 10 to 12 per cent. Outside India, such a drink would more likely be labelled a rum. According to the Scotch Whisky Association's 2013 annual report, \"there is no compulsory definition of whisky in India, and the Indian voluntary standard does not require whisky to be distilled from cereals or to be matured.\" Molasses-based blends made up 90 per cent of the spirits consumed as \"whisky\" in India, although whisky wholly distilled from malt and other grains is also produced. By 2004 shortages of wheat had been overcome and India was one of the largest producers. Amrut, the first single malt whisky produced in India, was launched in Glasgow, Scotland in 2004. After expanding in Europe it was launched in India in 2010.\nBy 2022 India produced many whiskies both for the local market\u2014the most lucrative market for whisky in the world\u2014and export. Indian single malts comprised 15% of the local market in 2017, increasing to 33% in 2022. In the three years to 2022 sales of Indian malts increased by an annual average of 42%, compared with 7% for imported rivals.\nIrish.\nIrish whiskeys are normally distilled three times, Cooley Distillery being the exception as they double distil. Though traditionally distilled using pot stills, the column still is now used to produce grain whiskey for blends. By law, Irish whiskey must be produced in Ireland and aged in wooden casks for a period of no less than three years, although in practice it is usually three or four times that period. Unpeated malt is almost always used, the main exception being Connemara Peated Malt whiskey. There are several types of whiskey common to Ireland: single malt, single grain, blended whiskey and single pot still whiskey.\nIrish whiskey was once the most popular spirit in the world, though a long period of decline from the late 19th century to the late 20th century greatly damaged the industry, so much so that, although Ireland boasted over 30 distilleries in the 1890s, a century later this number had fallen to just three. However, it has seen a great resurgence in popularity since the late twentieth century, and has been the fastest growing spirit in the world every year since 1990. With exports growing by over 15% per annum in recent years, existing distilleries have been expanded and a number of new distilleries constructed. As of mid 2019, Ireland now has 25 operating distilleries, with 24 more either planned or under development. However, many of these have not been operating long enough to have products sufficiently aged for sale, and only one was operating prior to 1975.\nJapanese.\nJapan produces both single malt and blended whiskies. The base is a mash of malted barley, dried in kilns fired with a little peat (although less than what is used for some peated Scotch whiskies), and is distilled using the pot still method. Production began in the 1920s. Before 2000, Japanese whisky was primarily for the domestic market and exports were limited. In recent years, though, Japanese whisky has grown in popularity on the global market. Japanese whiskies such as Suntory and Nikka won many prestigious international awards between 2007 and 2014. Japanese whisky has earned a reputation for quality.\nSince 2021, the local industry represented by the Japanese Spirits and Liqueurs Makers Association has regulated the definition of Japanese Whisky. It binds its members to ensuring that Japanese whisky is Japanese and conforms to quality standards. This includes a minimum alcohol content of 40% ABV, inclusion of malted grain, use of water sourced in Japan, a minimum of 3 years aging and most critically, that the distillation and bottling must occur in Japan. The standard was introduced in 2021 and enforced in 2024.\nMexican.\nMexican whisky is relatively young, as it has not been as popular as other distilled drinks in the country. However, many local distillers have recently begun working to produce homegrown whisky and raise its profile to match that of international brands.\nScotch.\nWhisky made in Scotland is known as Scotch whisky, or simply as \"Scotch\" (especially in North America).\nScotch whiskies are generally distilled twice, although some are distilled a third time and others even up to twenty times. Scotch Whisky Regulations require anything bearing the label \"Scotch\" to be distilled and bottled in Scotland and matured for a minimum of three years in oak casks, among other, more specific criteria. Any age statement on the bottle, in the form of a number, must reflect the age of the youngest Scotch whisky used to produce that product. A whisky with an age statement is known as guaranteed age whisky. Scotch whisky without an age statement may, by law, be as young as three years old.\nThe basic types of Scotch are malt whisky, grain whisky, or a blend of the two made in Scotland. Scotch malt whiskies were divided into five main regions: Highland, Lowland, Islay, Speyside and Campbeltown. Each of the whisky producing regions has a distinct flavour profile and characteristics to the whisky they produce.\nThere is also a sixth region recognized by some sources, though not by the Scotch Whisky Association: the Islands, excluding Islay. This unofficial region, (part of the Highlands according to the Association), includes the following whisky-producing islands making Island single malt: Arran, Jura, Mull, Orkney, and Skye.\nSwedish.\nWhisky started being produced in Sweden in 1955 by the now defunct \"Skeppets whisky\" brand. Their last bottle was sold in 1971. In 1999 Mackmyra Whisky was founded and is today the largest producer and has won several awards including European Whisky of the Year in Jim Murray's 2011 Whisky Bible and the International Wine &amp; Spirits Competition (IWSC) 2012 Award for Best European Spirits Producer of 2012.\nTaiwanese.\nKavalan was the first private whisky distillery in Taiwan. In January 2010, one of the distillery's products caused a stir by beating three Scotch whiskies and one English whisky in a blind tasting organised in Leith, Scotland, to celebrate Burns Night. The distillery was named by \"Whisky Magazine\" as the World Icons of Whisky \"Whisky Visitor Attraction of the Year\" for 2011, and its products have won several other awards. In 2012, Kavalan's Solist Fino Sherry Cask malt whisky was named \"new whisky of the year\" by Jim Murray in his guide, \"Jim Murray's Whisky Bible\". In 2015, Kavalan's Solist Vinho Barrique Single Cask was named the world's best single malt whisky by World Whiskies Awards. In 2016, Kavalan Solist Amontillado Sherry Single Cask was named the world's best single malt whisky by World Whisky Awards.\nWelsh.\nAlthough distillation of whisky in Wales began in Middle Ages there were no commercially operated distilleries during the 20th century. The rise of the temperance movement saw the decline of the commercial production of liquor during the 19th century and in 1894 Welsh whisky production ceased. The revival of Welsh whisky began in the 1990s. Initially a \"Prince of Wales\" malt whisky was sold as Welsh whisky but was simply blended scotch bottled in Wales. A lawsuit by Scotch distillers ended this enterprise. In 2000, Penderyn Distillery started production of Penderyn single malt whisky. The first bottles went on sale on 1 March 2004, Saint David's Day, and it is now sold worldwide. Penderyn Distillery is located in the Brecon Beacons National Park and is considered to be the smallest distillery in the world.\nDutch.\nThe Dutch have a historical distilling industry with Jenever for centuries, yet whisky is only a recent development since 2005. In 2005 Fryske Hynder Single Malt was introduced by the Us Heit Distillery, and Millstone was introduced by Zuidam Distillers. There are now over 70 Dutch whisky brands that make their mark on the (international) whisky market. \nOther.\nManX Spirit from the Isle of Man is distilled elsewhere and re-distilled in the country of its nominal \"origin\". The ManX distillery takes a previously matured Scotch malt whisky and re-distills it.\nWhisky DYC is a Spanish whisky made by Destiler\u00edas y Crianza del Whisky S.A since 1958.\nPuni is an Italian distillery in Glurns that makes single malt whisky, including Alba, which is matured in Marsala casks.\nAnkara was a whiskey produced in Turkey from 1964 to 2011.\nChemistry.\nOverview.\nWhiskies and other distilled beverages, such as cognac and rum, are complex beverages that contain a vast range of flavouring compounds, of which some 200 to 300 are easily detected by chemical analysis. The flavouring chemicals include \"carbonyl compounds, alcohols, carboxylic acids and their esters, nitrogen- and sulfur-containing compounds, tannins, and other polyphenolic compounds, terpenes, and oxygen-containing, heterocyclic compounds\" and esters of fatty acids. The nitrogen compounds include pyridines, picolines and pyrazines. The sulfur compounds include thiophenes and polysulfides which seem to contribute to whiskey's roasted character.\nFlavours from treating the malt.\nThe distinctive smoky flavour found in various types of whisky, especially Scotch, is due to the use of peat smoke to treat the malt.\nFlavours from distillation.\nThe flavouring of whisky is partially determined by the presence of congeners and fusel oils. Fusel oils are higher alcohols than ethanol, are mildly toxic, and have a strong, disagreeable smell and taste. An excess of fusel oils in whisky is considered a defect. A variety of methods are employed in the distillation process to remove unwanted fusel oils. Traditionally, American distillers focused on secondary filtration using charcoal, gravel, sand, or linen to remove undesired distillates.\nAcetals are rapidly formed in distillates and a great many are found in distilled beverages, the most prominent being acetaldehyde diethyl acetal (1,1-diethoxyethane). Among whiskies the highest levels are associated with malt whisky. This acetal is a principal flavour compound in sherry, and contributes fruitiness to the aroma.\nThe diketone diacetyl (2,3-butanedione) has a buttery aroma and is present in almost all distilled beverages. Whiskies and cognacs typically contain more of this than vodkas, but significantly less than rums or brandies.\nPolysulfides and thiophenes enter whiskey through the distillation process and contribute to its roasted flavour.\nFlavours from oak.\nWhisky that has been aged in oak barrels absorbs substances from the wood. One of these is cis-3-methyl-4-octanolide, known as the \"whisky lactone\" or \"quercus lactone\", a compound with a strong coconut aroma.\nCommercially charred oaks are rich in phenolic compounds. One study identified 40 different phenolic compounds. The coumarin scopoletin is present in whisky, with the highest level reported in Bourbon whiskey.\nIn an experiment, whiskey aged 3 years in orbit on the International Space Station tasted and measured significantly different from similar test subjects in gravity on Earth. Particularly, wood extractives were more present in the space samples.\nFlavours and colouring from additives.\nDepending on the local regulations, additional flavourings and colouring compounds may be added to the whisky. Canadian whisky may contain caramel and flavouring in addition to the distilled mash spirits. Scotch whisky may contain added (E150A) caramel colouring, but no other additives. The addition of flavourings is not allowed in American \"straight\" whiskey, but is allowed in American blends.\nChill filtration.\nWhisky is often \"chill filtered\": chilled to precipitate out fatty acid esters and then filtered to remove them. Most whiskies are bottled this way, unless specified as \"unchillfiltered\" or \"non-chill filtered\". This is done primarily for cosmetic reasons. Unchillfiltered whiskies often turn cloudy when stored at cool temperatures or when cool water is added to them, and this is perfectly normal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33154", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33154", "title": "Whiskey", "text": ""}
{"id": "33158", "revid": "49504735", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33158", "title": "War", "text": "Intense armed conflict\nWar is an armed conflict between the armed forces of states, or between governmental forces and armed groups that are organized under a certain command structure and have the capacity to sustain military operations, or between such organized groups. \nIt is generally characterized by widespread violence, destruction, and mortality, using regular or irregular military forces. Warfare refers to the common activities and characteristics of types of war, or of wars in general. \nTotal war is warfare that is not restricted to purely legitimate military targets, and can result in massive civilian or other non-combatant suffering and casualties.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"war\" derives from the 11th-century Old English words and , from Old French ( as in modern French), in turn from the Frankish , ultimately deriving from the Proto-Germanic 'mixture, confusion'. The word is related to the Old Saxon , Old High German , and the modern German , meaning 'to confuse, to perplex, to bring into confusion'.\nHistory.\nAnthropologists disagree about whether warfare was common throughout human prehistory, or whether it was a more recent development, following the invention of agriculture or organised states. It is difficult to determine whether warfare occurred during the Paleolithic due to the sparseness of known remains. Some sources claim that most Middle and Upper Paleolithic societies were possibly fundamentally egalitarian and may have rarely or never engaged in organized violence between groups (i.e. war). Evidence of violent conflict appears to increase during the Mesolithic period, from around 10,000 years ago onwards. \nAmerican cultural anthropologist and ethnologist Raymond Case Kelly claimed that before 400,000 years ago humans clashed like groups of chimpanzees; however, later they preferred \"positive and peaceful social relations between neighboring groups, such as joint hunting, trading, and courtship\". In his book \"Warless Societies and the Origin of War\" he explores the origins of modern wars and states that high surplus product encourages conflict, so \"raiding often begins in the richest environments\". \nIn \"War Before Civilization\", Lawrence H. Keeley, a professor at the University of Illinois, says approximately 90\u201395% of known societies throughout history engaged in at least occasional warfare, and many fought constantly. Keeley describes several styles of primitive combat such as small raids, large raids, and massacres. All of these forms of warfare were used by primitive societies, a finding supported by other researchers. Keeley explains that early war raids were not well organized, as the participants did not have any formal training. Scarcity of resources meant defensive works were not a cost-effective way to protect the society against enemy raids. William Rubinstein wrote \"Pre-literate societies, even those organized in a relatively advanced way, were renowned for their studied cruelty.'\" \nSince the rise of the state some 5,000 years ago, military activity has continued over much of the globe. In Europe the oldest known battlefield is thought to date to 1250 BC. The Bronze Age has been described as a key period in the intensification of warfare, with the emergence of dedicated warriors and the development of metal weapons like swords. Two other commonly named periods of increase are the Axial Age and Modern Times. The invention of gunpowder, and its eventual use in warfare, together with the acceleration of technological advances, have fomented major changes to war itself.\nIn \"Coercion, Capital, and European States, AD 990\u20131992\", Charles Tilly, professor of history, sociology, and social science at the University of Michigan and Columbia University, and described as \"the founding father of 21st-century sociology,\" argued that \"war made the state, and the state made war\", saying that wars have led to creation of states which in their turn perpetuate war. Tilly's theory of state formation is considered dominant in the state formation literature. \nSince 1945, great power wars, interstate wars, territorial conquests and war declarations have declined in frequency. Wars have been increasingly regulated by international humanitarian law. Battle deaths and casualties have declined, in part due to advances in military medicine and despite advances in weapons. In Western Europe, since the late 18th century, more than 150 conflicts and about 600 battles have taken place, but no battle has taken place since 1945.\nHowever, war in some aspects has not necessarily declined. Civil wars have increased in absolute terms since 1945. A distinctive feature of war since 1945 is that combat has largely been a matter of civil wars and insurgencies. The major exceptions were the Korean War, the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, the Iran\u2013Iraq War, the Gulf War, the Eritrean\u2013Ethiopian War, and the Russo-Ukrainian War.\nAims.\nEntities contemplating going to war and entities considering whether to end a war may formulate \"war aims\" as an evaluation/propaganda tool. War aims may stand as a proxy for national-military resolve.\nDefinition.\nFried defines war aims as \"the desired territorial, economic, military or other benefits expected following successful conclusion of a war\".\nClassification.\nTangible/intangible aims:\nExplicit/implicit aims:\nPositive/negative aims:\nWar aims can change in the course of conflict and may eventually morph into \"peace conditions\" \u2013 the minimal conditions under which a state may cease to wage a particular war.\nEffects.\nConflict zones.\nWhen a war takes place, one or more areas within a country or across border becomes a war zone or conflict zone. Daily life is interrupted, travel to or across the area may be difficult and international visitors may be advised to leave the area.\nCasualties.\nEstimates for total deaths due to war vary widely. In one estimate, primitive warfare from 50,000 to 3000 BCE has been thought to have claimed 400million\u00b1133,000 victims based on the assumption that it accounted for the 15.1% of all deaths. Ian Morris estimated that the rate could be as high as 20%. Other scholars find the prehistoric percentage much lower, around 2%, similar to the Neanderthals and ancestors of apes and primates. \nFor the period 3000 BCE until 1991, estimates range from 151million to severalbillion. The lowest estimate for history of 151 million was calculated by William Eckhardt. He explained his method as summing the recorded casualties and multiplying their average by the number of recorded battles or wars. This method excludes indirect deaths for premodern wars and all deaths for unrecorded wars. Few premodern wars were recorded beyond Eurasia and only 18 wars were recorded for period 3000 - 1500 BC worldwide. Later researchers shifted from Eckhardt's approach to general estimations of the percentage of population killed by wars. Azar Gat and Ian Morris both give the lowest estimate of 1% for history including all the 20th century, or about 1 billion. The highest estimates of both scholars exceed the famous \"hoax\" of 3,640,000,000 people killed in wars which circulated decades in scholarly literature in various countries. Gat gives 5%, or about 5 billion. Morris gives for the 20th century 2%, for 1400-1900 3% in Europe and \"slightly higher\" elsewhere, 5% for the ancient empires in 500 BC - AD 200, 10% for the rest of history and 20% for prehistory. His total for history is thus about 9 billion.\nLargest wars by death toll.\nThe deadliest war in history, in terms of the cumulative number of deaths since its start, is World War II, from 1939 to 1945, with 70\u201385\u00a0million deaths, followed by the Mongol conquests at up to 60\u00a0million. As concerns a belligerent's losses in proportion to its prewar population, the most destructive war in modern history may have been the Paraguayan War (see Paraguayan War casualties). War resulted in 31,000 deaths in 2013, down from 72,000 deaths in 1990. \nWar usually results in significant deterioration of infrastructure and the ecosystem, a decrease in social spending, famine, large-scale emigration from the war zone, and often the mistreatment of prisoners of war or civilians. For instance, of the nine million people who were on the territory of the Byelorussian SSR in 1941, some 1.6\u00a0million were killed by the Germans in actions away from battlefields, including about 700,000 prisoners of war, 500,000 Jews, and 320,000 people counted as partisans (the vast majority of whom were unarmed civilians). Another byproduct of some wars is the prevalence of propaganda by some or all parties in the conflict, and increased revenues by weapons manufacturers.\nThree of the ten most costly wars, in terms of loss of life, have been waged in the last century. These are the two World Wars, followed by the Second Sino-Japanese War (which is sometimes considered part of World War II, or as overlapping). Most of the others involved China or neighboring peoples. The death toll of World War II, being over 60\u00a0million, surpasses all other war-death-tolls.\nOn military personnel.\nMilitary personnel subject to combat in war often suffer mental and physical injuries, including depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, disease, injury, and death.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In every war in which American soldiers have fought in, the chances of becoming a psychiatric casualty \u2013 of being debilitated for some period of time as a consequence of the stresses of military life \u2013 were greater than the chances of being killed by enemy fire.\u2014\u200a\nSwank and Marchand's World War II study found that after sixty days of continuous combat, 98% of all surviving military personnel will become psychiatric casualties. Psychiatric casualties manifest themselves in fatigue cases, confusional states, conversion hysteria, anxiety, obsessional and compulsive states, and character disorders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One-tenth of mobilised American men were hospitalised for mental disturbances between 1942 and 1945, and after thirty-five days of uninterrupted combat, 98% of them manifested psychiatric disturbances in varying degrees.\u2014\u200a\nAdditionally, it has been estimated anywhere from 18% to 54% of Vietnam war veterans suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder. \nBased on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white American males aged 13 to 43 died in the American Civil War, including about 6% in the North and approximately 18% in the South. The war remains the deadliest conflict in American history, resulting in the deaths of 620,000 military personnel. United States military casualties of war since 1775 have totaled over two million. Of the 60\u00a0million European military personnel who were mobilized in World War I, 8\u00a0million were killed, 7\u00a0million were permanently disabled, and 15\u00a0million were seriously injured.\nDuring Napoleon's retreat from Moscow, more French military personnel died of typhus than were killed by the Russians. Of the 450,000 soldiers who crossed the Neman on 25 June 1812, less than 40,000 returned. More military personnel were killed from 1500 to 1914 by typhus than from military action. In addition, if it were not for modern medical advances there would be thousands more dead from disease and infection. For instance, during the Seven Years' War, the Royal Navy reported it conscripted 184,899 sailors, of whom 133,708 (72%) died of disease or were 'missing'. It is estimated that between 1985 and 1994, 378,000 people per year died due to war.\nOn civilians.\nMost wars have resulted in significant loss of life, along with destruction of infrastructure and resources (which may lead to famine, disease, and death in the civilian population). During the Thirty Years' War in Europe, the population of the Holy Roman Empire was reduced by 15 to 40 percent. Civilians in war zones may also be subject to war atrocities such as genocide, while survivors may suffer the psychological aftereffects of witnessing the destruction of war. War also results in lower quality of life and worse health outcomes. A medium-sized conflict with about 2,500 battle deaths reduces civilian life expectancy by one year and increases infant mortality by 10% and malnutrition by 3.3%. Additionally, about 1.8% of the population loses access to drinking water.\nMost estimates of World War II casualties indicate around 60\u00a0million people died, 40\u00a0million of whom were civilians. Deaths in the Soviet Union were around 27million. Since a high proportion of those killed were young men who had not yet fathered any children, population growth in the postwar Soviet Union was much lower than it otherwise would have been.\nEconomic.\nOnce a war has ended, losing nations are sometimes required to pay war reparations to the victorious nations. In certain cases, land is ceded to the victorious nations. For example, the territory of Alsace-Lorraine has been traded between France and Germany on three different occasions.\nTypically, war becomes intertwined with the economy and many wars are partially or entirely based on economic reasons. The common view among economic historians is that the Great Depression ended with the advent of World War II. Many economists believe that government spending on the war caused or at least accelerated recovery from the Great Depression, though some consider that it did not play a very large role in the recovery, though it did help in reducing unemployment. In most cases, such as the wars of Louis XIV, the Franco-Prussian War, and World War I, warfare primarily results in damage to the economy of the countries involved. For example, Russia's involvement in World War I took such a toll on the Russian economy that it almost collapsed and greatly contributed to the start of the Russian Revolution of 1917.\nWorld War II.\nWorld War II was the most financially costly conflict in history; its belligerents cumulatively spent about a trillion U.S. dollars on the war effort (as adjusted to 1940 prices).\nThe Great Depression of the 1930s ended as nations increased their production of war materials.\nBy the end of the war, 70% of European industrial infrastructure was destroyed. Property damage in the Soviet Union inflicted by the Axis invasion was estimated at a value of 679\u00a0billion rubles. The combined damage consisted of complete or partial destruction of 1,710 cities and towns, 70,000 villages/hamlets, 2,508 church buildings, 31,850 industrial establishments, of railroad, 4100 railroad stations, 40,000 hospitals, 84,000 schools, and 43,000 public libraries.\nTheories of motivation.\nThere are many theories about the motivations for war, but no consensus about which are most common. Military theorist Carl von Clausewitz said, \"Every age has its own kind of war, its own limiting conditions, and its own peculiar preconceptions.\"\nPsychoanalytic.\nDutch psychoanalyst Joost Meerloo held that, \"War is often...a mass discharge of accumulated internal rage (where)...the inner fears of mankind are discharged in mass destruction.\" Other psychoanalysts such as E.F.M. Durban and John Bowlby have argued human beings are inherently violent. This aggressiveness is fueled by displacement and projection where a person transfers his or her grievances into bias and hatred against other races, religions, nations or ideologies. By this theory, the nation state preserves order in the local society while creating an outlet for aggression through warfare.\nThe Italian psychoanalyst Franco Fornari, a follower of Melanie Klein, thought war was the paranoid or projective \"elaboration\" of mourning. Fornari thought war and violence develop out of our \"love need\": our wish to preserve and defend the sacred object to which we are attached, namely our early mother and our fusion with her. For the adult, nations are the sacred objects that generate warfare. Fornari focused upon sacrifice as the essence of war: the astonishing willingness of human beings to die for their country, to give over their bodies to their nation.\nDespite Fornari's theory that man's altruistic desire for self-sacrifice for a noble cause is a contributing factor towards war, few wars have originated from a desire for war among the general populace. Far more often the general population has been reluctantly drawn into war by its rulers. One psychological theory that looks at the leaders is advanced by Maurice Walsh. He argues the general populace is more neutral towards war and wars occur when leaders with a psychologically abnormal disregard for human life are placed into power. War is caused by leaders who seek war such as Napoleon and Hitler. Such leaders most often come to power in times of crisis when the populace opts for a decisive leader, who then leads the nation to war.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Naturally, the common people don't want war; neither in Russia nor in England nor in America, nor for that matter in Germany. That is understood. But, after all, it is the leaders of the country who determine the policy and it is always a simple matter to drag the people along, whether it is a democracy or a fascist dictatorship or a Parliament or a Communist dictatorship. ... the people can always be brought to the bidding of the leaders. That is easy. All you have to do is tell them they are being attacked and denounce the pacifists for lack of patriotism and exposing the country to danger. It works the same way in any country.\u2014\u200a\nEvolutionary.\nSeveral theories concern the evolutionary origins of warfare. There are two main schools: One sees organized warfare as emerging in or after the Mesolithic as a result of complex social organization and greater population density and competition over resources; the other sees human warfare as a more ancient practice derived from common animal tendencies, such as territoriality and sexual competition.\nThe latter school argues that since warlike behavior patterns are found in many primate species such as chimpanzees, as well as in many ant species, group conflict may be a general feature of animal social behavior. Some proponents of the idea argue that war, while innate, has been intensified greatly by developments of technology and social organization such as weaponry and states.\nPsychologist and linguist Steven Pinker argued that war-related behaviors may have been naturally selected in the ancestral environment due to the benefits of victory. He also argued that in order to have credible deterrence against other groups (as well as on an individual level), it was important to have a reputation for retaliation, causing humans to develop instincts for revenge as well as for protecting a group's (or an individual's) reputation (\"honor\").\nCrofoot and Wrangham have argued that warfare, if defined as group interactions in which \"coalitions attempt to aggressively dominate or kill members of other groups\", is a characteristic of most human societies. Those in which it has been lacking \"tend to be societies that were politically dominated by their neighbors\".\nAshley Montagu strongly denied universalistic instinctual arguments, arguing that social factors and childhood socialization are important in determining the nature and presence of warfare. Thus, he argues, warfare is not a universal human occurrence and appears to have been a historical invention, associated with certain types of human societies. Montagu's argument is supported by ethnographic research conducted in societies where the concept of aggression seems to be entirely absent, e.g. the Chewong and Semai of the Malay peninsula. Bobbi S. Low has observed correlation between warfare and education, noting societies where warfare is commonplace encourage their children to be more aggressive.\nEconomic.\nWar can be seen as a growth of economic competition in a competitive international system. In this view wars begin as a pursuit of markets for natural resources and for wealth. War has also been linked to economic development by economic historians and development economists studying state-building and fiscal capacity. While this theory has been applied to many conflicts, such counter arguments become less valid as the increasing mobility of capital and information level the distributions of wealth worldwide, or when considering that it is relative, not absolute, wealth differences that may fuel wars. There are those on the extreme right of the political spectrum who provide support, fascists in particular, by asserting a natural right of a strong nation to whatever the weak cannot hold by force.\nMarxist.\nThe Marxist theory of war is quasi-economic in that it states all modern wars are caused by competition for resources and markets between great (imperialist) powers, claiming these wars are a natural result of capitalism. Marxist economists Karl Kautsky, Rosa Luxemburg, Rudolf Hilferding and Vladimir Lenin theorized that imperialism was the result of capitalist countries needing new markets. Expansion of the means of production is only possible if there is a corresponding growth in consumer demand. Since the workers in a capitalist economy would be unable to fill the demand, producers must expand into non-capitalist markets to find consumers for their goods, hence driving imperialism.\nDemographic.\nDemographic theories can be grouped into two classes, Malthusian and youth bulge theories:\nMalthusian.\nMalthusian theories see expanding population and scarce resources as a source of violent conflict. Pope Urban II in 1095, on the eve of the First Crusade, advocating Crusade as a solution to European overpopulation, said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For this land which you now inhabit, shut in on all sides by the sea and the mountain peaks, is too narrow for your large population; it scarcely furnishes food enough for its cultivators. Hence it is that you murder and devour one another, that you wage wars, and that many among you perish in civil strife. Let hatred, therefore, depart from among you; let your quarrels end. Enter upon the road to the Holy Sepulchre; wrest that land from a wicked race, and subject it to yourselves.\nThis is one of the earliest expressions of what has come to be called the Malthusian theory of war, in which wars are caused by expanding populations and limited resources. Thomas Malthus (1766\u20131834) wrote that populations always increase until they are limited by war, disease, or famine. The violent herder\u2013farmer conflicts in Nigeria, Mali, Sudan and other countries in the Sahel region have been exacerbated by land degradation and population growth.\nYouth bulge.\nAccording to Heinsohn, who proposed youth bulge theory in its most generalized form, a youth bulge occurs when 30 to 40 percent of the males of a nation belong to the \"fighting age\" cohorts from 15 to 29 years of age. It will follow periods with total fertility rates as high as 4\u20138 children per woman with a 15\u201329-year delay. Heinsohn saw both past \"Christianist\" European colonialism and imperialism, as well as today's Islamist civil unrest and terrorism as results of high birth rates producing youth bulges. \nAmong prominent historical events that have been attributed to youth bulges are the role played by the historically large youth cohorts in the rebellion and revolution waves of early modern Europe, including the French Revolution of 1789, and the effect of economic depression upon the largest German youth cohorts ever in explaining the rise of Nazism in Germany in the 1930s. The 1994 Rwandan genocide has also been analyzed as following a massive youth bulge. Youth bulge theory has been subjected to statistical analysis by the World Bank, Population Action International, and the Berlin Institute for Population and Development. Youth bulge theories have been criticized as leading to racial, gender and age discrimination.\nCultural.\nGeoffrey Parker argues that what distinguishes the \"Western way of war\" based in Western Europe chiefly allows historians to explain its extraordinary success in conquering most of the world after 1500: The Western way of war rests upon five principal foundations: technology, discipline, a highly aggressive military tradition, a remarkable capacity to innovate and to respond rapidly to the innovation of others and\u00a0\u2013 from about 1500 onward\u00a0\u2013 a unique system of war finance. The combination of all five provided a formula for military success...The outcome of wars has been determined less by technology, then by better war plans, the achievement of surprise, greater economic strength, and above all superior discipline.\nParker argues that Western armies were stronger because they emphasized discipline, that is, \"the ability of a formation to stand fast in the face of the enemy, where they're attacking or being attacked, without giving way to the natural impulse of fear and panic.\" Discipline came from drills and marching in formation, target practice, and creating small \"artificial kinship groups: such as the company and the platoon, to enhance psychological cohesion and combat efficiency.\nRationalist.\nRationalism is an international relations theory or framework. Rationalism (and Neorealism (international relations)) operate under the assumption that states or international actors are rational, seek the best possible outcomes for themselves, and desire to avoid the costs of war. Under one game theory approach, rationalist theories posit all actors can bargain, would be better off if war did not occur, and likewise seek to understand why war nonetheless reoccurs. Under another rationalist game theory without bargaining, the peace war game, optimal strategies can still be found that depend upon number of iterations played. In \"Rationalist Explanations for War\", James Fearon examined three rationalist explanations for why some countries engage in war:\n\"Issue indivisibility\" occurs when the two parties cannot avoid war by bargaining, because the thing over which they are fighting cannot be shared between them, but only owned entirely by one side or the other. \"Information asymmetry with incentives to misrepresent\" occurs when two countries have secrets about their individual capabilities, and do not agree on either: who would win a war between them, or the magnitude of state's victory or loss. For instance, Geoffrey Blainey argues that war is a result of miscalculation of strength. He cites historical examples of war and demonstrates, \"war is usually the outcome of a diplomatic crisis which cannot be solved because both sides have conflicting estimates of their bargaining power.\" Thirdly, bargaining may fail due to the states' inability to make credible commitments.\nWithin the rationalist tradition, some theorists have suggested that individuals engaged in war suffer a normal level of cognitive bias, but are still \"as rational as you and me\". According to philosopher Iain King, \"Most instigators of conflict overrate their chances of success, while most participants underrate their chances of injury...\" King asserts that \"Most catastrophic military decisions are rooted in groupthink\" which is faulty, but still rational. The rationalist theory focused around bargaining, which is currently under debate. The Iraq War proved to be an anomaly that undercuts the validity of applying rationalist theory to some wars.\nPolitical science.\nThe statistical analysis of war was pioneered by Lewis Fry Richardson following World War I. More recent databases of wars and armed conflict have been assembled by the Correlates of War Project, Peter Brecke and the Uppsala Conflict Data Program. The following subsections consider causes of war from system, societal, and individual levels of analysis. This kind of division was first proposed by Kenneth Waltz in \"Man, the State, and War\" and has been often used by political scientists since then.\nSystem-level.\nThere are several different international relations theory schools. Supporters of realism in international relations argue that the motivation of states is the quest for security, and conflicts can arise from the inability to distinguish defense from offense, which is called the security dilemma.\nWithin the realist school as represented by scholars such as Henry Kissinger and Hans Morgenthau, and the neorealist school represented by scholars such as Kenneth Waltz and John Mearsheimer, two main sub-theories are:\nThe two theories are not mutually exclusive and may be used to explain disparate events according to the circumstance. Liberalism as it relates to international relations emphasizes factors such as trade, and its role in disincentivizing conflict which will damage economic relations. Critics respond that military force may sometimes be at least as effective as trade at achieving economic benefits, especially historically if not as much today. Furthermore, trade relations which result in a high level of dependency may escalate tensions and lead to conflict. Empirical data on the relationship of trade to peace are mixed, and moreover, some evidence suggests countries at war do not necessarily trade less with each other.\nIndividual-level.\nThese theories suggest differences in people's personalities, decision-making, emotions, belief systems, and biases are important in determining whether conflicts get out of hand. For instance, it has been proposed that conflict is modulated by bounded rationality and various cognitive biases, such as prospect theory.\nEthics.\nThe morality of war has been the subject of debate for thousands of years.\nThe two principal aspects of ethics in war, according to the just war theory, are \"jus ad bellum\" and \"jus in bello\".\n\"Jus ad bellum\" (right to war), dictates which unfriendly acts and circumstances justify a proper authority in declaring war on another nation. There are six main criteria for the declaration of a just war: first, any just war must be declared by a lawful authority; second, it must be a just and righteous cause, with sufficient gravity to merit large-scale violence; third, the just belligerent must have rightful intentions \u2013 namely, that they seek to advance good and curtail evil; fourth, a just belligerent must have a reasonable chance of success; fifth, the war must be a last resort; and sixth, the ends being sought must be proportional to means being used.\n\"Jus in bello\" (right in war), is the set of ethical rules when conducting war. The two main principles are proportionality and discrimination. Proportionality regards how much force is necessary and morally appropriate to the ends being sought and the injustice suffered. The principle of discrimination determines who are the legitimate targets in a war, and specifically makes a separation between combatants, who it is permissible to kill, and non-combatants, who it is not. Failure to follow these rules can result in the loss of legitimacy for the just-war-belligerent.\nThe just war theory was foundational in the creation of the United Nations and in international law's regulations on legitimate war.\nLewis Coser, an American conflict theorist and sociologist, argued that conflict provides a function and a process whereby a succession of new equilibriums are created. Thus, the struggle of opposing forces, rather than being disruptive, may be a means of balancing and maintaining a social structure or society.\nLimiting and stopping.\nReligious groups have long formally opposed or sought to limit war as in the Second Vatican Council document \"Gaudiem et Spes\": \"Any act of war aimed indiscriminately at the destruction of entire cities of extensive areas along with their population is a crime against God and man himself. It merits unequivocal and unhesitating condemnation.\"\nAnti-war movements have existed for every major war in the 20th century, including, most prominently, World War I, World War II, and the Vietnam War. In the 21st century, worldwide anti-war movements occurred in response to the United States invasion of Afghanistan and Iraq. Protests opposing the War in Afghanistan occurred in Europe, Asia, and the United States.\nPauses.\nDuring a war, the parties may agree to pauses. A ceasefire is a stoppage of a war in which each side agrees with the other to suspend aggressive actions (often due to mediation by a third party). Ceasefires may be declared as part of a formal treaty but also as part of an informal understanding between opposing forces. A ceasefire can be temporary with an intended end date or may be intended to last indefinitely. A ceasefire is distinct from an armistice in that the armistice is a formal end to a war whereas a ceasefire may be a temporary stoppage.\nThe immediate goal of a ceasefire is to stop violence but the underlying purposes of ceasefires vary. Ceasefires may be intended to meet short-term limited needs (such as providing humanitarian aid), manage a conflict to make it less devastating, or advance efforts to peacefully resolve a dispute. An actor may not always intend for a ceasefire to advance the peaceful resolution of a conflict but instead give the actor an upper hand in the conflict (for example, by re-arming and repositioning forces or attacking an unsuspecting adversary), which creates bargaining problems that may make ceasefires less likely to be implemented and less likely to be durable if implemented.\nThe durability of ceasefire agreements is affected by several factors, such as demilitarized zones, withdrawal of troops and third-party guarantees and monitoring (e.g. peacekeeping). Ceasefire agreements are more likely to be durable when they reduce incentives to attack, reduce uncertainty about the adversary's intentions, and when mechanisms are put in place to prevent accidents from spiraling into conflict.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33161", "revid": "39721018", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33161", "title": "Ward Cunningham", "text": "American computer programmer (born 1949)\nHoward G. Cunningham (born May 26, 1949) is an American computer programmer, who developed the first wiki and co-authored the \"Manifesto for Agile Software Development\". Called a pioneer, and innovator, he also helped create both software design patterns and extreme programming. He began coding the WikiWikiWeb in 1994, and installed it on c2.com (the website of his software consulting firm) on March 25, 1995, as an add-on to the Portland Pattern Repository. He co-authored (with Bo Leuf) a book about wikis, entitled \"The Wiki Way\", and invented the Framework for Integrated Test.\nCunningham was a keynote speaker at the first three instances of the WikiSym conference series on wiki research and practice, and also at the Wikimedia Developer Summit 2017. He was a keynote speaker at the MediaWiki Users and Developers Conference, Spring 2024.\nEarly life and career.\nCunningham was born in Michigan City, Indiana, on May 26, 1949. He grew up in Highland, Indiana, where he completed high school. \nCunningham received his bachelor's degree in interdisciplinary engineering (electrical engineering and computer science) and his master's degree in computer science from Purdue University, graduating in 1978. He is a co-founder of Cunningham &amp; Cunningham, a software consultancy he started with his wife. \nCunningham has also served as Director of R&amp;D at Wyatt Software and as Principal Engineer in the Tektronix Computer Research Laboratory. He is founder of The Hillside Group and has served as program chair of the Pattern Languages of Programming conference which it sponsors. \nCunningham was part of the Smalltalk community.\nFrom December 2003 until October 2005, Cunningham worked for Microsoft in the \"Patterns &amp; Practices\" group. From October 2005 to May 2007, he held the position of Director of Committer Community Development at the Eclipse Foundation. In May 2009, he joined AboutUs as its chief technology officer. On March 24, 2011 \"The Oregonian\" reported that Cunningham had departed AboutUs to join the Venice Beach-based CitizenGlobal, a startup working on crowd-sourced video content, as their chief technology officer and the Co-Creation Czar. He remains \"an adviser\" with AboutUs. In April 2013, Cunningham left CitizenGlobal to work as a programmer at New Relic.\nIdeas and inventions.\nCunningham is well known for a few widely disseminated ideas which he originated and developed. The most famous among these are the wiki and many ideas in the field of software design patterns, made popular by the Gang of Four (GoF). He owns the company Cunningham &amp; Cunningham Inc., a consultancy that has specialized in object-oriented programming. He coined the concept of technical debt and expanded on the idea in 1992.\nHe created the site (and software) WikiWikiWeb, the first internet wiki, in 1995.\nIn 2001, he signed the Manifesto for Agile Software Development as a co-author.\nWhen asked in a 2006 interview with internetnews.com whether he considered patenting the wiki concept, he explained that he thought the idea \"just sounded like something that no one would want to pay money for.\"\nCunningham is interested in tracking the number and location of wiki page edits as a sociological experiment and may even consider the degradation of a wiki page as part of its process to stability. \"There are those who give and those who take. You can tell by reading what they write.\"\nIn 2011, Cunningham created Smallest Federated Wiki, a tool for wiki federation, which applies aspects of software development such as forking to wiki pages. \nCunningham has contributed to the practice of object-oriented programming, in particular the use of pattern languages and (with Kent Beck) the class-responsibility-collaboration cards. He also contributes to the extreme programming software development methodology. Much of this work was done collaboratively on the first wiki site.\n\"Cunningham's Law\".\nCunningham is credited with the idea: \"The best way to get the right answer on the Internet is not to ask a question; it's to post the wrong answer.\" This refers to the observation that people are quicker to correct a wrong answer than to answer an unanswered question. According to Steven McGeady, Cunningham advised him of this on a whim in the early 1980s, and McGeady dubbed this Cunningham's Law. Although originally referring to interactions on Usenet, the law has been used to describe how other online communities work, such as Wikipedia. Cunningham relativises his ownership of the law, calling it a \"misquote that disproves itself by propagating through the internet\" and by saying that he \"never suggested asking questions by posting wrong answers\".\nPersonal life.\nCunningham lives in Beaverton, Oregon. He holds an amateur radio extra class license issued by the Federal Communications Commission. His call sign is K9OX.\nCunningham is Nike's first \"Code for a Better World\" Fellow.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33162", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33162", "title": "Wofgang Amadeus Mozart", "text": ""}
{"id": "33163", "revid": "15766062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33163", "title": "Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart", "text": "Composer (1756\u20131791)\nWolfgang Amadeus Mozart (27 January 1756 \u2013 5 December 1791) was a prolific and influential composer of the Classical period. Despite his short life, his rapid pace of composition and proficiency from an early age resulted in more than 800 works representing virtually every Western classical genre of his time. Many of these compositions are acknowledged as pinnacles of the symphonic, concertante, chamber, opera, and choral repertoires. Mozart is widely regarded as one of the greatest composers in the history of Western music, with his music admired for its \"melodic beauty, its formal elegance and its richness of harmony and texture\".\nBorn in Salzburg, Mozart showed prodigious ability from his earliest childhood. At age five, he was already competent on keyboard and violin, had begun to compose, and performed before European royalty. His father, Leopold Mozart, took him on a grand tour of Europe and then three trips to Italy. At 17, he was a musician at the Salzburg court but grew restless and travelled in search of a better position. Mozart's fruitless journey in search of employment led him to Paris, Mannheim, Munich, and eventually back to Salzburg. During this time he wrote his five violin concertos, the Sinfonia Concertante, and Concerto for Flute and Harp, as well as sacred pieces and masses, the motet\u00a0\"Exsultate Jubilate\", and the opera \"Idomeneo\", among other works.\nWhile visiting Vienna in 1781, Mozart was dismissed from his Salzburg position. He stayed in Vienna, where he achieved fame but little financial security. During Mozart's early years in Vienna, he produced several notable works, such as the opera \"Die Entf\u00fchrung aus dem Serail\", the \"Great Mass in C minor\", the \"Haydn\" Quartets and a number of symphonies. Throughout his Vienna years, Mozart composed over a dozen piano concertos, many considered some of his greatest achievements. In the final years of his life, Mozart wrote many of his best-known works, including his last three symphonies, culminating in the \"Jupiter\" Symphony, the serenade \"Eine kleine Nachtmusik\", his Clarinet Concerto, the operas \"The Marriage of Figaro\", \"Don Giovanni\", \"Cos\u00ec fan tutte\" and \"The Magic Flute\" and his Requiem. The Requiem was largely unfinished at the time of his death at age 35, the circumstances of which are uncertain and much mythologised.\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nFamily and childhood.\nWolfgang Amadeus Mozart was born on 27 January 1756 to Leopold Mozart and Anna Maria, n\u00e9e Pertl, at Getreidegasse 9 in Salzburg. Salzburg was the capital of the Archbishopric of Salzburg, an ecclesiastical principality within the Holy Roman Empire, located in what is now Austria. He was the youngest of seven children, five of whom died in infancy. His elder sister was Maria Anna Mozart, nicknamed \"Nannerl\". Mozart was baptised the day after his birth, at St. Rupert's Cathedral in Salzburg. The baptismal record gives his name in Latinised form, as \"Joannes Chrysostomus Wolfgangus Theophilus Mozart\". He generally called himself \"Wolfgang Amad\u00e8 Mozart\" as an adult, but his name had many variants.\nWolfgang's father, Leopold Mozart, a native of Augsburg, then an Imperial Free City in the Holy Roman Empire, was a minor composer and an experienced teacher. In 1743, he was appointed as the fourth violinist in the musical establishment of Count Leopold Anton von Firmian, the ruling Prince-Archbishop of Salzburg. Four years later, he married Anna Maria in Salzburg. Leopold became the orchestra's deputy Kapellmeister in 1763. During the year of his son's birth, Leopold published a violin textbook, \"Versuch einer gr\u00fcndlichen Violinschule\", which achieved success.\nWhen Nannerl was seven, she began keyboard lessons with her father, while her three-year-old brother looked on. Years later, after her brother's death, she reminisced:\nHe often spent much time at the clavier, picking out thirds, which he was ever striking, and his pleasure showed that it sounded good... In the fourth year of his age his father, for a game as it were, began to teach him a few minuets and pieces at the clavier... He could play it faultlessly and with the greatest delicacy, and keeping exactly in time... At the age of five, he was already composing little pieces, which he played to his father who wrote them down.\nThese early pieces, K. 1\u20135, were recorded in the \"Nannerl Notenbuch\". There is some scholarly debate about whether Mozart was four or five years old when he created his first musical compositions, though there is little doubt that Mozart composed his first three pieces of music within a few weeks of each other: K. 1a, 1b, and 1c.\nIn his early years, Wolfgang's father was his only teacher. Along with music, he taught his children languages and academic subjects. The biographer Maynard Solomon notes that, while Leopold was a devoted teacher to his children, there is evidence that Mozart was keen to progress beyond what he was taught. His first ink-spattered composition and his precocious efforts with the violin were of his initiative and came as a surprise to Leopold, who eventually gave up composing when his son's musical talents became evident.\n1762\u201373: Travel.\nWhile Wolfgang was young, his family made several European journeys in which he and Nannerl performed as child prodigies. These began with an exhibition in 1762 at the court of Prince-elector Maximilian III of Bavaria in Munich, and at the Imperial Courts in Vienna and Prague. A long concert tour followed, spanning three and a half years, taking the family to the courts of Munich, Mannheim, Paris, London, Dover, The Hague, Amsterdam, Utrecht, Mechelen and again to Paris, and back home via Z\u00fcrich, Donaueschingen, and Munich. During this trip, Wolfgang met many musicians and acquainted himself with the works of other composers. A particularly significant influence was Johann Christian Bach, whom he visited in London in 1764 and 1765. When he was eight years old, Mozart wrote his first symphony, most of which was probably transcribed by his father.\nThe family trips were often challenging, and travel conditions were primitive. They had to wait for invitations and reimbursement from the nobility, and they endured long, near-fatal illnesses far from home: first Leopold (London, summer 1764), then both children (The Hague, autumn 1765). The family again went to Vienna in late 1767 and remained there until December 1768.\nAfter one year in Salzburg, Leopold and Wolfgang set off for Italy, leaving Anna Maria and Nannerl at home. This tour lasted from December 1769 to March 1771. As with earlier journeys, Leopold wanted to display his son's abilities as a performer and a rapidly maturing composer. Wolfgang met Josef Myslive\u010dek and Giovanni Battista Martini in Bologna and was accepted as a member of the famous Accademia Filarmonica. There exists a myth, according to which, while in Rome, he heard Gregorio Allegri's \"Miserere\" twice in performance in the Sistine Chapel. Allegedly, he subsequently wrote it out from memory, thus producing the \"first unauthorised copy of this closely guarded property of the Vatican\". However, both the origin and plausibility of this account are disputed.\nIn Milan, Mozart wrote the opera \"Mitridate, re di Ponto\" (1770), which was performed with success. This led to further opera commissions. He returned with his father twice to Milan (August\u2013December 1771; October 1772\u00a0\u2013 March 1773) for the composition and premieres of \"Ascanio in Alba\" (1771) and \"Lucio Silla\" (1772). Leopold hoped these visits would result in a professional appointment for his son, and indeed ruling Archduke Ferdinand contemplated hiring Mozart, but owing to his mother Empress Maria Theresa's reluctance to employ \"useless people\", the matter was dropped and Leopold's hopes were never realised. Toward the end of the journey, Mozart wrote the solo motet \"Exsultate, jubilate\", K.165.\n1773\u201377: Employment at the Salzburg court.\nAfter finally returning with his father from Italy on 13 March 1773, Mozart was employed as a court musician by the ruler of Salzburg, Prince-Archbishop Hieronymus Colloredo. The composer had many friends and admirers in Salzburg and had the opportunity to work in many genres, including symphonies, sonatas, string quartets, masses, serenades, and a few minor operas.\nBetween April and December 1775, Mozart developed an enthusiasm for violin concertos, producing a series of five (the only ones he ever wrote), which steadily increased in their musical sophistication. The last three\u2014K.\u00a0216, K.\u00a0218, K.\u00a0219\u2014are now staples of the repertoire.\nIn 1776 he turned his efforts to piano concertos, culminating in the E\u266d concerto K.\u00a0271 of early 1777, considered by critics to be a breakthrough work.\nDespite these artistic successes, Mozart grew increasingly discontented with Salzburg and redoubled his efforts to find a position elsewhere. One reason was his low salary, 150 florins a year; Mozart longed to compose operas, and Salzburg provided only rare occasions for these. The situation worsened in 1775 when the court theatre was closed, especially since the other theatre in Salzburg was primarily reserved for visiting troupes.\nTwo long expeditions in search of work interrupted this long Salzburg stay. Mozart and his father visited Vienna from 14 July to 26 September 1773, and Munich from 6December 1774 to March 1775. Neither visit was successful, though the Munich journey resulted in a popular success with the premiere of Mozart's opera \"La finta giardiniera\".\n1777\u201378: Journey to Paris.\nIn August 1777 Mozart resigned his position at Salzburg and on 23 September ventured out once more in search of employment, with visits to Augsburg, Mannheim, Paris, and Munich.\nMozart became acquainted with members of the famous orchestra in Mannheim, the best in Europe at the time. He also fell in love with Aloysia Weber, one of four daughters of a musical family. There were prospects of employment in Mannheim, but they came to nothing, and Mozart left for Paris on 14 March 1778 to continue his search. One of his letters from Paris hints at a possible post as an organist at Versailles, but Mozart was not interested in such an appointment. He fell into debt and took to pawning valuables. The nadir of the visit occurred when Mozart's mother was taken ill and died on 3July 1778. There had been delays in calling a doctor\u2014probably, according to Halliwell, because of a lack of funds. Mozart stayed with Melchior Grimm at Marquise d'\u00c9pinay's residence, 5 rue de la Chauss\u00e9e-d'Antin.\nWhile Mozart was in Paris, his father was pursuing opportunities of employment for him in Salzburg. With the support of the local nobility, Mozart was offered a post as court organist and concertmaster. The annual salary was 450 florins, but he was reluctant to accept. By that time, relations between Grimm and Mozart had cooled, and Mozart moved out. After leaving Paris in September 1778 for Strasbourg, he lingered in Mannheim and Munich, still hoping to obtain an appointment outside Salzburg. In Munich, he again encountered Aloysia, now a very successful singer, but she was no longer interested in him. Mozart finally returned to Salzburg on 15 January 1779 and took up his new appointment, but his discontent with Salzburg remained undiminished.\nAmong the better-known works which Mozart wrote on the Paris journey are the A minor piano sonata, K.\u00a0310/300d, the \"Paris\" Symphony (No.\u00a031), which were performed in Paris on 12 and 18 June 1778; and the Concerto for Flute and Harp in C major, K. 299/297c.\nVienna.\n1781: Departure.\nIn January 1781 Mozart's opera \"Idomeneo\" premiered with \"considerable success\" in Munich. The following March, Mozart was summoned to Vienna, where his employer, Archbishop Colloredo, was attending the celebrations for the accession of Joseph II to the Austrian throne. For Colloredo, this was simply a matter of wanting his musical servant to be at hand (Mozart indeed was required to dine in Colloredo's establishment with the valets and cooks). He planned a bigger career as he continued in the archbishop's service; for example, he wrote to his father:\nMy main goal right now is to meet the emperor in some agreeable fashion, I am absolutely determined he should get to know me. I would be so happy if I could whip through my opera for him and then play a fugue or two, for that's what he likes.\nMozart did indeed soon meet the Emperor, who eventually was to support his career substantially with commissions and a part-time position.\nIn the same letter to his father just quoted, Mozart outlined his plans to participate as a soloist in the concerts of the Tonk\u00fcnstler-Societ\u00e4t, a prominent benefit concert series; this plan as well came to pass after the local nobility prevailed on Colloredo to drop his opposition.\nColloredo's wish to prevent Mozart from performing outside his establishment was in other cases carried through, raising the composer's anger; one example was a chance to perform before the Emperor at Countess Thun's for a fee equal to half of his yearly Salzburg salary.\nThe quarrel with the archbishop came to a head in May: Mozart attempted to resign and was refused. The following month, permission was granted, but in a grossly insulting way: the composer was dismissed literally \"with a kick in the arse\", administered by the archbishop's steward, Count Arco. Mozart decided to settle in Vienna as a freelance performer and composer.\nThe quarrel with Colloredo was more difficult for Mozart because his father sided against him. Hoping fervently that he would obediently follow Colloredo back to Salzburg, Mozart's father exchanged intense letters with his son, urging him to reconcile with their employer. Mozart passionately defended his intention to pursue an independent career in Vienna. The debate ended when Mozart was dismissed by the archbishop, freeing himself both of his employer and of his father's demands to return. Solomon characterizes Mozart's resignation as a \"revolutionary step\" that significantly altered the course of his life.\nEarly years.\nMozart's new career in Vienna began well. He often performed as a pianist, notably in a competition before the Emperor with Muzio Clementi on 24 December 1781, and he soon \"had established himself as the finest keyboard player in Vienna\". He also prospered as a composer, and in 1782 completed the opera \"Die Entf\u00fchrung aus dem Serail\" (\"The Abduction from the Seraglio\"), which premiered on 16 July 1782 and achieved considerable success. The work was soon being performed \"throughout German-speaking Europe\", and thoroughly established Mozart's reputation as a composer.\nNear the height of his quarrels with Colloredo, Mozart moved in with the Weber family, who had moved to Vienna from Mannheim. The family's father, Fridolin, had died, and the Webers were now taking in lodgers to make ends meet.\nMarriage and children.\nAfter failing to win the hand of Aloysia Weber, who was now married to the actor and artist Joseph Lange, Mozart's interest shifted to the third daughter of the family, Constanze.\nThe courtship did not go entirely smoothly; surviving correspondence indicates that Mozart and Constanze briefly broke up in April 1782, over an episode involving jealousy: Constanze had permitted another young man to measure her calves in a parlour game. Mozart also faced a very difficult task getting permission for the marriage from his father.\nThe marriage took place in an atmosphere of crisis. Daniel Heartz suggests that eventually, Constanze moved in with Mozart, which would have placed her in disgrace by the mores of the time. Mozart wrote to Leopold on 31 July 1782, \"All the good and well-intentioned advice you have sent fails to address the case of a man who has already gone so far with a maiden. Further postponement is out of the question.\" Heartz relates, \"Constanze's sister Sophie had tearfully declared that her mother would send the police after Constanze if she did not return home [presumably from Mozart's apartment].\" On 4 August, Mozart wrote to Baroness von Waldst\u00e4tten, asking: \"Can the police here enter anyone's house in this way? Perhaps it is only a ruse of Madame Weber to get her daughter back. If not, I know no better remedy than to marry Constanze tomorrow morning or if possible today.\"\nThe couple were finally married on 4August 1782 in St. Stephen's Cathedral, the day before his father's consenting letter arrived in the mail. In the marriage contract, Constanze \"assigns to her bridegroom five hundred gulden which ... the latter has promised to augment with one thousand gulden\", with the total \"to pass to the survivor\". Further, all joint acquisitions during the marriage were to remain the common property of both.\nThe couple had six children, of whom only two survived infancy:\n1782\u201387.\nIn 1782 and 1783 Mozart became intimately acquainted with the work of Johann Sebastian Bach and George Frideric Handel as a result of the influence of Gottfried van Swieten, who owned many manuscripts of the Baroque masters. Mozart's study of these scores inspired compositions in the Baroque style and later influenced his musical language, for example in fugal passages in \"Die Zauberfl\u00f6te\" (\"The Magic Flute\") and the finale of Symphony No.\u00a041 (\"Jupiter\").\nIn 1783 Mozart and his wife visited his family in Salzburg. His father and sister were cordially polite to Constanze, but the visit prompted the composition of one of Mozart's great liturgical pieces, the Mass in C minor. Though not completed, it was premiered in Salzburg, with Constanze singing a solo part.\nMozart met Joseph Haydn in Vienna around 1784, and the two composers became friends. When Haydn visited Vienna, they sometimes played together in an impromptu string quartet. Mozart's six quartets dedicated to Haydn (K.\u00a0387, K.\u00a0421, K.\u00a0428, K.\u00a0458, K.\u00a0464, and K.\u00a0465) date from the period 1782 to 1785, and are judged to be a response to Haydn's Opus 33 set from 1781. Haydn wrote, \"posterity will not see such a talent again in 100 years\" and in 1785 told Mozart's father: \"I tell you before God, and as an honest man, your son is the greatest composer known to me by person and repute, he has taste and what is more the greatest skill in composition.\"\nFrom 1782 to 1785 Mozart mounted concerts with himself as a soloist, presenting three or four new piano concertos in each season. Since space in the theatres was scarce, he booked unconventional venues: a large room in the Trattnerhof apartment building, and the ballroom of the Mehlgrube restaurant. The concerts were very popular, and his concertos premiered there are still firm fixtures in the repertoire. Solomon writes that during this period, Mozart created \"a harmonious connection between an eager composer-performer and a delighted audience, which was given the opportunity of witnessing the transformation and perfection of a major musical genre\".\nWith substantial returns from his concerts and elsewhere, Mozart and his wife adopted a more luxurious lifestyle. They moved to an expensive apartment, with a yearly rent of 460 florins. Mozart bought a fine fortepiano from Anton Walter for about 900 florins, and a billiard table for about 300. The Mozarts sent their son Karl Thomas to an expensive boarding school and kept servants. During this period Mozart saved little of his income.\nOn 14 December 1784 Mozart became a Freemason, admitted to the lodge Zur Wohlt\u00e4tigkeit (\"Beneficence\"). Freemasonry played an essential role in the remainder of Mozart's life: he attended meetings, a number of his friends were Masons, and on various occasions he composed Masonic music, e.g. the \"Maurerische Trauermusik\".\n1786\u201387: Return to opera.\nDespite the great success of \"Die Entf\u00fchrung aus dem Serail\", Mozart did little operatic writing for the next four years, producing only two unfinished works and the one-act \"Der Schauspieldirektor\". He focused instead on his career as a piano soloist and writer of concertos. Around the end of 1785, Mozart moved away from keyboard writing and began his famous operatic collaboration with the librettist Lorenzo Da Ponte. The year 1786 saw the successful premiere of \"Le nozze di Figaro\" in Vienna. Its reception in Prague later in the year was even warmer, and this led to a second collaboration with Da Ponte: the opera \"Don Giovanni\", which premiered in October 1787 to acclaim in Prague, but less success in Vienna during 1788. The two are among Mozart's most famous works and are mainstays of operatic repertoire today, though at their premieres their musical complexity caused difficulty both for listeners and for performers. These developments were not witnessed by Mozart's father, who had died on 28 May 1787. His Symphony No. 38 premiered in Prague that year.\nIn December 1787, Mozart finally obtained a steady post under aristocratic patronage. Emperor Joseph II appointed him as his \"chamber composer\", a post that had fallen vacant the previous month on the death of Christoph Willibald Gluck. It was a part-time appointment, paying just 800 florins per year, and required Mozart only to compose dances for the annual balls in the Redoutensaal (see \"Mozart and dance\"). This modest income became important to Mozart when hard times arrived. Court records show that Joseph aimed to keep the esteemed composer from leaving Vienna in pursuit of better prospects.\nIn 1787 the young Ludwig van Beethoven spent several weeks in Vienna, hoping to study with Mozart. No reliable records survive to indicate whether the two composers ever met.\nLater years.\n1788\u201390.\nToward the end of the decade, Mozart's circumstances worsened. Around 1786, he ceased to appear frequently in public concerts, and his income shrank. This was a difficult time for musicians in Vienna because of the Austro-Turkish War: both the general level of prosperity and the ability of the aristocracy to support music had declined. According to Solomon, in 1788, Mozart saw a 66% decline in his income compared to his best years in 1781.\nBy mid-1788, Mozart and his family had moved from central Vienna to the suburb of Alsergrund. Although it has been suggested that Mozart aimed to reduce his rental expenses by moving to a suburb, as he wrote in his letter to Michael von Puchberg, Mozart had not reduced his expenses but merely increased the housing space at his disposal. Mozart began to borrow money, most often from his friend and fellow mason Puchberg; \"a pitiful sequence of letters pleading for loans\" survives. Solomon and others have suggested that Mozart was suffering from depression, and it seems his musical output slowed. Major works of the period include the last three symphonies (Nos.\u00a039, 40, and 41, all from 1788), and the last of the three Da Ponte operas, \"Cos\u00ec fan tutte\", premiered in 1790.\nAround this time, Mozart made some long journeys hoping to improve his fortunes, visiting Leipzig, Dresden, and Berlin in the spring of 1789 (see Mozart's Berlin journey), and Frankfurt, Mannheim, and other German cities in 1790.\n1791.\nMozart's last year was, until his final illness struck, a time of high productivity\u2014and by some accounts, one of personal recovery. He composed a great deal, including some of his most admired works: the opera \"The Magic Flute\"; the final piano concerto (K.\u00a0595 in B\u266d); the Clarinet Concerto K.\u00a0622; the last in his series of string quintets (K.\u00a0614 in E\u266d); the motet \"Ave verum corpus\" K.\u00a0618; and the unfinished Requiem K.\u00a0626.\nMozart's financial situation, a source of anxiety in 1790, finally began to improve. Although the evidence is inconclusive, it appears that wealthy patrons in Hungary and Amsterdam pledged annuities to Mozart in return for the occasional composition. He is thought to have benefited from the sale of dance music written in his role as Imperial chamber composer. Mozart no longer borrowed large sums from Puchberg and began to pay off his debts.\nHe experienced great satisfaction in the public success of some of his works, notably \"The Magic Flute\" (which was performed several times in the short period between its premiere and Mozart's death) and the Little Masonic Cantata K.\u00a0623, premiered on 17 November 1791.\nFinal illness and death.\nMozart fell ill while in Prague for the premiere, on 6September 1791, of his opera \"La clemenza di Tito\", which he wrote that year on commission for Emperor Leopold II's coronation festivities. He continued to work professionally for some time and conducted the premiere of \"The Magic Flute\" on 30 September. His health deteriorated on 20 November, at which point he became bedridden, suffering from swelling, pain, and vomiting.\nMozart was nursed in his final days by his wife and her youngest sister and was attended by the family doctor, Thomas Franz Closset. He was occupied by the task of finishing his Requiem. Evidence that he dictated passages to his student Franz Xaver S\u00fcssmayr is minimal.\nMozart died in his home on at 12:55 am. The \"New Grove\" describes his funeral:\nMozart was interred in a common grave, in accordance with contemporary Viennese custom, at the St. Marx Cemetery outside the city on 7December. If, as later reports say, no mourners attended, that too is consistent with Viennese burial customs at the time; later Otto Jahn (1856) wrote that Salieri, S\u00fcssmayr, van Swieten and two other musicians were present. The tale of a storm and snow is false; the day was calm and mild.\nThe expression \"common grave\" refers to neither a communal grave nor a pauper's grave, but an individual grave for a member of the common people (i.e., not the aristocracy). Common graves were subject to excavation after ten years; aristocrats' graves were not.\nThe cause of Mozart's death is not known with certainty. The official record of \"hitziges Frieselfieber\" (\"severe miliary fever\", referring to a rash that looks like millet seeds) is more a symptomatic description than a diagnosis. Researchers have suggested more than a hundred causes of death, including acute rheumatic fever, streptococcal infection, trichinosis, influenza, mercury poisoning, and a rare kidney ailment.\nMozart's modest funeral did not reflect his standing with the public as a composer, but memorial services and concerts in Vienna and Prague were well attended. In the period immediately after his death, his reputation rose substantially. Solomon describes an \"unprecedented wave of enthusiasm\" for his work; biographies were written first by Friedrich Schlichtegroll, Franz Xaver Niemetschek, and Georg Nikolaus von Nissen, and publishers vied to produce complete editions of his works.\nAppearance and character.\nMozart's physical appearance was described by the tenor Michael Kelly in his \"Reminiscences\": \"a remarkably small man, very thin and pale, with a profusion of fine, fair hair of which he was rather vain\". His early biographer Niemetschek wrote, \"there was nothing special about [his] physique... He was small and his countenance, except for his large intense eyes, gave no signs of his genius.\" His facial complexion was pitted, a reminder of his childhood case of smallpox. Of his voice, his wife later wrote that it \"was a tenor, rather soft in speaking and delicate in singing, but when anything excited him, or it became necessary to exert it, it was both powerful and energetic.\"\nHe loved elegant clothing. Kelly remembered him at a rehearsal: \"[He] was on the stage with his crimson pelisse and gold-laced cocked hat, giving the time of the music to the orchestra.\" Based on paintings that researchers were able to find of Mozart, he seemed to wear a powdered wig tied in a queue in line with the style of the 18th century for most of his formal occasions\u2014researchers of the Salzburg Mozarteum declared that only one of his fourteen portraits they had found showed him without his wig.\nMozart usually worked long and hard, finishing compositions at a tremendous pace as deadlines approached. He often made sketches and drafts; unlike Beethoven's, these are mostly not preserved, as his wife sought to destroy them after his death.\nMozart lived at the centre of the Viennese musical world and knew a significant number and variety of people: fellow musicians, theatrical performers, fellow Salzburgers, and aristocrats, including some acquaintance with Emperor Joseph II. Solomon considers his three closest friends to have been Gottfried von Jacquin, Count August Hatzfeld, and Sigmund Barisani; others included his elder colleague Joseph Haydn, the singers Franz Xaver Gerl and Benedikt Schack, and the horn player Joseph Leutgeb. Leutgeb and Mozart carried on a kind of friendly mockery, often with Leutgeb as the butt of Mozart's practical jokes.\nHe enjoyed billiards, dancing, and kept pets, including a canary, a starling, a dog, and a horse for recreational riding. He had a startling fondness for scatological humour, which is preserved in his surviving letters, notably those written to his cousin Maria Anna Thekla Mozart around 1777\u20131778, and in his correspondence with his sister and parents. Mozart also wrote scatological music, a series of canons that he sang with his friends. He had an ear for languages, and having travelled all over Europe as a boy, was fluent in Latin, Italian, and French in addition to his native Salzburg dialect of German. He possibly also understood and spoke some English, having jokingly written \"You are an ass\" after his 19-year-old student Thomas Attwood made a thoughtless mistake on his exercise papers.\nMozart was raised a Catholic and remained a devout member of the Church throughout his life. He embraced some of the teachings of Freemasonry in 1784.\nWorks, musical style, and innovations.\nStyle.\nMozart's music, like Haydn's, stands as an archetype of the Classical style. At the time he began composing, European music was dominated by the \"style galant\", a reaction against the highly evolved intricacy of the Baroque. Progressively, and in large part at the hands of Mozart himself, the contrapuntal complexities of the late Baroque emerged once more, moderated and disciplined by new forms, and adapted to a new aesthetic and social milieu. Mozart was a versatile composer, and wrote in every major genre, including symphony, opera, the solo concerto, chamber music including string quartet and string quintet, and the piano sonata. These forms were not new, but Mozart advanced their technical sophistication and emotional reach. From his earliest years to his last, he composed a varied number of vocal works \u2013 concert arias, songs and canons. He almost single-handedly developed and popularised the Classical piano concerto. He wrote a great deal of religious music, including large-scale masses, as well as dances, divertimenti, serenades, and other forms of light entertainment.\nThe central traits of the Classical style are all present in Mozart's music. Clarity, balance, and transparency are the hallmarks of his work, but simplistic notions of its delicacy mask the exceptional power of his finest masterpieces, such as the Piano Concerto No. 24 in C minor, K.\u00a0491; the Symphony No.\u00a040 in G minor, K.\u00a0550; and the opera \"Don Giovanni\". Charles Rosen makes the point forcefully:\nIt is only through recognising the violence and sensuality at the centre of Mozart's work that we can make a start towards a comprehension of his structures and an insight into his magnificence. In a paradoxical way, Schumann's superficial characterisation of the G minor Symphony can help us to see Mozart's daemon more steadily. In all of Mozart's supreme expressions of suffering and terror, there is something shockingly voluptuous.\nDuring his last decade, Mozart frequently exploited chromatic harmony. A notable instance is his String Quartet in C major, K.\u00a0465 (1785), whose introduction abounds in chromatic suspensions, giving rise to the work's nickname, the \"Dissonance\" quartet.\nMozart had a gift for absorbing and adapting the valuable features of others' music. His travels helped in the forging of a unique compositional language. In London as a child, he met Johann Christian Bach and heard his music. In Paris, Mannheim, and Vienna he met with other compositional influences, as well as the avant-garde capabilities of the Mannheim orchestra. In Italy, he encountered the Italian overture and opera buffa, both of which deeply affected the evolution of his practice. In London and Italy, the galant style was in the ascendent: simple, light music with a mania for cadencing; an emphasis on tonic, dominant, and subdominant to the exclusion of other harmonies; symmetrical phrases; and clearly articulated partitions in the overall form of movements. Some of Mozart's early symphonies are Italian overtures, with three movements running into each other; many are homotonal (all three movements having the same key signature, with the slow middle movement being in the relative minor). Others mimic the works of J.\u00a0C. Bach, and others show the simple rounded binary forms turned out by Viennese composers.\nAs Mozart matured, he progressively incorporated more features adapted from the Baroque. For example, the Symphony No.\u00a029 in A major K.\u00a0201 has a contrapuntal main theme in its first movement, and experimentation with irregular phrase lengths. Some of his quartets from 1773 have fugal finales, probably influenced by Haydn, who had included three such finales in his recently published Opus\u00a020 set. The influence of the \"Sturm und Drang\" (\"Storm and Stress\") period in music, with its brief foreshadowing of the Romantic era, is evident in the music of both composers at that time. Mozart's Symphony No.\u00a025 in G minor K.\u00a0183 is another excellent example.\nMozart would sometimes switch his focus between operas and instrumental music. He produced operas in each of the prevailing styles: opera buffa, such as \"Le nozze di Figaro\", \"Don Giovanni\", and \"Cos\u00ec fan tutte\"; opera seria, such as \"Idomeneo\"; and Singspiel, of which \"Die Zauberfl\u00f6te\" is the most famous example by any composer. In his later operas, he employed subtle changes in instrumentation, orchestral texture, and tone colour, for emotional depth and to mark dramatic shifts. Here, his advances in opera and instrumental composing interacted: his increasingly sophisticated use of the orchestra in the symphonies and concertos influenced his operatic orchestration, and his developing subtlety in using the orchestra to psychological effect in his operas was in turn reflected in his later non-operatic compositions.\nK\u00f6chel catalogue.\nFor unambiguous identification of works by Mozart, a \"K\u00f6chel catalogue number\" is used. This is a unique number assigned, in regular chronological order, to every one of his known works. A work is referenced by the abbreviation \"K.\" or \"KV\" followed by this number. The first edition of the catalogue was completed in 1862 by Ludwig von K\u00f6chel. It has since been repeatedly updated, as scholarly research improves knowledge of the dates and authenticity of individual works.\nInstruments.\nAlthough some of Mozart's early pieces were written for harpsichord, he also became acquainted in his early years with fortepianos made by Regensburg builder Franz Jakob Sp\u00e4th. Later when Mozart was visiting Augsburg, he was impressed by Johann Andreas Stein's fortepianos and shared this in a letter to his father. On 22 October 1777 Mozart had premiered his triple-piano concerto, K. 242, on instruments provided by Stein. The Augsburg Cathedral organist Demmler was playing the first, Mozart the second and Stein the third part. In 1783, when he was living in Vienna, he purchased an instrument by Anton Walter. Leopold Mozart confirmed the attachment which Mozart had with his Walter fortepiano: \"It is impossible to describe the hustle and bustle. Your brother's pianoforte has been moved at least twelve times from his house to the theatre or to someone else's house.\" Mozart's Walter piano is exhibited in the main hall of the Tanzmeisterhaus (the former Mozart family residence) in Salzburg.\nInfluence.\nHis most famous pupil was Johann Nepomuk Hummel, a transitional figure between the Classical and Romantic eras whom the Mozarts took into their Vienna home for two years as a child. More important is the influence Mozart had on composers of later generations. Ever since the surge in his reputation after his death, studying his scores has been a standard part of a classical musician's training.\nBeethoven, Mozart's junior by fifteen years, was deeply influenced by his work, with which he was acquainted as a teenager. He is thought to have performed Mozart's operas while playing in the court orchestra at Bonn and travelled to Vienna in 1787 hoping to study with the older composer. Some of have direct models in comparable works by Mozart, and he wrote cadenzas (WoO\u00a058) to Mozart's D minor piano concerto K.\u00a0466.\nComposers have paid homage to Mozart by writing sets of variations on his themes. Beethoven wrote four such sets (Op.\u00a066, WoO\u00a028, WoO\u00a040, WoO\u00a046). Others include Fernando Sor's \"Introduction and Variations on a Theme by Mozart\" (1821), Mikhail Glinka's Variations on a Theme from Mozart's Opera \"The Magic Flute\" (1822), Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin's \"Variations on \"L\u00e0 ci darem la mano\"\" from \"Don Giovanni\" (1827), and Max Reger's Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Mozart (1914), based on the variation theme in the piano sonata K.\u00a0331. Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, who revered Mozart, wrote his Orchestral Suite No.\u00a04 in G, \"Mozartiana\" (1887), as a tribute to him. Albert Einstein said that \"Mozart's music is so pure it seems to have been ever present in the universe.\"\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n\"See for an extensive bibliography\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExternal links.\nDigitized documents\nSheet music"}
{"id": "33164", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33164", "title": "Wiki software", "text": "Software to run a collaborative wiki\nWiki software (also known as a wiki engine or a wiki application) is collaborative software that runs a wiki, which allows the users to create and collaboratively edit pages or entries via a web browser. A wiki system is usually a web application that runs on one or more web servers. The content, including previous revisions, is usually stored in either a file system or a database. Wikis are a type of web content management system, and the most commonly supported off-the-shelf software that web hosting facilities offer.\nThere are dozens of actively maintained wiki engines. They vary in the platforms they run on, the programming language they were developed in, whether they are open-source or proprietary, their support for natural language characters and conventions, and their assumptions about technical versus social control of editing.\nHistory.\nThe first generally recognized \"wiki\" application, WikiWikiWeb, was created by American computer programmer Ward Cunningham, and launched on c2.com in 1995. \"WikiWikiWeb\" was also the name of the wiki that ran on the software, and in the first years of wikis' existence there was no great distinction made between the contents of wikis and the software they ran on, possibly because almost every wiki ran on its own customized software.\nWiki software originated from older version control systems used for documentation and software in the 1980s. By the mid-1990s these generally had web browser interfaces. However, they lacked the ability to easily create links between internal pages without writing HTML code. For WikiWikiWeb, the CamelCase naming convention was used to indicate internal links (internal hyperlinks to other pages), without requiring HTML code.\nBy the time MediaWiki appeared, this convention had been largely abandoned in favor of explicitly marking links in edited source code with double square brackets. Page names thus did not interrupt the flow of English and could follow the standard English capitalization convention. Case insensitivity on the first letter but not subsequent letters supported standard English capitalization conventions and let writers author their pages in ordinary English, with the linking of particular words and phrases afterward. This proved to be the critical change that allowed ordinary authors of English to write wiki pages, and non-technical users to read them. This policy was extended to other natural languages, avoiding the use of unusual-looking text or awkward capitalization that violates the language's own rules.\nOver the next 10 years, many more wiki applications were written, in a variety of programming languages. After 2005, there began to be a move toward increasing consolidation and standardization: many less-popular wiki applications were gradually abandoned, and fewer new applications were created. Relatively few of the wiki engines currently in use were created after 2006.\nSome content management systems, such as Microsoft SharePoint, have also adopted wiki-like functionality.\nData compatibility.\nIn general new wiki engines have not followed the data formats (wiki markup languages) of the existing engines, making them of limited use for those who have already invested in large knowledge bases in existing software. As a rule newer wiki projects have not succeeded in attracting large numbers of users from the existing wiki software base.\nThe most well-known data format arguably is MediaWiki's, and correspondingly has been reimplemented in other wikis:\nNone of these alternatives support the extensions available under standard MediaWiki, some of which extend or alter its data format.\nIn 2007 a project named (Wiki)Creole to create a standardized markup language for wikis was completed. As of 2022, the effort has had significant technical success, gaining support through implementation in many engines, but limited social success as it is still relatively unused and unknown, has few cross-markup conversion tools for migrating existing knowledge bases to it and no major engines use it as their native markup syntax.\nTypes of usage.\nThere are essentially three types of usage for wiki software: public-facing wikis with a potentially large community of readers and editors, private enterprise wikis for data management by corporations and other organizations, and personal wikis, meant to be used by a single person to manage notes, and usually run on a desktop. Some types of wiki software are specifically designed for one of the usage types, while other types can be used for all three, but contain functionality, either in their core or through plugins, that help with one or more of the usage types.\nPublic wikis.\nPublic wikis are usually open to the public to read, edit and comment on some or all of the article space of each wiki. Many offer registration to offer further access and controls to each user and a few have, in-part commercialised aspects or further access, such as the popular wiki farm, Fandom.\nMediaWiki is by far the most dominant software as it powers Wikipedia, consistently and by a large margin, the most visited public wiki, it also powers many other public wikis as well. Other wiki engines used regularly for public wikis include MoinMoin and PmWiki, along with many others.\nOther Internet websites, based on wiki software, include encyclopedias such as Sensei's Library, Parlia, and WikiTree.\nEnterprise wikis.\nEnterprise wiki software is software intended to be used in a corporate (or organizational) context, especially to enhance internal knowledge sharing. It tends to have a greater emphasis on features like access control, integration with other software, and document management. Most proprietary wiki applications specifically market themselves as enterprise solutions, including Socialtext, Jive, Traction TeamPage and Notion.\nIncreasingly offerings appear which use the name 'wiki' but do not offer basic elements common to established wikis, like Wiki Markup and Link-first workflow as in Confluence (since 2018), Full Text Search as in Microsoft Teams, or Version Control.\nIn addition, some open source wiki applications also describe themselves as enterprise solutions, including XWiki, Foswiki, TWiki, and BlueSpice. Some open-source wiki applications, though they do not specifically bill themselves as enterprise solutions, have marketing materials geared for enterprise users, like Tiki Wiki CMS Groupware and MediaWiki. Many other wiki applications have also been used within enterprises.\nAmong the many companies and government organizations that use wikis internally are Adobe Systems, Amazon.com, Intel, Microsoft, and the United States intelligence community.\nWithin organizations, wikis may either add to or replace centrally managed content management systems. Their decentralized nature allows them, in principle, to disseminate needed information across an organization more rapidly and more cheaply than a centrally controlled knowledge repository. Wikis can also be used for document management, project management, customer relationship management, enterprise resource planning, and many other kinds of data management.\nFeatures of wikis which can serve an enterprise include:\nPersonal wikis.\nSoftware that is specifically designed for running personal wikis includes PmWiki, Tomboy, and ConnectedText (now discontinued). Other, more general, wiki applications have components geared for individual users, including MoinMoin (which offers a \"DesktopEdition\"), and TiddlyWiki.\nEditing.\nMost wiki software uses a special syntax, known as wiki markup, for users to format the text, instead of requiring them to enter in HTML. Some wiki applications also include a WYSIWYG editor, either instead of or in addition to the wiki markup editing.\nBased on the atomic property of database systems, any edit should be traced. On wiki software, the chronology of edits (e.g. published by Internet users) in any given article may be locally saved with a common .xml file extension by people having administrator rights.\nHosted application.\nThere are a variety of wiki hosting services, otherwise known as wiki farms, that host users' wikis on a server. Some wiki software is only available in hosted form: PBworks, Wetpaint and Wikispaces are all examples of wiki hosting services that run on code that is only available on those sites. Other wiki software is available in both hosted and downloadable form, including Confluence, Socialtext, MediaWiki and XWiki.\nAdditional features.\nContent-management features.\nWiki software can include features that come with traditional content management systems, such as calendars, to-do lists, blogs and discussion forums. All of these can either be stored via versioned wiki pages, or simply be a separate piece of functionality. Software that supports blogs with wiki-style editing and versioning is sometimes known as \"bliki\" software.\nTiki Wiki CMS Groupware is an example of wiki software that is designed to support such features at its core. Many of the enterprise wiki applications, such as TWiki, Confluence and SharePoint, also support such features, as do open-source applications like MediaWiki and XWiki, via plugins.\nScripting.\nSome wiki applications let users embed scripting-style calls into wiki pages, which are processed by the wiki's parser and run either when the page is saved or when it is displayed. XWiki and MediaWiki are examples of such applications.\nSpecifically XWiki offers support for the following scripting languages: Groovy, Velocity, Ruby, Python, PHP or more generally any JSR223 scripting language.\nSemantic annotation.\nWiki software can let users store data via the wiki, in a way that can be exported via the Semantic Web, or queried internally within the wiki. A wiki that allows such annotation is known as a semantic wiki. The current best-known semantic wiki software is Semantic MediaWiki, a plugin to MediaWiki.\nMobile access.\nSome wiki software have special handling for accessing by mobile devices, such as mobile phones. This is usually done by displaying conservative HTML coding.\nOffline viewing and editing.\nVarious approaches to providing wiki functionality when the user is not online have been tried. For users who need to simply read the wiki's content when offline, a copy of the content can often be made easily; in the case of Wikipedia, CD-ROMs and printed versions have been made of parts of Wikipedia's content.\nAllowing offline editing, however (where the changes are synchronized when the user is back online), is a much more difficult process. One approach to doing this is using a distributed revision control system as a backend of the wiki, in peer-to-peer style. With this approach, there is no central store of the wiki's content; instead, every user keeps a complete copy of the wiki locally, and the software handles merging and propagating of changes when they are made. This is the approach taken by the ikiwiki engine (which can use the distributed revision control system Git as its back-end), and Code Co-op (a distributed revision control system that includes a wiki component).\nDistributing and decentralizing.\nWiki software can be distributed. Examples include XWiki, Smallest Federated Wiki and Ibis. There has also been research done on allowing Wikipedia to be run as a decentralized wiki.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33165", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33165", "title": "Westphalia", "text": "State part and historic region of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany\nWestphalia (; ; ) is a region of northwestern Germany and one of the three historic parts of the state of North Rhine-Westphalia. It has an area of and 7.9\u00a0million inhabitants.\nThe territory of the region is almost identical with the historic Province of Westphalia, which was a part of the Kingdom of Prussia from 1815 to 1918 and the Free State of Prussia from 1918 to 1946. In 1946, Westphalia merged with North Rhine, another former part of Prussia, to form the newly created state of North Rhine-Westphalia. In 1947, the state with its two historic parts was joined by a third one: Lippe, a former principality and free state.\nThe seventeen districts and nine independent cities of Westphalia and the single district of Lippe are members of the Westphalia-Lippe Regional Association (\"Landschaftsverband Westfalen-Lippe\").\nPrevious to the formation of Westphalia as a province of Prussia and later state part of North Rhine-Westphalia, the term \"Westphalia\" was applied to different territories of different sizes such as the western part of the ancient Duchy of Saxony, the Duchy of Westphalia or the Kingdom of Westphalia. The Westphalian language, a variant of the Low German language, is spoken beyond modern Westphalia's borders in neighbouring southwestern Lower Saxony and northwestern Hesse.\nGeography.\nLandscapes.\nBeing a part of the North German Plain, most of Westphalia's north is flat. In the south the German Central Uplands emerge. Westphalia is divided into the following landscapes.\nFlat to hilly \"( and under):\" East Westphalia, M\u00fcnsterland, eastern Ruhr Metropolitan Area, Tecklenburg Land, Westphalian Hellweg\nHilly to mountainous \"(up to ):\" Westphalian part of the Sauerland, Siegerland, Wittgenstein\nRivers.\nWestphalia is roughly the region in between the rivers Rhine and Weser, located both north and south of the Ruhr River. Other important rivers are the Ems and the Lippe.\nMountains.\nThe Langenberg () and the Kahler Asten () in the Sauerland part of the Rothaar Mountains are Westphalia's and also North Rhine-Westphalia's highest mountains.\nWestphalia and Eastphalia.\nThe term \"Westphalia\" contrasts with the much less used term \"Eastphalia\", which roughly covers the southeastern part of the present-day state of Lower Saxony, western Saxony-Anhalt and northern Thuringia.\nDivision.\nWestphalia is divided into three governmental districts. These are subdivided into further districts and independent cities.\nAll districts and independent cities of the governmental districts of Arnsberg and M\u00fcnster are considered to be a part of Westphalia as a historic region. The District of Lippe as successor of the Free State of Lippe in the Governmental District of Detmold is rather considered to be a separate historic region.\nSymbols.\nCoat of arms.\nCurrent use.\nThe traditional symbol of Westphalia is the Westphalian Steed: a white horse on a red field. It is derived from the Saxon Steed in the coat of arms of the medieval Duchy of Saxony which most of today's Westphalia was part of. In official contexts the coat of arms of Westphalia is being used by the Westphalia-Lippe Regional Association, which represents these two historic parts of North Rhine-Westphalia.\nThe coat of arms of North Rhine-Westphalia uses the Westphalian Steed to represent Westphalia as one of its parts alongside the Lippish Rose representing Lippe and the Rhine River representing the Northern Rhineland.\nPrevious use.\nPrussia already used the Westphalian Steed in the coat of arms of its Province of Westphalia.\nSimilar versions.\nThe coat of arms of Lower Saxony uses a different version of the Saxon Steed since the state also covers large parts of the Old Saxons' duchy.\nFlag.\nCurrent use.\nThe colours of Westphalia are white and red. The flag of the Westphalia-Lippe Regional Association uses these colours with the Westphalian coat of arms in its centre.\nThe flag of North Rhine-Westphalia is a combination of the Northern Rhineland's colours green/white and the Westphalian white/red.\nPrevious use.\nThe flag of the Prussian Province of Westphalia already displayed the colours white and red.\nSimilar versions.\nThe flag of Lower Saxony shows the colours of Germany and the Saxon Steed.\nAnthem.\nComposed in Iserlohn in 1886 by Emil Rittershaus, the \"Westfalenlied\" is an unofficial anthem of Westphalia.\nIdentity.\nWhile the Northern Rhineland, Westphalia and Lippe are different historic territories of today's North Rhine-Westphalia, the old border between the former Rhine Province and the Province of Westphalia is also a language border. While in Westphalia and Lippe, people tend to speak West Low German dialects and especially the Westphalian variant of the Low German language, Central German and Low Franconian dialects are spoken in the Northern Rhineland.\nThese different regional identities are often being emphasized by different majorities of denomination between Roman Catholics and Lutheran Protestants. The different majorities date back to the days of the territorial fragmentation of the Holy Roman Empire (of the German Nation) which existed until 1806. The M\u00fcnsterland and the region around Paderborn for instance are still mainly Catholic regions because of the former existence of the prince-bishoprics of M\u00fcnster and Paderborn. The mainly Reformed Lippe was even able to retain its independence as a small state within Germany in the form of a principality until 1918 and as a free state until 1946. This continues to influence the identity of its people who often distinguish themselves from neighbouring regions such as East Westphalia.\nIn addition to these historic, lingual and religious aspects, there are some regional differences in culture and mentality. That is why many of the citizens of North Rhine-Westphalia rather see themselves either as \"Rhinelanders\", \"Westphalians\" or \"Lippers\" rather than as \"North Rhine-Westphalians\".\nHistory.\nWestphalia is known for the 1648 Peace of Westphalia which ended the Thirty Years' War, as the two treaties were signed in M\u00fcnster and Osnabr\u00fcck.\nIt is one of the regions that were part of all incarnations of the German state since the Early Middle Ages: the Holy Roman Empire, the Confederation of the Rhine, the German Confederation, the North German Confederation, the German Empire, the Weimar Republic and National Socialist Germany. After World War II it was a part of the British occupation zone which merged with the American zone to become the Bizone in 1947 and again merged with the French zone to become the Trizone in 1948. The current Federal Republic of Germany was founded on these territories making Westphalia a part of West Germany. It is a part of united Germany since 1990.\nRoman incursion.\nAround AD 1 there were numerous incursions through Westphalia and perhaps even some permanent Roman or Romanized settlements. The Battle of the Teutoburg Forest took place near Osnabr\u00fcck, which at this time was a place of settlement of the Westphalians, who were a part of the Germanic tribe of the Saxons. Some of the tribes who fought at this battle came from the area of Westphalia.\nCharlemagne.\nCharlemagne is thought to have spent considerable time in Paderborn and nearby parts. His Saxon Wars also partly took place in what is thought of as Westphalia today. Popular legends link his adversary Widukind to places near Detmold, Bielefeld, Lemgo, Osnabr\u00fcck and other places in Westphalia. Widukind was buried in Enger, which is also a subject of a legend.\nMiddle Ages.\nAlong with Eastphalia, Angria and Nordalbingia, Westphalia \"(Westfalahi)\" was originally a district of the Duchy of Saxony. At the time, large portions of its territory in the north lay in what today is Lower Saxony. Following the deposition of the Saxon duke Henry the Lion in 1180 and the subsequent belittlement of the duchy, Westphalia was elevated to a duchy in its own right by Emperor Barbarossa. The Duchy of Westphalia comprised only a small area south of the Lippe River.\nModern Westphalia was a part of the Lower Rhenish\u2013Westphalian Circle of the Holy Roman Empire, which comprised territories of Lower Lorraine, Frisia and parts of the former Duchy of Saxony.\nEarly modern era.\nAs a result of the Protestant Reformation, there was no dominant religion in Westphalia. Roman Catholicism and Lutheranism were on a relatively equal footing. Lutheranism was strong in the eastern and northern parts with numerous free churches. M\u00fcnster and especially Paderborn were considered to be Catholic. Osnabr\u00fcck was divided almost equally between Catholicism and Protestantism.\nParts of Westphalia came under Brandenburg-Prussian control during the 17th and 18th centuries, but most of it remained divided by duchies and other areas of feudal power. The Peace of Westphalia of 1648, signed in M\u00fcnster and Osnabr\u00fcck, ended the Thirty Years' War. The concept of nation-state sovereignty resulting from the treaty became known as \"Westphalian sovereignty\".\nPrussia.\nAfter the defeat of the Prussian Army by the French at the Battle of Jena\u2013Auerstedt, the Treaty of Tilsit in 1807 made the easternmost portion of today's Westphalia part of the French client Kingdom of Westphalia until 1813, when the kingdom was dissolved by the Russians. While this state shared its name with the historical region, it only contained a relatively small part of Westphalia, rather consisting of mostly Hessian and Eastphalian regions.\nFollowing to the Congress of Vienna, Prussia received a large amount of territories in the Westphalian region and created the Province of Westphalia in 1815. After in 1816, the former Duchy of Westphalia and the counties of Wittgenstein and in 1851 the condominium of Lippstadt had joined the province, Westphalia had received its modern territorial shape.\nIn 1816, the governmental districts of Arnsberg, Minden and M\u00fcnster were created.\nModern Westphalia.\nAfter World War II in 1946, the present state of North Rhine-Westphalia was created by the British military government from the former Prussian Province of Westphalia and the northern half of the former Prussian Rhine Province. The old governmental districts of 1816 stayed in place. When in 1947 the former Free State of Lippe with its capital Detmold joined North Rhine-Westphalia, the \"Governmental District of Minden\" was enlarged by this territory and renamed \"Governmental District of Detmold\". In total, North Rhine-Westphalia is subdivided into five governmental districts \"(Regierungsbezirke)\". Westphalia today consists of the old governmental districts of Arnsberg and M\u00fcnster and of Detmold (including the District of Lippe, which is a separate historical region). Inhabitants of the region call themselves Westphalians and their home region Westphalia even though there is no administrative division by that name.\nEconomy.\nWestphalia is home to the headquarters of Westfalia-Werke, the contractor that built the Volkswagen Westfalia Campers.\nIn popular culture.\n\"Candide:\" The protagonist of Voltaire's novella of the same name, resides in Westphalia in the beginning of the story.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
