{"id": "31389", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31389", "title": "Times Square", "text": "Intersection and area in Manhattan, New York\n}} at Times Square\u201342nd Street\n}} at 42nd Street\u2013Port Authority Bus Terminal\nTimes Square is a major commercial intersection, tourist destination, entertainment hub, and neighborhood in the Midtown Manhattan section of New York City. It is formed by the junction of Broadway, Seventh Avenue, and 42nd Street. Together with adjacent Duffy Square, Times Square is a bowtie-shaped plaza five blocks long between 42nd and 47th Streets.\nTimes Square is brightly lit by numerous digital billboards and advertisements as well as businesses offering 24/7 service. One of the world's busiest pedestrian intersections, it is also the hub of the Theater District, where most Broadway theatres are located, and a major center of the world's entertainment industry. Times Square is one of the world's most visited tourist attractions, drawing an estimated 50 million visitors annually. Approximately 330,000 people pass through Times Square daily, many of them tourists, while over 460,000 pedestrians walk through Times Square on its busiest days. The Times Square\u201342nd Street and 42nd Street\u2013Port Authority Bus Terminal stations have consistently ranked as the busiest in the New York City Subway system, transporting more than 200,000 passengers daily.\nFormerly known as Longacre Square, Times Square was renamed in 1904 after \"The New York Times\" moved its headquarters to the then newly erected Times Building, now One Times Square. It is the site of the annual New Year's Eve ball drop, which began on December 31, 1907, and continues to attract over a million visitors to Times Square every year, in addition to a worldwide audience of one billion or more on various digital media platforms.\nTimes Square, specifically the intersection of Broadway and 42nd Street, is the eastern terminus of the Lincoln Highway, the first road across the United States for motorized vehicles. Times Square is sometimes referred to as \"the Crossroads of the World\", \"the Center of the Universe\", and \"the heart of the Great White Way\".\nGeography.\nTimes Square functions as a town square, but is not geometrically a square. It is closer in shape to a bowtie, with two triangles emanating roughly north and south from 45th Street, where Seventh Avenue intersects Broadway. Broadway similarly intersects other north\u2013south avenues at Union Square, Madison Square, Herald Square, and Verdi Square, none of which are squares. The area is bounded by West 42nd Street, West 47th Street, 7th Avenue, and Broadway. Broadway runs diagonally, crossing through the horizontal and vertical street grid of Manhattan laid down by the Commissioners' Plan of 1811, and that intersection creates the \"bowtie\" shape of Times Square.\nTimes Square is the official name of the southern triangle, below 45th Street. The northern triangle is officially known as Duffy Square and was dedicated in June 1939 to honor World War I chaplain Father Francis P. Duffy of the 69th New York Infantry Regiment. A statue by Charles Keck was dedicated in May 1937 as a memorial to Duffy. There is also a statue of composer and entertainer George M. Cohan, and the TKTS discount ticket booth for same-day Broadway and off-Broadway theaters that has been at the site since June 1973.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nWhen Manhattan Island was first settled by the Dutch colonists, three small streams united near what is now the intersection of 10th Avenue and 40th Street. These three streams formed the \"Great Kill\" (Dutch: \"Grote Kil\"). From there the Great Kill wound through the low-lying Reed Valley, known for fish and waterfowl, and emptied into a deep bay in the Hudson River at the present 42nd Street. The name was retained in a tiny hamlet, Great Kill, that became a center for carriage-making, as the upland to the south and east became known as Longacre.\nBefore and after the American Revolution, the area belonged to John Morin Scott, a general of the New York militia, in which he served under George Washington. Scott's manor house was at what is currently 43rd Street, surrounded by countryside used for farming and breeding horses. In the first half of the 19th century, it became one of the prized possessions of John Jacob Astor, who made a second fortune selling off lots to hotels and other real estate concerns as the city rapidly spread uptown.\nBy 1872, the area had become the center of New York's horse carriage industry. The locality had not previously been given a name, and city authorities called it Longacre Square after Long Acre in London, where the horse and carriage trade was centered in that city. William Henry Vanderbilt owned and ran the American Horse Exchange there. In 1910, it became the Winter Garden Theatre.\nAs more profitable commerce and industrialization of Lower Manhattan pushed homes, theaters, and prostitution northward from the Tenderloin District, Longacre Square became nicknamed the \"Thieves Lair\" for its increasingly prominent reputation as a low entertainment district. The first theater on the square, the Olympia, was built by cigar manufacturer and impresario Oscar Hammerstein I. According to \"Gotham: A History of New York City to 1898\", \"By the early 1890s this once sparsely settled stretch of Broadway was ablaze with electric light and thronged by crowds of middle- and upper-class theatre, restaurant and cafe patrons.\"\n1900s\u20131930s.\nIn 1904, \"New York Times\" publisher Adolph S. Ochs moved the newspaper's operations to a new skyscraper on 42nd Street at Longacre Square, on the site of the former Pabst Hotel, which had existed on the site for less than a decade since it opened in November 1899. Ochs persuaded Mayor George B. McClellan Jr. to construct a subway station there, and the area was renamed \"Times Square\" on April 8, 1904. Just three weeks later, the first electrified advertisement appeared on the side of a bank at the corner of 46th Street and Broadway. The north end later became Duffy Square, and the former Horse Exchange became the Winter Garden Theatre, constructed in 1911.\n\"The New York Times\" moved to more spacious offices one block west of the square in 1913 and sold the building in 1961. The old Times Building was later named the Allied Chemical Building in 1963. Now known simply as One Times Square, it is famed for the Times Square Ball drop on its roof every New Year's Eve.\nIn 1913, the Lincoln Highway Association, headed by entrepreneur Carl G. Fisher, chose the intersection of 42nd Street and Broadway (at the southeast corner of Times Square) to be the Eastern Terminus of the Lincoln Highway. This was the first road across the United States, which originally ran coast to coast through 13 states to its western terminus in Lincoln Park in San Francisco.\nTimes Square grew dramatically after World War I. It became a cultural hub full of theatres, music halls, and upscale hotels.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Times Square quickly became New York's agora, a place to gather to await great tidings and to celebrate them, whether a World Series or a presidential election.\u2014\u200a\nAdvertising also grew significantly in the 1920s, growing from $25\u00a0million to $85\u00a0million over the decade. For example, the Wrigley Spearmint Gum sign, possibly the biggest electric sign \"in the world,\" cost $9,000 per month to rent. Some contemporary critics, such as Thorstein Veblen and G. K. Chesterton, disliked the advertising at Times Square. Fritz Lang, after seeing Times Square in 1923, used it as inspiration for his dark industrial film \"Metropolis\".\nEntertainment icons such as Irving Berlin, Charlie Chaplin, and Fred Astaire were closely associated with Times Square in the 1910s, 1920s, and 1930s. However, it was also during this period that the area began to be besieged by crime and corruption, in the form of gambling and prostitution; one case that garnered huge attention was the arrest and subsequent execution of police officer Charles Becker.\n1930s\u20131950s.\nThe general atmosphere of Times Square changed with the onset of the Great Depression in the early 1930s. City residents moved uptown to cheaper neighborhoods, and many popular theaters closed, replaced by saloons, brothels, \"burlesque halls, vaudeville stages, and dime houses\". The area acquired a reputation as a dangerous and seedy neighborhood in the following decades.\nNevertheless, Times Square continued to be the site of the annual ball drop on New Year's Eve. The ball drop was placed on hiatus for New Year's Eve in 1942 and 1943 due to lighting restrictions during World War II, replaced by a moment of silence that was observed at midnight in Times Square, accompanied by the sound of chimes played from sound trucks.\nOn May 8, 1945, a massive crowd celebrated Victory in Europe Day in Times Square; and on August 15, 1945, the largest crowd in the history of Times Square gathered to celebrate Victory over Japan Day, reaching an estimated two million. The victory itself was announced by a headline on the \"zipper\" news ticker at One Times Square, which read \"OFFICIAL ***TRUMAN ANNOUNCES JAPANESE SURRENDER ***\".\n1960s\u20131990s.\nDecline.\nFrom the 1960s to the early 1990s, the seediness of the area, especially due to its go-go bars, sex shops, peep shows, and adult theaters, became an infamous symbol of the city's decline. As early as 1960, 42nd Street between Seventh and Eighth avenues was described by \"The New York Times\" as \"the 'worst' [block] in town\". Later that decade, Times Square was depicted in \"Midnight Cowboy\" as gritty, depraved, and desperate. Conditions only worsened in the 1970s and 1980s, as did the crime in the rest of the city, with a 1981 article in \"Rolling Stone\" magazine calling 42nd Street in Times Square the \"sleaziest block in America\". In the mid-1980s, the area bounded by 40th and 50th Streets and Seventh and Ninth Avenues saw over 15,000 crime complaints per year. The block of 42nd Street between Seventh and Eighth avenues had 2,300 crimes per year in 1984, of which 20% were felonies.\nTimes Square was known in the 1970s-80s as the most notorious area for prostitution. In this era, formerly elegant movie theaters began to show x-rated films, and peep shows hustlers were common. In 1984, the area was so derelict and dilapidated, that the entire Times Square area paid the city only $6\u00a0million in property taxes (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024).\n1980s building boom.\nIn the 1980s, a commercial building boom began in the western parts of Midtown as part of a long-term development plan developed under mayors Ed Koch and David Dinkins. These included office buildings such as 1540 Broadway, 1585 Broadway, and 750 Seventh Avenue, as well as hotels such as the Macklowe Hotel, Marriott Marquis, Crowne Plaza, and DoubleTree Suites. By 1986, New York City Planning Commission (CPC) was considering enacting regulations that would have forced new buildings along Times Square to include bright signage as well as deep setbacks. The CPC adopted a planning regulation in 1987, which required large new developments in Times Square to set aside about 5\u00a0percent of their space for \"entertainment uses\". The regulation also required new buildings on Times Square to include large, bright signs.\nThe buildings at 1540 Broadway, 1585 Broadway, and 750 Seventh Avenue were completed at the beginning of the early 1990s recession, when 14.5\u00a0percent of Manhattan office space was vacant. Furthermore, some of office space in the western section of Midtown had been developed in the 1980s, of which only half had been leased. Consequently, 1540 Broadway was completely empty, while 1585 Broadway and 750 Seventh Avenue had one tenant each, despite the buildings having over of office space between them. Entertainment conglomerate Bertelsmann bought 1540 Broadway in 1992, spurring a revival of Times Square in the early 1990s. This was hastened when financial firm Morgan Stanley bought 1585 Broadway in 1993, followed by 750 Seventh Avenue in 1994.\n42nd Street Redevelopment, further revitalization.\nThe Empire State Development Corporation (ESDC), an agency of the New York state government, had proposed redeveloping the area around a portion of West 42nd Street in 1981. Four towers designed by Philip Johnson and John Burgee were to be built around 42nd Street's intersections with Broadway and Seventh Avenue. These towers would have been redeveloped by George Klein of Park Tower Realty, though the Prudential Insurance Company of America joined the project in 1986. Furthermore, as part of the West Midtown special zoning district created in 1982, the New York City government had allowed new buildings in Times Square to be developed with an increased floor area ratio. To ensure the area would not be darkened at nightfall, the city passed zoning regulations that encouraged developers to add large, bright signs on their buildings.\nIn 1990, the State of New York took possession of six of the nine historic theaters on 42nd Street, and the New 42nd Street non-profit organization was appointed to oversee their restoration and maintenance. The theaters underwent renovation for Broadway shows, conversion for commercial purposes, or demolition. Opposition to the towers on Times Square, along with Prudential and Park Tower's inability to secure tenants for the proposed buildings, led government officials to allow Prudential and Park Tower to postpone the project in 1992. By then, Prudential had spent $300\u00a0million on condemning the sites through eminent domain. The partners retained the right to develop the sites in the future, and the ESDC's zoning guidelines remained in effect. In exchange for being permitted to delay construction of the sites until 2002, Prudential and Park Tower were compelled to add stores and install large signage on the existing buildings.\nIn 1992, the Times Square Alliance (formerly the Times Square Business Improvement District, or \"BID\" for short), a coalition of city government and local businesses dedicated to improving the quality of commerce and cleanliness in the district, started operations in the area. In 1998, the alliance opened a tourist information center in the former Embassy Theatre at 1560 Broadway; the information center operated until 2014.\nIn the mid-1990s, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani led an effort to clean up the area, an effort that is described by Steve Macek in \"Urban Nightmares: The Media, the Right, and the Moral Panic Over the City\": Security was increased, pornographic theatres were closed, and \"undesirable\" low-rent residents were pressured to relocate, and then more tourist-friendly attractions and upscale establishments were opened. Advocates of the remodeling claim that the neighborhood is safer and cleaner. Detractors have countered that the changes have homogenized or \"Disneyfied\" the character of Times Square and have unfairly targeted lower-income New Yorkers from nearby neighborhoods such as Hell's Kitchen. The changes were shaped in large part by the actions of The Walt Disney Company, which bought and restored the New Amsterdam Theatre after several attempts at redevelopment had failed. As part of a contract with Disney, officials from the city and state evicted the pornographic theaters and contracted with Madame Tussauds and AMC Theatres to move onto 42nd Street. This spurred the construction of new office towers, hotels, and tourist attractions in the area.\nPrudential and Klein dissolved their partnership for the four office-building sites at Times Square's southern end in 1996. The same year, Douglas Durst acquired the site at the northeast corner of Broadway and 42nd Street, and he developed 4 Times Square there. The northwest corner of Seventh Avenue and 42nd Street was taken by Reuters, which enlisted Rudin Management as its development partner and built 3 Times Square on that corner; that building opened in 2001. In 1998, a joint venture of Klein, The Blackstone Group, and Boston Properties won the right to acquire the sites at the southwest and southeast corners of 42nd Street and Seventh Avenue for $330\u00a0million. 5 Times Square was completed on the southwest-corner site in 2002, and Times Square Tower opened on the southeast-corner site in 2004.\nEffects.\nTimes Square now boasts attractions such as ABC's Times Square Studios, where \"Good Morning America\" is broadcast live; competing Hershey's and M&amp;M's stores across the street from each other, and multiple multiplex movie theaters. Additionally, the area contains restaurants such as the Bubba Gump Shrimp Company, a seafood establishment; Planet Hollywood Restaurant and Bar, a theme restaurant; and Carmine's, serving Italian cuisine. It has also attracted several large financial, publishing, and media firms to set up headquarters in the area. A larger presence of police has improved the safety of the area.\nThe theatres of Broadway and the huge number of animated neon and LED signs have been one of New York's iconic images as well as a symbol of the intensely urban aspects of Manhattan. Since 1987 such signage has been mandated by zoning ordinances that require building owners to display illuminated signs, the only district in New York City with this requirement. The neighborhood has a minimum limit for lighting instead of the standard maximum limit. The density of illuminated signs in Times Square rivals that in Las Vegas. Officially, signs in Times Square are called \"spectaculars\", and the largest of them are called \"jumbotrons\". This signage ordinance was implemented in accordance with guidelines set in a revitalization program that New York Governor Mario Cuomo implemented in 1993.\nNotable signage includes the Toshiba billboard directly under the NYE ball drop, the curved seven-story NASDAQ sign at the NASDAQ MarketSite at 4 Times Square on 43rd Street, and the curved Coca-Cola sign located underneath another large LED display owned and operated by Samsung. Both the Coca-Cola sign and Samsung LED displays were built by LED display manufacturer Daktronics. Times Square's first environmentally friendly billboard powered by wind and solar energy was first lit on December 4, 2008. The new 20 Times Square development hosts the largest LED signage in Times Square at 18,000 square feet. The display is 1,000 square feet larger than the Times Square Walgreens display and one of the largest video-capable screens in the world.\n2000s\u2013present.\nIn 2002, New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani administered the oath of office to the city's next mayor, Michael Bloomberg, at Times Square after midnight on January 1 as part of the 2001\u201302 New Year's celebration. Approximately 500,000 revelers attended. Security was high following the September 11 terrorist attacks in 2001, with more than 7,000 New York City police officers on duty in the Square, twice the number for an ordinary year.\nTimes Square started hosting other major annual events in the 2000s. Since 2002, the summer solstice has been marked by \"Mind over Madness\", a mass yoga event involving up to 15,000 people. Tim Tompkins, a co-founder of the event, said part of its appeal was \"finding stillness and calm amid the city rush on the longest day of the year\". Architect Mark Foster Gage proposed and designed the original Times Square Valentine's Day heart in 2009. Since then, designing the heart has become an annual competition.\nIn February 2011, Times Square became smoke-free as New York extended the outdoors smoking ban to the area. The measure imposed a $50 fine for any person caught smoking within the area. From January 29 to February 1, 2014, a \"Super Bowl Boulevard\" was held on Broadway, especially in Times Square, between 34th and 47th Streets, as part of Super Bowl XLVIII. The boulevard contained activities such as autographs, a -high toboggan run, and photographs with the Vince Lombardi Trophy. The area was under increased security and witnessed over 400,000 people during the period.\nIn October 2022, casino operator Caesars Entertainment and commercial property developer SL Green submitted a joint proposal to open a casino at 1515 Broadway, along Times Square. The community advisory committee rejected the proposal in September of 2025, therefore ending the prospects of a casino hotel in Times Square.\nPedestrian plaza.\nOn February 26, 2009, Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced that traffic lanes along Broadway from 42nd Street to 47th Street would be de-mapped starting Memorial Day 2009 and transformed into pedestrian plazas as a trial until at least the end of the year. The same was done in Herald Square from 33rd to 35th Street. The results were to be closely monitored to determine if the project was successful and should be extended. Bloomberg also stated that he believed the street shutdown would make New York more livable by reducing pollution, cutting down on pedestrian-vehicle accidents, and helping traffic flow more smoothly through the Midtown street grid.\nThe pedestrian plaza project was originally opposed by local businesses, who thought that closing the street to cars would hurt business. The original seats put out for pedestrians were inexpensive multicolored plastic lawn chairs, a source of amusement to many New Yorkers; they lasted from the onset of the plaza transformation until August 14, 2009, when they were ceremoniously bundled together in an installation christened \"Now You See It, Now You Don't\" by the artist Jason Peters, and shortly afterward were replaced by sturdier metal furniture. Although the plaza had mixed results on traffic in the area, injuries to motorists and pedestrians decreased, fewer pedestrians were walking in the road, and the number of pedestrians in Times Square increased. On February 11, 2010, Bloomberg announced that the pedestrian plazas would become permanent.\nThe city started rebuilding the plaza in 2010, hiring the design and landscaping firm Sn\u00f8hetta to permanently replace Broadway's roadway with custom-made granite pavers and benches. By December 2013, the first phase of the Times Square pedestrian plaza had been completed at the southern end of the square in time for the Times Square Ball drop on New Year's Eve. The project was originally intended to be completed by the end of 2015. The entire project was finally completed just before New Year's Eve 2016. Some safety bollards were also installed as part of the renovation to prevent vehicular attacks or collisions on the sidewalk. After a 2017 vehicle-ramming attack, there were calls to install more bollards along Times Square.\nTimes Square's pedestrian plaza is frequented by topless women (with painted breasts) called \"desnudas\", as well as costumed characters, who typically panhandle for tips. The pedestrian plaza became a source of controversy in the summer of 2015 because of a large number of complaints about the topless women and panhandling characters. Although neither of these activities are illegal, opponents believed that the panhandlers' presence was detrimental to the quality of life in the area. There were calls from Police Commissioner Bratton and Mayor Bill de Blasio to remove the plaza, although Manhattan Borough President Gale Brewer opposed the proposal. In June 2016, work started on \"pedestrian flow zones\" where no one was allowed to loiter, as well as \"activity zones\" where costumed characters were allowed to perform.\nIncidents.\nThere have been several incidents in Times Square:\nNumber of visitors.\nTimes Square is the most visited place globally with 360,000 pedestrian visitors a day, amounting to over 131 million a year. As of 2013[ [update]], it had a greater attendance than each of the Disney theme parks worldwide, with 128,794,000 visitors between March 2012 and February 2013, versus 126,479,000 for the Walt Disney World theme parks in Bay Lake, Florida, in 2012. Even excluding residents from the visitor count, Times Square is the world's second most visited tourist attraction, behind the Las Vegas Strip. The high level of pedestrian traffic has resulted in $4.8\u00a0billion in annual retail, entertainment, and hotel sales, with 22 cents out of every dollar spent by visitors in New York City being spent within Times Square.\nNew Year's Eve celebrations.\nTimes Square is the site of the annual New Year's Eve ball drop. About one million revelers crowd Times Square for the New Year's Eve celebrations, more than twice the usual number of visitors the area usually receives daily. However, for the millennium celebration on December 31, 1999, published reports stated approximately two million people overflowed Times Square, flowing from Sixth Avenue to Eighth Avenue and back on Broadway and Seventh Avenue to 59th Street, making it the largest gathering in Times Square since August 1945 during celebrations marking the end of World War II.\nOn December 31, 1907, a ball signifying New Year's Day was first dropped at Times Square, and the Square has held the main New Year's celebration in New York City ever since. On that night, hundreds of thousands of people congregate to watch the Waterford Crystal ball being lowered on a pole atop the building, marking the start of the new year. It replaced a lavish fireworks display from the top of the building that was held from 1904 to 1906 but stopped by city officials because of the danger of fire. Beginning in 1908, and for more than eighty years thereafter, Times Square sign maker Artkraft Strauss was responsible for the ball-lowering. During World War II, a minute of silence, followed by a recording of church bells pealing, replaced the ball drop because of wartime blackout restrictions. Today, Countdown Entertainment and One Times Square handle the New Year's Eve event in conjunction with the Times Square Alliance. A new energy-efficient LED ball debuted for the arrival of 2008, which was the centennial of the Times Square ball drop. The 2008\u201309 ball is larger and has become a permanent installation as a year-round attraction, being used for celebrations on days such as Valentine's Day and Halloween.\nThe New Year's Eve celebrations are usually overseen by thousands of police officers. Aluminum barriers are erected to accommodate spectators; for the 2020 celebration, attended by a million people, barriers were erected from 38th to 59th Street and from Sixth to Eighth Avenue. Typically, the celebrations create large amounts of waste. The waste includes the 3,000 pounds of biodegradable confetti dropped at midnight, a tradition of which started in 1992. The New York City Department of Sanitation estimated that by 8 a.m. on New Year's Day 2014, it had cleared over of trash from the New Year's celebration, using 190 workers from their crews and the Times Square Alliance.\nImpact of COVID-19.\nThe onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in New York City during 2020 reduced the number of people traveling to Times Square. About 108,000 pedestrians visited Times Square each day in late 2020 compared to the 380,000 before the pandemic. From March to October 2020, 26 of the area's 46 hotels closed, as well as 39 of 151 stores and 84 of 162 restaurants. Times Square was closed to the public for New Year's Day 2021 and observers were dispersed into enclosures measuring .\nNotable landmarks.\nTimes Square is a busy intersection of art and commerce, where scores of advertisements \u2013 electric, neon and illuminated signs and \"zipper\" news crawls \u2013 vie for viewers' attention. Notable examples include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nContemporary artists regularly perform on Times Square. Examples include \"test pattern [times square]\" by Ryoji Ikeda and \"Continuum\" by Krista Kim.\nIn popular culture.\nAn immediately recognizable location, Times Square has been featured countless times in literature, films, video games, music videos, and on television.\nThe seediness of the area was featured prominently in such films as \"Midnight Cowboy\" (1969), \"Born to Win\" (1971), and \"Taxi Driver\" (1976). The area was shown in the 1980 film \"Times Square\", which featured a punk rock/new wave soundtrack. It was also depicted in the 2011 movie \"New Year's Eve\". The area also appeared on \"The Amazing Race\" as the starting location in a race around the world in the first episode of the show's 25th season, as well as on the sixth season of the Israeli edition of \"The Amazing Race\" with teams finishing their second leg in Times Square.\nTimes Square has been fictionally attacked and destroyed in several movies, including \"Knowing\", when a solar flare destroys New York City; \"Deep Impact\", when a tsunami created from a meteor impact destroys New York City; the 1998 film \"Godzilla\", where Godzilla is chased through Times Square; the \"Ghostbusters\" movies; Stephen King's \"The Stand\", where the intersection is overcome by total anarchy; \"\", \"Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs\", and \"2012\". It was also seen in the festival battle scene in the 2002 film \"Spider-Man\", and a stand-off in the later film \"The Amazing Spider-Man 2\".\nFilms and TV shows have also employed the opposite tactic, depicting the typically bustling area as eerily still, such as in \"Vanilla Sky,\" as well as the post-apocalyptic \"I Am Legend\", in which Will Smith and his dog go hunting for deer in the deserted urban canyon. In the pilot episode of the TV series \"Blindspot\", Times Square is completely emptied due to an abandoned bag being suspected to be a bomb.\nTimes Square also has featured prominently in video games. For instance, in \"Grand Theft Auto IV\", a recreation of the Times Square area referred to in-game as \"Star Junction\", is included in the game's fictional \"Liberty City\" setting. Times Square is also shown in \"Battlefield 3\", where the final fight with the main antagonist takes place, where the player must stop him from detonating a nuclear bomb in the square; and \"Crysis 2\", in which player must fight off attacking alien forces to assist U.S. Marines in evacuating the area. \"Gran Turismo 4\" also features Times Square both as a photo spot and as a part of the New York city circuit which also includes Central Park.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31390", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31390", "title": "Terry Riley", "text": "American composer and performing musician (born 1935)\nTerrence Mitchell Riley (born June 24, 1935) is an American composer and performing musician best known as a pioneer of the minimalist school of composition. Influenced by jazz and Indian classical music, his work became notable for its innovative use of repetition, tape music techniques, improvisation, and delay systems. His best known works are the 1964 composition \"In C\" and the 1969 album \"A Rainbow in Curved Air\", both considered landmarks of minimalism and important influences on experimental music, rock, and contemporary electronic music. Subsequent works such as \"Shri Camel\" (1980) explored just intonation.\nRaised in Redding, California, Riley began studying composition and performing solo piano in the 1950s. He befriended and collaborated with composer La Monte Young, and later became involved with both the San Francisco Tape Music Center and Young's New York collective, the Theatre of Eternal Music. A three-record deal with CBS in the late 1960s brought his work to wider audiences. In 1970, he began intensive studies under Hindustani singer Pandit Pran Nath, whom he often accompanied in performance. He has collaborated frequently throughout his career, most extensively with chamber ensemble the Kronos Quartet and his son, guitarist Gyan Riley.\nLife.\nRiley was born in Colfax, California on June 24, 1935, and grew up in Redding, California. In the 1950s, he began performing as a solo pianist and studied composition at San Francisco State University, the San Francisco Conservatory, and the University of California, Berkeley, studying with Seymour Shifrin and Robert Erickson. He befriended composer La Monte Young, whose earliest minimalist compositions using sustained tones were an influence; together, Young and Riley performed Riley's improvisatory composition \"Concert for Two Pianists and Tape Recorders\" in 1959\u201360. Riley later became involved in the experimental San Francisco Tape Music Center, working with Morton Subotnick, Steve Reich, Pauline Oliveros, and Ramon Sender. Throughout the 1960s, he also traveled frequently in Europe, taking in musical influences and supporting himself by playing in piano bars. He also performed briefly with the Theatre of Eternal Music in New York in 1965-1966.\nHis most influential teacher was Pandit Pran Nath (1918\u20131996), a master of Indian classical voice who also taught La Monte Young, Marian Zazeela, and Michael Harrison. Riley made numerous trips to India over the course of their association to study and accompany him on tabla, tambura, and voice. In 1971 he joined the Mills College faculty to teach Indian classical music. Riley also cites John Cage and \"the really great chamber music groups of John Coltrane and Miles Davis, Charles Mingus, Bill Evans, and Gil Evans\" as influences on his work. He was awarded an Honorary Doctorate Degree in Music at Chapman University in 2007.\nAround 1980, Riley began his long-lasting association with the Kronos Quartet when he met their founder David Harrington while at Mills. Throughout his career, Riley composed 13 string quartets for the ensemble, in addition to other works. He wrote his first orchestral piece, \"Jade Palace\", in 1991, and has continued to pursue that avenue, with several commissioned orchestral compositions following. He is also currently performing and teaching both as an Indian raga vocalist and as a solo pianist.\nRiley continues to perform live, and was part of the All Tomorrow's Parties festival in May 2011.\nArtistry.\nMusical style.\n\"Where American minimalism, Indian classical raga, barrelhouse piano, modal jazz, and rugged western individualism all intersect, there stands the sage composer Terry Riley. [...] His work exploded listeners\u2019 notions of classical composition with his ever-shifting structures and epic improvisations.\" Riley was initially inspired by jazz saxophonist John Coltrane.\nTechniques.\nRiley's music is usually based on improvising through a series of modal figures of different lengths. Works such as \"In C\" (1964) and the \"Keyboard Studies\" (1964\u20131966) demonstrate this technique. The first performance of \"In C\" was given by Steve Reich, Jon Gibson, Pauline Oliveros, and Morton Subotnick, among others. Its form was an innovation: The piece consists of 53 separate modules of roughly one measure apiece, each containing a different musical pattern but each, as the title implies, in the key of C. One performer beats a steady pulse of \"C\"s on the piano to keep tempo. The others, in any number and on any instrument, perform these musical modules following a few loose guidelines, with the different musical modules interlocking in various ways as time goes on.\nIn the 1950s Riley was already working with tape loops, a technology still in its infancy at the time; he would later, with the help of a sound engineer, create what he called a \"time-lag accumulator\". He has continued manipulating tapes to musical effect, in the studio and in live performances throughout his career. An early tape loop piece titled \"Music for the Gift\" (1963) featured the trumpet playing of Chet Baker. It was during Riley's time in Paris, while composing this piece, that he conceived of and created the time-lag accumulator technique. Premiered in 1968 in the Magic Theatre Exhibition at the Nelson Atkins Gallery in Kansas City, a new version of the installation was commissioned three decades later by Lille 2004-European Capital of Culture and purchased by the Museum of Contemporary Art of Lyon. A third version was built and presented by the Schauspielhaus in Bochum in 2019. He has composed using just intonation as well as microtones. In New York City in the mid-1960s he played with his longtime friend La Monte Young, as well as with John Cale and tabla player Angus MacLise, who were founding members of The Velvet Underground. Riley is credited as inspiring Cale's keyboard part on Lou Reed's composition \"All Tomorrow's Parties\", which was sung by German actress Nico and included on the album \"The Velvet Underground and Nico\", recorded in 1966.\nRiley's famous overdubbed electronic album \"A Rainbow in Curved Air\" (recorded 1968, released 1969) inspired many later developments in electronic music. These include Pete Townshend's organ parts on The Who's \"Won't Get Fooled Again\" and \"Baba O'Riley\", the latter named in tribute to Riley as well as to Meher Baba. Charles Hazlewood, in his BBC documentary on Minimalism (Part 1) suggests that the album 'Tubular Bells' by Mike Oldfield was also inspired by Riley's example. The English progressive rock group Curved Air, formed in 1970, took its name from the album.\nRiley's collaborators have included the Rova Saxophone Quartet, Pauline Oliveros, the ARTE Quartett, and, as mentioned, the Kronos Quartet. His 1995 \"Lisbon Concert\" recording features him in a solo piano format, improvising on his own works. In the liner notes Riley cites Art Tatum, Bud Powell and Bill Evans as his piano \"heroes\", illustrating the importance of jazz to his conceptions.\nPersonal life.\nHe has three children: one daughter, Colleen, and two sons, Gyan, who is a guitarist, and Shahn. He was married to Ann Riley until her death in 2015. Since 2020, Riley has lived in Japan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31392", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31392", "title": "Tasmanian devil", "text": "Australian carnivorous marsupial\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii; palawa kani: \"purinina\") is a carnivorous marsupial of the family Dasyuridae. It was formerly present across mainland Australia, but became extinct there around 3,500 years ago; it is now confined to the island of Tasmania. The size of a small dog, the Tasmanian devil became the largest carnivorous marsupial in the world following the extinction of the thylacine in 1936. It is related to quolls, and distantly related to the thylacine. It is characterised by its stocky and muscular build, black fur, pungent odour, extremely loud and disturbing screech, keen sense of smell, and ferocity when feeding. The Tasmanian devil's large head and neck allow it to generate among the strongest bites per unit body mass of any extant predatory land mammal. It hunts prey and scavenges on carrion.\nAlthough devils are usually solitary, they sometimes eat and defecate together in a communal location. Unlike most other dasyurids, the devil thermoregulates effectively, and is active during the middle of the day without overheating. Despite its rotund appearance, it is capable of surprising speed and endurance, and can climb trees and swim across rivers. Devils are not monogamous. Males fight one another for females, and guard their partners to prevent female infidelity. Females can ovulate three times in as many weeks during the mating season, and 80% of two-year-old females are seen to be pregnant during the annual mating season.\nFemales average four breeding seasons in their life, and give birth to 20 to 30 live young after three weeks' gestation. The newborn are pink, lack fur, have indistinct facial features, and weigh around at birth. As there are only four nipples in the pouch, competition is fierce, and few newborns survive. The young grow rapidly, and are ejected from the pouch after around 100 days, weighing roughly . The young become independent after around nine months.\nIn 1941, devils became officially protected. Since the late 1990s, the devil facial tumour disease (DFTD) has drastically reduced the population and now threatens the survival of the species, which in 2008 was declared to be endangered. Starting in 2013, Tasmanian devils are again being sent to zoos around the world as part of the Australian government's Save the Tasmanian Devil Program. The devil is an iconic symbol of Tasmania and many organisations, groups and products associated with the state use the animal in their logos. It is seen as an important attractor of tourists to Tasmania and has come to worldwide attention through the \"Looney Tunes\" character of the same name.\nTaxonomy.\nBelieving it to be a type of opossum, naturalist George Harris wrote the first published description of the Tasmanian devil in 1807, naming it \"Didelphis ursina\", due to its bearlike characteristics such as the round ear. He had earlier made a presentation on the topic at the Zoological Society of London. However, that particular binomial name had been given to the common wombat (later reclassified as \"Vombatus ursinus\") by George Shaw in 1800, and was hence unavailable. In 1838, a specimen was named \"Dasyurus laniarius\" by Richard Owen, but by 1877 he had relegated it to \"Sarcophilus\". The modern Tasmanian devil was named \"Sarcophilus harrisii\" (\"Harris's flesh-lover\") by French naturalist Pierre Boitard in 1841.\nA later revision of the devil's taxonomy, published in 1987, attempted to change the species name to \"Sarcophilus laniarius\" based on mainland fossil records of only a few animals. However, this was not accepted by the taxonomic community at large; the name \"S.\u00a0harrisii\" has been retained and \"S.\u00a0laniarius\" relegated to a fossil species. \"Beelzebub's pup\" was an early vernacular name given to it by the explorers of Tasmania, in reference to a religious figure who is a prince of hell and an assistant of Satan; the explorers first encountered the animal by hearing its far-reaching vocalisations at night. Related names that were used in the 19th century were \"Sarcophilus satanicus\" (\"Satanic flesh-lover\") and \"Diabolus ursinus\" (\"bear devil\"), all due to early misconceptions of the species as implacably vicious. The Tasmanian devil (\"Sarcophilus harrisii\") belongs to the family Dasyuridae. The genus \"Sarcophilus\" contains two other species, known only from Pleistocene fossils: \"S.\u00a0laniarius\" and \"S.\u00a0moomaensis\". Phylogenetic analysis shows that the Tasmanian devil is most closely related to quolls.\nAccording to Pemberton, the possible ancestors of the devil may have needed to climb trees to acquire food, leading to a growth in size and the hopping gait of many marsupials. He speculated that these adaptations may have caused the contemporary devil's peculiar gait. The specific lineage of the Tasmanian devil is theorised to have emerged during the Miocene, molecular evidence suggesting a split from the ancestors of quolls between 10 and 15 million years ago, when severe climate change came to bear in Australia, transforming the climate from warm and moist to an arid, dry ice age, resulting in mass extinctions. As most of their prey died of the cold, only a few carnivores survived, including the ancestors of the quoll and thylacine. It is speculated that the devil lineage may have arisen at this time to fill a niche in the ecosystem, as a scavenger that disposed of carrion left behind by the selective-eating thylacine. The extinct \"Glaucodon ballaratensis\" of the Pliocene age has been dubbed an intermediate species between the quoll and devil. Fossil deposits in limestone caves at Naracoorte, South Australia, dating to the Miocene include specimens of \"S.\u00a0laniarius\", which were around 15% larger and 50% heavier than modern devils. Older specimens believed to be 50\u201370,000 years old were found in Darling Downs in Queensland and in Western Australia. It is not clear whether the modern devil evolved from \"S.\u00a0laniarius\", or whether they coexisted at the time. Richard Owen argued for the latter hypothesis in the 19th century, based on fossils found in 1877 in New South Wales. Large bones attributed to \"S.\u00a0moornaensis\" have been found in New South Wales, and it has been conjectured that these two extinct larger species may have hunted and scavenged. It is known that there were several genera of thylacine millions of years ago, and that they ranged in size, the smaller being more reliant on foraging. As the devil and thylacine are similar, the extinction of the co-existing thylacine genera has been cited as evidence for an analogous history for the devils. It has been speculated that the smaller size of \"S.\u00a0laniarius\" and \"S.\u00a0moornaensis\" allowed them to adapt to the changing conditions more effectively and survive longer than the corresponding thylacines. As the extinction of these two species came at a similar time to human habitation of Australia, hunting by humans and land clearance have been mooted as possible causes. Critics of this theory point out that as indigenous Australians only developed boomerangs and spears for hunting around 10,000 years ago, a critical fall in numbers due to systematic hunting is unlikely. They also point out that caves inhabited by Aborigines have a low proportion of bones and rock paintings of devils, and suggest that this is an indication that it was not a large part of indigenous lifestyle. A scientific report in 1910 claimed that Aborigines preferred the meat of herbivores rather than carnivores. The other main theory for the extinction was that it was due to the climate change brought on by the most recent ice age.\nGenetics.\nThe Tasmanian devil's genome was sequenced in 2010 by the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute. Like all dasyurids, the devil has 14 chromosomes. Devils have a low genetic diversity compared to other Australian marsupials and placental carnivores; this is consistent with a founder effect as allelic size ranges were low and nearly continuous throughout all subpopulations measured. Allelic diversity was measured at 2.7\u20133.3 in the subpopulations sampled, and heterozygosity was in the range 0.386\u20130.467. According to a study by Menna Jones, \"gene flow appears extensive up to \", meaning a high assignment rate to source or close neighbour populations \"in agreement with movement data. At larger scales (), gene flow is reduced but there is no evidence for isolation by distance\". Island effects may also have contributed to their low genetic diversity. Periods of low population density may also have created moderate population bottlenecks, reducing genetic diversity. Low genetic diversity is thought to have been a feature in the Tasmanian devil population since the mid-Holocene. Outbreaks of devil facial tumour disease (DFTD) cause an increase in inbreeding. A sub-population of devils in the north-west of the state is genetically distinct from other devils, but there is some exchange between the two groups.\nOne strand conformation polymorphism analysis (OSCP) on the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I domain taken from various locations across Tasmania showed 25 different types, and showed a different pattern of MHC types in north-western Tasmania to eastern Tasmania. Those devils in the east of the state have less MHC diversity; 30% are of the same type as the tumour (type 1), and 24% are of type A. Seven of every ten devils in the east are of type A, D, G or 1, which are linked to DFTD; whereas only 55% of the western devils fall into these MHC categories. Of the 25 MHC types, 40% are exclusive to the western devils. Although the north-west population is less genetically diverse overall, it has higher MHC gene diversity, which allows them to mount an immune response to DFTD. According to this research, mixing the devils may increase the chance of disease. Of the fifteen different regions in Tasmania surveyed in this research, six were in the eastern half of the island. In the eastern half, Epping Forest had only two different types, 75% being type O. In the Buckland-Nugent area, only three types were present, and there were an average of 5.33 different types per location. In contrast, in the west, Cape Sorell yielded three types, and Togari North-Christmas Hills yielded six, but the other seven sites all had at least eight MHC types, and West Pencil Pine had 15 types. There was an average of 10.11 MHC types per site in the west. Recent research has suggested that the wild population of devils are rapidly evolving a resistance to DFTD.\nDescription.\nThe Tasmanian devil is the largest surviving carnivorous marsupial. It has a squat, thick build, with a large head and a tail which is about half its body length. Unusually for a marsupial, its forelegs are slightly longer than its hind legs, and devils can run up to for short distances, on typical terrain, though on flat roads they have been recorded reaching speeds of up to for distances up to .. The fur is usually black, often with irregular white patches on the chest and rump (although approximately 16% of wild devils do not have white patches). These markings suggest that the devil is most active at dawn and dusk, and they are thought to draw biting attacks toward less important areas of the body, as fighting between devils often leads to a concentration of scars in that region. Males are usually larger than females, having an average head and body length of , a tail and an average weight of . Females have an average head and body length of , a tail and an average weight of , although devils in western Tasmania tend to be smaller. Devils have five long toes on their forefeet, four pointing to the front and one coming out from the side, which gives the devil the ability to hold food. The hind feet have four toes, and the devils have non-retractable claws. The stocky devils have a relatively low centre of mass.\nDevils are fully grown at two years of age, and few devils live longer than five years in the wild. Possibly the longest-lived Tasmanian devil recorded was Coolah, a male devil which lived in captivity for more than seven years. Born in January 1997 at the Cincinnati Zoo, Coolah died in May 2004 at the Fort Wayne Children's Zoo. The devil stores body fat in its tail, and healthy devils have fat tails. The tail is largely non-prehensile and is important to its physiology, social behaviour and locomotion. It acts as a counterbalance to aid stability when the devil is moving quickly. An ano-genital scent gland at the base of its tail is used to mark the ground behind the animal with its strong, pungent scent. The male has external testes in a pouch-like structure formed by lateral ventrocrural folds of the abdomen, which partially hides and protects them. The testes are subovoid in shape and the mean dimensions of 30 testes of adult males was . The female's pouch opens backwards, and is present throughout its life, unlike some other dasyurids.\nThe Tasmanian devil has the most powerful bite relative to body size of any living mammalian carnivore, with a Bite Force Quotient of 181 and exerting a canine bite force of . The jaw can open to 75\u201380 degrees, allowing the devil to generate the large amount of power to tear meat and crush bones\u2014sufficient force to allow it to bite through thick metal wire. The power of the jaws is in part due to its comparatively large head. The teeth and jaws of Tasmanian devils resemble those of hyenas, an example of convergent evolution. Dasyurid teeth resemble those of primitive marsupials. Like all dasyurids, the devil has prominent canines and cheek teeth. It has three pairs of lower incisors and four pairs of upper incisors. These are located at the top of the front of the devil's mouth. Like dogs, it has 42 teeth, however, unlike dogs, its teeth are not replaced after birth but grow continuously throughout life at a slow rate. It has a \"highly carnivorous dentition and trophic adaptations for bone consumption\". The devil has long claws that allow it to dig burrows and seek subterranean food easily and grip prey or mates strongly. The teeth and claw strength allow the devil to attack wombats up to in weight. The large neck and forebody that give the devil its strength also cause this strength to be biased towards the front half of the body; the lopsided, awkward, shuffling gait of the devil is attributed to this.\nThe devil has long whiskers on its face and in clumps on the top of the head. These help the devil locate prey when foraging in the dark, and aid in detecting when other devils are close during feeding. The whiskers can extend from the tip of the chin to the rear of the jaw and can cover the span of its shoulder. Hearing is its dominant sense, and it also has an excellent sense of smell, which has a range of . The devil, unlike other marsupials, has a \"well-defined, saddle-shaped ectotympanic\". Since devils hunt at night, their vision seems to be strongest in black and white. In these conditions they can detect moving objects readily, but have difficulty seeing stationary objects.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe Tasmanian devil was formerly present across mainland Australia, but became extinct there 3,500 years ago, co-incident with the extinction of the Thylacine from the region. A number of causal factors for the extinction have been proposed, including the introduction of the dingo, intensification of human activity, as well as climatic change.\nDevils are found in all habitats on the island of Tasmania, including the outskirts of urban areas, and are distributed throughout the Tasmanian mainland and on Robbins Island (which is connected to mainland Tasmania at low tide). The north-western population is located west of the Forth River and as far south as Macquarie Heads. Previously, they were present on Bruny Island from the 19th century, but there have been no records of them after 1900. They were illegally introduced to Badger Island in the mid-1990s but were removed by the Tasmanian government by 2007. Although the Badger Island population was free from DFTD, the removed individuals were returned to the Tasmanian mainland, some to infected areas. A study has modelled the reintroduction of DFTD-free Tasmanian devils to the Australian mainland in areas where dingoes are sparse. It is proposed that devils would have fewer impacts on both livestock and native fauna than dingoes, and that the mainland population could act as an additional insurance population. In September 2015, 20 immunised captive-bred devils were released into Narawntapu National Park, Tasmania. Two later died from being hit by cars.\nThe \"core habitat\" of the devils is considered to be within the \"low to moderate annual rainfall zone of eastern and north-western Tasmania\". Tasmanian devils particularly like dry sclerophyll forests and coastal woodlands. Although they are not found at the highest altitudes of Tasmania, and their population density is low in the button grass plains in the south-west of the state, their population is high in dry or mixed sclerophyll forests and coastal heaths. Devils prefer open forest to tall forest, and dry rather than wet forests. They are also found near roads where roadkill is prevalent, although the devils themselves are often killed by vehicles while retrieving the carrion. According to the Threatened Species Scientific Committee, their versatility means that habitat modification from destruction is not seen as a major threat to the species.\nThe devil is directly linked to the \"Dasyurotaenia robusta\", a tapeworm which is classified as Rare under the Tasmanian Threatened Species Protection Act 1995. This tapeworm is found only in devils.\nIn late 2020, Tasmanian devils were reintroduced to mainland Australia in a sanctuary run by Aussie Ark in the Barrington Tops area of New South Wales. This was the first time devils had lived on the Australian mainland in over 3,000 years. 26 adult devils were released into the protected area, and by late April 2021, seven joeys had been born, with up to 20 expected by the end of the year.\nEcology and behaviour.\nThe Tasmanian devil is a keystone species in the ecosystem of Tasmania. It is a nocturnal and crepuscular hunter, spending the days in dense bush or in a hole. It has been speculated that nocturnalism may have been adopted to avoid predation by eagles and humans. Young devils are predominantly crepuscular. There is no evidence of torpor.\nYoung devils can climb trees, but this becomes more difficult as they grow larger. Devils can scale trees of trunk diameter larger than , which tend to have no small side branches to hang onto, up to a height of around . Devils that are yet to reach maturity can climb shrubs to a height of , and can climb a tree to if it is not vertical. Adult devils may eat young devils if they are very hungry, so this climbing behaviour may be an adaptation to allow young devils to escape. Devils can also swim and have been observed crossing rivers that are in width, including icy cold waterways, apparently enthusiastically.\nTasmanian devils do not form packs, but rather spend most of their time alone once weaned. Classically considered as solitary animals, their social interactions were poorly understood. However, a field study published in 2009 shed some light on this. Tasmanian devils in Narawntapu National Park were fitted with proximity sensing radio collars which recorded their interactions with other devils over several months from February to June 2006. This revealed that all devils were part of a single huge contact network, characterised by male-female interactions during mating season, while female\u2013female interactions were the most common at other times, although frequency and patterns of contact did not vary markedly between seasons. Previously thought to fight over food, males only rarely interacted with other males. Hence, all devils in a region are part of a single social network. They are considered to be non-territorial in general, but females are territorial around their dens. This allows a higher total mass of devils to occupy a given area than territorial animals, without conflict. Tasmanian devils instead occupy a home range. In a period of between two and four weeks, devils' home ranges are estimated to vary between , with an average of . The location and geometry of these areas depend on the distribution of food, particularly wallabies and pademelons nearby.\nDevils use three or four dens regularly. Dens formerly owned by wombats are especially prized as maternity dens because of their security. Dense vegetation near creeks, thick grass tussocks, and caves are also used as dens. Adult devils use the same dens for life. It is believed that, as a secure den is highly prized, some may have been used for several centuries by generations of animals. Studies have suggested that food security is less important than den security, as habitat destruction that affects the latter has had more effect on mortality rates. Young pups remain in one den with their mother, and other devils are mobile, changing dens every 1\u20133 days and travelling a mean distance of every night. However, there are also reports that an upper bound can be per night. They choose to travel through lowlands, saddles and along the banks of creeks, particularly preferring carved-out tracks and livestock paths and eschewing steep slopes and rocky terrain. The amount of movement is believed to be similar throughout the year, except for mothers who have given birth recently. The similarity in travel distances for males and females is unusual for sexually dimorphic, solitary carnivores. As a male needs more food, he will spend more time eating than travelling. Devils typically make circuits of their home range during their hunts. In areas near human habitation, they are known to steal clothes, blankets and pillows and take them for use in dens in wooden buildings.\nWhile the dasyurids have similar diet and anatomy, differing body sizes affect thermoregulation and thus behaviour. In ambient temperatures between , the devil was able to maintain a body temperature between . When the temperature was raised to , and the humidity to 50%, the devil's body temperature spiked upwards by within 60 minutes, but then steadily decreased back to the starting temperature after a further two hours, and remained there for two more hours. During this time, the devil drank water and showed no visible signs of discomfort, leading scientists to believe that sweating and evaporative cooling is its primary means of heat dissipation. A later study found that devils pant but do not sweat to release heat. In contrast, many other marsupials were unable to keep their body temperatures down. As the smaller animals have to live in hotter and more arid conditions to which they are less well-adapted, they take up a nocturnal lifestyle and drop their body temperatures during the day, whereas the devil is active in the day and its body temperature varies by from its minimum at night to the maximum in the middle of the day.\nThe standard metabolic rate of a Tasmanian devil is 141 kJ/kg (15.3 kcal/lb) per day, many times lower than smaller marsupials. A devil uses per day. The field metabolic rate is 407 kJ/kg (44.1 kcal/lb). Along with quolls, Tasmanian devils have a metabolic rate comparable to non-carnivorous marsupials of a similar size. This differs from placental carnivores, which have comparatively high basal metabolic rates. A study of devils showed a loss of weight from from summer to winter, but in the same time, daily energy consumption increased from . This is equivalent to an increase in food consumption from . The diet is protein-based with 70% water content. For every of insects consumed, of energy are produced, while a corresponding amount of wallaby meat generated . In terms of its body mass, the devil eats only a quarter of the eastern quoll's intake, allowing it to survive longer during food shortages.\nFeeding.\nTasmanian devils can take prey up to the size of a small kangaroo, but in practice they are opportunistic and eat carrion more often than they hunt live prey. Although the devil favours wombats because of the ease of predation and high fat content, it will eat all small native mammals such as wallabies, bettong and potoroos, domestic mammals (including sheep and rabbits), birds (including penguins), fish, fruit, vegetable matter, insects, tadpoles, frogs and reptiles. Their diet is widely varied and depends on the food available. Before the extinction of the thylacine, the Tasmanian devil ate thylacine joeys left alone in dens when their parents were away. This may have helped to hasten the extinction of the thylacine, which also ate devils. They are known to hunt water rats by the sea and forage on dead fish that have been washed ashore. Near human habitation, they can also steal shoes and chew on them, and eat the legs of otherwise robust sheep that have slipped in wooden shearing sheds, leaving their legs dangling below. Other unusual matter observed in devil scats includes collars and tags of devoured animals, intact echidna spines, pencil, plastic and jeans. Devils can bite through metal traps, and tend to reserve their strong jaws for escaping captivity rather than breaking into food storage. Due to their relative lack of speed, they cannot run down a wallaby or a rabbit, but they can attack animals that have become slow due to illness. They survey flocks of sheep by sniffing them from away and attack if the prey is ill. The sheep stamp their feet in a show of strength.\nDespite their lack of extreme speed, there have been reports that devils can run at for on flat ground, and it has been conjectured that, before European immigration and the introduction of livestock, vehicles and roadkill, they would have had to chase other native animals at a reasonable pace to find food. Pemberton has reported that they can average for \"extended periods\" on several nights per week, and that they run for long distances before sitting still for up to half an hour, something that has been interpreted as evidence of ambush predation.\nDevils can dig to forage corpses, in one case digging down to eat the corpse of a buried horse that had died due to illness. They are known to eat animal cadavers by first ripping out the digestive system, which is the softest part of the anatomy, and they often reside in the resulting cavity while they are eating.\nOn average, devils eat about 15% of their body weight each day, although they can eat up to 40% of their body weight in 30 minutes if the opportunity arises. This means they can become very heavy and lethargic after a large meal; in this state they tend to waddle away slowly and lie down, becoming easy to approach. This has led to a belief that such eating habits became possible due to the lack of a predator to attack such bloated individuals.\nTasmanian devils can eliminate all traces of a carcass of a smaller animal, devouring the bones and fur if desired. In this respect, devils have earned the gratitude of Tasmanian farmers, as the speed at which they clean a carcass helps prevent the spread of insects that might otherwise harm livestock. Some of these dead animals are disposed of when the devils haul off the excess feed back to their residence to continue eating at a later time.\nThe diet of a devil can vary substantially for males and females, and seasonally, according to studies at Cradle Mountain. In winter, males prefer medium mammals over larger ones, with a ratio of 4:5, but in summer, they prefer larger prey in a 7:2 ratio. These two categories accounted for more than 95% of the diet. Females are less inclined to target large prey, but have the same seasonal bias. In winter, large and medium mammals account for 25% and 58% each, with 7% small mammals and 10% birds. In summer, the first two categories account for 61% and 37% respectively.\nJuvenile devils are sometimes known to climb trees; in addition to small vertebrates and invertebrates, juveniles climb trees to eat grubs and birds' eggs. Juveniles have also been observed climbing into nests and capturing birds. Throughout the year, adult devils derive 16.2% of their biomass intake from arboreal species, almost all of which is possum meat, just 1.0% being large birds. From February to July, subadult devils derive 35.8% of their biomass intake from arboreal life, 12.2% being small birds and 23.2% being possums. Female devils in winter source 40.0% of their intake from arboreal species, including 26.7% from possums and 8.9% from various birds. Not all of these animals were caught while they were in trees, but this high figure for females, which is higher than for male spotted-tailed quolls during the same season, is unusual, as the devil has inferior tree climbing skills.\nAlthough they hunt alone, there have been unsubstantiated claims of communal hunting, where one devil drives prey out of its habitat and an accomplice attacks. Eating is a social event for the Tasmanian devil. This combination of a solitary animal that eats communally makes the devil unique among carnivores. Much of the noise attributed to the animal is a result of raucous communal eating, at which up to 12 individuals can gather, although groups of two to five are common; it can often be heard several kilometres away. This has been interpreted as notifications to colleagues to share in the meal, so that food is not wasted by rot and energy is saved. The amount of noise is correlated to the size of the carcass. The devils eat in accordance with a system. Juveniles are active at dusk, so they tend to reach the source before the adults. Typically, the dominant animal eats until it is satiated and leaves, fighting off any challengers in the meantime. Defeated animals run into the bush with their hair and tail erect, their conqueror in pursuit and biting their victim's rear where possible. Disputes are less common as the food source increases as the motive appears to be getting sufficient food rather than oppressing other devils. When quolls are eating a carcass, devils will tend to chase them away. This is a substantial problem for spotted-tailed quolls, as they kill relatively large possums and cannot finish their meal before devils arrive. In contrast, the smaller eastern quolls prey on much smaller victims, and can complete feeding before devils turn up. This is seen as a possible reason for the relatively small population of spotted-tailed quolls.\nA study of feeding devils identified twenty physical postures, including their characteristic vicious yawn, and eleven different vocal sounds, including clicks, shrieks and various types of growls, that devils use to communicate as they feed. They usually establish dominance by sound and physical posturing, although fighting does occur. The white patches on the devil are visible to the night-vision of its colleagues. Chemical gestures are also used. Adult males are the most aggressive, and scarring is common. They can also stand on their hind legs and push each other's shoulders with their front legs and heads, similar to sumo wrestling. Torn flesh around the mouth and teeth, as well as punctures in the rump, can sometimes be observed, although these can also be inflicted during breeding fights.\nDigestion is very fast in dasyurids and, for the Tasmanian devil, the few hours taken for food to pass through the small gut is a long period in comparison to some other dasyuridae. Devils are known to return to the same places to defecate, and to do so at a communal location, called a \"devil latrine\". It is believed that the communal defecation may be a means of communication that is not well understood. Devil scats are very large compared to body size; they are on average long, but there have been samples that are in length. They are characteristically grey in colour due to digested bones, or have bone fragments included.\nOwen and Pemberton believe that the relationship between Tasmanian devils and thylacines was \"close and complex\", as they competed directly for prey and probably also for shelter. The thylacines preyed on the devils, the devils scavenged from the thylacine's kills, and the devils ate thylacine young. Menna Jones hypothesises that the two species shared the role of apex predator in Tasmania. Wedge-tailed eagles have a similar carrion-based diet to the devils and are regarded as competitors. Quolls and devils are also seen as being in direct competition in Tasmania. Jones believed that the quoll has evolved into its current state in just 100\u2013200 generations of around two years as determined by the equal spacing effect on the devil, the largest species, the spotted-tail quoll, and the smallest species, the eastern quoll. Both the Tasmanian devil and the quolls appears to have evolved up to 50 times faster than the average evolutionary rate amongst mammals.\nReproduction.\nFemales start to breed when they reach sexual maturity, typically in their second year. At this point, they become fertile once a year, producing multiple ova while in heat. As prey is most abundant in spring and early summer, the devil's reproductive cycle starts in March or April so that the end of the weaning period coincides with the maximisation of food supplies in the wild for the newly roaming young devils.\nOccurring in March, mating takes places in sheltered locations during both day and night. Males fight over females in the breeding season, and female devils will mate with the dominant male. Females can ovulate up to three times in a 21-day period, and copulation can take five days; one instance of a couple being in the mating den for eight days has been recorded. Devils are not monogamous, and females will mate with several males if not guarded after mating; males also reproduce with several females during a season. Females have been shown to be selective in an attempt to ensure the best genetic offspring, for example, fighting off the advances of smaller males. Males often keep their mates in custody in the den, or take them along if they need to drink, lest they engage in infidelity.\nMales can produce up to 16 offspring over their lifetime, while females average four mating seasons and 12 offspring. Theoretically this means that a devil population can double on an annual basis and make the species insulated against high mortality. The pregnancy rate is high; 80% of two-year-old females were observed with newborns in their pouches during the mating season. More recent studies of breeding place the mating season between February and June, as opposed to between February and March.\nGestation lasts 21 days, and devils give birth to 20\u201330 young standing up, each weighing approximately . Embryonic diapause does not occur. At birth, the front limb has well-developed digits with claws; unlike many marsupials, the claws of baby devils are not deciduous. As with most other marsupials, the forelimb is longer () than the rear limb (), the eyes are spots, and the body is pink. There are no external ears or openings. Unusually, the sex can be determined at birth, with an external scrotum present.\nTasmanian devil young are variously called \"pups\", \"joeys\", or \"imps\". When the young are born, competition is fierce as they move from the vagina in a sticky flow of mucus to the pouch. Once inside the pouch, they each remain attached to a nipple for the next 100 days. The female Tasmanian devil's pouch, like that of the wombat, opens to the rear, so it is physically difficult for the female to interact with young inside the pouch. Despite the large litter at birth, the female has only four nipples, so there are never more than four babies nursing in the pouch, and the older a female devil gets, the smaller her litters will become. Once the young have made contact with the nipple, it expands, resulting in the oversized nipple being firmly clamped inside the newborn and ensuring that the newborn does not fall out of the pouch. On average, more females survive than males, and up to 60% of young do not survive to maturity. Milk replacements are often used for devils that have been bred in captivity, for orphaned devils or young who are born to diseased mothers. Little is known about the composition of the devil's milk compared to other marsupials.\nInside the pouch, the nourished young develop quickly. In the second week, the rhinarium becomes distinctive and heavily pigmented. At 15 days, the external parts of the ear are visible, although these are attached to the head and do not open out until the devil is around 10 weeks old. The ear begins blackening after around 40 days, when it is less than long, and by the time the ear becomes erect, it is between . Eyelids are apparent at 16 days, whiskers at 17 days, and the lips at 20 days. The devils can make squeaking noises after eight weeks, and after around 10\u201311 weeks, the lips can open. Despite the formation of eyelids, they do not open for three months, although eyelashes form at around 50 days. The young\u2014up to this point they are pink\u2014start to grow fur at 49 days and have a full coat by 90 days. The fur growing process starts at the snout and proceeds back through the body, although the tail attains fur before the rump, which is the last part of the body to become covered. Just before the start of the furring process, the colour of the bare devil's skin will darken and become black or dark grey in the tail.\nThe devils have a complete set of facial vibrissae and ulnar carpels, although it is devoid of anconeal vibrissae. During the third week, the mystacials and ulnarcarpals are the first to form. Subsequently, the infraorbital, interramal, supraorbital and submental vibrissae form. The last four typically occur between the 26th and 39th day. Their eyes open shortly after their fur coat develops\u2014between 87 and 93 days\u2014and their mouths can relax their hold of the nipple at 100 days. They leave the pouch 105 days after birth, appearing as small copies of the parent and weighing around . Zoologist Eric Guiler recorded its size at this time as follows: a crown-snout length of , tail length of , pes length , manus , shank , forearm and crown-rump length is . During this period, the devils lengthen at a roughly linear rate.\nAfter being ejected, the devils stay outside the pouch, but they remain in the den for around another three months, first venturing outside the den between October and December before becoming independent in January. During this transitional phase out of the pouch, the young devils are relatively safe from predation as they are generally accompanied. When the mother is hunting they can stay inside a shelter or come along, often riding on their mother's back. During this time they continue to drink their mother's milk. Female devils are occupied with raising their young for all but approximately six weeks of the year. The milk contains a higher amount of iron than the milk of placental mammals. In Guiler's 1970 study, no females died while rearing their offspring in the pouch. After leaving the pouch, the devils grow by around a month until they are six months old. While most pups will survive to be weaned, Guiler reported that up to three fifths of devils do not reach maturity. As juveniles are more crepuscular than adults, their appearance in the open during summer gives the impression to humans of a population boom. A study into the success of translocated devils that were orphaned and raised in captivity found that young devils who had consistently engaged with new experiences while they were in captivity survived better than young who had not.\nConservation status.\nThe cause of the devil's disappearance from the mainland is unclear, but their decline seems to coincide with an abrupt change in climate and the expansion across the mainland of indigenous Australians and dingoes. However, whether it was direct hunting by people, competition with dingoes, changes brought about by the increasing human population, who by 3000 years ago were using all habitat types across the continent, or a combination of all three, is unknown; devils had coexisted with dingoes on the mainland for around 3000 years. Brown has also proposed that the El Ni\u00f1o\u2013Southern Oscillation (ENSO) grew stronger during the Holocene, and that the devil, as a scavenger with a short life span, was highly sensitive to this. In dingo-free Tasmania, carnivorous marsupials were still active when Europeans arrived. The extermination of the thylacine after the arrival of the Europeans is well known, but the Tasmanian devil was threatened as well.\nHabitat disruption can expose dens where mothers raise their young. This increases mortality, as the mother leaves the disturbed den with her pups clinging to her back, making them more vulnerable. Cancer in general is a common cause of death in devils. In 2008, high levels of potentially carcinogenic flame retardant chemicals were found in Tasmanian devils. Preliminary results of tests ordered by the Tasmanian government on chemicals found in fat tissue from 16 devils have revealed high levels of hexabromobiphenyl (BB153) and \"reasonably high\" levels of decabromodiphenyl ether (BDE209). The Save the Tasmanian Devil Appeal is the official fundraising entity for the Save the Tasmanian Devil Program. The priority is to ensure the survival of the Tasmanian devil in the wild.\nPopulation declines.\nAt least two major population declines, possibly due to disease epidemics, have occurred in recorded history: in 1909 and 1950. The devil was also reported as scarce in the 1850s. It is difficult to estimate the size of the devil population. In the mid-1990s, the population was estimated at 130,000\u2013150,000 animals, but this is likely to have been an overestimate. The Tasmanian devil's population has been calculated in 2008 by Tasmania's Department of Primary Industries and Water as being in the range of 10,000 to 100,000 individuals, with 20,000 to 50,000 mature individuals being likely. Experts estimate that the devil has suffered a more than 80% decline in its population since the mid-1990s and that only around 10,000\u201315,000 remain in the wild as of 2008.\nThe species was listed as vulnerable under the Tasmanian \"Threatened Species Protection Act 1995\" in 2005 and the Australian \"Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999\" in 2006, which means that it is at risk of extinction in the \"medium term\". The IUCN classified the Tasmanian devil in the lower risk/least concern category in 1996, but in 2009 they reclassified it as endangered. Appropriate wildlife refuges such as Savage River National Park in North West Tasmania provide hope for their survival.\nCulling.\nThe first European Tasmanian settlers ate Tasmanian devil, which they described as tasting like veal. As it was believed devils would hunt and kill livestock, possibly due to strong imagery of packs of devils eating weak sheep, a bounty scheme to remove the devil from rural properties was introduced as early as 1830. However, Guiler's research contended that the real cause of livestock losses was poor land management policies and feral dogs. In areas where the devil is now absent, poultry has continued to be killed by quolls. In earlier times, hunting possums and wallabies for fur was a big business\u2014more than 900,000 animals were hunted in 1923\u2014and this resulted in a continuation of bounty hunting of devils as they were thought to be a major threat to the fur industry, even though quolls were more adept at hunting the animals in question. Over the next 100 years, trapping and poisoning brought them to the brink of extinction.\nAfter the death of the last thylacine in 1936, the Tasmanian devil was protected by law in June 1941 and the population slowly recovered. In the 1950s, with reports of increasing numbers, some permits to capture devils were granted after complaints of livestock damage. In 1966, poisoning permits were issued although attempts to have the animal unprotected failed. During this time environmentalists also became more outspoken, particularly as scientific studies provided new data suggesting the threat of devils to livestock had been vastly exaggerated. Numbers may have peaked in the early 1970s after a population boom; in 1975 they were reported to be lower, possibly due to overpopulation and consequent lack of food. Another report of overpopulation and livestock damage was reported in 1987. The following year, \"Trichinella spiralis\", a parasite which kills animals and can infect humans, was found in devils and minor panic broke out before scientists assured the public that 30% of devils had it but that they could not transmit it to other species. Control permits were ended in the 1990s, but illegal killing continues to a limited extent, albeit \"locally intense\". This is not considered a substantial problem for the survival of the devil. Approximately 10,000 devils were killed per year in the mid-1990s. A selective culling program has taken place to remove individuals affected with DFTD, and has been shown to not slow the rate of disease progression or reduced the number of animals dying. A model has been tested to find out whether culling devils infected with DFTD would assist in the survival of the species, and it has found that culling would not be a suitable strategy to employ.\nRoad mortality.\nMotor vehicles are a threat to localised populations of non-abundant Tasmanian mammals, and a 2010 study showed that devils were particularly vulnerable. A study of nine species, mostly marsupials of a similar size, showed that devils were more difficult for drivers to detect and avoid. At high beam, devils had the lowest detection distance, 40% closer than the median. This requires a 20% reduction in speed for a motorist to avoid the devil. For low beam, the devils had the second shortest detection distance, 16% below the median. For avoidance of roadkill to be feasible, motorists would have to drive at around half the current speed limit in rural areas. A study in the 1990s on a localised population of devils in a national park in Tasmania recorded a halving of the population after a hitherto gravel access road was upgraded, surfaced with bitumen and widened. At the same time, there was a large increase in deaths caused by vehicles along the new road; there had been none in the preceding six months.\nThe vast majority of deaths occurred in the sealed portion of the road, believed to be due to an increase in speeds. It was also conjectured that the animals were harder to see against the dark bitumen instead of the light gravel. The devil and quoll are especially vulnerable as they often try to retrieve roadkill for food and travel along the road. To alleviate the problem, traffic slowing measures, man-made pathways that offer alternative routes for devils, education campaigns, and the installation of light reflectors to indicate oncoming vehicles have been implemented. They are credited with decreases in roadkill. Devils have often been victims of roadkill when they are retrieving other roadkill. Work by scientist Menna Jones and a group of conservation volunteers to remove dead animals from the road resulted in a significant reduction in devil traffic deaths. It was estimated that 3,392 devils, or 3.8\u20135.7% of the population, were being killed annually by vehicles in 2001\u20132004. In 2009, the Save the Tasmanian Devil group launched the \"Roadkill Project\", which allowed members of the public to report sightings of devils which had been killed on the road. On 25 September 2015, 20 immunised devils were microchipped and released in Narawntapu National Park. By 5 October four had been hit by cars, prompting Samantha Fox, leader of Save the Tasmanian Devil, to describe roadkill as being the biggest threat to the Tasmanian devil after DFTD. A series of solar-powered alarms have been trialled that make noises and flash lights when cars are approaching, warning the animals. The trial ran for 18 months and the trial area had two-thirds less deaths than the control.\nDevil facial tumour disease.\nFirst seen in 1996 in Mount William in northeastern Tasmania, devil facial tumour disease (DFTD) has ravaged Tasmania's wild devils, and estimates of the impact range from 20% to as much as an 80% decline in the devil population, with over 65% of the state affected. The state's west coast area and far north-west are the only places where devils are tumour free. Individual devils die within months of infection. The disease is an example of transmissible cancer, which means that it is contagious and passed from one animal to another. This tumour is able to pass between hosts without inducing a response from the host's immune system. Dominant devils who engage in more biting behaviour are more exposed to the disease.\nWild Tasmanian devil populations are being monitored to track the spread of the disease and to identify changes in disease prevalence. Field monitoring involves trapping devils within a defined area to check for the presence of the disease and determine the number of affected animals. The same area is visited repeatedly to characterise the spread of the disease over time. So far, it has been established that the short-term effects of the disease in an area can be severe. Long-term monitoring at replicated sites will be essential to assess whether these effects remain, or whether populations can recover. Field workers are also testing the effectiveness of disease suppression by trapping and removing diseased devils. It is hoped that the removal of diseased devils from wild populations should decrease disease prevalence and allow more devils to survive beyond their juvenile years and breed. In March 2017, scientists at the University of Tasmania presented an apparent first report of having successfully treated Tasmanian devils with the disease. Live cancer cells that were treated with IFN-\u03b3 to restore MHC-I expression, were injected into the infected devils to stimulate their immune system to recognise and fight the disease. In 2020 it was reported that one of the last DFTD-free wild population of Tasmanian devils was suffering from inbreeding depression and has undergone a significant decline in reproductive success in recent years.\nRelationship with humans.\nAt Lake Nitchie in western New South Wales in 1970, a male human skeleton wearing a necklace of 178 teeth from 49 different devils was found. The skeleton is estimated to be 7000 years old, and the necklace is believed to be much older than the skeleton. Archaeologist Josephine Flood believes the devil was hunted for its teeth and that this contributed to its extinction on mainland Australia. Owen and Pemberton note that few such necklaces have been found. Middens that contain devil bones are rare\u2014two notable examples are Devil's Lair in the south-western part of Western Australia and Tower Hill in Victoria. In Tasmania, local Indigenous Australians and devils sheltered in the same caves. Tasmanian Aboriginal names for the devil recorded by Europeans include \"tarrabah\", \"poirinnah\", and \"par-loo-mer-rer\". Variations also exist, such as \"Taraba\" and \"purinina\".\nIt is a common belief that devils will eat humans. While they are known to eat dead bodies, there are prevalent myths that they eat living humans who wander into the bush. Despite outdated beliefs and exaggerations regarding their disposition, many, although not all, devils will remain still when in the presence of a human; some will also shake nervously. They can bite and scratch out of fear when held by a human, but a firm grip will cause them to remain still. Although they can be tamed, they are asocial, and are not considered appropriate as pets; they have an unpleasant odour, and neither demonstrate nor respond to affection.\nUntil recently, the devil was not studied much by academics and naturalists. At the start of the 20th century, Hobart zoo operator Mary Roberts, who was not a trained scientist, was credited for changing people's attitudes and encouraging scientific interest in native animals (such as the devil) that were seen as fearsome and abhorrent, and the human perception of the animal changed. Theodore Thomson Flynn was the first professor of biology in Tasmania, and carried out some research during the period around World War I. In the mid-1960s, Professor Guiler assembled a team of researchers and started a decade of systematic fieldwork on the devil. This is seen as the start of modern scientific study of it. However, the devil was still negatively depicted, including in tourism material. The first doctorate awarded for research into the devil came in 1991.\nIn captivity.\nEarly attempts to breed Tasmanian devils in captivity had limited success. Mary Roberts bred a pair at Beaumaris Zoo (which she named Billy and Truganini) in 1913. However, although advised to remove Billy, Roberts found Truganini too distressed by his absence, and returned him. The first litter was presumed eaten by Billy, but a second litter in 1914 survived, after Billy was removed. Roberts wrote an article on keeping and breeding the devils for the London Zoological Society. Even by 1934, successful breeding of the devil was rare. In a study on the growth of young devils in captivity, some developmental stages were very different from those reported by Guiler. The pinnae were free on day 36, and eyes opened later, on days 115\u2013121. In general, females tend to retain more stress after being taken into captivity than males.\nTasmanian devils were displayed in various zoos around the world from the 1850s onwards. In the 1950s several animals were given to European zoos. In October 2005 the Tasmanian government sent four devils, two male and two female, to the Copenhagen Zoo, following the birth of the first son of King Frederik X of Denmark and his Tasmanian-born wife Mary. Due to restrictions on their export by the Australian government, at the time these were the only devils known to be living outside Australia. In June 2013, due to the successes of the insurance population program, it was planned to send devils to other zoos around the world in a pilot program. San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance and Albuquerque Biopark were selected to participate in the program, and Wellington Zoo and Auckland Zoo soon followed. In the United States, four additional zoos have since been selected as part of the Australian government's Save the Tasmanian Devil program, the zoos selected were: the Fort Wayne Children's Zoo, the Los Angeles Zoo, the Saint Louis Zoo, and the Toledo Zoo. Captive devils are usually forced to stay awake during the day to cater to visitors, rather than following their natural nocturnal style.\nIn popular culture.\nThe devil is an iconic animal within Australia, and particularly associated with Tasmania. The animal is used as the emblem of the Tasmanian National Parks and Wildlife Service, and the former Tasmanian Australian rules football team which played in the Victorian Football League was known as the Devils. The Hobart Devils were once part of the National Basketball League. The devil has appeared on several commemorative coins in Australia over the years. Cascade Brewery in Tasmania sells a ginger beer with a Tasmanian devil on the label. In 2015, the Tasmanian devil was chosen as Tasmania's state emblem.\nTasmanian devils are popular with tourists, and the director of the Tasmanian Devil Conservation Park has described their possible extinction as \"a really significant blow for Australian and Tasmanian tourism\". There has also been a multimillion-dollar proposal to build a giant 19\u00a0m-high, 35\u00a0m-long devil in Launceston in northern Tasmania as a tourist attraction. Devils began to be used as ecotourism in the 1970s, when studies showed that the animals were often the only things known about Tasmania overseas, and suggested that they should therefore be the centrepiece of marketing efforts, resulting in some devils being taken on promotional tours.\nThe Tasmanian devil is probably best known internationally as the inspiration for the \"Looney Tunes\" cartoon character the Tasmanian Devil, or \"Taz\" in 1954. Little known at the time, the loud hyperactive cartoon character has little in common with the real life animal. After a few shorts between 1957 and 1964, the character was retired until the 1990s, when he gained his own show, \"Taz-Mania\", and again became popular. In 1997, a newspaper report noted that Warner Bros. had \"trademarked the character and registered the name Tasmanian Devil\", and that this trademark \"was policed\", including an eight-year legal case to allow a Tasmanian company to call a fishing lure \"Tasmanian Devil\". Debate followed, and a delegation from the Tasmanian government met with Warner Bros. Ray Groom, the Tourism Minister, later announced that a \"verbal agreement\" had been reached. An annual fee would be paid to Warner Bros. in return for the Government of Tasmania being able to use the image of Taz for \"marketing purposes\". This agreement later disappeared. In 2006, Warner Bros. permitted the Government of Tasmania to sell stuffed toys of Taz with profits funnelled into research on DFTD.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31394", "revid": "1311329960", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31394", "title": "Great Tribulation", "text": "Calamitous end times period as found in the Synoptic Gospels\nIn Christian eschatology, the Great Tribulation () is a period mentioned by Jesus in the Olivet Discourse as a sign that would occur in the time of the end.\nAt , \"the Great Tribulation\" () is used to indicate the period spoken of by Jesus. uses \"tribulation\" (\u03b8\u03bb\u03af\u03b2\u03c9) in a context denoting afflictions of those hard-pressed by siege and the calamities of war.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Great Tribulation\" occurs four times in the New Testament: , , , and . Some take the words of Jesus in Matthew 24:21 to be describing a period of intense persecution and tribulation at the end of the age, prior to Jesus's return.\nViews.\nChristians disagree over whether the Tribulation will be a relatively short period of great hardship before the end of the world and Second Coming of Christ (a school of thought sometimes called \"Futurism\"); or has already occurred, having happened in AD 70 when Roman legions laid siege to Jerusalem and destroyed its temple (sometimes called Preterism); or began in 538 AD when papal Rome came to power\u2014popes being anti-Christs\u2014and will intensify shortly before the end of the world, (sometimes called \"Historicism\").\nFuturism.\nIn the futurist view of Christian eschatology, the Great Tribulation is a relatively short period of time where everyone will experience worldwide hardships, persecution, disasters, famine, war, pain, and suffering, which will affect all of creation, and precede judgment of all when the Second Coming takes place. Some pretribulationists believe that those who choose to follow God will be raptured before the tribulation, and thus escape it. On the other hand, posttribulationists believe Christians who are alive at the time of the Great Tribulation must endure the Great Tribulation and will receive great blessings.\nAccording to dispensationalists, the Tribulation is thought to occur before the Second Coming of Jesus and during the End Times. In this view, the Tribulation will last seven prophetic Hebrew years (lasting 360 days each) in all, but the Great Tribulation will be the second half of the Tribulation period.\nIn this view, this seven-year period is considered to be the final week of Daniel's Prophecy of Seventy Weeks, found in Daniel chapter 9. It is theorized that each week represents seven years, with the timetable beginning from Artaxerxes' order to rebuild the Second Temple in Jerusalem. After seven weeks and 62 weeks, the prophecy says that the messiah will be \"cut off\", which is taken to correspond to the death of Christ. This is seen as creating a break of indeterminate length in the timeline, with one week remaining to be fulfilled.\nThe time period for these beliefs is also based on other passages: in the Book of Daniel, \"time, times, and half a time\", interpreted as \"three and a half years,\" and the Book of Revelation, \"a thousand two hundred and threescore days\" and \"forty and two months\" (the prophetic month averaging 30 days, hence 1260/30 = 42 months or 3.5 years). The 1290 days of , (rather than the 1260 days of ), is thought to be the result of either a simple intercalary leap month adjustment, or due to further calculations related to the prophecy, or due to an intermediate stage of time that is to prepare the world for the beginning of the millennial reign.\nEvents.\nAmong Futurists there are differing views about what will happen to Christians during the Tribulation:\nIn pretribulationism and midtribulationism, the rapture and the Second Coming of Christ are separate events, while in post-tribulationism the two events are identical or simultaneous. Another feature of the pre- and mid-tribulation beliefs is the idea that after the rapture, Christ will return for a third time (when also counting the first coming) to set up his kingdom on the earth.\nThe Catholic Church teaches that there will be a \"final Passover\" or last \"purgatory\" before the final parousia (Second Coming), in which the church will \"pass through a final fire that will shake the faith of many\". Generally neither the Catholic Church, the various Orthodox and Anglican communions, nor the older Protestant denominations use the term \"rapture\", and tend toward amillennialism. In this view, the millennium is regarded as the initial period of Christ's reign (manifested in the life and activity of the church) that began with the Pentecost and will lead up to the messiah's eventual return, with the outcome being a single and permanent event at the end of present time.\nPreterism.\nIn the Preterist view, the Tribulation took place in the past when Roman legions destroyed Jerusalem and its temple in AD 70 during the end stages of the First Jewish\u2013Roman War, and it only affected the Jewish people rather than all mankind.\nChristian preterists believe that the Tribulation was a divine judgment visited upon the Jews for their sins, including rejection of Jesus as the promised Messiah. It occurred entirely in the past, around AD 70 when the armed forces of the Roman Empire destroyed Jerusalem and its temple.\nA preterist discussion of the Tribulation has its focus on the Gospels, in particular the prophetic passages in Matthew 24, Mark 13 and Luke 21, rather than on the Apocalypse or Book of Revelation. (Preterists apply much of the symbolism in the Revelation to Rome, the C\u00e6sars, and their persecution of Christians, rather than to the Tribulation upon the Jews.)\nJesus' warning in Matthew 24:34 that \"this generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled\" is tied back to his similar warning to the Scribes and the Pharisees that their judgment would \"come upon this generation\", that is, during the first century rather than at a future time long after the Scribes and Pharisees had died. The destruction in AD 70 occurred within a 40-year generation from the time when Jesus gave that discourse.\nThe judgment on the Jewish nation was executed by the Roman legions, \"the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet.\"\nSince Matthew 24 begins with Jesus visiting the Jerusalem Temple and pronouncing that \"there shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down\" (vs. 3), preterists see nothing in Scripture to indicate that another Jewish temple will ever be built. The prophecies were all fulfilled on the then-existing temple that Jesus spoke about and that was subsequently destroyed within that generation.\nHistoricism.\nThe Historicist view applies Tribulation to the period known as \"persecution of the saints\" (Daniel 7, Revelation 13). This is believed to have begun with the period after the \"falling away\" when papal Rome came to power for 1260 years from 538 to 1798 (using the day-year principle). They believe that the Tribulation is not a future event, but it intensifies right at the end to a time such as never before. Matthew's reference to \"Great Tribulation\" as parallel to Revelation 6:12-13, will reach a point that if it was not shortened even the just would not survive.\nHistoricists are prone to see prophecy fulfilled down through the centuries and rather than a single Antichrist to rule the earth during a future Tribulation period, Martin Luther, John Calvin and the other Protestant Reformers saw the Antichrist as fulfilled in the papacy. The reformers like Martin Luther, John Calvin and others saw the papacy's claim of temporal power over all secular governments and the autocratic character of the papal office as the falling away from the original faith founded by Jesus and the apostles, and challenged papal authority as it had deviated from scripture with its tradition and was a corruption from the early church.\nSimilarly, some modern historicists see the Tribulation on the Jews as beginning in AD 70 and continuing for centuries, covering the same time span as \"the times of the Gentiles\" during which \"Jerusalem shall be trodden down by the Gentiles.\" This view would have it encompass not only the death of a million Jews at the hands of the Roman legions, but also the death of six million Jews in the Holocaust.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31395", "revid": "49474299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31395", "title": "Tantra", "text": "Esoteric traditions of Hinduism and Buddhism\nTantra (; ) is an esoteric yogic tradition that developed on the Indian subcontinent beginning in the middle of the 1st millennium CE, initially within Shaivism and Shaktism, and subsequently in Mahayana Buddhism, Vaishnavism. The Tantras focus on s\u0101dhana, encompassing d\u012bk\u1e63\u0101, rituals, and yoga, within a ritual framework that includes bodily purification, divine self-creation through mantra, dhy\u0101na, p\u016bj\u0101, mudr\u0101, mantra recitation, and the use of yantras or ma\u1e47\u1e0dalas, despite variations in deities and mantras. They present complex cosmologies, viewing the body as divine and typically reflecting the union of Shiva and Shakti as the path to liberation. Tantric goals include siddhi (supernatural accomplishment), bhoga (worldly enjoyment), and Ku\u1e47\u1e0dalin\u012b\u2019s ascent, while also addressing states of possession (\u0101ve\u015ba) and exorcism.\nThe term \"tantra\", in the Indian traditions, also means any systematic broadly applicable \"text, theory, system, method, instrument, technique or practice\". A key feature of these traditions is the use of mantras, and thus they are commonly referred to as Mantram\u0101rga (\"Path of Mantra\") in Hinduism or Mantray\u0101na (\"Mantra Vehicle\") and Guhyamantra (\"Secret Mantra\") in Buddhism.\nIn Buddhism, the Vajrayana traditions are known for tantric ideas and practices, which are based on Indian Buddhist Tantras. They include Indo-Tibetan Buddhism, Chinese Esoteric Buddhism, Japanese Shingon Buddhism and Nepalese Newar Buddhism. Although Southern Esoteric Buddhism does not directly reference the tantras, its practices and ideas parallel them. In Buddhism, tantra has influenced the art and iconography of Tibetan and East Asian Buddhism, as well as historic cave temples of India and the art of Southeast Asia.\nTantric Hindu and Buddhist traditions have also influenced other Eastern religious traditions such as Jainism, the Tibetan B\u00f6n tradition, Daoism, and the Japanese Shint\u014d tradition. Certain modes of worship, such as Puja, are considered tantric in their conception and rituals. Hindu temple building also generally conforms to the iconography of tantra. Hindu texts describing these topics are called Tantras, \u0100gamas or Samhit\u0101s. Though Western views often equate Tantra with sex, scholars emphasize that sexual practices in tantric traditions are rare, highly restricted to initiated adepts, and serve as a means of spiritual transcendence rather than an end in themselves.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nTantra () literally means \"loom, warp, weave\". According to Padoux, the verbal root Tan means: \"to extend\", \"to spread\", \"to spin out\", \"weave\", \"display\", \"put forth\", and \"compose\". Therefore, by extension, it can also mean \"system\", \"doctrine\", or \"work\".\nThe connotation of the word \"tantra\" to mean an esoteric practice or religious ritualism is a colonial era European invention. This term is based on the metaphor of weaving, states Ron Barrett, where the Sanskrit root \"tan\" means the warping of threads on a loom. It implies \"interweaving of traditions and teachings as threads\" into a text, technique or practice.\nThe word appears in the hymns of the \"Rigveda\" such as in 10.71, with the meaning of \"warp (weaving)\". It is found in many other Vedic era texts, such as in section 10.7.42 of the \"Atharvaveda\" and many Brahmanas. In these and post-Vedic texts, the contextual meaning of \"Tantra\" is that which is \"principal or essential part, main point, model, framework, feature\". In the Smritis and epics of Hinduism (and Jainism), the term means \"doctrine, rule, theory, method, technique or chapter\" and the word appears both as a separate word and as a common suffix, such as \"atma-tantra\" meaning \"doctrine or theory of Atman (Self)\".\nThe term \"Tantra\" after about 500\u00a0BCE, in Buddhism, Hinduism and Jainism is a bibliographic category, just like the word Sutra (which means \"sewing together\", mirroring the metaphor of \"weaving together\" in \"Tantra\"). The same Buddhist texts are sometimes referred to as tantra or sutra; for example, \"Vairocabhisambodhi-tantra\" is also referred to as \"Vairocabhisambodhi-sutra\". The various contextual meanings of the word Tantra vary with the Indian text and are summarized in the appended table.\nDefinition.\nAncient and medieval era.\nThe 5th-century BCE scholar P\u0101\u1e47ini in his Sutra 1.4.54\u201355 of Sanskrit grammar, cryptically explains tantra through the example of \"Sva-tantra\" (Sanskrit: \u0938\u094d\u0935\u0924\u0928\u094d\u0924\u094d\u0930), which he states means \"independent\" or a person who is his own \"warp, cloth, weaver, promoter, karta (actor)\". Patanjali in his \"Mah\u0101bh\u0101\u1e63ya\" quotes and accepts Panini's definition, then discusses or mentions it at a greater length, in 18 instances, stating that its metaphorical definition of \"warp (weaving), extended cloth\" is relevant to many contexts. The word \"tantra\", states Patanjali, means \"principal, main\".\nHe uses the same example of \"svatantra\" as a composite word of \"sva\" (self) and tantra, then stating \"svatantra\" means \"one who is self-dependent, one who is his own master, the principal thing for whom is himself\", thereby interpreting the definition of tantra. Patanjali also offers a semantic definition of Tantra, stating that it is structural rules, standard procedures, centralized guide or knowledge in any field that applies to many elements.\nStarting in the early centuries of the common era, newly revealed Tantras centering on Vishnu, Shiva or Shakti emerged. There are tantric lineages in all main forms of modern Hinduism, such as the Shaiva Siddhanta tradition, the Shakta sect of Shri Vidya, the Kaula, and Kashmir Shaivism.\nThe ancient Mimamsa school of Hinduism uses the term tantra extensively, and its scholars offer various definitions. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When an action or a thing, once complete, becomes beneficial in several matters to one person, or to many people, that is known as \"Tantra\". For example, a lamp placed amidst many priests. In contrast, that which benefits by its repetition is called \"\u0100v\u0101pa\", such as massaging with oil. (...)\u2014\u200a\nMedieval texts present their own definitions of Tantra. \"\", for example, gives the following explanation of the term \"tantra\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Because it elaborates (') copious and profound matters, especially relating to the principles of reality (') and sacred mantras, and because it provides liberation ('), it is called a '.\nModern era.\nThe occultist and businessman Pierre Bernard (1875\u20131955) is widely credited with introducing the philosophy and practices of tantra to the American people, at the same time creating a somewhat misleading impression of its connection to sex. That popular sexualization is more accurately regarded as the western \"Neo-Tantra\" movement.\nWhile hugely influential on Hindu practices and ritual, the Tantric traditions are poorly understood by contemporary Hindus. Likewise, western scholarship has often ignored this important aspect of Indian and Hindu-culture. \nMany definitions of Tantra have been proposed since, and there is no universally accepted definition. Andr\u00e9 Padoux, in his review of Tantra definitions offers two, then rejects both. One definition, according to Padoux, is found among Tantra practitioners \u2013 it is any \"system of observances\" about the vision of man and the cosmos where correspondences between the inner world of the person and the macrocosmic reality play an essential role. Another definition, more common among observers and non-practitioners, is some \"set of mechanistic rituals, omitting entirely the ideological side\".\nTantric traditions have been studied mostly from textual and historical perspectives. Anthropological work on living Tantric tradition is scarce, and ethnography has rarely engaged with the study of Tantra. This is arguably a result of the modern construction of Tantrism as occult, esoteric and secret. Some scholars have tried to demystify the myth of secrecy in contemporary Tantric traditions, suggesting new methodological avenues to overcome the ethical and epistemological problems in the study of living Tantric traditions.\nAccording to David N. Lorenzen, two different kinds of definitions of Tantra exist, narrow and broad. According to the narrow definition, Tantrism, or \"Tantric religion\", is the elite traditions directly based on the Sanskrit texts called the Tantras, Samhitas, and Agamas. Lorenzen's \"broad definition\" extends this by including a broad range of \"magical beliefs and practices\" such as Yoga and Shaktism. \nThe term \"yoga\" is broadly attributed to many traditions and practices, including the western assumption that yoga is synonymous with physical stretching and little more. The \"Yoga Sutras of Patanjali\" define yoga as \"the stilling of the disturbances of the mind\". Richard Payne states that Tantra has been commonly but incorrectly associated with sex, given popular culture's prurient obsession with intimacy. Tantra has been labelled as the \"yoga of ecstasy\", driven by senseless ritualistic libertinism. This is far from the diverse and complex understanding of what Tantra means to those Buddhists, Hindu and Jains who practice it.\nDavid Gray disagrees with broad generalizations and states that defining Tantra is a difficult task because \"Tantra traditions are manifold, spanning several religious traditions and cultural worlds. As a result they are also diverse, which makes it a significant challenge to come up with an adequate definition\". The challenge of defining Tantra is compounded by the fact that it has been a historically significant part of major Indian religions, including Buddhism, Hinduism and Jainism, both in and outside South Asia and East Asia. To its practitioners, Tantra is defined as a combination of texts, techniques, rituals, monastic practices, meditation, yoga, and ideology.\nAccording to Georg Feuerstein,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The scope of topics discussed in the Tantras is considerable. They deal with the creation and history of the world; the names and functions of a great variety of male and female deities and other higher beings; the types of ritual worship (especially of Goddesses); magic, sorcery, and divination; esoteric \"physiology\" (the mapping of the subtle or psychic body); the awakening of the mysterious serpent power (kundalin\u00ee-shakti); techniques of bodily and mental purification; the nature of enlightenment; and not least, sacred sexuality.\nHindu puja, temples and iconography all show tantric influence. These texts, states Gavin Flood, contain representation of \"the body in philosophy, in ritual and in art\", which are linked to \"techniques of the body, methods or technologies developed within the tantric traditions intended to transform body and self\".\nTantrism.\nThe term \"tantrism\" is a 19th-century European invention not present in any Asian language; compare \"Sufism\", of similar Orientalist origin. According to Padoux, \"Tantrism\" is a Western term and notion, not a category that is used by Tantrikas themselves. The term was introduced by 19th-century Indologists, with limited knowledge of India and in whose view Tantrism was a particular, unusual and minority practice in contrast to Indian traditions they believed to be mainstream.\nRobert Brown similarly notes that \"tantrism\" is a construct of Western scholarship, not a concept of the religious system itself. He defines Tantrism as an apologetic label of Westerners for a system that they little understand that is \"not coherent\" and which is \"an accumulated set of practices and ideas from various sources, that has varied between its practitioners within a group, varied across groups, across geography and over its history\". It is a system, adds Brown, that gives each follower the freedom to mix Tantric elements with non-Tantric aspects, to challenge and transgress any and all norms, experiment with \"the mundane to reach the supramundane\".\nTeun Goudriaan in his 1981 review of Hindu Tantrism, states that Tantrism usually means a \"systematic quest for salvation or spiritual excellence\" by realizing and fostering the divine within one's own body, one that is simultaneous union of the masculine-feminine and spirit-matter, and has the ultimate goal of realizing the \"primal blissful state of non-duality\". It is typically a methodically striven system, consisting of voluntarily chosen specific practices which may include Tantric items such as mantras (\"bijas\"), geometric patterns and symbols (\"mandala\"), gestures (\"mudra\"), mapping of the microcosm within one's body to the macrocosmic elements outside as the subtle body (\"kundalini yoga\"), assignments of icons and sounds (\"nyasa\"), meditation (\"dhyana\"), ritual worship (\"puja\"), initiation (\"diksha\") and others. Tantrism, adds Goudriaan, is a living system that is decidedly monistic, but with wide variations, and it is impossible to be dogmatic about a simple or fixed definition.\nTantrism is an overarching term for \"Tantric traditions\", states David Gray in a 2016 review, that combine Vedic, yogic and meditative traditions from 5th-century Hinduism as well as rival Buddhist and Jain traditions. it is a neologism of western scholars and does not reflect the self-understanding of any particular tantric tradition. While Goudriaan's description is useful, adds Gray, there is no single defining universal characteristic common to all Tantra traditions, being an open evolving system. Tantrism, whether Buddhist or Hindu, can best be characterized as practices, a set of techniques, with a strong focus on rituals and meditation, by those who believe that it is a path to liberation that is characterized by both knowledge and freedom.\nTantrika.\nAccording to Padoux, the term \"Tantrika\" is based on a comment by Kulluka Bhatta on \"Manava Dharmasastra 2.1\", who contrasted \"vaidika\" and \"tantrika\" forms of \u015aruti (canonical texts). The Tantrika, to Bhatta, is that literature which forms a parallel part of the Hindu tradition, independent of the Vedic corpus. The Vedic and non-Vedic (Tantric) paths are seen as two different approaches to ultimate reality, the Vedic approach based on Brahman, and Tantrika being based on the non-Vedic \u0100gama texts. Despite Bhatta attempt to clarify, states Padoux, in reality Hindus and Buddhists have historically felt free to borrow and blend ideas from all sources, Vedic, non-Vedic and in the case of Buddhism, its own canonical works.\nOne of the key differences between the Tantric and non-Tantric traditions \u2013 whether it be orthodox Buddhism, Hinduism or Jainism \u2013 is their assumptions about the need for monastic or ascetic life. Non-Tantrika, or orthodox traditions in all three major ancient Indian religions, hold that the worldly life of a householder is one driven by desires and greeds which are a serious impediment to spiritual liberation (\"moksha\", \"nirvana\", \"kaivalya\"). These orthodox traditions teach renunciation of householder life, a mendicant's life of simplicity and leaving all attachments to become a monk or nun. In contrast, the Tantrika traditions hold, states Robert Brown, that \"both enlightenment and worldly success\" are achievable, and that \"this world need not be shunned to achieve enlightenment\". Yet, even this supposed categorical divergence is debatable, e.g. Bhagavad Gita v.2:48\u201353, including: \"Yoga is skill in [the performance of] actions.\"\nFeatures.\nThe Tantras emphasize spiritual practice or s\u0101dhana, including initiation (d\u012bk\u1e63\u0101), rituals, and yoga. A standard ritual framework is present in the Tantras, despite variations in deities and mantras, involving body purification through symbolic dissolution, creation of a divine body or self via mantra, internal worship or dhy\u0101na (visualization), and external worship or p\u016bj\u0101, utilizing hand gestures (mudr\u0101), mantra chanting, and sacred diagrams (yantra, ma\u1e47\u1e0dala). The Tantras feature complex cosmological hierarchies that incorporate earlier traditions' cosmic structures, with the highest \u015aaiva Siddh\u0101nta realm surpassed by additional realms in Kashmir \u015aaiva traditions. The body is seen as divine, containing the cosmic order, reflecting the polarity of the male deity and his consort, the feminine energy, often Shiva and his Shakti as Goddess Ku\u1e47\u1e0dalin\u012b, with their union symbolizing liberation. The Tantras focus on attaining mystical powers (siddhi) and experiencing bliss in higher realms (bhoga) as part of the practitioner\u2019s spiritual journey, also interpreted as the movement of Ku\u1e47\u1e0dalin\u012b through the body. The Tantras address possession (\u0101ve\u015ba) and the practice of exorcism.\nHistory.\nProto-tantric elements in Indian religions.\nWhile Tantra arose in the 5th century CE in Shaivite religions, practices and ideas can be found in Indian religion and history which may have been formative to Tantric practices and ideas.\nProto-tantric elements in Vedic religion.\nRig Veda.\nThe Ke\u015bin hymn of the \"Rig Veda\" (10.136) describes the \"wild loner\" who, states Karel Werner, \"carrying within oneself fire and poison, heaven and earth, ranging from enthusiasm and creativity to depression and agony, from the heights of spiritual bliss to the heaviness of earth-bound labor\". The Rigveda uses words of admiration for these loners, and whether it is related to Tantra or not, has been variously interpreted. According to David Lorenzen, it describes \"munis\" (sages) experiencing Tantra-like \"ecstatic, altered states of consciousness\" and gaining the ability \"to fly on the wind\". In contrast, Werner suggests that these are early Yoga pioneers and accomplished yogis of the ancient pre-Buddhist Indian tradition, and that this Vedic hymn is speaking of those \"lost in thoughts\" whose \"personalities are not bound to earth, for they follow the path of the mysterious wind\". However, Patrick Olivelle suggests that in the early Vedic-Brahmanical texts, some of which predate the 3rd-century BCE ruler Ashoka, Brahmana and \u015arama\u1e47a (ascetics) were neither distinct nor opposed. The later distinctions were semantic developments possibly influenced by the appropriation of the term \u015arama\u1e47a by Buddhism and Jainism.\nUpanishads.\nThe two oldest Upanishadic scriptures of Hinduism, the \"Brihadaranyaka Upanishad\" in section 4.2 and \"Chandogya Upanishad\" in section 8.6, refer to nadis (\"hati\") in presenting their theory on how the Atman (Self) and the body are connected and interdependent through energy carrying arteries when one is awake or sleeping, but they do not mention anything related to Tantric practices. The \"Shvetashvatara Upanishad\" describes breath control that became a standard part of Yoga, but Tantric practices do not appear in it. Likewise, the \"Taittiriya Upanishad\" discusses a central channel running through the body and various Vedic texts mention the bodily pranas (vital breaths) that move around in the body and animate it. However, the idea of consciously moving the bodily pranas through yoga is not found in these sources. According to Lorenzen, Vedic ideas related to the body later diversified into the \"mystical anatomy\" of \"nadis\" and \"chakras\" found in Tantra. The yogic component of Tantrism appears clearly in B\u0101\u1e47abha\u1e6d\u1e6da's \"Harshacharita\" and Da\u1e47\u1e0din's \"Dashakumaracharita\". In contrast to this theory of Lorenzen, other scholars such as Mircea Eliade consider Yoga and the evolution of Yogic practices to be separate and distinct from the evolution of Tantra and Tantric practices.\nTapas and spiritualized sexual energy.\nAccording to Geoffrey Samuel, the inner development of a spiritual energy called tapas becomes a central element of Vedic religion in the Brahmanas and Srauta texts. In these texts, ascetic practices allow a holy man to build up tapas, a kind of magical inner heat, which allows them to perform all sorts of magical feats as well as granting visions and divine revelations. Samuel also notes that in the \"Mahabharata\", one of the commonest use of the term \"yoga\" refers to \"a dying warrior transferring himself at death to the sphere of the sun through yoga, a practice that links up with Upanisadic references to the channel to the crown of the head as the pathway by which one can travel through the solar orb to the World of Brahman.\" This practice of transferring one's consciousness at death is still an important practice in Tibetan Buddhism. Samuel also notes that sexual rituals and a spiritualized sexuality are mentioned in the late Upanishads. According to Samuel, \"late Vedic texts treat sexual intercourse as symbolically equivalent to the Vedic sacrifice, and ejaculation of semen as the offering.\" This theme can be found in the \"Jaiminiya Brahmana\", the \"Chandogya Upanisad\", and the \"Brhadaranyaka Upanisad\". The \"Brhadaranyaka\" contains various sexual rituals and practices which are mostly aimed at obtaining a child which are concerned with the loss of male virility and power.\nYogini cults.\nDavid Gordon White views Yogini cults as foundational to early tantra but disagrees with scholars who maintain that the roots of such cults lie in an \"autochthonous non-Vedic source\" such as indigenous tribes or the Indus Valley civilization. Instead, White suggests Vedic Srauta texts mention offerings to goddesses R\u0101k\u0101, Sin\u012bv\u0101l\u012b, and Kuh\u016b in a manner similar to a tantric ritual.\nAtharvaveda.\nFrederick Smith \u2013 a professor of Sanskrit and Classical Indian Religions, considers Tantra to be a religious movement parallel to the Bhakti movement of the 1st millennium CE. Tantra along with Ayurveda, states Smith, has traditionally been attributed to \"Atharvaveda\", but this attribution is one of respect not of historicity. Ayurveda has primarily been an empirical practice with Vedic roots, but Tantra has been an esoteric, folk movement without grounding that cannot be traced to anything in \"Atharvaveda\" or any other vedic text.\nProto-Tantric elements in Buddhism.\nPre-tantric Buddhism contains elements which could be seen as proto-tantric, and which may have influenced the development of the Buddhist Tantric tradition. The use of magical chants or incantations can be found in the early Buddhist texts as well as in some Mahayana sutras. These magical spells or chants were used for various reasons, such as for protection, and for the generation of auspiciousness. Mahayana incantations are called dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012bs. Some Mahayana sutras incorporate the use of mantras, a central feature of tantric practice.\nAccording to Geoffrey Samuel, sramana groups like the Buddhists and Jains were associated with the dead. Samuel notes that they \"frequently settled at sites associated with the dead and seem to have taken over a significant role in relation to the spirits of the dead.\" To step into this realm required entering a dangerous and impure supernatural realm from the Indian perspective. This association with death remains a feature of modern Buddhism, and in Buddhist countries today, Buddhist monks and other ritual specialists are in charge of the dead. Thus, the association of tantric practitioners with charnel grounds and death imagery is preceded by early Buddhist contact with these sites of the dead.\nSome scholars think that the development of tantra may have been influenced by the cults of nature spirit-deities like Yak\u1e63as and Nagas. Yak\u1e63a cults were an important part of early Buddhism. Yak\u1e63as are powerful nature spirits which were sometimes seen as guardians or protectors. Yak\u1e63as like Kubera are also associated with magical incantations. Kubera is said to have provided the Buddhist sangha with protection spells in the \"\u0100\u1e6d\u0101n\u0101\u1e6diya Sutta\". These spirit deities also included numerous female deities (yak\u1e63i\u1e47\u012b) that can be found depicted in major Buddhist sites like Sanchi and Bharhut. In early Buddhist texts there is also mention of fierce demon like deities called r\u0101k\u1e63asa and r\u0101k\u1e63as\u012b, like the children-eating H\u0101r\u012bt\u012b. They are also present in Mahayana texts, such as in Chapter 26 of the \"Lotus Sutra\" which includes a dialogue between the Buddha and a group of r\u0101k\u1e63as\u012bs, who swear to uphold and protect the sutra. These figures also teach magical dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012bs to protect followers of the \"Lotus Sutra\".\nA key element of Buddhist Tantric practice is the visualization of deities in meditation. This practice is actually found in pre-tantric Buddhist texts as well. In Mahayana sutras like the \"Pratyutpanna Sam\u0101dhi\" and the three Amitabha Pure land sutras. There are other Mah\u0101y\u0101na sutras which contain what may be called \"proto-tantric\" material such as the \"Gandavyuha\" and the \"Dasabhumika\" which might have served as a source for the imagery found in later Tantric texts. According to Samuel, the \"Golden Light Sutra\" (c. 5th century at the latest) contains what could be seen as a proto-mandala. In the second chapter, a bodhisattva has a vision of \"a vast building made of beryl and with divine jewels and celestial perfumes. Four lotus-seats appear in the four directions, with four Buddhas seated upon them: Aksobhya in the East, Ratnaketu in the South, Amitayus in the West and Dundubh\u012b\u015bvara in the North.\"\nA series of artwork discovered in Gandhara, in modern-day Pakistan, dating from about the 1st century CE, show Buddhist and Hindu monks holding skulls. The legend corresponding to these artworks is found in Buddhist texts, and describes monks \"who tap skulls and forecast the future rebirths of the person to whom that skull belonged\". According to Robert Brown, these Buddhist skull-tapping reliefs suggest that tantric practices may have been in vogue by the 1st century CE.\nProto-Tantric elements in Shaktism and Shaivism.\nThe \"Mahabharata\", the \"Harivamsa\", and the \"Devi Mahatmya\" in the \"Markandeya Purana\" all mention the fierce, demon-killing manifestations of the Great Goddess, Mahishamardini, identified with Durga-Parvati. These suggest that Shaktism, reverence and worship for the Goddess in Indian culture, was an established tradition by the early centuries of the 1st millennium. Padoux mentions an inscription from 423 to 424\u00a0CE which mentions the founding of a temple to terrifying deities called \"the mothers\". However, this does not mean Tantric rituals and practices were as yet a part of either Hindu or Buddhist traditions. \"Apart from the somewhat dubious reference to Tantra in the Gangadhar inscription of 423\u00a0CE\", states David Lorenzen, it is only 7th-century Banabhatta's \"Kadambari\" which provide convincing proof of Tantra and Tantric texts.\nShaivite ascetics seem to have been involved in the initial development of Tantra, particularly the transgressive elements dealing with the charnel ground. According to Samuel, one group of Shaiva ascetics, the Pasupatas, practiced a form of spirituality that made use of shocking and disreputable behavior later found in a tantric context, such as dancing, singing, and smearing themselves with ashes.\nEarly Tantric practices are sometimes attributed to Shaiva ascetics associated with Bhairava, the Kapalikas (\"skull men\", also called \"Somasiddhatins\" or \"Mahavartins\"). Besides the shocking fact that they frequented cremation grounds and carried human skulls, little is known about them, and there is a paucity of primary sources on the Kapalikas. Samuel also states that the sources depict them as using alcohol and sex freely, that they were associated with terrifying female spirit-deities called yoginis and dakinis, and that they were believed to possess magical powers, such as flight.\nKapalikas are depicted in fictional works and also widely disparaged in Buddhist, Hindu and Jain texts of the 1st millennium CE. In H\u0101la's \"Gatha-saptasati\" (composed by the 5th century AD), for example, the story calls a female character Kapalika, whose lover dies, he is cremated, she takes his cremation ashes and smears her body with it. The 6th-century Var\u0101hamihira mentions Kapalikas in his literary works. Some of the K\u0101p\u0101lika practices mentioned in these texts are those found in Shaiva Hinduism and Vajrayana Buddhism, and scholars disagree on who influenced whom.\nThese early historical mentions are in passing and appear to be Tantra-like practices, they are not detailed nor comprehensive presentation of Tantric beliefs and practices. Epigraphic references to the \"Kaulas\" Tantric practices are rare. Reference is made in the early 9th century to \"vama\" (left-hand) Tantras of the Kaulas. Literary evidence suggests Tantric Buddhism was probably flourishing by the 7th century. Matrikas, or fierce mother goddesses that later are closely linked to Tantra practices, appear both in Buddhist and Hindu arts and literature between the 7th and 10th centuries.\nRise and development.\nAccording to Peter C. Bisschop, the expansion of the P\u0101\u015bupata \u015aaivite movement (early CE) throughout North India gave rise to different forms of \u015aaivism, eventually leading to the emergence of various tantric traditions.\nAccording to David B. Gray, Vajrayana originated from pre-existing Tantric traditions, also known as 'Tantrism', which emerged within Hinduism during the first millennium CE. These early Hindu tantric practices had a profound influence on South Asian Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhism, leading to the emergence of distinct Buddhist tantric traditions in the 7th century CE. These traditions quickly spread across Southeast, East, and Central Asia, giving rise to unique forms in East Asia and Tibet.\nAccording to Gavin Flood, the earliest date for the Tantra texts related to Tantric practices is 600\u00a0CE, though most of them were probably composed after the 8th century onwards. According to Flood, very little is known about who created the Tantras, nor much is known about the social status of these and medieval era Tantrikas.\nFlood states that the pioneers of Tantra may have been ascetics who lived at the cremation grounds, possibly from \"above low-caste groups\", and were probably non-Brahmanical and possibly part of an ancient tradition. By the early medieval times, their practices may have included the imitation of deities such as Kali and Bhairava, with offerings of non-vegetarian food, alcohol and sexual substances. According to this theory, these practitioners would have invited their deities to enter them, then reverted the role in order to control that deity and gain its power. These ascetics would have been supported by low castes living at the cremation places.\nAccording to Samuel, a key element in the development of tantra was \"the gradual transformation of local and regional deity cults through which fierce male and, particularly, female deities came to take a leading role in the place of the yaksa deities.\" Samuel states that this took place between the fifth to eighth centuries CE. According to Samuel, there are two main scholarly opinions on these terrifying goddesses which became incorporated into \u015aaiva and Buddhist Tantra. The first view is that they originate out of a pan-Indian religious substrate that was not Vedic. Another opinion is to see these fierce goddesses as developing out of the Vedic religion.\nAlexis Sanderson has argued that tantric practices originally developed in a \u015aaiva milieu and were later adopted by Buddhists. He cites numerous elements that are found in the \u015aaiva \"Vidyapitha\" literature, including whole passages and lists of pithas, that seem to have been directly borrowed by Vajrayana texts. This has been criticized by Ronald M. Davidson, however, due to the uncertain date of the \"Vidyapitha\" texts. Davidson argues that the pithas seem to have been neither uniquely Buddhist nor \u015aaiva, but frequented by both groups. He also states that the \u015aaiva tradition was also involved in the appropriation of local deities and that tantra may have been influenced by tribal Indian religions and their deities. Samuel writes that \"the female divinities may well best be understood in terms of a distinct \u015a\u0101kta milieu from which both \u015aaivas and Buddhists were borrowing\", but that other elements, like the Kapalika style practices, are more clearly derived from a \u015aaiva tradition.\nThere is considerable evidence that the \"Hevajra\" and \"Cakrasamvara\" tantras borrow significant portions from Saiva sources. The text \"Cakrasamvara\" and its commentaries have revealed numerous attempts by the Buddhists to enlarge and modify it, both to remove references to Saiva deities and to add more Buddhist technical terminology.\nVamachara and Dakshinachara.\nVamachara.\nVamachara is used to describe a particular mode of tantric worship or sadhana (spiritual practice) that uses heterodox methods to sublimate for spiritual growth. These tantric practices also included secret initiation ceremonies in which individuals would enter the tantric family (kula) and receive the secret mantras of the tantric deities. These initiations included the consumption of the sexual substances (semen and female sexual secretions) produced through ritual sex between the guru and his consort. These substances were seen as spiritually powerful and were also used as offerings for tantric deities. For both \u015aaivas and Buddhists, tantric practices often took place at important sacred sites (pithas) associated with fierce goddesses. Samuel writes that \"we do not have a clear picture of how this network of pilgrimage sites arose.\" Whatever the case, it seems that it was in these ritual spaces visited by both Buddhists and \u015aaivas that the practice of Kaula and Anuttarayoga Tantra developed during the eighth and ninth centuries. Besides the practices outlined above, these sites also saw the practice of animal sacrifice as blood offerings to \u015a\u0101kta goddesses like Kamakhya. This practice is mentioned in \u015a\u0101kta texts like the \"K\u0101lik\u0101pur\u0101\u1e47a\" and the \"Yogin\u012btantra.\" In some of these sites, such as Kamakhya Pitha, animal sacrifice is still widely practiced by \u015a\u0101ktas. Samuel states that transgressive and antinomian tantric practices developed in both Buddhist and Brahmanical (mainly \u015aaiva ascetics like the Kapalikas) contexts and that \"\u015aaivas and Buddhists borrowed extensively from each other, with varying degrees of acknowledgement.\" According to Samuel, these deliberately transgressive practices included, \"night time orgies in charnel grounds, involving the eating of human flesh, the use of ornaments, bowls and musical instruments made from human bones, sexual relations while seated on corpses, and the like.\" Samuel writes that the Saiva Tantra tradition appears to have originated as ritual sorcery carried out by hereditary caste groups (kulas) and associated with sex, death and fierce goddesses. The initiation rituals involved the consumption of the mixed sexual secretions (the clan essence) of a male guru and his consort. These practices were adopted by Kapalika styled ascetics and influenced the early Nath siddhas. Over time, the more extreme external elements were replaced by internalized yogas that make use of the subtle body. Sexual ritual became a way to reach the liberating wisdom taught in the tradition.\nAnother key and innovative feature of medieval tantric systems was the development of internal yogas based on elements of the subtle body (\"s\u016bk\u1e63ma \u015bar\u012bra\"). This subtle anatomy held that there were channels in the body (\"nadis\") through which certain substances or energies (such as vayu, prana, kundalini, and shakti) flowed. These yogas involved moving these energies through the body to clear out certain knots or blockages (\"granthi\") and to direct the energies to the central channel (\"avadhuti, sushumna\"). These yogic practices are also closely related to the practice of sexual yoga, since sexual intercourse was seen as being involved in the stimulation of the flow of these energies. Samuel thinks that these subtle body practices may have been influenced by Chinese Daoist practices.\nOne of the earliest mentions of sexual yoga practice is in the Buddhist \"Mah\u0101y\u0101nas\u016btr\u0101lamk\u0101ra\" of Asanga (c. 5th century), which states \"Supreme self-control is achieved in the reversal of sexual intercourse in the blissful Buddha-poise and the untrammelled vision of one's spouse.\" According to David Snellgrove, the text's mention of a 'reversal of sexual intercourse' might indicate the practice of withholding ejaculation. Snellgrove states that it is possible that sexual yoga was already being practiced in Buddhist circles at this time, and that Asanga saw it as a valid practice. Likewise, Samuel thinks that there is a possibility that sexual yoga existed in the fourth or fifth centuries (though not in the same transgressive tantric contexts where it was later practiced).\nIt is only in the seventh and eighth centuries however that we find substantial evidence for these sexual yogas. Unlike previous Upanishadic sexual rituals however, which seem to have been associated with Vedic sacrifice and mundane ends like childbirth, these sexual yogas were associated with the movement of subtle body energies (like Kundalini and Chandali, which were also seen as goddesses), and also with spiritual ends. These practices seemed to have developed at around the same time in both Saiva and Buddhist circles, and are associated with figures such as Tirum\u00fclar, Gorakhnath, Virupa, Naropa. The tantric mahasiddhas developed yogic systems with subtle body and sexual elements which could lead to magical powers (siddhis), immortality, as well as spiritual liberation (moksha, nirvana). Sexual yoga was seen as one way of producing a blissful expansion of consciousness that could lead to liberation.\nAccording to Jacob Dalton, ritualized sexual yoga (along with the sexual elements of the tantric initiation ritual, like the consumption of sexual fluids) first appears in Buddhist works called Mahayoga tantras (which include the \"Guhyagarbha\" and \"Guhyasamaja\"). These texts \"focused on the body's interior, on the anatomical details of the male and female sexual organs and the pleasure generated through sexual union.\" In these texts, sexual energy was also seen as a powerful force that could be harnessed for spiritual practice and according to Samuel \"perhaps create the state of bliss and loss of personal identity which is homologised with liberating insight.\" These sexual yogas continued to develop further into more complex systems which are found in texts dating from about the ninth or tenth century, including the Saiva \"Kaulaj\u00f1\u0101nanir\u1e47aya\" and \"Kubjik\u0101tantra\" as well as the Buddhist \"Hevajra\", and \"Cakrasamvara\" tantras which make use of charnel ground symbolism and fierce goddesses. Samuel writes that these later texts also combine the sexual yoga with a system of controlling the energies of the subtle body.\nThe Buddhists developed their own corpus of Tantras, which also drew on various Mahayana doctrines and practices, as well as on elements of the fierce goddess tradition and also on elements from the \u015aaiva traditions (such as deities like Bhairava, which were seen as having been subjugated and converted to Buddhism). Some Buddhist tantras (sometimes called \"lower\" or \"outer\" tantras) which are earlier works, do not make use of transgression, sex and fierce deities. These earlier Buddhist tantras mainly reflect a development of Mahayana theory and practice (like deity visualization) and a focus on ritual and purity. Between the eighth and tenth centuries, new tantras emerged which included fierce deities, kula style sexual initiations, subtle body practices and sexual yoga. The later Buddhist tantras are known as the \"inner\" or \"unsurpassed yoga\" (\"Anuttarayoga\" or \"Yogini\") tantras. According to Samuel, it seems that these sexual practices were not initially practiced by Buddhist monastics and instead developed outside of the monastic establishments among traveling siddhas.\nDakshinachara.\nDakshinachara is used to describe tantric sects that do not engage in heterodox practices. The \"Brahma Yamala\", a tantric text, asserts that there are three currents of tradition (\"dakshina\", \"vama\", and \"madhyama\") characterized respectively by the predominance of each of the three \"gunas\" (\"sattva\", \"rajas\", and \"tamas\"). According to this text, \"dakshina\" is characterized by \"sattva\", and is pure; \"madhyama\" (a balance of the two), characterized by \"rajas\", is mixed; and \"vama\", characterized by \"tamas\", is impure. The tantras of each class follow a particular line of spiritual practice. N. N. Bhattacharyya explains the Sanskrit technical term \"\" as follows:\nThe means of spiritual attainment which varies from person to person according to competence... \"\u0100c\u0101ras\" are generally of seven kinds \u2013 Veda, Vai\u1e63\u1e47ava, \u015aaiva, Dak\u1e63i\u1e47a, V\u0101ma, Siddh\u0101\u1e47ta, and Kaula, falling into two broad categories \u2013 Dak\u1e63i\u1e47a and V\u0101ma. Interpretations vary regarding the nature and grouping of the \"\u0101c\u0101ras\".\nTantric age.\nFrom the 8th to the 14th century, Tantric traditions rose to prominence and flourished throughout India and beyond. By the 10th century, the main elements of tantric practice had reached maturity and were being practiced in Saiva and Buddhist contexts. This period has been referred to as the 'Tantric Age' by some scholars due to prevalence of Tantra. Also by the 10th century, numerous tantric texts (variously called Agamas, Samhitas and Tantras) had been written, particularly in Kashmir, Nepal and Bengal. By this time, Tantric texts had also been translated into regional languages such as Tamil, and Tantric practices had spread across South Asia. Tantra also spread into Tibet, Indonesia and China. Gavin Flood describes the Tantric age as follows:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTantrism has been so pervasive that all of Hinduism after the eleventh century, perhaps with the exception of the vedic Srauta tradition, is influenced by it. All forms of Saiva, Vaisnava and Smarta religion, even those forms which wanted to distance themselves from Tantrism, absorbed elements derived from the Tantras.\nThough the whole northern and Himalayan part of India was involved in the development of tantra, Kashmir was a particularly important center, both Saiva and Buddhist and numerous key tantric texts were written there according to Padoux. According to Alexis Sanderson, the \u015aaiva Tantra traditions of medieval Kashmir were mainly divided between the dualistic \u015aaiva Siddhanta and the non-dualist theology found in \u015aakta lineages like the Trika, Krama and Kaula. The non-dualists generally accepted and made use of sexual and transgressive practices, while the dualists mostly rejected them. Saiva tantra was especially successful because it managed to forge strong ties with South Asian kings who valued the power (shakti) of fierce deities like the warrior goddess Durga as a way to increase their own royal power. These kings took part in royal rituals led by Saiva \"royal gurus\" in which they were symbolically married to tantric deities and thus became the earthly representative of male gods like Shiva. Saiva tantra could also employ a variety of protection and destruction rituals which could be used for the benefit of the kingdom and the king. Tantric Shaivism was adopted by the kings of Kashmir, as well as by the Somavamshis of Odisha, the Kalachuris, and the Chandelas of Jejakabhukti (in Bundelkhand). There is also evidence of state support from the Cambodian Khmer Empire. As noted by Samuel, in spite of the increased depiction of female goddesses, these tantric traditions all seemed to have been mostly \"male-directed and male-controlled.\"\nDuring the Tantric Age, Buddhist Tantra was embraced by the Mahayana Buddhist mainstream and was studied at the great universities such as Nalanda and Vikramashila, from which it spread to Tibet and to the East Asian states of China, Korea, and Japan. This new Tantric Buddhism was supported by the Pala Dynasty (8th\u201312th century) which supported these centers of learning and also built grand tantric temples and monasteries such as Somapura Mahavihara and Odantapuri while establishing good relations with the Tibetan Empire and Srivijaya Empire where the Buddhist Mahasiddhas of the Vajrayana tradition spread their influence via songs of realization like those collected in the Charyapada which were orally transmitted in various lineages and translated into many different languages over time. The later Khmer kings and the Indonesian Srivijaya kingdom also supported tantric Buddhism. According to Samuel, while the sexual and transgressive practices were mostly undertaken in symbolic form (or through visualization) in later Tibetan Buddhist monastic contexts, it seems that in the eighth to tenth century Indian context, they were actually performed.\nIn the 10th and 11th centuries, both Shaiva and Buddhist tantra evolved into more tame, philosophical, and liberation-oriented religions. This transformation saw a move from external and transgressive rituals towards a more internalized yogic practice focused on attaining spiritual insight. This recasting also made tantric religions much less open to attack by other groups. In Shaivism, this development is often associated with the Kashmiri master Abhinavagupta (c. 950 \u2013 1016\u00a0CE) and his followers, as well the movements which were influenced by their work, like the Sri Vidya tradition (which spread as far as South India, and has been referred to as \"high\" tantra).\nIn Buddhism, this taming of tantra is associated with the adoption of tantra by Buddhist monastics who sought to incorporate it within the Buddhist Mahayana scholastic framework. Buddhist tantras were written down and scholars like Abhayakaragupta wrote commentaries on them. Another important figure, the Bengali teacher Atisha, wrote a treatise which placed tantra as the culmination of a graduated Mahayana path to awakening, the \"Bodhipathaprad\u012bpa\". In his view, one needed to first begin practicing non-tantric Mahayana, and then later one might be ready for tantra. This system became the model for tantric practice among some Tibetan Buddhist schools, like the Gelug. In Tibet, the transgressive and sexual practices of tantra became much less central and tantric practice was seen as suitable only for a small elite group. New tantras continued to be composed during this later period as well, such as the Kalachakra (c. 11th century), which seems to be concerned with converting Buddhists and non-Buddhists alike, and uniting them together against Islam. The Kalachakra teaches sexual yoga, but also warns not to introduce the practice of ingesting impure substances to beginners, since this is only for advanced yogis. This tantra also seems to want to minimize the impact of the transgressive practices, since it advises tantrikas to outwardly follow the customs of their country.\nAnother influential development during this period was the codification of tantric yogic techniques that would later become the separate movement known as Hatha Yoga. According to James Mallinson, the original \"source text\" for Hatha Yoga is the Vajrayana Buddhist \"Am\u1e5btasiddhi\" (11th century CE) attributed to the mahasiddha Virupa. This text was later adopted by Saiva yogic traditions (such as the Naths) and is quoted in their texts.\nAnother tradition of Hindu Tantra developed among the Vaishnavas, this was called the P\u0101\u00f1car\u0101tra Agama tradition. This tradition avoided the transgressive and sexual elements that were embraced by the Saivas and the Buddhists. There is also a smaller tantric tradition associated with Surya, the sun god. Jainism also seems to have developed a substantial Tantra corpus based on the Saura tradition, with rituals based on yakshas and yakshinis. However, this Jain tantrism was mainly used for pragmatic purposes like protection, and was not used to attain liberation. Complete manuscripts of these Jain tantras have not survived. The Jains also seem to have adopted some of the subtle body practices of tantra, but not sexual yoga. The Svetambara thinker Hemacandra (c. 1089\u20131172) discusses tantric practices extensively, such as internal meditations on chakras, which betray Kaula and Nath influences.\nReception and later developments.\nThere seems to have been some debate regarding the appropriateness of tantra. Among the Hindus, those belonging to the more orthodox Vedic traditions rejected the Tantras. Meanwhile, tantrikas incorporated Vedic ideas within their own systems, while considering the Tantras as the higher, more refined understanding. Meanwhile, some Tantrikas considered the Tantras to be superior to the Vedas, while others considered them complementary such as Umapati, who is quoted as stating: \"The Veda is the cow, the true Agama its milk.\"\nAccording to Samuel, the great Advaita philosopher Shankara (9th century) \"is portrayed in his biography, the \"Sankaravijaya\", as condemning the approaches of various kinds of Tantric practitioners and defeating them through argument or spiritual power.\" He also is said to have encouraged the replacement of fierce goddesses with benign female deities, and thus to have promoted the Sri Vidya tradition (which worships a peaceful and sweet goddess, Tripura Sundari). Though it is far from certain that Shankara actually campaigned against tantra, he is traditionally seen as someone who purified Hinduism from transgressive and antinomian tantric practices.\nThe 14th-century Indian scholar M\u0101dhav\u0101c\u0101rya (in Sarva-Darsana-Sangraha) wrote copious commentaries on then existing major schools of Indian philosophies and practices, and cited the works of the 10th century Abhinavagupta, who was considered a major and influential Tantra scholar. However, Madhavacarya does not mention Tantra as a separate, distinct religious or ritual-driven practice. The early 20th-century Indian scholar Pandurang Vaman Kane conjectured that Madhavacharya ignored Tantra because it may have been considered scandalous. In contrast, Padoux suggests that Tantra may have been so pervasive by the 13th century that \"it was not regarded as being a distinct system.\"\nHindu tantra, while practiced by some of the general lay population, was eventually overshadowed by the more popular Bhakti movements that swept throughout India from the 15th century onwards. According to Samuel, \"these new devotional styles of religion, with their emphasis on emotional submission to a supreme saviour-deity, whether Saivite or Vaisnavite, were better adapted, perhaps, to the subaltern role of non-Muslim groups under Muslim rule.\" Saiva tantra did remain an important practice among most Saiva ascetics however. Tantric traditions also survived in certain regions, such as among the Naths of Rajasthan, in the Sri Vidya tradition of South India and in the Bengali Bauls.\nIn Buddhism, while tantra became accepted in the great Mahayana establishments of Nalanda and Vikramashila and spread to the Himalayan regions, it also experienced serious setbacks in other regions, particularly Southeast Asia. In Burma, for example, King Anawratha (1044\u20131077) is said to have disbanded tantric \"Ari\" monks. As Theravada Buddhism became dominant in South East Asian states, tantric religions became marginalised in those regions. In Sri Lanka, tantric Buddhism also suffered debilitating setbacks. Initially the large Abhayagiri Monastery was a place where the practice of Vajrayana seems to have flourished during the 8th century. However, Abhayagiri was disbanded and forced to convert to the orthodox Mah\u0101vih\u0101ra sect during the reign of Parakramabahu\u00a0I (1153\u20131186).\nRegarding the reception of tantra during the period of Hindu modernism in the 19th and 20th centuries, Samuel writes that this period saw \"a radical reframing of yogic practices away from the Tantric context.\" Samuel notes that while Hindu Hatha yoga had its origins in a Saiva tantric context,\nGiven the extremely negative views of Tantra and its sexual and magical practices which prevailed in middle-class India in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and still largely prevail today, this was an embarrassing heritage. Much effort was given by people such as Swami Vivekananda into reconstructing yoga, generally in terms of a selective Vedantic reading of Pata\u00f1jali's Yogasutra (de Michelis 2004). The effort was largely successful, and many modern Western practitioners of yoga for health and relaxation have little or no knowledge of its original function as a preparation for the internal sexual practices of the Nath tradition.\nBuddhist tantra has survived in modern Indo-Tibetan Buddhism, in various Japanese traditions such as Shingon, and in the Newar Buddhism of the Kathmandu Valley. There are also magical quasi-tantric traditions in Southeast Asia, sometimes termed Esoteric Southern Buddhism, though they are not called \"tantric\" and have been marginalised by state supported modernist forms of Theravada Buddhism.\nTantric traditions.\nHindu tantra.\nWithin Hinduism, the word tantra often refers to a text, which may or may not be \"tantric.\" Conversely, various tantric texts are actually not always called tantras (instead they may be called \"\u0101gama, j\u00f1\u0101na\", \"sa\u1e43hit\u0101, siddh\u0101nta, vidy\u0101\"). There are also tantric Upanishads, which are late Upanishads as well as tantric Puranas (and Puranas influenced by tantric ideas). Besides these types of texts, there are also various types of tantric \"\u015bastras\" (treatises) which may be \"commentaries, digests, compilations, monographs, collections of hymns or of names of deities, and mantras and works on mantras.\" Though much of this vast body of tantric literature is in Sanskrit, others have also been written in Indian vernacular languages. As noted by Padoux, the largest portion of these tantric works are Shaiva texts.\nTantric texts and practitioners (\"tantrikas\" and \"tantrinis\") are often contrasted with Vedic texts and those who practice Vedic religion (\"Vaidikas\"). This non-Vedic path was often termed Mantramarga (\"The way of mantras\") or Tantrasastra (\"Tantra teaching\"). One of the most well known comments on this dichotomy is Kulluka Bhatta's statement in his 15th-century commentary to the Manusmriti which states that revelation (sruti) is twofold \u2013 Vedic and Tantric. Hindu tantric teachings are generally seen as revelations from a divine being (such as \u015aiva, or the Goddess) which are considered by tantrikas to be superior to the Vedas in leading beings to liberation. They are also considered to be more effective during the Kali Yuga, a time of much passion (kama). However, tantric thinkers like Abhinavagupta, while considering tantra as superior, do not totally reject Vedic teachings, and instead consider them valid on a lower level since they also derive from the same source, the supreme Godhead.\nThere are various Hindu tantric traditions within Shaivism, Shaktism and Vaishnavism. There are numerous tantric texts for these different traditions with different philosophical points of view, ranging from theistic dualism to absolute monism. According to David B. Gray, \"one of the most important tropes in the history of the dissemination of tantric traditions is that of lineage, the transmission of teachings along an uninterrupted lineage, from master to disciple, the so-called \"gurupara\u1e43par\u0101\".\" These various traditions also differ among themselves on how heterodox and transgressive they are (vis a vis the Vedic tradition). Since tantric rituals became so widespread, certain forms of tantra were eventually accepted by many orthodox Vedic thinkers such as Jayanta Bhatta and Yamunacarya as long as they did not contradict Vedic teaching and social rules. Tantric scriptures such as the Kali centered \"Jayadrathayamala\" also state that tantrikas can follow the Vedic social rules out of convenience and for the benefit of their clan and guru. However, not all Vedic thinkers accepted tantra. For example, Kumarila Bhatta wrote that one should have no contact with tantrikas nor speak to them.\n\u015aaiva and \u015a\u0101kta tantra.\n\u015aaiva Tantra is called the Mantram\u0101rga, and is often seen as being a separate teaching than the ascetic \"Atim\u0101rga\" tradition (which includes the P\u0101\u015bupatas and K\u0101p\u0101likas). There are various doctrines, textual classes and schools of Shaiva Tantra, which often overlap with the Shakta tradition in different ways.\nThe \u015aaiva Siddh\u0101nta tradition is the earliest \u015aaiva Tantra school and was characterized by public rituals performed by priests. Some of their texts, like the \"Ni\u015bv\u0101satattvasa\u1e43hit\u0101\" have been dated to the fifth century. Their scriptures (the \u015aaiva Agamas) and basic doctrines are also shared by the other traditions as a common \u015aaiva doctrine and many of their rites are also used in other schools of Shaiva Tantra. The prescriptions and rituals of the \u015aaiva Siddh\u0101nta Agamas are generally followed by \u015aaiva temples in South India and they are mostly compatible with orthodox Brahmanism, lacking terrifying deities and animal sacrifice.\nThe Mantrap\u012b\u1e6dha tradition on the other hand, worships Svacchanda Bhairava, a terrifying form of Shiva also known as \"Aghora\" (\"not fearsome\"). This tradition promotes the Skull observance (\"Kapalavrata\"), that is, carrying a skull, a skull staff (khatavanga) and worshipping in cremation grounds. One contemporary group of Kapalika ascetics are the Aghoris.\nThere are also various traditions who are classified as \"Vidy\u0101p\u012b\u1e6dha\". The texts of this tradition focus on worshipping goddesses known as Yogin\u012bs or \u1e0c\u0101kin\u012bs and include antinomian practices dealing with charnel grounds and sexuality. These goddess centered traditions of the \u015a\u0101kta tantras are mostly of the \"left\" current (vamachara) and are thus considered more heterodox.\nThere are various Vidy\u0101p\u012b\u1e6dha traditions, which focus on a bipolar, bisexual divinity that is equal parts male and female, \u015aaiva and \u015a\u0101kta. The \"Yamalatantras\" worship Bhairava along with Kapalini, the goddess of the skull. The Goddess centered traditions are known as the Kulam\u0101rga (Path of the Clans), referring to the clans of the goddesses and their \"Shakti tantras\", which may have been established around the 9th century. It includes sexual rituals, sanguinary practices, the ritual consumption of liquor and the importance of spirit possession. It includes various sub-traditions the developed in different regions of India, such as the Trika lineage (which worships a trio of deities: Par\u0101, Par\u0101par\u0101, and Apar\u0101), the tradition of the fierce goddess Guhyak\u0101l\u012b, Krama tradition, focusing on the goddess K\u0101l\u012b, the Kubjik\u0101 cult, and the southern tradition which worships the beautiful goddess K\u0101me\u015bvar\u012b or Tripurasundar\u012b.\nDuring the 10th century, the syncretic nondual tradition of Kashmir \u015aaivism developed. According to Alexis Sanderson, this tradition arose out of the confrontation between the dualistic and more orthodox \u015aaiva Siddh\u0101nta and the nondual transgressive traditions of the Trika and Krama. According to David B. Gray, this school integrated elements from both of these traditions, \"the end result was a nondualistic system in which the transgressive elements were internalized and hence rendered less offensive to the orthodox.\"\nThe philosophers of Kashmir \u015aaivism, especially Abhinavagupta (\"c\". 975\u20131025 ce) and his student Jayaratha, are some of the most influential philosophers who wrote on Hindu tantra. These thinkers synthesized the various goddess and \u015aaiva lineages and philosophies into a comprehensive and influential religious system. According to David White, Abhinavagupta \"sublimates, cosmeticizes, and semanticizes many of its practices into a type of meditative asceticism whose aim is to realize a transcendent subjectivity\". Thus, his work domesticated the radically antinomian practices of Vidy\u0101p\u012b\u1e6dha lineages into meditative exercises.\nIn Nepal, the Sarvamnaya tantra system evolved as a tantrik tradition which drew upon the \u0101mn\u0101ya system. Amnaya is often translated as 'transmission'. This system serves as the guiding source for the tradition of worship of deities that emanate from the five different aspects of Lord \u015aiva. At its core, the concept of \u0100mn\u0101ya revolves around the idea that \u015aiva, with his five faces, (referred to as Sadashiva), imparts the secret Tantric teachings to the goddess through her corresponding five emanations. Scholarly work on Sarvamnaya can be found in the article, \"The transmission of all powers: Sarv\u0101mn\u0101ya \u015a\u0101kta Tantra and the semiotics of power in Nep\u0101la-ma\u1e47\u1e0dala\" by Jeffrey S. Lidke.\nThe last major \u015aaiva tantric tradition is that of the N\u0101th or \"Split-Ear\" K\u0101npha\u1e6da tradition, which emerged in the 12th or 13th century. They produced various Ha\u1e6dhayoga texts which draw on tantric yogas.\nWhile the \u015a\u0101kta traditions continued to develop in different ways, sometimes in a more popular and devotional direction, many of them retain various tantric elements today. The two most important and popular \u015a\u0101kta tantra traditions today are the Southern Kaula transmission, which focus on the beautiful goddess \u015ar\u012b (\"\u015br\u012bkula\") or Lalit\u0101 Tripurasundar\u012b and the Northern and Eastern transmission, focusing on the ferocious goddess K\u0101l\u012b (\"k\u0101l\u012bkula\"). The southern transmission gave rise to the \u015ar\u012b Vidy\u0101 tradition, an important tantric religion in South India. Though it takes much of its philosophical and doctrinal system from Kashmir Shaivism, it generally avoids the transgressive elements and is orthodox or \"right handed\". Bhaskararaya (18th century) is considered a key thinker of this tradition. The K\u0101l\u012bkula tradition is particularly important in East and South India and K\u0101l\u012b remains a popular goddess in India, a focus of much devotion.\nVai\u1e63\u1e47ava.\nThe main Vai\u1e63\u1e47ava tradition that is associated with tantra is the Pa\u00f1charatra. This tradition produced a number of tantric texts including Lakshmi tantra, but most of the other tantras are lost. However, this sect does not identify itself as \"tantric\". The worship and ritual of most of the Vai\u1e63\u1e47ava temples in South India follow this tradition, which is ritually similar to the Shaiva Siddhanta. According to Padoux, \"from the doctrinal point of view, they are nearer to brahmanical orthodoxy (proudly asserted by some of their affiliates) and their mantras are indeed often Vedic.\"\nAccording to David B. Gray,\nDuring the medieval period another tantric Vai\u1e63\u1e47ava tradition emerged in Bengal. Known as the Sahajiy\u0101 tradition, it flourished in Bengal around the 16th through 19th centuries. It taught that each individual is a divinity, embodying the divine couple K\u1e5b\u1e63\u1e47a and his consort R\u0101dh\u0101. This tradition integrated earlier Hindu and Buddhist tantric practices within a Vai\u1e63\u1e47ava theological framework.\nBuddhist tantra.\nThere are various Buddhist tantric traditions with the goal of attaining Enlightenment which are called by different names such as Vajrayana, Secret Mantra, Mantrayana and so on. The Indo-Tibetan Buddhist tradition has been dominant in Tibet and the Himalayan regions. It first spread to Tibet in the 8th century and quickly rose to prominence. The Tibetan Buddhist tantric teachings have recently been spread to the Western world by the Tibetan diaspora. Nepalese Newar Buddhism meanwhile is still practiced in the Kathmandu Valley by the Newar people. The tradition maintains a canon of Sanskrit texts, the only Buddhist tantric tradition to still do so.\nBuddhist Tantric practices and texts which developed from the 5th to the 8th centuries were translated into Chinese and are preserved in the Chinese Buddhist canon as well as in the Dunhuang manuscripts. Tantric materials involving the use of mantras and dharanis began to appear in China during the fifth century period, and Buddhist masters such as Zhiyi developed proto-tantric rituals based on esoteric texts. Chinese Esoteric Buddhism became especially influential in China in the Tang dynasty period with the arrival of esoteric masters such as Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra to the capital city of Chang'an. The succeeding Song dynasty saw an influx of new esoteric texts being transmitted by monks from Central Asia. Chinese Esoteric Buddhist rituals were also noted to be particularly popular in the Liao dynasty, which contended with the Song for control of northern China. Due to the highly eclectic nature of Chinese Buddhism where sectarian denominations were not strictly drawn between the various Buddhist schools (even during the Tang dynasty), and where most Buddhist masters mixed practices from the different traditions, Chinese Esoteric Buddhist practices were absorbed by lineages from the other Buddhist traditions such as Chan and Tiantai. For example, the Northern School of Chan even became known for its esoteric practices of dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012bs and mantras. During the Yuan and Ming dynasty periods, certain esoteric elements from Tibetan Buddhism were also adapted and incorporated into general Chinese Buddhist practices and rituals. In modern Chinese Buddhism, the esoteric traditions continue to be passed on and practiced through numerous tantric rituals such as the Shuilu Fahui ceremony and the Yujia Yankou rite, which involve practices like deity yoga and mandala offerings, as well as the recitation of tantric mantras such as the Cund\u012b Dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012b, the Hundred Syllable Mantra of Vajrasattva, the Mah\u0101cakravidy\u0101r\u0101ja Dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u012b and the Shurangama Mantra. Esoteric practices also spread to Korea and to Japan, where it exists as an independent tradition called Shingon.\nOther religions.\nThe Hindu and Buddhist Tantric traditions significantly influenced other religions such as Jainism, Sikhism, the Tibetan B\u00f6n tradition, Daoism, Shint\u014d, Sufi Islam, and the Western New Age movement.\nIn the Sikh literature, the ideas related to Shakti and goddess reverence attributed to Guru Gobind Singh, particularly in the \"Dasam Granth\", are related to tantra ideas found in Buddhism and Hinduism.\nThe Jain worship methods, states Ellen Gough, were likely influenced by Shaktism ideas, and this is attested by the tantric diagrams of the \"Rishi-mandala\" where the Tirthankaras are portrayed. The Tantric traditions within Jainism use verbal spells or mantra, and rituals that are believed to accrue merit for rebirth realms.\nPractices.\nOne of the main elements of the Tantric literature is rituals. Rather than one coherent system, Tantra is an accumulation of practices and ideas from different sources. As Samuel writes, the tantric traditions are \"a confluence of a variety of different factors and components.\" These elements include: mandalas, mantras, internal sexual yogic practices, fierce male and female deities, cremation ground symbolism, as well as concepts from Indian Philosophy.\nAndr\u00e9 Padoux notes that there is no consensus among scholars as to which elements are characteristic for Tantra, nor is there any text that contains all those elements. Also, most of those elements can also be found in non-Tantric traditions. Because of the wide range of communities covered by the term, it is problematic to describe tantric practices definitively. However, there are sets of practices and elements which are shared by numerous tantric traditions, and thus a family resemblance relationship can be established among them.\nDifferent scholars give different main features of tantra. For example, David N. Lorenzen writes that tantra shares various \"shamanic and yogic\" practices, worship of goddesses, association with specific schools like the Kaulas and Kapalikas, as well as tantric texts. Christopher Wallis meanwhile, basing himself on the definition given the tantric scholar R\u0101maka\u1e47\u1e6dha, gives four main features of tantra: \"1) concern with ritual modes of manipulation (of the environment or one's own awareness), 2) requirement for esoteric initiation (to receive access to the scriptural teachings and practices), 3) a twofold goal of practice: the soteriological and supramundane one of liberation (variously conceived) and/or the mundane one of extraordinary power over other beings and one's environment, and 4) the claim that these three are explicated in scriptures that are the word of God (\"\u0101gama\") or the Buddha (\"buddhavacana\").\"\nAccording to Anthony Tribe, a scholar of Buddhist Tantra, Tantra has the following defining features:\nThere are a wide array of Tantric techniques or spiritual practices (sadhana) such as:\nWorship and ritual.\nWorship or puja in Hindu Tantra differs from Vedic forms somewhat. While in the Vedic practice of yajna there are no idols, shrines, and symbolic art, in tantra they are important means of worship.\nRituals are particularly important in the dualistic \u015aaiva Siddh\u0101nta which according to Padoux \"is typically characterized by an overabundance of rituals, which are necessarily accompanied by mantras. These rituals are not so much a succession of actions as a play of mentally visualized and experienced images, a situation common to all Tantric traditions, where rites, meditation, and yoga are exercises in creative identifying imagination.\" The theory behind these rituals is the idea that all humans have a fundamental impurity (mala) that binds them to rebirth. This impurity can be removed by ritual action (along with proper knowledge). The initial step in this path is the ritual of initiation (diksa), which opens to door to future liberation at death.\nIn the non-dualistic and transgressive (or \"left hand\") traditions like the Kali cults and the Trika school, rituals and pujas can include certain left hand path elements that are not found in the more orthodox traditions. These transgressive elements include the use of skulls and other human bone implements (as part of the Kapalika vow), fierce deities like Bhairava, Kubjika and Kali which were used as part of meditative visualizations, ritual possession by the deities (avesa), sexual rites and offering the deity (as well as consuming) certain impure substances like meat, alcohol and sexual fluids. Padoux explains the transgressive practices as follows:On the ritual and mental plane, transgression was an essential trait by which the nondualistic Tantric traditions set themselves apart from other traditions \u2013 so much so that they used the term \"nondualistic practice\" (advaitacara) to refer to the Kaula transgressive practices as a rejection of the duality (dvaita) of pure and impure in brahmanical society. Let us also note that for the nondualistic Saiva systems, the Yoginis were not active merely in the world of spirits; they were also powers present in humans \u2013 mistresses of their senses, governing their affects, which acquired an intensity and super-natural dimension through this divinization. This led adepts to an identification of their individual consciousness with the infinite divine Consciousness, thus also helping them transcend the sexual plane.In both the Buddhist and Saiva contexts, the sexual practices are often seen as a way to expand one's consciousness through the use of bliss.\nThere is also a fundamental philosophical disagreement between \u015aaiva Siddh\u0101nta and the non-dualistic schools like the Trika regarding ritual. In \u015aaiva Siddh\u0101nta, only ritual can do away with \"innate impurities\" (\"anavamala\") that bind individual Selfs, though the ritual must be performed with an understanding of their nature and purpose as well as with devotion. In the view of the Trika school (especially in the work of Abhinavagupta), only knowledge (\"j\u00f1ana\") which is a \"recognition\" (\"pratyabhij\u00f1a\") of our true nature, leads to liberation. According to Padoux, \"this is also, with nuances, the position of the P\u00f1caratra and of other Vaisnava Tantric traditions.\"\nYoga, mantra, meditation.\nTantric yoga is first and foremost an embodied practice, which is seen as having a divine esoteric structure. As noted by Padoux, tantric yoga makes use of a \"mystic physiology\" which includes various psychosomatic elements known as the subtle body. This imaginary inner structure includes chakras (\"wheels\"), nadis (\"channels\"), and energies (like Kundalini, Chandali, different pranas and vital winds, etc.). The tantric body is also held to be a microcosmic reflection of the universe, and is thus seen as containing gods and goddesses. According to Padoux, the \"internalized image of the yogic body\" is a fundamental element for nearly all meditative and tantric ritual practices.\nThe use of mantras is one of the most common and widespread elements of tantric practice. They are used in rituals as well as during various meditative and yogic practices. Mantra recitation (japa) is often practiced along with nyasa (\"depositing\" the mantra), mudras (\"seals\", i.e. hand gestures) and complex visualizations involving divine symbols, mandalas and deities. Nyasa involves touching various parts of the body while reciting mantra, which is thought to connect the deity with the yogis body and transform the body into that of the deity.\nMantras are also often visualized as being located within the yogi's body as part of tantric meditations. For example, in the \"Yogini Heart\" tantra, a \u015ar\u012b Vidy\u0101 text, the yogi is instructed to imagine the five syllables (HA SA KA LA HRIM) of the deity's mantra in the muladhara chakra. The next set of five syllables (HA SA KA HA LA HRIM) is visualized in the heart chakra and the third cluster (SA KA LA HRIM) in the cakra between the eyebrows. The yogi is further instructed to lengthen the enunciation of the M sound at the end of the HRIM syllable, a practice called nada (phonic vibration). This practice goes through various increasingly subtle stages until it dissolves into the silence of the Absolute.\nAnother common element found in tantric yoga is the use of visionary meditations in which tantrikas focus on a vision or image of the deity (or deities), and in some cases imagine themselves as being the deity and their own body as the body of the deity. The practitioner may use visualizations, identifying with a deity to the degree that the aspirant becomes the \"Ishta-deva\" (or meditational deity). In other meditations, the deities are visualized as being inside the tantrika's body. For example, in Abhinavagupta's \"Tantraloka\" (chapter 15), the Trika trinity of goddesses (Par\u0101, Par\u0101par\u0101, and Apar\u0101) are visualized on the ends of the three prongs of a trident (located above the head). The rest of the trident is imagined positioned along the central axis of the yogi's body, with the blazing corpse of Shiva visualized in the head.\nMandalas and yantras.\nYantra are mystical diagrams which are used in tantric meditation and ritual. They are usually associated with specific Hindu deities such as Shiva, Shakti, or Kali. Similarly, a \"puja\" may involve focusing on a \"yantra\" or \"mandala\" associated with a deity.\nAccording to David Gordon White, geometrical mandalas are a key element of Tantra. They are used to represent numerous tantric ideas and concepts as well as used for meditative focus. Mandalas symbolically communicate the correspondences between the \"transcendent-yet-immanent\" macrocosm and the microcosm of mundane human experience. The godhead (or principal Buddha) is often depicted at the center of the mandala, while all other beings, including the practitioner, are located at various distances from this center. Mandalas also reflected the medieval feudal system, with the king at its centre.\nMandalas and Yantras may be depicted in various ways, on paintings, cloth, in three dimensional form, made out of colored sand or powders, etc. Tantric yoga also often involves the mental visualization of a mandala or yantra. This is usually combined with mantra recitation and other ritual actions as part of a tantric sadhana (practice).\nSex and eroticism.\nWhile tantra involves a wide range of ideas and practices which are not always of a sexual nature, Flood and Padoux both note that in the West, Tantra is most often thought of as a kind of ritualized sex or a spiritualized yogic sexuality. According to Padoux, \"this is a misunderstanding, for though the place of sex in Tantra is ideologically essential, it is not always so in action and ritual.\" Padoux further notes that while sexual practices do exist and were used by certain tantric groups, they \"lost their prevalence when Tantra spread to other larger social groups.\"\nIn the tantric traditions which do use sex as part of spiritual practice (this refers mainly to the Kaulas, and also Tibetan Buddhism), sex and desire are often seen as a means of transcendence that is used to reach the Absolute. Thus, sex and desire are not seen as ends in themselves. Because these practices transgress orthodox Hindu ideas of ritual purity, they have often given tantra a bad image in India, where it is often condemned by the orthodox. According to Padoux, even among the traditions which accept these practices, they are far from prominent and practiced only by a \"few initiated and fully qualified adepts\".\nWestern scholarly research.\nJohn Woodroffe.\nThe first Western scholar to seriously study Tantra was John Woodroffe (1865\u20131936), who wrote about Tantra under the pen name Arthur Avalon and is known as the \"founding father of Tantric studies\". Unlike previous Western scholars Woodroffe advocated for Tantra, defending and presenting it as an ethical and philosophical system in accord with the Vedas and Vedanta. Woodroffe practised Tantra and, while trying to maintain scholastic objectivity, was a student of Hindu Tantra (the \"Shiva-Shakta\" tradition).\nFurther development.\nFollowing Woodroffe, a number of scholars began investigating Tantric teachings, including scholars of comparative religion and Indology such as Agehananda Bharati, Mircea Eliade, Julius Evola, Carl Jung, Alexandra David-N\u00e9el, Giuseppe Tucci and Heinrich Zimmer. According to Hugh Urban, Zimmer, Evola and Eliade viewed Tantra as \"the culmination of all Indian thought: the most radical form of spirituality and the archaic heart of aboriginal India\", regarding it as the ideal religion for the modern era. All three saw Tantra as \"the most transgressive and violent path to the sacred\".\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31398", "revid": "36729223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31398", "title": "Twelve-step program", "text": "Organizations for recovery from addiction\nTwelve-step programs are mutual aid programs supporting recovery from substance addictions, behavioral addictions and compulsions. Developed in the 1930s, the first twelve-step program, Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), founded by Bill Wilson and Bob Smith, aided its membership to overcome alcoholism. Since that time dozens of other organizations have been derived from AA's approach to address problems as varied as drug addiction, compulsive gambling, sex, and overeating. All twelve-step programs utilize a version of AA's suggested twelve steps first published in the 1939 book \"Alcoholics Anonymous: The Story of How More Than One Hundred Men Have Recovered from Alcoholism.\"\nAs summarized by the American Psychological Association (APA), the process involves the following:\nOverview.\nTwelve-step methods have been adapted to address a wide range of alcoholism, substance abuse, and dependency problems. Over 200 mutual aid organizations\u2014often known as fellowships\u2014with a worldwide membership of millions have adopted and adapted AA's 12 Steps and 12 Traditions for recovery. Narcotics Anonymous was formed by addicts who did not relate to the specifics of alcohol dependency.\nDemographic preferences related to the addicts' drug of choice has led to the creation of Cocaine Anonymous, Crystal Meth Anonymous and Marijuana Anonymous. Behavioral issues such as compulsion for or addiction to gambling, crime, food, sex, hoarding, getting into debt and work are addressed in fellowships such as Gamblers Anonymous, Overeaters Anonymous, Sexaholics Anonymous and Debtors Anonymous.\nAuxiliary groups such as Al-Anon and Nar-Anon, for friends and family members of alcoholics and addicts, respectively, are part of a response to treating addiction as a disease that is enabled by family systems. Adult Children of Alcoholics &amp; Dysfunctional Families (ACA or ACOA) addresses the effects of growing up in an alcoholic or otherwise dysfunctional family. Co-Dependents Anonymous (CoDA) addresses compulsions related to relationships, referred to as codependency.\nHistory.\nAlcoholics Anonymous (AA), the first twelve-step fellowship, was founded in 1935 by Bill Wilson and Dr. Robert Holbrook Smith, known to AA members as \"Bill W.\" and \"Dr. Bob\", in Akron, Ohio. In 1946, they formally established the twelve traditions to help deal with the issues of how various groups could relate and function as membership grew. The practice of remaining anonymous (using only one's first names) when interacting with the general public was published in the first edition of the AA Big Book.\nAs AA chapters were increasing in number during the 1930s and 1940s, the guiding principles were gradually defined as the Twelve Traditions. A singleness of purpose emerged as Tradition Five: \"Each group has but one primary purpose\u2014to carry its message to the alcoholic who still suffers\". Consequently, drug addicts who do not suffer from the specifics of alcoholism involved in AA hoping for recovery technically are not welcome in \"closed\" meetings unless they have a desire to stop drinking alcohol.\nThe principles of AA have been used to form numerous other fellowships specifically designed for those recovering from various pathologies; each emphasizes recovery from the specific malady which brought the sufferer into the fellowship.\nTwelve Steps.\nThe following are the twelve steps as published in 2001 by Alcoholics Anonymous:\nWhere other twelve-step groups have adapted the AA steps as guiding principles, step one is generally updated to reflect the focus of recovery. For example, in Overeaters Anonymous, the first step reads, \"We admitted we were powerless over compulsive overeating\u2014that our lives had become unmanageable.\" Variations in the languaging of the third step (which once spoke of making \"a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God as we understand Him\")\nsometimes occur\nto avoid gender-specific pronouns or to accommodate non-theistic beliefs.\nSome Twelve-steppers may adapt references to \"God\" to refer to a \"higher power\" or to \"HP\".\nTwelve Traditions.\nThe Twelve Traditions accompany the Twelve Steps. The Traditions provide guidelines for group governance. They were developed in AA in order to help resolve conflicts in the areas of publicity, politics, religion, and finances. Alcoholics Anonymous' Twelve Traditions are:\nProcess.\nIn the twelve-step program, the human structure is symbolically represented in three dimensions: physical, mental, and spiritual. The problems the groups deal with are understood to manifest themselves in each dimension. For addicts and alcoholics, the physical dimension is best described by the allergy-like bodily reaction resulting in the compulsion to continue using substances even when it's harmful or the addict wants to quit. The statement in the First Step that the individual is \"powerless\" over the substance-abuse related behavior at issue refers to the lack of control over this compulsion, which persists despite any negative consequences that may be endured as a result.\nThe mental obsession is described as the cognitive processes that cause the individual to repeat the compulsive behavior after some period of abstinence, either knowing that the result will be an inability to stop or operating under the delusion that the result will be different. The description in the First Step of the life of the alcoholic or addict as \"unmanageable\" refers to the lack of choice that the mind of the addict or alcoholic affords concerning whether to drink or use again.\nThe illness of the spiritual dimension, or \"spiritual malady,\" is considered in all twelve-step groups to be self-centeredness. The process of working the steps is intended to replace self-centeredness with a growing moral consciousness and a willingness for self-sacrifice and unselfish constructive action. In twelve-step groups, this is known as a \"spiritual awakening.\" This should not be confused with abreaction, which produces dramatic, but temporary, changes. As a rule, in twelve-step fellowships, spiritual awakening occurs slowly over a period of time, although there are exceptions where members experience a sudden spiritual awakening.\nIn accordance with the First Step, twelve-step groups emphasize self-admission by members of the problem they are recovering from. It is in this spirit that members often identify themselves along with an admission of their problem, often as \"Hi, I'm [first name only], and I'm an alcoholic\".\nSponsorship.\nA sponsor is a more experienced person in recovery who guides the less-experienced aspirant (\"sponsee\") through the program's twelve steps. New members in twelve-step programs are encouraged to secure a relationship with at least one sponsor who both has a sponsor and has taken the twelve steps themselves. Publications from twelve-step fellowships emphasize that sponsorship is a \"one on one\" nonhierarchical relationship of shared experiences focused on working the Twelve Steps. According to Narcotics Anonymous:\nSponsors share their experience, strength, and hope with their sponsees... A sponsor's role is not that of a legal adviser, a banker, a parent, a marriage counselor, or a social worker. Nor is a sponsor a therapist offering some sort of professional advice. A sponsor is simply another addict in recovery who is willing to share his or her journey through the Twelve Steps.\nSponsors and sponsees participate in activities that lead to spiritual growth. Experiences in the program are often shared by outgoing members with incoming members. This rotation of experience is often considered to have a great spiritual reward. These may include practices such as literature discussion and study, meditation, and writing. Completing the program usually implies competency to guide newcomers which is often encouraged. Sponsees typically do their Fifth Step, review their moral inventory written as part of the Fourth Step, with their sponsor. The Fifth Step, as well as the Ninth Step, have been compared to confession and penitence. Michel Foucault, a French philosopher, noted such practices produce intrinsic modifications in the person\u2014exonerating, redeeming and purifying them; relieves them of their burden of wrong, liberating them and promising salvation.\nThe personal nature of the behavioral issues that lead to seeking help in twelve-step fellowships results in a strong relationship between sponsee and sponsor. As the relationship is based on spiritual principles, it is unique and not generally characterized as \"friendship\". Fundamentally, the sponsor has the single purpose of helping the sponsee recover from the behavioral problem that brought the sufferer into twelve-step work, which reflexively helps the sponsor recover.\nA study of sponsorship as practiced in Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous found that providing direction and support to other alcoholics and addicts is associated with sustained abstinence for the sponsor, but suggested that there were few short-term benefits for the sponsee's one-year sustained abstinence rate.\nEffectiveness.\nAlcoholics Anonymous is the largest of all of the twelve-step programs (from which all other twelve-step programs are derived), followed by Narcotics Anonymous; the majority of twelve-step members are recovering from addiction to alcohol or other drugs. The majority of twelve-step programs, however, address illnesses other than substance addiction. For example, the third-largest twelve-step program, Al-Anon, assists family members and friends of people who have alcoholism and other addictions. About twenty percent of twelve-step programs are for substance addiction recovery, the other eighty percent address a variety of problems from debt to depression. It would be an error to assume the effectiveness of twelve-step methods at treating problems in one domain translates to all or to another domain.\nA 2020 Cochrane review of Alcoholics Anonymous showed that participation in AA resulted in more alcoholics being abstinent from alcohol and for longer periods of time than cognitive behavioral therapy and motivational enhancement therapy, and as effective as these in other measures. The 2020 review did not compare twelve step programs to the use of disulfiram or naltrexone, though some patients did receive these medications. These medications are considered the standard of care in alcohol use disorder treatment among medical experts and have demonstrated efficacy in randomized-controlled trials in promoting alcohol abstinence. A systematic review published in 2017 found that twelve-step programs for reducing illicit drug use are neither better nor worse than other interventions, though the researchers behind the review noted the weakness of most of the studies analyzed, which may lead to interpretations of their results that did not accurately reflect the actual picture.\nCriticism.\nSome medical professionals have criticized twelve-step programs as \"a cult that relies on God as the mechanism of action\" and as lacking any experimental evidence in favor of its efficacy. Ethical and operational issues had prevented robust randomized controlled trials from being conducted comparing twelve-step programs directly to other approaches. More recent studies employing non-randomized and quasi-experimental studies have shown twelve-step programs provide similar benefit compared to motivational enhancement therapy (MET) and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), and were more effective in producing continuous abstinence and remission compared to these approaches.\nConfidentiality.\nThe Twelve Traditions encourage members to practice the spiritual principle of anonymity in the public media and members are also asked to respect each other's confidentiality. This is a group norm, however, and not legally mandated; there are no legal consequences to discourage those attending twelve-step groups from revealing information disclosed during meetings. Statutes on group therapy do not encompass those associations that lack a professional therapist or clergyman to whom confidentiality and privilege might apply. Professionals and paraprofessionals who refer patients to these groups, to avoid both civil liability and licensure problems, have been advised that they should alert their patients that, at any time, their statements made in meetings may be disclosed.\nCultural identity.\nOne review warned of detrimental iatrogenic effects of twelve-step philosophy and labeled the organizations as cults, while another review asserts that these programs bore little semblance to religious cults and that the techniques used appeared beneficial to some. Another study found that a twelve-step program's focus on self-admission of having a problem increases deviant stigma and strips members of their previous cultural identity, replacing it with the deviant identity. Another study asserts that the prior cultural identity may not be replaced entirely, but rather members found adapted a bicultural identity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nScholarly publications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31399", "revid": "50714462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31399", "title": "The Washington Times", "text": "American broadsheet newspaper\nThe Washington Times is an American conservative daily newspaper published in Washington, D.C. It covers general interest topics with an emphasis on national politics. Its broadsheet daily edition is distributed throughout Washington, D.C. and the greater Washington metropolitan area, including suburban Maryland and Northern Virginia. It also publishes a subscription-based weekly tabloid edition aimed at a national audience.\nThe first edition of \"The Washington Times\" was published on May 17, 1982. The newspaper was founded by Unification Church leader Sun Myung Moon, and it was owned until 2010 by News World Communications, an international media conglomerate founded by Moon. It is currently owned by Operations Holdings, which is a part of the Unification Church movement.\n\"The Washington Times\" has been known for its conservative political stance, often supporting the policies of Republican presidents Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, George W. Bush, and Donald Trump. During the 1990s and 2000s, \"The Washington Times\" was critical of the Democratic presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama, and published stories supporting neo-confederate historical revisionism. It also drew controversy by publishing conspiracy theories and racist columns by a former editor about U.S. president Barack Obama. \"The Washington Times\" has published columns contradicting scientific consensus on multiple environmental and health issues.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\n1980s.\n\"The Washington Times\" was founded May 17, 1982, by News World Communications, a New York City-based international media conglomerate associated with the Unification Church, which also owns United Press International (UPI) and newspapers in Japan, South America, and South Korea.\nBo Hi Pak, chief aide to Unification Church founder and leader Sun Myung Moon, was the founding president and founding chairman of the board. Moon asked Richard L. Rubenstein, a rabbi and college professor who had written on the Holocaust, to serve on the board of directors. The newspaper's first editor and publisher was James R. Whelan.\n\"The Washington Times\" was founded one year after \"The Washington Star\", a Washington, D.C. daily newspaper, went out of business, leaving the city with \"The Washington Post\" as its only daily newspaper. A large percentage of the newspaper's news staff came from the \"Star\".\nUnusual among daily newspapers when \"The Washington Times\" was founded, the newspaper published full color front pages in all its sections and color elements throughout. It also used ink that it advertised as being less likely to come off on the reader's hands than the type used by \"The Washington Post\". At its start, it had 125 reporters, 25 percent of whom were members of the Unification Church of the United States.\nPresident Ronald Reagan read \"The Washington Times\" every day during his presidency. In 1997, he said: \"The American people know the truth. You, my friends at \"The Washington Times\", have told it to them. It wasn't always the popular thing to do. But you were a loud and powerful voice. Like me, you arrived in Washington at the beginning of the most momentous decade of the century. Together, we rolled up our sleeves and got to work. And\u2014oh, yes\u2014we won the Cold War.\"\nAfter a brief editorship under Smith Hempstone, Arnaud de Borchgrave, a former UPI and \"Newsweek\" reporter, became executive editor, serving from 1985 to 1991. Borchgrave was credited with encouraging energetic reporting by staff but was known to make unorthodox journalistic decisions. During his tenure, \"The Washington Times\" mounted a fundraising drive for Contra rebels in Nicaragua and offered rewards for information leading to the arrest of Nazi war criminals.\nFrom 1985 to 2008, News World published a weekly news magazine called \"Insight on the News\", also called just \"Insight\", as a companion to \"The Washington Times\". \"Insight\"'s reporting sometimes resulted in journalistic controversy.\n1990s.\nIn 1991, Moon said he had spent between $900 million and $1 billion on \"The Washington Times\". By 2002, Moon had spent between $1.7 billion and $2 billion, according to different estimates.\nWesley Pruden, previously a correspondent and then a managing editor of \"The Washington Times\", was named executive editor in 1991. During his editorship, the paper took a strongly conservative and nativist editorial stance.\nIn 1992, North Korean leader Kim Il Sung gave his first and only interview with the Western news media to \"The Washington Times\" reporter Josette Sheeran, who later became executive director of the United Nations World Food Programme.\nIn 1992, \"The Washington Times\" had one-eighth the circulation of \"The Washington Post\" (100,000 compared to 800,000) and two-thirds of its subscribers subscribed to both papers. In 1994, it introduced a weekly national edition, which was published in a tabloid format and distributed nationally. U.S. President George H. W. Bush encouraged the political influence of \"The Washington Times\" and other Unification Church movement activism in support of American foreign policy.\nIn 1997, the \"Washington Report on Middle East Affairs,\" which is critical of U.S. and Israeli policies, praised \"The Washington Times\" and its sister publication, \"The Middle East Times\", for what it called their objective and informative coverage of Islam and the Middle East, while criticizing \"The Washington Times\" for its generally pro-Israel editorial positions. The \"Report\" suggested that these newspapers and \"The Christian Science Monitor\", each owned by religious institutions, were less influenced by pro-Israel pressure groups than corporate-owned newspapers.\n2000s.\nIn 2002, at an event held to celebrate \"The Washington Times\"' 20th anniversary, Moon said, \"\"The Washington Times\" is responsible to let the American people know about God\" and \"\"The Washington Times\" will become the instrument in spreading the truth about God to the world.\"\nIn 2004, David Ignatius, a correspondent for \"The Washington Post\", reported that Chung Hwan Kwak, a leader in the Unification Church, wanted \"The Washington Times\" to \"support international organizations such as the United Nations and to campaign for world peace and interfaith understanding.\" This, Ignatius wrote, created difficulties for Pruden and some of \"The Washington Times\"' columnists. Ignatius also mentioned the Unification Church movement's reconciliatory attitude towards North Korea, which at the time included joint business ventures, and Kwak's advocacy for greater understanding between the U.S. and the Islamic world as issues of contention. Ignatius predicted that conservatives in Congress and the George W. Bush administration would support Pruden's position over Kwak's.\nIn 2006, Moon's son, Hyun Jin Moon, president and CEO of News World Communications, dismissed managing editor Francis \"Fran\" Coombs following accusations of racist editorializing. Coombs had made some racist and sexist comments, for which he was sued by other employees at \"The Washington Times\".\nIn January 2008, Pruden retired, and John F. Solomon, who worked with the Associated Press and had most recently been head of investigative reporting and mixed media development at \"The Washington Post\", was appointed executive editor.\nA month later, \"The Washington Times\" changed some of its style guide to conform more to what was becoming mainstream media usage. It announced that it would no longer use words like \"illegal aliens\" and \"homosexual\" and, in most cases, opt for \"more neutral terminology\" like \"illegal immigrants\" and \"gay\", respectively. It also decided to stop using \"Hillary\" when referring to then U.S. Senator Hillary Clinton, and the word \"marriage\" in the expression \"gay marriage\" would no longer appear in quotes in the newspaper. These policy changes drew criticism from some conservatives. \"Prospect\" magazine attributed \"The Washington Times\"' apparent political moderation to differences of opinion over the United Nations and North Korea, and wrote, \"The Republican right may be losing its most devoted media ally.\"\nIn November 2009, \"The New York Times\" reported that \"The Washington Times\" would no longer be receiving funds from the Unification Church movement and might have to cease publication or become an online publication only. Later that year, it dismissed 40 percent of its 370 employees and stopped its subscription service, instead distributing the paper free in some areas of the Washington metropolitan area, including federal government departments and agencies. However, a subscription website owned by the paper, theconservatives.com, and the \"Times\"' three-hour radio program, \"America's Morning News\", both continued. The paper also announced that it would cease publication of its Sunday edition, along with other changes, partly in order to end its reliance on subsidies from the Unification Church.\nOn December 31, 2009, \"The Washington Times\" announced that it would no longer be a full-service newspaper, eliminating its metropolitan news and sports sections.\n2010s.\nIn July 2010, the Unification Church issued a letter protesting the direction \"The Washington Times\" was taking and urging closer ties with it. In August 2010, a deal was made to sell it to a group more closely related to the movement. Editor-in-chief Sam Dealey said that this was a welcome development among the \"Times\"' staff.\nIn November 2010, Moon and a group of former editors purchased \"The Washington Times\" from News World Communications for $1. This ended a conflict within the Moon family that had been threatening to shut down the paper completely. In June 2011, Ed Kelley, formerly of \"The Oklahoman\", was hired as editor overseeing both news and opinion content.\nIn March 2011, \"The Washington Times\" announced that some former staffers would be rehired and that the paper would bring back its sports, metro, and life sections.\nIn 2012, Douglas D. M. Joo stepped down as senior executive, president, and chairman. \"Times\" president Tom McDevitt took his place as chairman, and Larry Beasley was hired as the company's new president and chief executive officer.\nIn March 2013, \"The Washington Times\" partnered with Herring Networks to create a new conservative cable news channel, One America News Network (OAN), which began broadcasting in mid\u20112013.\nIn July 2013, \"The Washington Times\" hired David Keene, former president of the National Rifle Association and chairman of the American Conservative Union, to serve as its opinion editor.\nIn September 2013, Solomon returned as editor and vice president of content and business development. Solomon's tenure was marked by a focus on profitability.\nIn September 2015, the newspaper had its first profitable month, ending a streak of monthly financial losses over the paper's first 33 years. In December 2015, Solomon left for \"Circa News\".\n\"The Washington Times\" opinion editor Charles Hurt was one of Trump's earliest supporters in Washington, D.C.\nDuring the 2016 presidential election, \"The Washington Times\" did not endorse a presidential candidate, but it endorsed Trump for reelection in the 2020 presidential election.\n2020s.\nIn 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, \"The Washington Times\" received between $1 million and $2 million in federal-backed small business loans from Citibank as related of the Paycheck Protection Program. The Washington Times which it said helped retain of its 91 employees. During the 2024 presidential election, \"The Washington Times\" endorsed Trump for election.\nReactions.\nIn the 1980s, reporters for \"The Washington Times\" visited imprisoned then South African activist Nelson Mandela, who wrote about the newspaper in his autobiography, \"Long Walk to Freedom\". He said, \"They seemed less intent on finding out my views than on proving that I was a Communist and a terrorist. All of their questions were slanted in that direction, and when I reiterated that I was neither a Communist nor a terrorist, they attempted to show that I was not a Christian either by asserting that the Reverend Martin Luther King never resorted to violence.\"\n\"The Washington Times\" holds a conservative political stance. In 1995, the \"Columbia Journalism Review\" wrote that \"The Washington Times\" \"is like no major city daily in America in the way that it wears its political heart on its sleeve. No major paper in America would dare be so partisan.\" In 2002, \"The Washington Post\" reported that the newspaper \"was established by Moon to combat communism and be a conservative alternative to what Moon perceived as the liberal leanings of \"The Washington Post\". Since then, the paper has fought to prove its editorial independence, trying to demonstrate that it is neither a \"Moonie paper\" nor a booster of the political right but rather a fair and balanced reporter of the news.\"\nIn October 2002, veteran \"Washington Post\" editor Ben Bradlee complimented \"The Washington Times\", saying, \"I see them get some local stories that I think the \"Post\" doesn't have and should have had.\" In 2007, \"Mother Jones\" reported that \"The Washington Times\" had become \"essential reading for political news junkies\" soon after its founding, and described it as a \"conservative newspaper with close ties to every Republican administration since Reagan.\"\nIn August 2008, in a \"Harper's\" essay, American historian Thomas Frank linked \"The Washington Times\" to the modern American conservative movement, saying: \"There is even a daily newspaper\u2014\"The Washington Times\"\u2014published strictly for the movement's benefit, a propaganda sheet whose distortions are so obvious and so alien that it puts one in mind of those official party organs one encounters when traveling in authoritarian countries.\"\nIn January 2011, conservative commentator Paul Weyrich said, \"\"The Washington Post\" became very arrogant and they just decided that they would determine what was news and what wasn't news and they wouldn't cover a lot of things that went on. And \"The Washington Times\" has forced the \"Post\" to cover a lot of things that they wouldn't cover if the \"Times\" wasn't in existence.\"\nIn December 2012, \"The New York Times\" wrote that \"The Washington Times\" had become \"a crucial training ground for many rising conservative journalists and a must-read for those in the movement. A veritable who's who of conservatives\u2014Tony Blankley, Frank J. Gaffney Jr., Larry Kudlow, John Podhoretz and Tony Snow\u2014has churned out copy for its pages.\" The \"Columbia Journalism Review\" noted that reporters for \"The Washington Times\" had used it as a springboard to other mainstream news outlets.\nControversies.\nGeneral controversies.\nSome former employees, including Whelan, have insisted that \"The Washington Times\" was always under Moon's control. Whelan, whose contract guaranteed editorial autonomy, left the paper in 1984 when the owners refused to renew his contract. Three years later, editorial page editor William P. Cheshire and four of his staff resigned, charging that, at the explicit direction of Sang Kook Han, a top official of the Unification Church, executive editor Arnaud de Borchgrave had stifled editorial criticism of political repression in South Korea under President Chun Doo-hwan.\nIn 1982, \"The Washington Times\" refused to publish film critic Scott Sublett's negative review of the movie \"Inchon\", which was also sponsored by the Unification Church.\nIn 1988, \"The Washington Times\" published a misleading story suggesting that Democratic presidential candidate Michael Dukakis had sought psychiatric help, and included a quote from Dukakis' sister-in-law saying \"it is possible\" he visited a psychiatrist. However, \"The Washington Times\" clipped the full quote by the sister-in-law, which was: \"It's possible, but I doubt it.\"\nReporter Peggy Weyrich quit in 1991 after one of her articles about Anita Hill's testimony in the Clarence Thomas Supreme Court nominee hearings was rewritten to depict Hill as a \"fantasizer\". During the presidency of Bill Clinton \"The Washington Times\" reporting on his alleged sex scandals was often picked up by other, more respected, news media which contributed to enhanced public awareness of the topic, and eventually to Clinton's impeachment. In 1999 the Senate voted to acquit Clinton, allowing him to complete his second term as president.\nIn a 1997 column in \"The Washington Times\", Frank Gaffney falsely alleged that a seismic incident in Russia was a nuclear detonation at that nation's Novaya Zemlya test site, which would have meant that Russia had violated the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTB). Subsequent scientific analysis of the Novaya Zemlya event showed that it was a routine earthquake. Reporting on the allegation, the \"Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists\" observed that following its publication: \"fax machines around Washington, D.C. and across the country poured out pages detailing Russian duplicity. They came from Frank Gaffney.\"\nIn 2002, \"The Washington Times\" published a story accusing the National Educational Association (NEA), the largest teachers' union in the United States, of teaching students that the policies of the U.S. government were partly responsible for the 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center. The NEA responded to the story by denying all of its accusations. Brendan Nyhan, later a political science professor at the University of Michigan, wrote that \"The Washington Times\" story was a lie and a myth.\nIn 2018, \"The Washington Times\" published a commentary piece by retired U.S. Navy admiral James A. Lyons which promoted conspiracy theories about the murder of Seth Rich. Lyon wrote that it was \"well known in intelligence circles that Seth Rich and his brother, Aaron Rich, downloaded the DNC emails and was paid by WikiLeaks for that information.\" The piece cited no evidence for the assertion. Aaron Rich filed a lawsuit against \"The Washington Times\", saying that it acted with \"reckless disregard for the truth\" and that it did not retract or remove the piece after \"receiving notice of the falsity of the statements about Aaron after the publication\". Rich and \"The Washington Times\" settled their lawsuit, and the paper issued an unusually robust retraction.\nOn January 6, 2021, after violent pro-Trump rioters attacked the United States Capitol, \"The Washington Times\" published a false story quoting an unidentified retired military officer claiming that the facial recognition system company XRVision had used its technology and identified two members of antifa amid the mob. XRVision quickly denied this, sending a cease and desist to \"The Washington Times\", and issued a statement saying that its technology had actually identified two Neo-Nazis and a believer in the QAnon conspiracy theory and that it had not done any detection work for a retired military officer authorized to share that information. On January 7, the article was removed from the website and replaced with a corrected version. Before the correction, Representative Matt Gaetz cited the original story as proof that antifa were partially responsible for the attack in the floor debate of the 2021 United States Electoral College vote count, and it was widely shared on social media.\n\"The Washington Times\" has twice published articles, one written by the ambassador of Turkey to the United States and one by an attorney and lobbyist for the Turkish government, that featured Armenian genocide denial.\nScience coverage.\nClimate change denial.\n\"The Washington Times\" has promoted climate change denial. Michael E. Mann, director of the Earth System Science Center at Pennsylvania State University, characterizes \"The Washington Times\" as a prominent outlet that propagates \"climate change disinformation\". Naomi Oreskes, Professor of the History of Science at Harvard University, and Erik M. Conway, historian of science at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology, wrote in their 2010 book \"Merchants of Doubt\" that \"The Washington Times\" has given the public a false sense that the science of anthropogenic climate change was in dispute by giving disproportionate coverage of fringe viewpoints and by preventing scientists from rebutting coverage in \"The Washington Times\". \"The Washington Times\" reprinted a column by Steve Milloy criticizing research of climate change in the Arctic without disclosing Milloy's financial ties to the fossil fuel industry.\nIn 1993, \"The Washington Times\" published articles purporting to debunk climate change. It headlined its story about the 1997 Kyoto Protocol on climate change: \"Under the deal, the use of coal, oil and other fossil fuel in the United States would be cut by more than one-third by 2002, resulting in lower standards of living for consumers and a long-term reduction in economic growth.\"\nDuring the Climatic Research Unit email controversy (also known as \"Climategate\") in 2009 in the lead-up to the UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen, \"The Washington Times\" wrote in an editorial: \"these revelations of fudged science should have a cooling effect on global-warming hysteria and the panicked policies that are being pushed forward to address the unproven theory.\" Eight committees investigated the controversy and found no evidence of fraud or scientific misconduct. In 2010, \"The Washington Times\" published an article claiming that February 2010 snow storms \"Undermin[e] The Case For Global Warming One Flake At A Time\". A 2014 \"The Washington Times\" editorial mocked the \"global warming scam\" and asserted: \"The planetary thermometer hasn't budged in 15 years. Wildfires, tornadoes, hurricanes and other 'extreme' weather events are at normal or below-normal levels. Pacific islands aren't submerged. There's so much ice the polar bears are celebrating.\" \"The Washington Times\" cited a blog post in support of these claims; PolitiFact fact-checked the claims in the blog post and concluded it was \"pants-on-fire\" false. \"The Washington Times\" later said that a NASA scientist claimed that global warming was on a \"hiatus\" and that NASA had found evidence of global cooling; Rebecca Leber of \"The New Republic\" said that the NASA scientist in question said the opposite of what \"The Washington Times\" claimed.\nIn 2015, \"The Washington Times\" published a column by Republican Texas congressman Lamar Smith in which he argued that the work of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration was \"not good science, [but] science fiction.\" The American Association for the Advancement of Science and six other scientific organizations objected to Smith's politicalisation of scientific research saying: \"Scientists should not be subjected to fraud investigations or harassment simply for providing scientific results that some may see as politically controversial. Science cannot thrive when policymakers\u2014regardless of party affiliation\u2014use policy disagreements as a pretext to attack scientific conclusions.\"\nIn November 2021, a study by the Center for Countering Digital Hate described \"The Washington Times\" as being among \"ten fringe publishers\" that together were responsible for nearly 70 percent of Facebook user interactions with content that denied climate change. Facebook disputed the study's methodology.&lt;ref name=\"Porterfield_11/2/2021\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"Toxic_Ten_11/2/2021\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nOzone depletion denial.\nIn the 1990s, \"The Washington Times\" published columns which cast doubt on the scientific consensus on the causes of ozone depletion (which had led to the \"ozone hole\"). It published columns disputing the science as late as 2000. In 1991, NASA scientists warned of the potential of a major Arctic ozone hole developing in the spring of 1992 due to elevated levels of chlorine monoxide in the Arctic stratosphere. However, as the Arctic winter was unusually warm, the chemical reactions needed for ozone depletion did not occur. Even though the science was not incorrect, \"The Washington Times\", along with other conservative media, subsequently created a \"crying wolf\" narrative, where scientists were portrayed as political activists who were following an environmental agenda rather than the science. In 1992, it published an editorial saying: \"This is not the disinterested, objective, just-the-facts tone one ordinarily expects from scientists... This is the cry of the apocalyptic, laying the groundwork for a decidedly non-scientific end: public policy... it would be nice if the next time NASA cries 'wolf,' fewer journalists, politicians and citizens heed the warning like sheep.\"\nSecond-hand smoke denial.\nIn 1995, \"The Washington Times\" published a column by Fred Singer, who is known for promoting views contrary to mainstream science on a number of issues, where Singer referred to the science on the adverse health impact of second-hand smoke as the \"second-hand smoke scare\" and accused the Environmental Protection Agency of distorting data when it classified second-hand smoke as harmful. Singer's column also denied the scientific consensus on climate change and on the health risks of exposure to environmental radiation. In 1995, \"The Washington Times\" published an editorial titled \"How not to spend science dollars\" condemning a grant to the National Cancer Institute to study how political contributions from tobacco companies shape policy-making and the voting behavior of politicians.\nControversial reporting on the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn January 2020, \"The Washington Times\" published two articles about the COVID-19 pandemic that suggested that the virus was created by the government of the People's Republic of China as a biological weapon. One article quoted a former Israeli intelligence officer as a source. The two articles were shared on hundreds of social media sites, potentially reaching an audience of millions.\nAllegations of racism.\nWesley Pruden controversy.\nUnder Pruden's editorship (1992\u20132008), \"The Washington Times\" regularly printed excerpts from racist hard-right publications including VDARE and \"American Renaissance\", and from Bill White, leader of the American National Socialist Workers' Party, in its Culture Briefs section.\nIn 2013, \"Columbia Journalism Review\" reported that under Pruden's editorship \"The Washington Times\" was: \"a forum for the racialist hard right, including white nationalists, neo-Confederates, and anti-immigrant scare mongers.\" Between 1998 and 2004, the \"Times\" covered every biennial \"American Renaissance\" conference, hosted by the white supremacist New Century Foundation. According to the \"Columbia Journalism Review\", \"the paper's coverage of these events\u2014which are hotbeds for holocaust deniers, neo-Nazis, and eugenicists\u2014was stunningly one sided\", and favorably depicted the conference and attendees. In 2009, journalist David Neiwert wrote that it championed, \"various white-nationalist causes emanating from the neo-Confederate movement (with which, until a recent housecleaning, two senior editors had long associations.)\"\nA page in \"The Washington Times\"' Sunday edition was devoted to the American Civil War, on which the Confederacy was several times described with admiration. In 1993, Pruden gave an interview to the neo-Confederate magazine \"Southern Partisan\", which has been called \"arguably the most important neo-Confederate periodical\" by the Southern Poverty Law Center, where he said: \"Every year I make sure that we have a story in the paper about any observance of Robert E. Lee's birthday.\" Pruden said, \"And the fact that it falls around Martin Luther King's birthday,\" to which a \"Southern Partisan\" interviewer interjected, \"Makes it all the better,\" with Pruden finishing, \"I make sure we have a story. Oh, yes.\"\nSam Francis controversy.\n\"The Washington Times\" employed Sam Francis, a white nationalist, as a columnist and editor, beginning in 1991 after he was chosen by Pat Buchanan to take over his column.\nIn 1995, Francis resigned or was forced out after Dinesh D'Souza reported on racist comments that Francis made at a conference hosted by \"American Renaissance\" the previous year. At the conference, Francis called on whites to: \"reassert our identity and our solidarity, and we must do so in explicitly racial terms through the articulation of a racial consciousness as whites... The civilization that we as whites created in Europe and America could not have developed apart from the genetic endowments of the creating people.\"\nFrancis was an aide to Republican senator John East of North Carolina before joining the editorial staff of \"The Washington Times\" in 1986. Five years later, he became a columnist for the newspaper, and his column became syndicated. In addition to his journalistic career, Francis was an adjunct scholar at the Ludwig von Mises Institute of Auburn, Alabama.\nIn June 1995, editor-in-chief Wesley Pruden \"had cut back on Francis' column\" after \"The Washington Times\" ran his essay criticizing the Southern Baptist Convention for its approval of a resolution which apologized for slavery. In the piece, Francis asserted that \"The contrition of the Southern Baptists for slavery and racism is a bit more than a politically fashionable gesture intended to massage race relations\" and that \"Neither slavery' nor racism' as an institution is a sin.\"\nIn September 1995, Pruden dismissed Francis from \"The Washington Times\" after conservative journalist Dinesh D'Souza, in a column in \"The Washington Post\", described Francis's appearance at the 1994 \"American Renaissance\" conference:\nA lively controversialist, Francis began with some largely valid complaints about how the Southern heritage is demonized in mainstream culture. He went on, however, to attack the liberal principles of humanism and universalism for facilitating \"the war against the white race\". At one point he described country music megastar Garth Brooks as \"repulsive\" because \"he has that stupid universalist song \"(We Shall Be Free)\", in which we all intermarry.\"\nAfter D'Souza's column was published, Pruden \"decided he did not want the \"Times\" associated with such views after looking into other Francis writings, in which he advocated the possible deportation of legal immigrants and forced birth control for welfare mothers.\"\nWhen Francis died in 2005, \"The Washington Times\" wrote a \"glowing\" obituary that omitted his racist beliefs and his firing from the paper, and described him as a \"scholarly, challenging and sometimes pungent writer\"; in response, editor David Mastio of the conservative \"Washington Examiner\" wrote in an obituary: \"Sam Francis was merely a racist and doesn't deserve to be remembered as anything less.\" Mastio added that Francis: \"led a double life \u2013 by day he served up conservative, red meat that was strong but never quite out of bounds by mainstream standards; by night, unbeknownst to the \"Times\" or his syndicate, he pushed white supremacist ideas.\"\nSouthern Poverty Law Center report.\nThe Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) noted that \"The Washington Times\" had, by 2005, published at least 35 articles by Marian Kester Coombs, who was married to managing editor Francis Coombs. She had a record of racially incendiary rhetoric and had written for the white nationalist magazine \"The Occidental Quarterly\", which has been described as a \"stalwart\" of the alt-right movement in the United States and as a \"far-right, racially obsessed US magazine\". The SPLC highlighted columns written by Marian Kester Coombs in \"The Washington Times\", in which she asserted that the whole of human history was \"the struggle of ... races\"; that non-white immigration is the \"importing [of] poverty and revolution\" that will end in \"the eventual loss of sovereign American territory\"; and that Muslims in England \"are turning life in this once pleasant land into a misery for its native inhabitants.\"\nCoverage of Barack Obama.\nIn 2007 \"The Washington Times\"' companion news magazine \"Insight on the News\", also called just \"Insight\", published a story which claimed that someone on the campaign staff of American presidential candidate Senator Hillary Clinton had leaked a report to one of \"Insight's\" reporters which said that Obama had \"spent at least four years in a so-called madrassa, or Muslim seminary, in Indonesia\". \"Insight's\" editor, Jeff Kuhner, also claimed that the source said that the Clinton campaign was \"preparing an accusation that her rival Senator Barack Obama had covered up a brief period he had spent in an Islamic religious school in Indonesia when he was six.\" Clinton denied the allegations. When interviewed by the \"New York Times\", Kuhner refused to name the person said to be the reporter's source to the \"New York Times\".\n\"Insight's\" story was reported on first by conservative talk radio and \"Fox News Channel\", and then by \"The New York Times\" and other major newspapers. CNN reporter John Vause visited State Elementary School Menteng 01, a secular public school which Obama had attended for one year after attending a Roman Catholic school for three, and found that each student received two hours of religious instruction per week in his or her own faith. He was told by Hardi Priyono, deputy headmaster of the school, \"This is a public school. We don't focus on religion. In our daily lives, we try to respect religion, but we don't give preferential treatment.\" Students at Besuki wore Western clothing, and the \"Chicago Tribune\" described the school as \"so progressive that teachers wore miniskirts and all students were encouraged to celebrate Christmas\". Interviews by Nedra Pickler of the Associated Press found that students of all faiths have been welcome there since before Obama's attendance. Akmad Solichin, the vice principal of the school, told Pickler: \"The allegations are completely baseless. Yes, most of our students are Muslim, but there are Christians as well. Everyone's welcome here ... it's a public school.\"\nIn 2008, \"The Washington Times\" published a column by Frank Gaffney that promoted the false conspiracy theories which asserted that President Barack Obama was born in Kenya and was courting the \"jihadist vote\". Gaffney also published pieces in 2009 and 2010 promoting the false assertion that Obama is a Muslim.\nIn a 2009 column entitled \"'Inner Muslim' at work in Cairo\", Pruden wrote that President Obama was the: \"first president without an instinctive appreciation of the culture, history, tradition, common law and literature whence America sprang. The genetic imprint writ large in his 43 predecessors is missing from the Obama DNA.\" In another 2009 column, Pruden wrote that Obama had \"no natural instinct or blood impulse\" for what America was about because he was \"sired by a Kenyan father\" and \"born to a mother attracted to men of the Third World.\" Pruden's columns stirred controversy, leading \"The Washington Times\" to assign David Mastio, its deputy editor, to edit his work.\nIn 2016, \"The Washington Times\" claimed that $3.6 million in federal funds were spent on a 2013 golf outing for President Obama and pro-golfer Tiger Woods which was widely reported on by the American news media in 2013. \"Snopes\" rated the article \"mostly false\", because the estimated cost included both official presidential travel and a brief vacation in Florida. The online article contained hyperlinks to other, unrelated, stories from \"The Washington Times\". These links' appearance were not readily distinguishable from the citation links sometimes used to support or substantiate reporting. Not included in \"The Washington Times\" the article were any links to the Government Accountability Office (GAO) report of expenditure for the 2013 trip, which included a detailed overview of President Obama's activities of February 15 to 18, 2013.\nIslamophobia and anti-Muslim.\nGaffney, known for his \"long history of pushing extreme anti-Muslim views\", wrote weekly columns for \"The Washington Times\" from the late 1990s to 2016. According to John Esposito, a Professor of Religion and International Affairs and of Islamic Studies at Georgetown University, Gaffney's \"editorial track record in the \"Washington Times\" is long on accusation and short on supportive evidence.\" In columns for the \"Times\", Gaffney helped to popularize conspiracy theories that Islamic terrorists were infiltrating the Bush administration, the conservative movement and the Obama administration. In 2015, the \"Times\" published a column describing refugees fleeing the Syrian Civil War as an \"Islamic Trojan Horse\" conducting a \"'jihad' by another name\".\nThe Muslim advocacy group Council on American\u2013Islamic Relations listed \"The Washington Times\" among media outlets it said \"regularly demonstrates or supports Islamophobic themes.\" In 1998, the Egyptian newspaper \"Al-Ahram\" wrote that \"The Washington Times\" its editorial policy was \"rabidly anti-Arab, anti-Muslim and pro-Israel.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31401", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31401", "title": "The nature of God", "text": ""}
{"id": "31403", "revid": "11049176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31403", "title": "Tectonic plates", "text": ""}
{"id": "31404", "revid": "1307699334", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31404", "title": "Tietze extension theorem", "text": "Continuous maps on a closed subset of a normal space can be extended\nIn topology, the Tietze extension theorem (also known as the Tietze\u2013Urysohn\u2013Brouwer extension theorem or Urysohn-Brouwer lemma) states that any real-valued, continuous function on a closed subset of a normal topological space can be extended to the entire space, preserving boundedness if necessary.\nFormal statement.\nIf formula_1 is a normal space and\nformula_2\nis a continuous map from a closed subset formula_3 of formula_1 into the real numbers formula_5 carrying the standard topology, then there exists a continuous extension of formula_6 to formula_7 that is, there exists a map\nformula_8\ncontinuous on all of formula_1 with formula_10 for all formula_11 Moreover, formula_12 may be chosen such that \nformula_13\nthat is, if formula_6 is bounded then formula_12 may be chosen to be bounded (with the same bound as formula_6).\nProof.\nWe prove the theorem in the case where formula_6 is bounded.\nThe function formula_12 is constructed iteratively. Firstly, we define\nformula_19\nObserve that formula_20 and formula_21 are closed and disjoint subsets of formula_3. By taking a linear combination of the function obtained from the proof of Urysohn's lemma, there exists a continuous function formula_23 such that\nformula_24\nand furthermore \nformula_25\non formula_1. In particular, it follows that \nformula_27\non formula_3. We now use induction to construct a sequence of continuous functions formula_29 such that \nformula_30\nWe've shown that this holds for formula_31 and assume that formula_32 have been constructed. Define\nformula_33\nand repeat the above argument replacing formula_34 with formula_35 and replacing formula_6 with formula_37. Then we find that there exists a continuous function formula_38 such that \nformula_39\nBy the inductive hypothesis, formula_40 hence we obtain the required identities and the induction is complete. Now, we define a continuous function formula_41 as \nformula_42\nGiven formula_43,\nformula_44\nTherefore, the sequence formula_45 is Cauchy. Since the space of continuous functions on formula_1 together with the sup norm is a complete metric space, it follows that there exists a continuous function formula_47 such that formula_48 converges uniformly to formula_12. Since \nformula_50\non formula_3, it follows that formula_52 on formula_3. Finally, we observe that \nformula_54\nhence formula_12 is bounded and has the same bound as formula_6. formula_57\nHistory.\nL. E. J. Brouwer and Henri Lebesgue proved a special case of the theorem, when formula_1 is a finite-dimensional real vector space. Heinrich Tietze extended it to all metric spaces, and Pavel Urysohn proved the theorem as stated here, for normal topological spaces.\nEquivalent statements.\nThis theorem is equivalent to Urysohn's lemma (which is also equivalent to the normality of the space) and is widely applicable, since all metric spaces and all compact Hausdorff spaces are normal. It can be generalized by replacing formula_5 with formula_60 for some indexing set formula_61 any retract of formula_62 or any normal absolute retract whatsoever.\nVariations.\nIf formula_1 is a metric space, formula_3 a non-empty subset of formula_1 and formula_66 is a Lipschitz continuous function with Lipschitz constant formula_67 then formula_6 can be extended to a Lipschitz continuous function formula_69 with same constant formula_70\nThis theorem is also valid for H\u00f6lder continuous functions, that is, if formula_66 is H\u00f6lder continuous function with constant less than or equal to formula_72 then formula_6 can be extended to a H\u00f6lder continuous function formula_69 with the same constant.\nAnother variant (in fact, generalization) of Tietze's theorem is due to H.Tong and Z. Ercan:\nLet formula_3 be a closed subset of a normal topological space formula_76 If formula_77 is an upper semicontinuous function, formula_78 a lower semicontinuous function, and formula_79 a continuous function such that formula_80 for each formula_81 and formula_82 for each formula_83, then there is a continuous\nextension formula_84 of formula_85 such that formula_86 for each formula_87 \nThis theorem is also valid with some additional hypothesis if formula_5 is replaced by a general locally solid Riesz space.\nDugundji (1951) extends the theorem as follows: If formula_1 is a metric space, formula_90 is a locally convex topological vector space, formula_3 is a closed subset of formula_1 and formula_93 is continuous, then it could be extended to a continuous function formula_94 defined on all of formula_1. Moreover, the extension could be chosen such that formula_96\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31408", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31408", "title": "Thomas J. Watson", "text": "American businessman (1874\u20131956)\nThomas John Watson Sr. (February 17, 1874 \u2013 June 19, 1956) was an American businessman who was the chairman and CEO of IBM. He oversaw the company's growth into an international force from 1914 to 1956. Watson developed IBM's management style and corporate culture from John Henry Patterson's training at NCR. He turned the company into a highly effective selling organization, based largely on punched card tabulating machines.\nWatson authorized providing Nazi Germany with data processing solutions and involved IBM in cooperation throughout the 1930s and until the end of World War II, profiting from both the German and American war efforts. A leading self-made industrialist, he was one of the richest men of his time when he died in 1956.\nEarly life and career.\nThomas J. Watson was born in Campbell, New York, in the state's Southern Tier region, the fifth child and only son of Thomas and Jane Fulton White Watson. His four older siblings were Jennie, Effie, Loua, and Emma. His father farmed and owned a modest lumber business located near Painted Post, a few miles west of Corning. Thomas worked on the family farm in East Campbell and attended the District School Number Five in the late 1870s. As Watson entered his teen years he attended Addison Academy in nearby Addison.\nHaving given up his first job\u2014teaching\u2014after just one day, Watson took a year's course in accounting and business at the Miller School of Commerce in Elmira, New York. He left the school in 1891, taking a job at $6 a week as bookkeeper for Clarence Risley's Market in Painted Post. One year later he joined a traveling salesman, George Cornwell, peddling organs and pianos around the farms for William Bronson's local hardware store. When Cornwell left, Watson continued alone, earning $10 per week. After two years of this life, he realized he would be earning $70 per week if he were on a commission. His indignation on making this discovery was such that he quit and moved from his familiar surroundings to the relative metropolis of Buffalo.\nWatson then spent a very brief period selling sewing machines for Wheeler and Wilson. According to his son Thomas J. Watson Jr.'s autobiography:\nOne day my dad went into a roadside saloon to celebrate a sale and had too much to drink. When the bar closed, he found that his entire rig\u2014horse, buggy, and samples\u2014had been stolen. Wheeler and Wilson fired him and dunned him for the lost property. Word got around, of course, and it took Dad more than a year to find another steady job. Watson would later enforce strict rules at IBM against alcohol consumption, even off the job. According to Tom Jr.: This anecdote never made it into IBM lore, which is too bad, because it would have helped explain Father to the tens of thousands of people who had to follow his rules.\nWatson's next job was peddling shares of the Buffalo Building and Loan Company for a huckster named C. B. Barron, a showman renowned for his disreputable conduct, which Watson deplored. Barron absconded with the commission and the loan funds. Next Watson opened a butcher shop in Buffalo, which soon failed, leaving Watson with no money, no investment, and no job.\nNCR.\nWatson had a newly acquired NCR cash register in his butcher shop, for which he had to arrange transfer of its installment payments to the shop's new owner. On visiting NCR he met its Buffalo branch manager, John J. Range, and asked him for a job. Determined to join the company, he repeatedly called on Range until, after a number of abortive attempts, he finally was hired in November 1896, as sales apprentice to Range.\nLed by John Patterson, NCR was then one of the leading selling organizations, and Range became almost a father figure for Watson and was a model for his sales and management style. Under Range's guidance Watson became the most successful salesman in the East, earning $100 per week. In a 1952 interview Watson claimed he learned more from Range than anyone else. Four years later, NCR assigned Watson to run the struggling NCR agency in Rochester, New York. As an agent, he got 35% commission and reported directly to Hugh Chalmers, the second-in-command at NCR. In four years Watson made Rochester effectively an NCR monopoly by using the technique of knocking the main competitor, Hallwood, out of business, sometimes resorting to sabotage of the competitor's machines. As a reward, he was called to the NCR head office in Dayton, Ohio.\nIn 1912, the company was found guilty of violating the Sherman Antitrust Act. Patterson, Watson, and 26 other NCR executives and managers were convicted for illegal anti-competitive sales practices and were sentenced to one year of imprisonment. Their convictions were unpopular with the public because of the efforts of Patterson and Watson to help those affected by the Great Dayton Flood of 1913, but efforts to have them pardoned by President Woodrow Wilson were unsuccessful. However, their convictions were overturned on appeal in 1915 on the grounds that important defense evidence should have been admitted.\nHead of IBM.\nCharles Ranlett Flint, who had engineered the amalgamation (via stock acquisition) forming the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company (CTR) found it difficult to manage the five companies. He hired Watson as general manager on May 1, 1914, when the five companies had about 1,300 employees. Eleven months later Watson was made President when court cases relating to his time at NCR were resolved. Within four years revenues had been doubled to $9\u00a0million. In 1924, he renamed CTR to International Business Machines. Watson built IBM into such a dominant company that the federal government filed a civil antitrust suit against it in 1952. IBM owned and leased to its customers more than 90 percent of all tabulating machines in the United States at the time. When Watson died in 1956, IBM's revenues were $897\u00a0million, and the company had 72,500 employees.\nThroughout his life, Watson maintained a deep interest in international relations, from both a diplomatic and a business perspective. He was known as US President Franklin D. Roosevelt's unofficial ambassador in New York and often entertained foreign statesmen. In 1937, he was elected president of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) and at that year's biennial congress in Berlin stated that the conference keynote would be \"World Peace Through World Trade.\" That phrase became the slogan of both the ICC and IBM.\nDealings with Nazi Germany.\nIn 1937, as President of the International Chamber of Commerce, Watson met Adolf Hitler. During the 1930s, IBM's German subsidiary was its most profitable foreign operation. A 2001 book by Edwin Black, \"IBM and the Holocaust\", claims that Watson's pursuit of profit led him to personally approve and spearhead IBM's strategic technological relationship with Nazi Germany. It describes how IBM provided the tabulating equipment Hitler used to round up the Jews. His Hollerith punch-card machines are in the Holocaust Museum today. The book describes IBM's punch cards as \"a card with standardized holes\", each representing a different trait of the individual. The card was fed into a \"reader\" and sorted. Punch cards identified Jews by name. Each one served as \"a twentieth-century bar code for human beings\". In particular, critics point to the Order of the German Eagle medal that Watson received at the Berlin ICC meeting in 1937, as evidence that he was being honored for the help that IBM's German subsidiary Dehomag (Deutsche Hollerith-Maschinen Gesellschaft mbH) and its punch card machines provided the Nazi regime, particularly in the tabulation of census data (which included the location of Jews). Another study argues that Watson believed, perhaps naively, that the medal was in recognition of his years of labor on behalf of global commerce and international peace.[please add a precise citation page]\nBecause of his strong feelings about the issue, Watson wanted to return his German citation shortly after receiving it. When Secretary of State Hull advised him against that course of action, he gave up the idea until the spring of 1940. Then Hull refused advice, and Watson sent the medal back in June 1940. Dehomag's management disapproved of Watson's action and considered separating from IBM. This occurred when Germany declared war on the United States in December 1941, and the German shareholders took custody of the Dehomag operation. However, during World War II, IBM subsidiaries in occupied Europe never stopped delivery of punch cards to Dehomag, and documents uncovered show that senior executives at IBM world headquarters in New York took great pains to maintain legal authority over Dehomag's operations and assets through the personal intervention of IBM managers in neutral Switzerland, directed via personal communications and private letters, which confirms the close ties between the company\u2019s headquarters and its subsidiaries throughout the war.\nDealings with the United States.\nDuring this same period, IBM became more deeply involved in the war effort for the U.S., focusing on producing large quantities of data processing equipment for the military and experimenting with analog computers. Watson Sr. also developed the \"1% doctrine\" for war profits which mandated that IBM receive no more than 1% profit from the sales of military equipment to U.S. Government. Watson was one of the few CEOs to develop such a policy.\nIn 1941, Watson received the third highest salary and compensation package in the U.S., $517,221, on which he paid 69% in tax.\nWatson had a personal interest in the progress of the war. His eldest son, Thomas J. Watson Jr., joined the United States Army Air Corps and became a bomber pilot. He was soon hand-picked to become the assistant and personal pilot for General Follet Bradley, who was in charge of all Lend-Lease equipment supplied to the Soviet Union from the United States. Watson Sr.'s youngest son, Arthur K. Watson, also joined the military during the conflict.\nPost\u2013World War II.\nWatson worked with local leaders to create a college in the Binghamton area, where IBM was founded and had major plants. In 1946, IBM provided land and funding for Triple Cities College, an extension of Syracuse University. Later it became known as Harpur College, and eventually evolved into Binghamton University. \nAfter World War II, Watson began work to further the extent of IBM's influence abroad and in 1949, he created the IBM World Trade Corporation in order to oversee IBM's foreign business.\nWatson retired in May 1956 and his oldest son, Thomas J. Watson Jr., became IBM's CEO. Watson Sr. died on June 19, 1956, in Manhattan, New York City, and was buried in Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Sleepy Hollow, New York.\nPersonal life.\nWatson married Jeanette Kittredge, from a prominent Dayton, Ohio, railroad family, on April 17, 1913. They had two sons and two daughters.\nAs a Democrat (after his criminal indictment by the Taft Administration), Watson was an ardent supporter of Roosevelt. He was one of the most prominent businessmen in the Democratic Party. He was considered Roosevelt's strongest supporter in the business community.\nWatson served as a powerful trustee of Columbia University from June 6, 1933, until his death. He engineered the selection of Dwight D. Eisenhower as its president and played the central role in convincing Eisenhower to become president of the university. Additionally, he served as a trustee of Lafayette College and is the namesake of Watson Hall, a campus residence hall.\nIn 1936 the U.S. Supreme Court upheld a lower court decision that IBM, together with Remington Rand, should cease its practice of requiring its customers to buy their punch cards from it alone. The ruling made little difference because IBM was the only effective supplier to the market, and profits continued undiminished.\nIn 1937, Watson was awarded the Order of the German Eagle by Adolf Hitler. Watson was also president of the International Chamber of Commerce in 1937; the medal was awarded while the ICC was meeting in Germany that year.\nIn 1939, he received an honorary degree in Doctor of Commercial Science from Oglethorpe University.\nIn the 1940s, Watson was on the national executive board of the Boy Scouts of America and served for a time as an international Scout commissioner. E. Urner Goodman recounts that the elderly Watson attended an international Scout commissioners' meeting in Switzerland, where the IBM founder asked not to be put on a pedestal. Before the conference was over, Goodman relates, Watson \"...\u00a0sat by that campfire, in Scout uniform, 'chewing the fat' like the rest of the boys\". He received the Silver Buffalo Award in 1944. His son, Thomas Jr., later served as national president of the Boy Scouts from 1964 to 1968. He was also inducted into the Steuben County, New York Hall of Fame. Throughout his life Watson continued to own and enjoy the family farm on which he was born. In 1955 he and his wife gave it, along with one million dollars, to the Methodist Church for use as a retreat and conference center, to be named Watson Homestead in memory of his parents. Watson Homestead became independent of the church in 1995, and continues as a conference and retreat center. The one-room school that Watson attended as a child is still on the grounds.\nWatson was chairman of the Elmira College centennial committee in 1955 and donated Watson Hall, primarily a music and mathematics academic building.\nWatson was a member of both the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1960) and the American Philosophical Society (1984).\nHe was posthumously inducted into the Junior Achievement U.S. Business Hall of Fame in 1990.\nFamous attribution.\nAlthough Watson is well known for his alleged 1943 statement, \"I think there is a world market for maybe five computers,\" there is scant evidence he said it. Author Kevin Maney tried to find the origin of the quote, but has been unable to locate any speeches or documents of Watson's that contain this, nor are the words present in any contemporary articles about IBM.\nOne of the first attributions is in the German magazine \"Der Spiegel\" of May 22, 1965, stating that IBM boss Thomas Watson had not been interested in the new machines initially, and when the first commercial calculation behemoths appeared in the early 1950s, filling whole floors with thousands of heat generating vacuum tubes, he estimated the demand by the US economy at a maximum of five.\nLater attributions may be found in \"The Experts Speak\", a book written by Christopher Cerf and Victor S. Navasky in 1984. Cerf and Navasky quote from a book written by Morgan and Langford, \"Facts and Fallacies\". Another early article source (May 15, 1985) is a column by Neil Morgan, a \"San Diego Evening Tribune\" writer who wrote: \"Forrest Shumway, chairman of The Signal Cos., doesn't make predictions. His role model is Tom Watson, then IBM chairman, who said in 1958: 'I think there is a world market for about five computers.'\" The earliest known citation on the Internet is from 1986 on Usenet in the signature of a poster from Convex Computer Corporation as \"'I think there is a world market for about five computers' \u2014Remark attributed to Thomas J. Watson (Chairman of the Board of International Business Machines), 1943\". All these early quotes are questioned by Eric Weiss, an editor of the \"Annals of the History of Computing\" in ACS letters in 1985.\nThere are documented versions of similar quotes by other people in the early history of the computer. In 1946 Sir Charles Darwin (grandson of the famous naturalist), head of Britain's NPL (National Physical Laboratory), where research into computers was taking place, wrote: it is very possible that ... one machine would suffice to solve all the problems that are demanded of it from the whole country.\nIn 1985 the story was discussed on Usenet (in net.misc), without Watson's name being attached. The original discussion has not survived, but an explanation has; it attributes a very similar quote to the Cambridge mathematician Professor Douglas Hartree, around 1951:\nI went to see Professor Douglas Hartree, who had built the first differential analyzers in England and had more experience in using these very specialized computers than anyone else. He told me that, in his opinion, all the calculations that would ever be needed in this country could be done on the three digital computers which were then being built\u2014one in Cambridge, one in Teddington, and one in Manchester. No one else, he said, would ever need machines of their own, or would be able to afford to buy them.\nHoward H. Aiken made a similar statement in 1952:\nOriginally one thought that if there were a half dozen large computers in this country, hidden away in research laboratories, this would take care of all requirements we had throughout the country.\nThe story already had been described as a myth in 1973; the \"Economist\" quoted a Mr. Maney as \"revealing that Watson never made his oft-quoted prediction that there was 'a world market for maybe five computers.'\"\nSince the attribution typically is used to demonstrate the fallacy of predictions, if Watson had made such a prediction in 1943, then, as Gordon Bell pointed out in his ACM 50 years celebration keynote, it would have held true for some ten years.\nThe IBM archives of Frequently Asked Questions notes an inquiry about whether he said in the 1950s that he foresaw a market potential for only five electronic computers. The document says no, but quotes his son and then IBM President Thomas J. Watson Jr. at the annual IBM stockholders meeting, April 28, 1953, as speaking about the IBM 701 Electronic Data Processing Machine, which it identifies as \"the company's first production computer designed for scientific calculations\". He said that \"IBM had developed a paper plan for such a machine and took this paper plan across the country to some 20 concerns that we thought could use such a machine. I would like to tell you that the machine rents for between $12,000 and $18,000 a month, so it was not the type of thing that could be sold from place to place. But, as a result of our trip, on which we expected to get orders for five machines, we came home with orders for 18.\" Watson Jr. later gave a slightly different version of the story in his autobiography, where he said the initial market sampling indicated 11 firm takers and 10 more prospective orders.\nFamous motto.\n\"THINK\" \u2013 Watson began using \"THINK\" to motivate, or inspire, staff while at NCR and continued to use it at CTR. International Business Machines's first U.S. trademark was for the name \"THINK\" filed as a U.S. trademark on June 6, 1935, with the description \"periodical publications\". This trademark was filed fourteen years before the company filed for a U.S. trademark on the name IBM. A biographical article in 1940 noted that \"This word is on the most conspicuous wall of every room in every IBM building. Each employee carries a THINK notebook in which to record inspirations. The company stationery, matches, scratch pads all bear the inscription, THINK. A monthly magazine called 'Think' is distributed to the employees.\" THINK remains a part of IBM's corporate culture; it was the inspiration behind naming IBM's successful line of notebook computers, IBM ThinkPad. In 2007, IBM Mid America Employees Federal Credit Union changed its name to Think Mutual Bank.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31409", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31409", "title": "The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck", "text": "1992\u20131994 Disney comics series\nThe Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck (Lo$) is a 12-part comic book storyline written and drawn by Don Rosa, lettered by Todd Klein (American editions), first published by the Danish publisher Egmont in the magazine \"Anders And &amp; Co.\" from 1992 to 1994 and later in English in \"Uncle Scrooge\" #285 through #296 (1994\u201396). It follows the life of Scrooge McDuck from 1877 to 1947, the year of his real-life debut, working in almost every event about his past referenced in stories by Carl Barks.\nRosa earned the Will Eisner Award for Best Serialized Story in 1995 for this story. The trade paperback collection was also a top vote-getter for the Comics Buyer's Guide Fan Award for Favorite Reprint Graphic Novel/Album for 1997.\nAfter being out of print for several years with high demand, the book was reprinted under the BOOM! Studios label in two deluxe hardcover volumes, and again under Fantagraphics Books.\nThe Finnish composer Tuomas Holopainen released a concept album based on the book, titled \"Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge\". Don Rosa illustrated the cover artwork for the album.\nChapter list.\nCensorship.\nIn February 2023, The Walt Disney Company instated a worldwide ban from reprinting two of Don Rosa's duck stories; \"The Empire-Builder from Calisota\" (listed as \"The Richest Duck in the World\" in the announcement) and \"The Dream of a Lifetime\". Both stories were noted by Rosa to feature the character Bombie the Zombie, a zombie sent by the leader of a Voodoo tribe to haunt Scrooge, making future collections or reprints of \"Lo$\" impossible as Rosa views the character to be integral to the story.\nHistorical figures appearing in the work.\nSeveral notable historical figures appear in the series:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther notable historical figures mentioned include:\nCollected editions.\nThe series has also been collected in volumes 4 and 5 of The Don Rosa Library, as \"The Last of the Clan McDuck\" and \"The Richest Duck in the World\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31410", "revid": "4460044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31410", "title": "The Lower 48", "text": ""}
{"id": "31411", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31411", "title": "Clan McDuck", "text": "Disney comics characters\nThe Clan McDuck is a fictional Scottish clan of cartoon ducks from which Disney character Scrooge McDuck is descended. Within the Donald Duck universe, the clan is related to the American Duck family through the marriage of Hortense McDuck and Quackmore Duck, Donald and Della Duck's parents, giving both of them partial Scottish ancestry.\nClan McDuck was created by American comic book author Carl Barks, who also created the character of Scrooge McDuck. Barks' 1948 story \"The Old Castle's Secret,\" in which Scrooge and his nephews search for hidden treasure in McDuck Castle, introduced the backstory of the clan. Other authors built on Barks' work, most notably Don Rosa in his 12-part comic saga \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\" (1992\u201394) which introduced Scrooge's immediate family.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLiterary origins.\n Carl Barks (left) and Don Rosa (right)\nIn the early 1950s, Carl Barks was in his second decade of creating comic book stories starring Donald Duck and his various relatives. He had personally created several of the latter, including cousin Gladstone Gander and uncle Scrooge McDuck, although the specific relationships between them were still uncertain. To better define these relationships, Barks created a version of the McDuck/Duck/Coot family tree for his own personal benefit, incidentally creating several additional characters.\nDuring his retirement, Barks' stories remained popular and gained him unexpected fame. Barks gave several interviews during which he answered questions about his stories and the characters he had created. In 1981, Barks described his personal version of Donald's family tree, which was used by amateur artist Mark Worden in drawing the family tree and including portraits of the characters mentioned. Worden's tree was first published in several fanzines, and later in the Disney-licensed \"Carl Barks Library\", a ten-volume hardcover collection of Barks' stories in black-and-white.\nIn 1987, Don Rosa, a long-time fan of Carl Barks and a personal friend of Mark Worden, started creating his own stories featuring Scrooge McDuck. His stories contained numerous references to older stories by Barks as well as several original ideas. After several years he gained a fan base of his own. In the early 1990s, the Egmont Group, the publishing house employing Rosa, offered him an ambitious assignment: he was to create the definitive version of Scrooge's biography and a family tree to accompany it. The project was intended to end decades of contradictions between stories which caused confusion to readers. The project was to become \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\". The family tree accompanying it was first published in Norway on July 3, 1993.\nIn the process of working on Scrooge's biography, Rosa studied Barks' old stories in detail. Rosa made note of as many clues as he could of Scrooge's past given by Barks \u2013 which Rosa dubbed \"Barksian facts\" \u2013 and used them to write new stories. Despite the ambitious nature of the project, Rosa himself stressed in the introduction to the book \"...this version of Scrooge's life is not the 'official' version \u2013 there's no particular reason why I (or anyone else) should expect other Duck writers to adhere to my vision of Scrooge's history. As carefully and authentically as I sought to construct it, it was never intended to be anything but my personal telling of the life of Scrooge McDuck.\"\nModern family tree by Carl Barks.\nThe family tree below shows the McDuck portion of Donald's family tree according to Carl Barks. The chart is based on a 1950s sketch made by Barks for personal use, which was later illustrated by artist Mark Worden in 1981. According to Barks, Matilda McDuck is married to Goosetail Gander, and the couple adopts Donald's cousin Gladstone. The character Old \"Scotty\" McDuck does not appear in any stories, but eventually became Fergus McDuck in Don Rosa's stories.\nModern family tree by Don Rosa.\nThis family tree is based on the work of Don Rosa.\nThe seat of Clan McDuck.\nThe seat of Clan McDuck is McDuck Castle (alternately called Castle McDuck) which is located in Dismal Downs, somewhere in Rannoch Moor, a non-fictional moorland area in north-central Scotland approximately 100 miles (160\u00a0km) north of Glasgow. The nearest village is the fictional MacDuich. The castle usually appears in good condition considering its great age. However, in the Barks story \"Hound of the Whiskervilles\" (1960) the castle is in ruins.\nThe comics continuity does not establish when McDuck Castle was built, but it first appears (on the fictional timeline) in 946 when the Saxons laid siege to it. For many centuries the castle served as the home of the clan chief. In 1675, the McDucks were run out of the castle due to the depredations of a \"monstrous devil dog\" in Dismal Downs, later discovered to be a plot by the rival Clan Whiskerville. At this time, many of the McDucks moved to the village of MacDuich and to Glasgow. Even after their departure, the clan still owned the castle and continued to pay the taxes by pooling their incomes. By 1885, only Fergus and Jake McDuck remain to pay the taxes, but their combined income is not enough, causing the Crown to auction it off. Scrooge then buys the estate, allowing his family to reoccupy the castle. He also hires local dogface Scottie McTerrier as caretaker. Sometime after Scottie's death, Scrooge's sister Matilda becomes caretaker.\nIn the \"DuckTales\" continuity, Castle McDuck was built by Scrooge's great-great grandfather Silas who incorporated the castle into an existing Druid stone circle to save on construction costs. This story would date the castle itself to about the 18th century. The Druids, seeking revenge on the McDucks for taking away their sacred meeting place, scared the clan away using trained phosphorescent hounds. Years later, Scrooge returns with Huey, Dewey, Louie, and Webby and uncovers the mystery. Scrooge befriends the Druids and partners with them to turn Castle McDuck into a tourist attraction. Scrooge plans to give a share of the profit to the Druids as reparations for desecrating their stone circle. The story is loosely based on the Barks story \"Hound of the Whiskervilles\", which was in turn loosely based on \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\". In the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series, the castle is Clan McDuck's ancestral home, as in the comics, and is protected by the spirits of the McDuck ancestors buried there. Scrooge used part of his fortune to purchase and restore the castle as a home for his parents, but because he used discount druid stones, his parents were cursed with immortality and bound to the castle, which appears only once every five years.\nThe castle appears in the Carl Barks stories \"The Old Castle's Secret\" (1948) and \"Hound of the Whiskervilles\" (1960) and in the Don Rosa stories \"The Last of the Clan McDuck\" (1992), \"The New Laird of Castle McDuck\" (1993), \"The Billionaire of Dismal Downs\" (1993) and \"The Old Castle's Other Secret or A Letter from Home\" (2004). Other comic book authors have also used the castle, such as Andrew Galton, Dave Angus, and Vicar in \"The Crying Monster\" (1982). In the 1987 TV series \"DuckTales\", McDuck Castle appears in the episode \"The Curse of Castle McDuck\". In the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series, the castle is the setting of the episodes \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck!\" and \"The Fight for Castle McDuck!\"\nTartan of Clan McDuck.\nThe fictional McDuck tartan first appears in 1960 in \"Hound of the Whiskervilles\". However, the coloring of the tartan was not Barks' decision but that of colorists working for Dell Comics, which first published the story; subsequent publications showed the tartan having differing colors. When Don Rosa decided to include the tartan in his stories, he used the original coloring of green and orange. Nevertheless, some European publications have still shown variations in Rosa's color scheme. (See Sir Roast McDuck's tam o' shanter cap in the illustration at the top of the page, which was first published in France.) The old clansmen seen on \"DuckTales\" wear a green and orange tartan, but of a slightly different design from that of the comics.\nAncient McDucks.\nScrooge Shah and Prince Donduk.\nScrooge Shah was the last king of Sagbad and the earliest known ancestor of Scrooge McDuck. A young King Khan Khan (2050 BC-1967 BC) sacked the city of Sagbad in 2033 BC, but Scrooge Shah and Prince Donduk, his heir apparent, managed to escape. Khan Khan lost their tracks, but would much later locate their distant descendants. Prince Donduk also has three unnamed nephews who resemble Huey, Dewey, and Louie. Scrooge Shah features in the story \"King Scrooge the First\" (1967) by Carl Barks and Tony Strobl.\nPostclassical McDucks.\nEider McDuck.\nSir Eider McDuck (880-946; from earlier Eider MacDuich) was the chief of Clan McDuck during an Anglo-Saxon invasion in 946 (despite England and Scotland signing a peace treaty in 945). Eider was killed during the Anglo-Saxons' siege of McDuck Castle after his serfs abandoned him. He had refused to buy them arrows because they were too expensive, and only paid his serfs, collectively, 30 copper pieces an hour. Eider McDuck is first mentioned in Barks' \"The Old Castle's Secret\" (1948).\nFriar Juicy McDuck (910-971) and Sir Smokt McDuck (b. 931) are buried in the McDuck cemetery as seen in the Carl Barks painting \"Dubious Doings at Dismal Downs\".\nEider makes a cameo appearance in the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series episode, \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck!\", both as a statue in front of the titular Castle McDuck and as a ghost.\nSlye MacDuich.\nSlye MacDuich who was enlisted as a spy for Malcolm II of Scotland, in 1018, during his conquest of the Angles.\nQuackly McDuck.\nSir Quackly McDuck (1010-1057; from earlier Quackly MacDuich) was clan chief when King Macbeth was killed in 1057. That same year, Macbeth offered Quackly a treasure chest in exchange for his support in the ongoing war for the throne. Quackly agreed and served the king during the war, but became obsessed with protecting the treasure, eventually trapping himself inside the castle walls with it. Quackly and his treasure became a McDuck legend, and it is believed that his ghost continues to protect the treasure and the castle.\nIn 1877, Quackly's ghost saves a young Scrooge McDuck from the Whiskervilles of Dismal Downs. Without revealing his true identity, he suggests to Scrooge that he travel to America and work for his Uncle Pothole, thus serving as the catalyst for all of Scrooge's adventures. In 1885, Quackly again tries to save Scrooge, but his action unintentionally brings about Scrooge's temporary death. In heaven, Quackly is reprimanded by his relatives for interfering in earthly events. Quackly McDuck is first mentioned in \"The Old Castle's Secret\" (1948) by Carl Barks, and first appears in \"The Last of the Clan McDuck\" (1994) by Don Rosa.\nMurdoch McDuck.\nSir Murdoch McDuck (?-1066; from earlier Murdoch MacDuich) was a businessman who patented the longbow. Most notably in 1066, when the Normans invaded England, he had the latter sign a contract with him so they would have enough longbows to fight off the invaders. However, they did not have enough arrows as Sir Murdoch charged extra for them. He is also the last of the Dark Ages McDucks and the one who modernized their family name \"MacDuich\" to the more familiar \"McDuck\". He only appears in the unfinished sketch-only story \"The History of the Clan McDuck\" (written and drawn approx. in 1992 by Don Rosa, but not released until December 2011), which was meant to serve as a prologue to \"The Last of the Clan McDuck\" before it was scrapped.\nIn the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series episode, \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck!\", Downy McDuck relates Murdoch's history (which remains intact) to Huey, Dewey, and Louie Duck, and Webby Vanderquack. His longbow is later used as a clue that the boys use to uncover the mystery behind their mother, Della's, disappearance.\nStuft McDuck.\nSir Stuft McDuck (1110-1175) was a successful chief of Clan McDuck who oversaw a period of prosperity.\nRoast McDuck.\nSir Roast McDuck (1159-1205) succeeded his father, Stuft McDuck, as clan chief, while Clan McDuck was one of the richest clans in Scotland. However, in 1189, Roast offered much of the clan's wealth to the king of Scotland, William the Lion, after William asked for his help in paying tribute to Richard I of England. This act of patriotic generosity led to financial ruin for the clan. Aside from this imprudence, Roast is primarily remembered for his gluttony. In 1205, he raided the king's pantry and ate himself to death. Roast's memorial suit of armor displayed in Castle McDuck holds a knife and fork in its hands. The character is first mentioned in \"The Old Castle's Secret\" (1948) by Carl Barks. He has a small speaking role in \"The Last of the Clan McDuck\" (1994), but makes his first appearance in \"The New Laird of Castle McDuck\".\nHis ghost makes a cameo appearance in the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series episode, \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck!\"\nSwamphole McDuck.\nSir Swamphole McDuck (1190-1260) succeeded his father, Roast McDuck, as clan chief and inherited its financial problems. In 1220, Swamphole sealed the dungeon of Castle McDuck, which he claimed was an attempt to decrease maintenance costs. He did, however, create secret passageways in the castle leading to the dungeons. (These passageways would later be useful during subsequent sieges.) After his death in 1260, Swamphole was not buried in the clan cemetery; rather, his skeleton was placed inside his memorial suit of armor, which was placed in Castle McDuck. Swamphole McDuck is first mentioned in \"The Old Castle's Secret\" by Carl Barks. In \"The Old Castle's Other Secret or A Letter from Home\" (2004) by Don Rosa, it is revealed that Swamphole sealed the dungeons not to reduce maintenance costs, but to conceal a treasure.\nIn the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series episode, \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck!\", he is stated to be a treasure hunter (like Scrooge) who constructed secret passageways underneath Castle McDuck and let loose a demon dog to protect his treasure. His ghost later appears to ward off said demon dog alongside the ghosts of several of his family members.\nDonald McDuck.\nSir Donald McDuck, nicknamed \"Black Donald\" because of his foul temper, is said to have invented golf, the hammer throw, and the caber toss in 1440. His temper while playing golf resulted in James II of Scotland outlawing the sport. Black Donald is mentioned in \"The History of the Clan McDuck\" by Don Rosa.\nIn the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series episode \"The Missing Links of Moorshire!\", Scrooge McDuck relates the story of how \"Black Donald\" McDuck invented golf and subsequently got it banned due to his temper to Dewey, Louie, and Webby before participating in a golf tournament in Scotland.\nSimon McDuck.\nSir Simon McDuck (1437-1509) was the treasurer of the Knights Templar and hid their treasure beneath McDuck Castle. He is mentioned in \"The Old Castle's Other Secret or A Letter from Home\" (2004) by Don Rosa.\nIn the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series episode, \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck\", Scrooge McDuck states Simon was the \"accountant\" to the Knights Templar who had stolen and hidden their treasure somewhere underneath Castle McDuck, and he had returned to his father Fergus to reluctantly ask for his help in finding it since he knows where it is. His ghost appears later in the episode to stop a ghost hound from attacking Scrooge's grandnephews, Huey, Dewey, and Louie.\nEarly modern McDucks.\nMalcolm \"Matey\" McDuck.\nMalcolm \"Matey\" McDuck (1530-1564?) was a McDuck relative who settled in England and is suggested to be a previous incarnation of Scrooge McDuck. Malcolm served in the English Navy, and in 1563 he became first mate of the frigate HMS \"Falcon Rover\", serving under Captain Loyal Hawk. The \"Falcon Rover\" raided Spanish targets in the Caribbean Sea between 1563 and 1564. Also serving on the \"Falcon Rover\" was the boatswain, Pintail Duck, whose descendant, Quackmore Duck, would marry Malcolm's descendant, Hortense McDuck. The two were the parents of twins Donald and Della Duck.\nMalcolm is said to have lost his life on 9 December 1564 when the Spanish fleet sank HMS \"Falcon Rover\". However, in 1579, Malcolm was also said to have commanded the newly founded Fort Drakeborough, an establishment that in 1818 was taken over by Cornelius Coot and renamed Fort Duckburg. Malcolm first appears in \"Back to Long Ago!\" (1956) by Carl Barks.\nHe is mentioned on Webby Vanderquack's family chart in the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series.\nLocksley McDuck.\nLocksley McDuck was an 18th-century McDuck relative. Sometime after 1707, he became an associate of Scottish outlaw Rob Roy MacGregor who is characterized as a noble thief who would \"rob from the rich to give to the poor\". Locksley's alliance with MacGregor would come to an end after Locksley was unable to \"give to the poor\" after having robbed the rich. He is mentioned in \"The History of The Clan McDuck\" by Don Rosa. His name is derived from the English village of Loxley, the traditional birthplace of Robin Hood.\nHugh \"Seafoam\" McDuck.\nCaptain Hugh \"Seafoam\" McDuck (1710-1776) was a McDuck relative who settled in Glasgow in 1727, as the clan had been driven from their ancestral home of Dismal Downs in 1675. Hugh turned to the sea for a living and became a successful merchant. He obtained his own ship, the \"Golden Goose\", and became known by the nickname \"Seafoam\".\nIn 1753, Seafoam McDuck signed a contract with Swindle McSue to deliver a cargo of horseradish to Jamaica. But McSue sabotaged the \"Golden Goose\" and the ship sank before reaching Jamaica. Upon returning to Scotland, Seafoam McDuck learned that his contract with McSue contained fine print stating that if the shipment was not completed, McDuck would forfeit all his possessions to McSue. Seafoam escaped with nothing but the clothes on his back, a silver pocket watch, and the golden dentures in his mouth. It is later presumed that Seafoam was involved in the American Revolutionary War and died in 1776. His descendant Quagmire McDuck inherited the silver pocket watch. Seafoam McDuck first appears in \"The Horseradish Story\" (1953) by Carl Barks. According to Don Rosa, he is Scrooge's great-great-great-grandfather.\nHis ghost makes a cameo appearance in the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series episode, \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck\".\nPotcrack McDuck.\nPotcrack McDuck was a member of Clan McDuck, who invented steam-powered bagpipes in 1767, his invention later inspired James Watt to create the steam engine.\nSilas McDuck.\nSilas McDuck was a member of Clan McDuck and Scrooge's\ngreat-great-grandfather. He was very wealthy and built Castle McDuck for his large family to live in. Despite the ground being cursed by druids, Silas finished the constructions and the McDucks moved in, only to be scared away by the frightening Hound of Castle McDuck. Spending what little he had left from erecting the castle, Silas built Cottage McDuck, where the family lived in poverty until Scrooge left for America.\nModern McDucks (1st generation).\nDingus McDuck.\n\"Dirty\" Dingus McDuck, was Scrooge's paternal grandfather. He worked as a coal miner, married Molly Mallard, and had three sons \u2013 Angus, Fergus, and Jake. He appeared in Don Rosa's illustrated family tree, but has not appeared in any comic book stories. A 1960s story by Bob Gregory and Tony Strobl identifies Scrooge's grandfather as Titus McDuck.\nIn the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series episode, \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck\", Dingus is revealed to have had an antagonistic relationship with his son, Fergus (not unlike that of the latter and his son, Scrooge). In fact, knowing he would seek out Simon McDuck's treasure, he left his son a note telling him to work hard and not accept hand-outs inside a hidden chamber underneath Castle McDuck.\nMolly Mallard.\nMolly McDuck (n\u00e9e Mallard) was the wife of Dingus McDuck, Scrooge's paternal grandmother, and the mother of Angus, Fergus, and Jake McDuck. Her first and only appearance was in an illustrated family tree created by Don Rosa; she has not appeared in any stories. Coincidentally, her maiden name is the same as the title character of \"Darkwing Duck.\"\nHer ghost makes a cameo appearance in the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series' episode, \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck!\"\nQuagmire McDuck.\nQuagmire McDuck was Dingus McDuck's brother and Scrooge McDuck's paternal great uncle. He inherited a silver watch from his ancestor Hugh \"Seafoam\" McDuck and passed it on to his nephew Fergus. After his death, Quagmire's estate remained unclaimed. Quagmire appears in the Carl Barks story \"The Heirloom Watch\" (1955).\nHis ghost makes a cameo appearance in the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series episode, \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck\".\nModern McDucks (2nd generation).\nAngus \"Pothole\" McDuck.\nAngus \"Pothole\" McDuck (born 1829) is the first child of Dingus and Molly McDuck, and is Scrooge's paternal uncle. Angus was born in Glasgow in 1829. He was first mentioned in \"The Great Steamboat Race\" by Carl Barks and later appeared in person in a handful of stories by Don Rosa.\nAngus migrated to the United States during the late 1840s. In 1850 he was working as a cabin boy in the Mississippi riverboat \"Drennan Whyte\" when it sank. He was the only survivor. He continued working on Mississippi riverboats and he had obtained his own by 1861, named \"Cotton Queen\". Around the time of the American Civil War (1861\u20131865) he became quite successful as a river boater. Soon after the end of the war in 1865 he and fellow river boater Porker Hogg became the co-owners of Cornpone Gables, a Southern plantation that had gone bankrupt. The two were unable to settle their differences and they decided to have a riverboat race in 1870 to decide who would be the owner. Both riverboats sank. Porker had two more riverboats but Angus spent the next ten years as a professional card player.\nIn 1880, in a poker game with Porker, Angus won the rights to one of his rival's riverboats, named \"Dilly Dollar\". Porker soon lost his other riverboat to Blackheart Beagle and his sons, the first generation of the Beagle Boys, a family of outlaws, and retired. Angus on the other hand hired his nephew Scrooge McDuck and a penniless inventor named Ratchet Gearloose as his crew. Business wasn't going well and Angus decided to retire in 1882. He left his riverboat to his nephew and settled down in New Orleans.\nHe became the writer of a series of dime novels under the title \"The Master of Mississippi\", based on a highly exaggerated description of his life. His dime novels became very popular and to have more material to add he occasionally traveled through the country. In the story \"The Vigilante of Pizen Bluff\" by Don Rosa, he is seen appearing at Buffalo Bill's Wild West. After the show's money is stolen by the Dalton Gang, Angus rides out with Bill, Scrooge, P. T. Barnum, Annie Oakley, and Geronimo to stop the bandits.\nAngus' exact date of death is unknown.\nIn 1955, Porker's nephew, Horseshoe Hogg, and Scrooge McDuck would bring their uncles' steamboats back to the surface to finish the race for Cornpone Gables. Scrooge won, only to learn that 85 years of disuse made the mansion so fragile that he accidentally destroyed it with a sneeze.\nA character based on Angus named \"Catfish\" McDuck appears in the 1987 \"DuckTales\" episode, \"Once Upon a Dime\", voiced by Peter Renaday,\nFergus McDuck.\nFergus McDuck (1835\u20131902) is the second child of Dingus and Molly McDuck and the father of Scrooge McDuck. As such he is a prominent character in \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\".\nHe was born in Glasgow in 1835 to Dingus McDuck and Molly Mallard, who were both working as coal miners at the time. He spent most of his life as a mill worker.\nAccording to a story by William Van Horn, Fergus at some point had a short marriage with an unidentified woman, with whom he had the son Rumpus McFowl. He later married Downy O'Drake, his wife in Rosa's stories, who became the mother of three of his children \u2013 Scrooge, Matilda, and Hortense.\nThe rest of Fergus' biography is shown in \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\". In 1877 he encouraged his son to work to have his own money. Scrooge's obvious intelligence, skill at hard work and ambition made his father believe that Scrooge would be able to restore Clan McDuck to its former glory. In the story \"Of Ducks, Dimes, and Destinies\", it is revealed that Scrooge's Number One Dime came from Fergus, who gave it to the man who used it to pay Scrooge for shining his shoes.\nIn 1885 the Clan's hereditary lands would have been seized due to Fergus' inability to pay his taxes. But Scrooge spent his savings at the time ($10,000) to pay the taxes and become the new owner of their lands. While Scrooge was away, Fergus and his family moved back to Castle McDuck, abandoned for centuries in Dismal Downs. The family continued to work to pay for the taxes, and Scrooge sent them money he earned while traveling. Fergus became a widower in 1897.\nScrooge became rich in the Klondike and returned to Scotland in 1902 as a billionaire. Scrooge's intention was originally to settle in Dismal Downs, but he quickly changed his mind and decided to settle in the United States. He wanted to take his family with him. His sisters accepted, but Fergus decided to stay. He died during the night, aged 72, and was re-united with his wife Downy and the rest of the McDuck Clan as his three children left Scotland.\nIn Don Rosa's \"The Old Castle's Other Secret or A Letter from Home\" (2004), it's revealed that Fergus tried to find the Knights Templar treasure hidden in the castle McDuck by one of his ancestors, a Knight himself. Even though Fergus decided not to tell Scrooge about the treasure, he learns about it through other ways and, like Matilda McDuck, thinks Fergus kept the secret from him because he disapproved of Scrooge. In the middle of their way to the treasure, Scrooge, Matilda and Scrooge's nephews find a letter from Fergus, who believed Scrooge would eventually find it, revealing the reason he hid the secret from Scrooge is that Scrooge would feel better building his own fortune instead of inheriting one.\nFergus appears in the classic 1987 \"DuckTales\" episode, \"Once Upon a Dime\", which explores Scrooge's history. Here he is referred to as \"McPapa.\" Fergus' name and image are also present in the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series, which draws heavily from the comics. He later appears in the episode \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck!\", having survived to the present day due to Scrooge rebuilding Castle McDuck using magic stones that granted his parents immortality. Scrooge and Fergus' relationship is initially tense, with the latter expressing apparent disapproval of the former; though in reality, he was upset because Scrooge had not been a part of his life. They later reconcile after Fergus reveals he was the one who gave Scrooge his Number One Dime, via Burt the Ditch Digger, in order to give him the gift of \"self-reliance\" since he was unable to afford a proper gift for him. Alan Young, who voiced Scrooge in the original series, was meant to provide Fergus's voice, but died before he could record any dialogue and the role went to Graham McTavish.\nIn the 1993 NES game \"DuckTales 2\", Scrooge and his nephews found a piece of a treasure map that led to the lost treasure of a character named Fergus McDuck. However, this Fergus is not Scrooge's father but Scrooge's great-great-uncle.\nDowny O'Drake.\nDowny McDuck (n\u00e9e O'Drake; 1840\u20131897) is Scrooge McDuck's mother. She was created by Don Rosa and first appears in \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\". She is of Irish origin and was born in 1840.\nShe was a very devoted housewife and mother. She settled in Castle McDuck at Dismal Downs, Clan McDuck's old castle, along with her family in 1885. She died in 1897, and was buried in the McDucks' cemetery. She later appeared to her husband Fergus at his own passing, and together they joined various McDuck ancestors.\nDowny's image and name are also present in the 2017 incarnation of \"DuckTales\", usually alongside those of her husband. Alongside Fergus, she makes a physical appearance in the episode, \"The Secret(s) of Castle McDuck!\", voiced by Ashley Jensen.\nJake McDuck.\nJake McDuck (1832\u2013?) is Scrooge McDuck's uncle. He was mentioned in the story \"A Christmas for Shacktown\" (1952) by Carl Barks, in which Donald Duck dresses up as Jake in an attempt to trick Scrooge into giving money to charity.\nThe character was later used by Don Rosa, and appears in three of twelve original chapters of Rosa's \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\". He lived in the same house as his brother Fergus McDuck and helped Fergus and his wife Downy O'Drake to raise their children. He settled in McDuck castle along with his brother in 1885. However, it appears that by 1902, Jake was no longer living there.\nAccording to Rosa's sketches and timelines, Jake was born in 1832 to coal miners Dingus McDuck and Molly Mallard, and grew up to become a stockyard hand in Glasgow. His date of death is unknown, but it appears that both Scrooge and Donald believed him to be alive in 1952.\nModern McDucks (3rd generation).\nScrooge McDuck.\nScrooge McDuck (1867, according to Don Rosa) is the first child of Fergus and Downy McDuck and is the protagonist of most stories involving the Clan McDuck. Unlike his two younger sisters, he remains unmarried, but in \"The Last Adventure!\" of the DuckTales series, Webby is revealed to actually be Scrooge's daughter via cloning and her original F.O.W.L. given name is April. This is in a reboot/alternate universe. In the original Webby and April are two separate characters and neither are related to Scrooge. Also, he comes to maintain close relationships with his nephew Donald Duck and his grandnephews Huey, Dewey, and Louie Duck.\nMatilda McDuck.\nMatilda McDuck (born 1871) is one of Scrooge McDuck's two younger sisters, the maternal aunt of his niece and nephew, Donald Duck and Della Duck and the maternal grandaunt of Huey, Dewey, and Louie. She was first mentioned in Carl Barks' 1950s sketch for a Duck family tree, where she was shown to have adopted Gladstone Gander. The Matilda McDuck character was dropped in Barks' 1991 Duck Family Tree sketch (where Gladstone Gander is the biological grandson of Grandma Duck and not related to Scrooge), but Don Rosa picked up the name, and used Matilda McDuck as a prominent character in \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\".\nMatilda McDuck was born in Glasgow, Scotland, in 1871 to Fergus McDuck and Downy O'Drake. She is the younger sister of Scrooge McDuck. She has a younger sister named Hortense.\nIn contrast to Scrooge and Hortense's fiery tempers, she usually had a calm demeanor. In 1902 Scrooge returned to Scotland and took both of his younger sisters with him to go to America. When he established his base in Duckburg, Calisota, United States he left Matilda and Hortense to run his empire from 1902 to 1930. In the meantime he traveled the world expanding his financial empire. In 1930, a conflict with Scrooge ended all relationships between him and his family, and his younger sisters are believed to have left Duckburg.\nIn the story \"The Old Castle's Other Secret or A Letter from Home\" (2004), Don Rosa used Matilda McDuck in a non-\"Life and Times\" story for the first time. In this story, it is shown that she was hired by her nephew Donald Duck (son of Hortense) to tend the McDuck castle in Scotland. The story shows the reconciliation between Matilda and Scrooge. It is suggested that Donald deliberately set them up for a reunion. Unfortunately, he did not get the thanks he expected until Scrooge admitted his shameful actions and regrets. This is the first time Huey, Dewey, and Louie met their maternal great aunt. In that story, Scrooge returns to McDuck Castle for another treasure and learns from Matilda that his family already knew about the treasure but their father Fergus decided not to tell Scrooge about it. Both Scrooge and Matilda thought that was because of Fergus' disapproval of Scrooge's greedy ways but after finding a letter on the way for the treasure (hence the other title \"A Letter from Home\") they learn Fergus's real motive was that he thought Scrooge would feel better building his own fortune instead of simply inheriting one.\nMatilda, while trying to leave the castle, mentions Hortense. However, in the commentary in the American printing of the story, Don Rosa states that he was prevented from using Hortense because he would have had to explain why she had abandoned her family. So Hortense's fate remains a mystery. In the notes to the Danish publication of the story (Hall of Fame - Don Rosa Book 10), it is stated that the publisher decided that Hortense was \"officially dead\".\nMatilda is usually drawn with a flower on her hat, which loses a petal in each panel in which she appears.\nDon Rosa has suggested that Matilda McDuck could have married the well-known Disney character Ludwig Von Drake.\nA picture of Matilda appears in the 2017 DuckTales series pilot episode, \"Woo-oo!\", as part of Webby's research on Scrooge's family. She later appears in person in the episode \"The Fight for Castle McDuck!\", voiced by Michelle Gomez.\nHortense McDuck.\nHortense Duck (n\u00e9e \"McDuck\"; b. 1876) was introduced as a relatively well-connected member of her family. A daughter-in-law of Humperdink Duck and Elvira Duck, a younger sister to Matilda McDuck and Scrooge McDuck, wife to Quackmore Duck, sister-in-law of Goostave Gander and Daphne Duck, aunt to Gladstone Gander, mother of Della Duck and Donald Duck, and finally maternal grandmother of Huey, Dewey, and Louie.\nHortense was born in 1876 in Glasgow, Scotland as the youngest child of Fergus McDuck and Downy O'Drake. In Barks' tree, her oldest brother was Scrooge McDuck and her older sister Matilda McDuck. Some non-Barks writers gave Scrooge two half-brothers, Rumpus McFowl and Gideon McDuck, though these do not appear in Barks' conception of the family. De' Paperoni is a twin of Scrooge in a story. Jake McDuck, her paternal uncle, was also living with them.\nHortense was born in a working class family living in relative poverty. In 1877 her ten-year-old brother Scrooge started working as a shoe polisher in an effort to help support his family. At the time Hortense was merely an infant sucking on her thumb. She observed from a distance with her father and sister while her brother earned the number one dime. Scrooge would spend some of his leisure time with his younger sisters, and occasionally repaired their dolls. Otherwise Hortense spent most of her time clinging to her older sister.\nBy 1880, Scrooge came to realize that his earnings were not enough despite his hard work and efforts. He emigrated to the United States in hopes of earning his own fortune. He was hired as a cabin boy on a merchant ship heading to New Orleans. Scrooge noted that Hortense's \"Bye, Scroogey\" were her first spoken words. Before that, all she could say was \"glxblt\".\nFrom an early age it was obvious Hortense had a fairly nasty temper combined with considerable strength, and on at least one occasion (in The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck, Chapter 10) she has been called a spitfire. In 1882, Scrooge was hired as a cowboy by Murdo MacKenzie. To do this he had to ride Widow Maker, a mare who had already managed to dispose of five other cowboys. Scrooge soon managed to become her rider although he never really managed to tame her. He renamed the horse Hortense after his spirited six-year-old sister. The latter found this idea unflattering at best.\nIn 1885, the Clan McDuck's hereditary lands were in danger of being seized due to her father being unable to pay taxes. The lands also included Dismal Downs, the Clan's castle which had been abandoned since 1675. The Whiskervilles, traditional enemies of the McDucks since the 15th century, planned to gain ownership of the lands and were already trying to plunder the castle and its graveyard in search of old relics and treasure. Fergus and Jake guarded the Castle in order to stop them. Nine-year-old Hortense offered to help them and proved more effective in conflict than either of the elder McDucks. The Whiskervilles came to fear her.\nIn 1902 Scrooge McDuck returned to Scotland to fetch Hortense and their sister Matilda McDuck. When Scrooge established Duckburg, Calisota as his home base he started journeying the world trying to expand his financial empire. One of her proudest moments was when she single-handedly caused the entire US military to flee Killmotor Hill armed only with a broom and her bad temper, much to the shame of the current president, Theodore Roosevelt, and the fear of the soldiers. From 1902 until 1930, she and Matilda ran Scrooge's empire from his home base while he was away. During these years Hortense met her boyfriend, Quackmore Duck, whom she married in 1920. Later the same year she gave birth to twins. Her son was named Donald Duck and her daughter Della Duck. Of the two only Donald inherited his mother's temper. A fight with Scrooge in 1930 ended all relationships between Scrooge and his family and she retired.\nScrooge may have claimed that he is the last McDuck, as he is the only male left. Hortense and Matilda changed their names to Duck after marriage, so, technically, Scrooge is the last McDuck.\nHortense is mentioned and pictured in the \"DuckTales\" 2017 premier \"Woo-oo!\", where Webby Vanderquack cites her as a connecting link between the triplets and Scrooge.\nIn a 2024 comic, Hortense was revealed to be an adventurer and a scientist, who studied apes, until she disappeared, Scrooge traveled to Africa to investigate, however she still wasn't found, but Donald read her letters she wrote to him over the years. She was hinted to still be alive, with her brother saying she could return.\nRumpus McFowl.\nRumpus McFowl was created by William Van Horn and introduced as a lazy and greedy cousin of Scrooge McDuck. It was soon revealed that he was in fact Scrooge's half-brother, born during his mother's brief marriage to Fergus McDuck.\nRumpus McFowl is a tall, obese duck who wears a green coat and a black bowler hat. He is not ashamed to take advantage of Scrooge McDuck's money at every chance he gets, citing his relationship to Scrooge as the reason. He has never been shown to do any work. Scrooge views Rumpus as a useless good-for-nothing and tries his best to get rid of his company.\nGideon McDuck.\nGideon McDuck (\"Gedeone de' Paperoni\" in original Italian) is Scrooge McDuck's moralistic brother, and is a recurring character in Italian comic stories; in those stories, Gideon is the editor of the newspaper \"The County Conscience\", the most credible newspaper in Duckburg. The newspaper is originally known as \"Il Grillo Parlante\", which is the Italian name of the Pinocchio character The Talking Cricket and its Disney version Jiminy Cricket; a statue of Jiminy is therefore present in Gideon's office. Gideon also has an antagonistic relationship with his brother Scrooge.\nThe character was created by Romano Scarpa, and first appeared in the story \"Paperino e i gamberi in salm\u00ec\" (1956). The character's debut story is the only one that was printed in the United States, as it was published in 2015 under the title \"Shellfish Motives\".\nGideon's existence is inconsistent with a statement made in Carl Barks's \"The Old Castle's Secret\". In this story, Scrooge states that he is the last of the Clan McDuck, which would mean that he couldn't have a living sibling. However, Gideon is not the only living relative of Scrooge to carry the surname \"McDuck\", and therefore cause the same inconsistency with Barks's story; others include his sister Matilda and first cousin Douglas. In the American translation of \"Shellfish Motives\" Gideon is said to be younger than Scrooge, while the original version doesn't specify which one of them is younger.\nDouglas McDuck.\nDouglas McDuck is a cousin of Scrooge who has appeared in several Danish Disney comic stories. He looks like Scrooge not only in appearance but also in temperament. He is so incredibly stingy that he considers Scrooge a spendthrift, often criticizing a frustrated Scrooge for not being \"McDuck-like\" enough. Douglas is, however, hopeless at finding and identifying gold; he generally lives a rustic life in mining country, locating only fool's gold and earning a modest living. In the story \"https://\", Douglas was portrayed as being the uncle of Whitewater Duck.\nMoocher McDuck.\nMoocher McDuck is the beggar cousin of Scrooge who appeared for the first time in the story \"https://\" by Tony Strobl. Moocher's look is very similar to Scrooge's, except for the fact that he wears tattered clothes, but unlike his very rich cousin, Moocher is a sweetheart. He was used in some Brazilian comic stories in the 1970s.\nCyril McDuck.\nCyril McDuck is the banished cousin of Scrooge, who appeared in the story The Search for Cyril, by Bob Gregory, where he failed to pass a \u201cstinginess test\u201d given to him by Dingus McDuck (called Titus McDuck), where each child of Clan McDuck would be given money to save, however Cyril failed buying candy for some children, and was banished to the Scottish Highlands, where he became a goatherd. In the story Donald sees that Scrooge has a photo of every Clan McDuck member, except for Cyril, and Donald attempts to photograph him.\nOther relatives.\nDuck family.\nThe Duck family are Scrooge's American relatives and include his nephew Donald, niece Della and grandnephews Huey, Dewey, and Louie. They are related through Hortense's marriage to Quackmore Duck, Donald's father.\nAunt Eider.\nAunt Eider is the aunt of both Scrooge McDuck and John D. Rockerduck. The Italian story \"La Stella di Burbank\", where she is portrayed as a myopic old woman who doesn't realize she needs to wear glasses, is presumably her first comic book appearance. But Aunt Eider appears wearing glasses in her next three comic book appearances. Dick Kinney wrote the last three comic stories where this character was used, and three famous cartoonists respectively drew those ones. Al Hubbard, Marco Rota and Giorgio Cavazzano. Neither of these stories was published in America. The story \"Most Helpful Aunt Eider\" is the only one where Aunt Eider doesn't meet her wealthy nephews. It's a Junior Woodchucks story.\nSince there isn't any clue on how the tireless and slightly bossy Aunt Eider could be the aunt of both Scrooge and Rockerduck in the comic stories with her, some fans of this universe have invented their own explanations for this fact. It really seems she never had a surname, so she has been connected to Scrooge's family through his paternal grandmother, Molly Mallard, who would be an aunt of Eider. This would make Eider a \"Mallard\" too, but, of course, this is not a widely accepted explanation at all. According to this same invented explanation, Aunt Eider would be a sister of Rockerduck's mother.\nLudwig Von Drake.\nLudwig Von Drake is Donald Duck's uncle. Their exact relationship has only rarely been described. Don Rosa fans have speculated that Ludwig is married to Matilda McDuck, while the Disney company have portrayed him as a bachelor. Walt Disney stated Ludwig is Donald's father's brother.\nAunt Vera.\nAunt Vera is Scrooge McDuck and Rumpus McFowl's mutual aunt. She is only briefly mentioned, where she gave her nephew Rumpus information that informed him and Scrooge that they were half-brothers. She is also mentioned to be living, however the exact relationship to Scrooge and Clan McDuck is unknown.\nIn other languages.\nIn the Dutch and Finnish languages, Scrooge personally drops the \"Mac/Mc\" from his last name while other members of his family retain it.\nSee also.\nDonald Duck universe:\nReal-life:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31414", "revid": "12317794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31414", "title": "Tessin", "text": "Tessin may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlaces.\nGermany.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "31415", "revid": "50712324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31415", "title": "Topaz", "text": "Silicate mineral\nTopaz is a silicate mineral made of aluminum and fluorine with the chemical formula Al2SiO4(F, OH)2. It is used as a gemstone in jewelry and other adornments. Common topaz in its natural state is colorless, though trace element impurities can make it pale blue or golden-brown to yellow-orange. Topaz is often treated with heat or radiation to make it a deep blue, reddish-orange, pale green, pink, or purple.\nTopaz is a nesosilicate mineral, and more specifically, an aluminosilicate mineral. It is one of the hardest naturally occurring minerals and has a relatively low index of refraction. It has the orthorhombic crystal system and a dipyramidial crystal class.\nIt occurs in many places in the world. Two of the most popular places that topaz is sourced are Brazil and Russia. Topaz is often mined in open-pit or alluvial settings.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"topaz\" is usually believed to be derived (via Old French: Topace and Latin: Topazius) from the Greek \"\u03a4\u03bf\u03c0\u03ac\u03b6\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2\" (Top\u00e1zios) or \"\u03a4\u03bf\u03c0\u03ac\u03b6\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd\" (Top\u00e1zion), from \u03a4\u03bf\u03c0\u03b1\u03b6\u03bf\u03c2. This is the ancient name of St. John's Island in the Red Sea which was difficult to find and from which a yellow stone (now believed to be chrysolite: yellowish olivine) was mined in ancient times. The name \"topaz\" was first applied to the mineral now known by that name in 1737. Ancient Sri Lanka (Tamraparni) exported topazes to Greece and ancient Egypt, which led to the etymologically related names of the island by Alexander Polyhistor (\"Topazius\") and the early Egyptians (\"Topapwene\") \u2013 \"land of the Topaz\". Pliny said that Topazos is a \"legendary\" island in the Red Sea and the mineral \"topaz\" was first mined there. Alternatively, the word \"topaz\" may be related to the Sanskrit word \u0924\u092a\u0938\u094d \"tapas\", meaning \"heat\" or \"fire\".\nHistory.\nThomas Nicols, the author of one of the first systematic treatises on minerals and gemstones, dedicated two chapters to the topic in 1652. In the Middle Ages, the name topaz was used to refer to any yellow gemstone, but in modern times it denotes only the silicate described above.\nMany English translations of the Bible, including the King James Version, mention topaz. However, because these translations as \"topaz\" all derive from the Septuagint translation \"topazi[os]\", which referred to a yellow stone that was not topaz, but probably \"chrysolite\" (chrysoberyl or peridot), topaz is likely not meant here.\nAn English superstition also held that topaz cured lunacy. The ancient Romans believed that topaz provided protection from danger while traveling. During the Middle Ages, it was believed that attaching the topaz to the left arm protected the owner from any curse and warded off the evil eye. It was also believed that wearing topaz increased body heat, which would enable people to relieve a cold or fever. In Europe during the Middle Ages, topaz was believed to enhance mental powers. In India, people believed topaz granted beauty, intelligence, and longevity when worn over the heart.\nGemstone.\nTopaz is a gemstone. In cut and polished form, it is used to make jewelry or other adornments. Lower quality topaz is commonly used as an abrasive material due to its hardness and it is used to produce refractory materials for high temperature environments. Topaz can be used as a flux in steel production. Using topaz as a refectory material does have some health and environmental concerns due to the production of fluorine as a byproduct of calcining topaz.\nTopaz is a part of the second rank of gemstones, or semiprecious stones, accompanying aquamarine, morganite, and tourmaline. The first rank of gemstones, or precious stones, includes ruby, sapphire, diamond, and emerald.\nOrange topaz, also known as precious topaz, is the birthstone for the month of November, the symbol of friendship, and the state gemstone of the U.S. state of Utah. Blue topaz is the state gemstone of the US state of Texas. The 4th wedding anniversary gem is blue topaz and the 23rd is imperial topaz.\nSynthetic topaz can be produced using a method that includes the thermal hydrolysis of SiO2 and AlF3. When these compounds are heated to temperatures of 750\u00b0 to 850\u00a0\u00b0C topaz is formed. Another method uses a combination of amorphous Al2O3, Na2SiF6, and water which is heated to a temperature of 500\u00a0\u00b0C, put under a pressure of 4000 bars, and left for 9 days.\nTo care for a topaz gemstone, it is best to avoid ultrasonic cleaners or steam as this could produce small fractures within the crystal. Warm water with soap is the best way to wash it.\nTo choose an ethically sourced topaz gemstone, it is recommended to search for a stone that the seller knows the origin of. If the seller cannot produce information about the locality and mine that the topaz was collected from, it is likely that it was collected unethically. \nStructure.\nTopaz is an accessory mineral to felsic igneous, sedimentary, and hydrothermally altered rocks.\nThe crystal structure of topaz alternates between sheets of (F, OH)2O and O along (010) with Al3+ occupying the octahedral sites and Si4+ in the tetrahedral sites. Fluorine can be substituted by hydroxide in topaz by up to 30\u00a0mol.% in nature and hydroxide-dominating topaz can be made in laboratories but has not been found in nature.\nOn occasion, cavities can be found within topaz and they are filled with a liquid called brewsterlinite. Brewsterlinite was discovered by David Brewster upon heating a sample of topaz. After heating, the topaz lost mass, and through examination Brewster concluded Topaz was formed in a wet environment creating these liquid-filled cavities. This liquid is a hydrocarbon with a refractive index of 1\u00b713.\nTopaz's crystal habit takes many forms. It can display a range of slender and long crystals to bulky and short. There can also be variation in the terminations displaying blunt, pyramidal, chisel, or wedge-shaped terminations. The perfect cleavage {001} in topaz breaks no Si-O bonds within its structure and only breaks Al-O and Al-F bonds. This cleavage is diagnostic for this mineral. The 2V optical angle in topaz can range from 48\u00b0 to 69.5\u00b0. Low fluorine content yields a smaller angle and high fluorine content yields a larger angle.\nCharacteristics.\nTopaz in its natural state is colorless, often with a greyish cast. It also occurs as a golden brown to yellow color which makes it sometimes confused with citrine, a less valuable gemstone. The specific gravity of all shades of topaz, however, means that it is considerably heavier than citrine (about 25% per volume) and this difference in weight can be used to distinguish two stones of equal volume. Also, if the volume of a given stone can be determined, its weight if it were topaz can be established and then checked with a sensitive scale. Likewise, glass stones are also much lighter than equally sized topaz.\nA variety of impurities and treatments may make topaz wine red, pale gray, reddish-orange, pale green, or pink (rare), and opaque to translucent/transparent. The pink and red varieties come from chromium replacing aluminium in its crystalline structure.\nImperial topaz is yellow, pink (rare, if natural), or pink-orange. Brazilian imperial topaz can often have a bright yellow to deep golden brown hue, sometimes even violet. Many brown or pale topazes are treated to make them bright yellow, gold, pink, or violet colored. Some imperial topaz stones can fade from exposure to sunlight for an extended period of time. Naturally occurring blue topaz is quite rare. Typically, colorless, gray, or pale yellow and blue material is heat treated and irradiated to produce a more desired darker blue. Mystic topaz is a colorless topaz that has been artificially coated via a vapor deposition process giving it a rainbow effect on its surface.\nAlthough very hard, topaz must be treated with greater care than some other minerals of similar hardness (such as corundum) because of a weakness of chemical bonding of the stone's ionic components along one or another axial plane (whereas diamonds, for example, are composed of carbon atoms bonded to each other with equal strength along all of its planes). This gives topaz a tendency to break along such a cleavage plane if struck with sufficient force.\nTopaz has a relatively low index of refraction for a gemstone, and so stones with large facets or tables do not sparkle as readily as stones cut from minerals with higher refractive indices, though quality colorless topaz sparkles and shows more \"life\" than similarly cut quartz. When given a typical \"brilliant\" cut, topaz may either show a sparkling table facet surrounded by dead-looking crown facets or a ring of sparkling crown facets with a dull well-like table. It also takes an exceptionally fine polish, and can sometimes be distinguished from citrine by its slippery feel alone (quartz cannot be polished to this level of smoothness).\nAnother method of distinguishing topaz from quartz is by placing the unset stone in a solution of bromoform or methylene iodide. Quartz will invariably float in these solutions, whereas topaz will sink.\nLocalities and occurrence.\nTopaz is commonly associated with silicic igneous rocks of the granite and rhyolite type. It typically crystallizes in granitic pegmatites or in vapor cavities in rhyolite lava flows including those at Topaz Mountain in western Utah and Chivinar in South America. It can be found with fluorite and cassiterite in various areas including the Ural and Ilmensky mountains of Russia, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, the Czech Republic, Germany, Norway, Pakistan, Italy, Sweden, Japan, Brazil, Mexico; Flinders Island, Australia; Nigeria, Ukraine and the United States. Topaz was found around the time of the 1700s in a pegmatite formation within the central Urals Mountains in Russia.\nBrazil is one of the largest producers of topaz, some clear topaz crystals from Brazilian pegmatites can reach boulder size and weigh hundreds of pounds. The Topaz of Aurangzeb, observed by Jean Baptiste Tavernier weighed . The American Golden Topaz, a more recent gem, weighed . Large, vivid blue topaz specimens from the St. Anns mine in Zimbabwe were found in the late 1980s. Colorless and light-blue varieties of topaz are found in Precambrian granite in Mason County, Texas within the Llano Uplift. There is no commercial mining of topaz in that area. It is possible to synthesize topaz.\nMining.\nLarge-scale topaz mining typically uses open pit and underground mining to extract the gem. The waste material is discarded using large machines to transport it away while the valuable ore is washed and sorted to recover the topaz gems. In smaller-scale mines, dry sieving is used in alluvial environments by shoveling the material into sieves to separate the gems from unwanted dust and debris. The topaz can then be selected by hand from the remaining material. Mined topaz is then sent to be processed for use in jewelry by polishing the gem and treating it to achieve the desired color.\nMining for topaz can cause some environmental concerns mostly associated with larger-scale operations. The introduction of a large open pit mine into an environment leads to modification of the land around it to make it accessible to workers. After use of such mines is over, they are often refilled with loose sediments left over from the mining process. These loose sediments can be washed away to other areas, cutting off water features, destroying farmland, and creating a threat of landslides. The pollution produced by mining can impact the environment around it and damage its health. Deforestation undergone to create the mine, along with the machinery used during the mining process, adds greenhouse gasses to the atmosphere. Deforestation also removes habitats and biodiversity from a large area of natural space. These disruptions to the ecosystem can be challenging to wildlife and local populations. Water, also a large component of mining operations, is drawn away from neighboring communities to create a lack of water. Tailings leftover from the mining process can leach contaminants into nearby water systems and can contaminate the drinking water of local communities.\nSome ways humans can be impacted by gem mining is through danger in mines and inadequate compensation. Accidents such as collapsing mines and machinery malfunctioning can put human life in danger. Those working in the mines can also be exposed to harmful chemicals and heavy metals that can impact their health. For income, there can be an unequal dispersal of the funds made from gem mining between land owners, laborers, and the operators of the mine. In illegal mining operations, there can be more money given to miners, however, these operations have fewer regulations and more dangerous environments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31416", "revid": "33125536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31416", "title": "Ted Raimi", "text": "American actor (born 1965)\nTheodore Raimi (born December 14, 1965) is an American character actor, director and writer. He is known for his roles in the works of his brother Sam Raimi, including a fake Shemp in \"The Evil Dead\", possessed Henrietta in \"Evil Dead II\", and Ted Hoffman in the \"Spider-Man\" trilogy. He later reprised his role as Henrietta in the television series \"Ash vs. Evil Dead\", in which he also played the character Chet Kaminski. He is also known for his roles as Lieutenant JG Tim O'Neill in \"seaQuest DSV\", his recurring role as the merchant in \"Legend of the Seeker\" and Joxer the Mighty in both ' and '.\nRaimi has appeared in minor roles including the films \"Crimewave\", \"Intruder\", \"Shocker\", \"Darkman\", \"Candyman\", \"Army of Darkness\", \"Clear and Present Danger\", \"The Grudge\", \"Drag Me to Hell\" and \"Oz the Great and Powerful\", as well as the television series \"ALF\", \"Twin Peaks\", \"Baywatch\" and \"Supernatural\". He has had voice roles in the television series \"Invader Zim\" and \"Code Monkeys\", and in the video games \"\" and \"The Quarry\".\nEarly life.\nRaimi was born to a Jewish family in Detroit, Michigan. His parents are Celia (n\u00e9e Abrams), a lingerie store proprietor, and Leonard Raimi, a furniture store proprietor. Ted was raised in Conservative Judaism, and his ancestors immigrated from Russia and Hungary. He attended Wylie E. Groves High School in Beverly Hills, Michigan, where he played blues harp and was a DJ and a member of the Groves Cinema Society. At seventeen, Raimi began his professional acting career doing industrial films in Detroit, for Ford, General Motors and Chrysler. He attended University of Michigan, New York University, then finally University of Detroit. Raimi's older brothers are director Sam Raimi and screenwriter Ivan Raimi.\nCareer.\nRaimi's motion picture acting credits include: Wes Craven's \"Shocker\", \"Born Yesterday\", \"Patriot Games\", \"Clear and Present Danger\", \"The Evil Dead\", \"Evil Dead II\", \"Army of Darkness\", \"Darkman\" and the \"Spider-Man\" series, as well as roles in such features as: \"Stuart Saves His Family\", \"The Grudge\", \"Midnight Meat Train\" and \"Oz the Great and Powerful\".\nOn television, he has been seen on shows such as \"Twin Peaks\", ', \"Supernatural\" and \"Legend of the Seeker,\" but is best known for his roles as the communication officer Lt. Tim O'Neill on the science fiction television series \"seaQuest DSV\" (later \"seaQuest 2032\") and starring as the warrior wannabe Joxer on '.\nRaimi wrote the original \"Joxer the Mighty\" song with help from director Josh Becker for \"\". In 2022, he joined director Alex Kahuam for his upcoming feature film \"Failure!\", which was shot entirely in a single long-take.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31417", "revid": "51063984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31417", "title": "The Monkees", "text": "American rock and pop band\nThe Monkees were an American pop rock band formed in Los Angeles in the mid-1960s. The band consisted of Micky Dolenz, Davy Jones, Michael Nesmith, and Peter Tork. Spurred by the success of \"The Monkees\" television series, they were one of the most successful bands of the late 1960s. The band produced four chart-topping albums and three chart-topping songs (\"Last Train to Clarksville\", \"I'm a Believer\", and \"Daydream Believer\").\nThe Monkees were originally a fictional band created for the NBC television sitcom \"The Monkees\". Dolenz, Jones, Nesmith and Tork were cast to portray members of a band in the sitcom. Music credited to the Monkees appeared in the sitcom and was released on LPs and singles beginning in 1966, and the sitcom aired from 1966 to 1968. At first, the band members' musical contributions were primarily limited to lead vocals and the occasional composition, with the remaining music provided by professional songwriters and studio musicians. Though this arrangement yielded multiple hit albums and singles, the band members desired greater control over the creation of their music. Following a brief power struggle, the Monkees gained full control over the recording process in 1967. For two albums, the Monkees mostly performed as a group; however, within a year, each member was pursuing his own interests under the Monkees' name, rendering the Monkees once again a group in name only. With much of the public under the misconception that the band members still did not play their own instruments\u2014followed by the cancellation of \"The Monkees\" TV series, diminishing success on the charts, and waning popularity overall\u2014band members began to leave the group. The Monkees held a final recording session in 1970 before breaking up.\nRenewed interest in the Monkees emerged in 1986, leading to a 20th anniversary reunion. Over the subsequent 35 years, the Monkees intermittently reunited for reunion tours, a major-network television special, and the production of new studio albums. After the deaths of Jones in 2012 and Tork in 2019, Dolenz and Nesmith undertook a farewell tour in 2021. This tour concluded shortly before Nesmith's death later that year, leaving Dolenz as the sole surviving member of the Monkees.\nHistory.\nConception and casting.\nThe Monkees were formed in the mid-1960s in Los Angeles.\nAspiring filmmaker Bob Rafelson developed the initial idea for \"The Monkees\" in 1962 and tried selling it to Revue Productions, the television division of Universal Pictures, but was unsuccessful. In May 1964, while working at Screen Gems, Rafelson teamed up with Bert Schneider, whose father, Abraham Schneider, headed the Colpix Records and Screen Gems Television units of Columbia Pictures. Rafelson and Schneider ultimately formed Raybert Productions. The Beatles' films \"A Hard Day's Night\" and \"Help!\" inspired Rafelson and Schneider to revive Rafelson's idea for \"The Monkees\". As \"Raybert Productions\", they sold the show to Screen Gems Television on April 16, 1965.\nRafelson and Schneider's original idea was to cast an existing New York folk rock group, the Lovin' Spoonful, who were not widely known at the time. After those plans fell through, Rafelson and Schneider focused on Davy Jones. In September 1964, Jones had signed to a long-term contract to appear in TV programs for Screen Gems, to make feature films for Columbia Pictures and to record music for the Colpix label. His involvement with \"The Monkees\" was publicly announced on July 14, 1965. Jones had previously starred as the Artful Dodger in the Broadway theater show \"Oliver!\"; for his work in \"Oliver!\", he was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Musical in 1963.\nIn September1965, \"Daily Variety\" and \"The Hollywood Reporter\" ran advertisements to cast the remainder of the band/cast members for the TV show. The advertisements each read as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Madness!! Auditions. Folk &amp; Roll Musicians-Singers for acting roles in new TV series. Running parts for 4 insane boys, age 17\u201321. Want spirited Ben Frank's-types. Have courage to work. Must come down for interview.\nOut of 437 applicants, the other three chosen for the cast of the TV show were Michael Nesmith, Peter Tork, and Micky Dolenz.&lt;ref name=\"brightlightsfilm/monkees-birthed\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nDolenz, son of screen actor George Dolenz, had prior screen experience under the name \"Mickey Braddock\" as the 10-year-old star of the \"Circus Boy\" series in the 1950s. He was actively auditioning for pilots at the time and was told about the Raybert project by his agent.\nNesmith's mother, Bette Nesmith Graham, had invented a correction fluid and founded the company that became Liquid Paper. He had served a brief stint in the U.S. Air Force and had also recorded for Colpix under the name \"Michael Blessing\". He was the only one of The Monkees who had come for the audition based on seeing the trade magazine ad. He showed up to the audition with his laundry and impressed Rafelson and Schneider with his laid-back style and droll sense of humor. He also wore a woollen hat to keep his hair out of his eyes when he rode his motorcycle, leading to early promotional materials which nicknamed him \"Wool Hat\". The hat remained part of Nesmith's wardrobe, but the name was dropped after the pilot.\nTork was recommended to Rafelson and Schneider by friend Stephen Stills at his audition. Tork was a skilled multi-instrumentalist who had performed at various Greenwich Village folk clubs before moving west, where he worked as a busboy.\nEarly years.\nDeveloping the music for their debut album.\nDuring the casting process, Don Kirshner, Screen Gems' head of music, was contacted to secure music for \"The Monkees\" pilot. Kirshner's Brill Building firm Aldon Music had an extensive portfolio of songwriters, many in need of work after the British Invasion had reorganized the American music scene; while several Aldon writers contributed songs to the Monkees during their existence, the bulk of the songwriting for the group fell upon Tommy Boyce and Bobby Hart, two songwriters who were only beginning to break through to success at the time. Boyce and Hart contributed four demo recordings for the pilot. One of these recordings was \"(Theme From) The Monkees\", which helped get the series the green light.\nNBC ordered 32 episodes of \"The Monkees\" on January 17, 1966.\nWhen \"The Monkees\" was picked up as a series, development of the musical side of the project accelerated. Columbia\u2013Screen Gems and RCA Victor entered into a joint venture called Colgems Records; the primary purpose of the venture was to distribute Monkees records. Raybert set up a rehearsal space and rented instruments for the group to practice playing in April 1966, but it quickly became apparent they would not be in shape in time for the series debut. The producers called upon Kirshner to recruit a producer for the Monkees' sessions.\nKirshner called on Snuff Garrett, composer of several hits by Gary Lewis &amp; the Playboys, to produce the initial musical cuts for the show. Garrett, upon meeting the four Monkees in June 1966, decided that Jones would sing lead, a choice that was unpopular with the group. This cool reception led Kirshner to drop Garrett and buy out his contract.\nKirshner next allowed Nesmith to produce sessions, provided he did not play on any tracks he produced. Nesmith did, however, start using the other Monkees in his sessions; he especially used Tork as a guitarist. Kirshner came back to the enthusiastic Boyce and Hart to be the regular producers, but he brought in one of his top East Coast associates, Jack Keller, to lend some production experience to the sessions. Boyce and Hart quickly realized that, when together, the four actors fooled around and tried to crack each other up. Because of this, the producers often brought in each singer individually.\nThe Monkees' debut and second albums were meant to be a soundtrack to the first season of the TV show, to cash in on the audience. In the 2006 Rhino Deluxe Edition re-issue of their second album, \"More of the Monkees\", Nesmith stated that he was angered by the release of the first album because it portrayed the band as an actual rock-and-roll band and gave no credit to the other musicians involved in the project.\nThe Monkees' first single, \"Last Train to Clarksville\" b/w \"Take a Giant Step\", was released in August 1966, just weeks prior to the TV broadcast debut. In conjunction with the first broadcast of the television show on September 12, 1966, on the NBC television network, NBC and Columbia had a major hit on their hands. The single topped the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 for the week ending November 5, 1966. The Monkees' debut album, \"The Monkees\", was released a month later; it spent 13 weeks at No. 1 and stayed on the Billboard charts for 78 weeks. Twenty years later, during their reunion, it spent another 24 weeks on the Billboard charts.\nLive performances and touring.\nPleased with their initial efforts, Columbia (over Kirshner's objections) planned to send the Monkees out to play live concerts. The massive success of the series\u2014and its spin-off records\u2014created intense pressure to mount a touring version of the group. Against the initial wishes of the producers, the band went out on the road and made their debut live performance in December 1966 in Hawaii.\nThe results of these live performances were far better than expected. Wherever they went, the group was greeted by scenes of fan adulation reminiscent of Beatlemania. This gave the singers increased confidence in their fight for control over the musical material chosen for the series.\nIndependence.\nConflict with Kirshner.\nIn early 1967, controversy concerning the Monkees' studio abilities arose. Dolenz told a reporter that the Wrecking Crew provided the backing tracks for the first two Monkees albums, and that his position as drummer was simply because a Monkee had to learn to play the drums, and he only knew the guitar. In the January 28, 1967, issue of \"Saturday Evening Post\" an article quoted Nesmith railing against the music creation process. \"Do you know how debilitating it is to sit up and have to duplicate somebody else's records?\" he asked. \"Tell the world we don't record our own music.\"\nThe band members were displeased that the music publishing company would not allow them to play their own instruments on their records or to use more of their own material. These complaints intensified when Kirshner moved track recording from California to New York, leaving the band out of the musical process entirely until they were called upon to add their vocals to the completed tracks. Nesmith, when asked about the situation by \"Rolling Stone\" magazine, said, \"The [TV show's] producers [in Hollywood] backed us and David went along. None of us could have fought the battles we did [with the music publishers] without the explicit support of the show's producers\".\nOn January 16, 1967, the Monkees held their first recording session as a fully functioning, self-contained band. The band recorded an early version of Nesmith's self-composed top 40 hit single \"The Girl I Knew Somewhere\", along with \"All of Your Toys\" and \"She's So Far Out, She's In\". \nAlso in January, Kirshner released the band's second album of songs that used session musicians, \"More of the Monkees\", without the band's knowledge. The Monkees were annoyed at not having even been told of the release in advance, at having their opinions on the track selection ignored, and at Kirshner's self-congratulatory liner notes. The band was also displeased because of the cover photo, which was a composite of photographs taken for a J.C. Penney clothing advertisement. Indeed, the Monkees were not even given a copy of the album; they had to buy it from a record store.\nThe climax of the conflict between Kirshner and the band was an intense argument among Nesmith, Kirshner and Colgems lawyer Herb Moelis, which took place at the Beverly Hills Hotel in January 1967. Kirshner had presented the group with royalty checks and gold records. Nesmith had responded with an ultimatum, demanding a change in the way the Monkees' music was chosen and recorded. Moelis reminded Nesmith that he was under contract. The confrontation ended with Nesmith punching a hole in a wall and saying, \"That could have been your face!\" However, each of the members, including Nesmith, accepted the $250,000 royalty checks.\nSoon after, Colgems and the Monkees reached an agreement not to release material directly created by the group together with unrelated Kirshner-produced material. Kirshner immediately violated this agreement in early February 1967, when he released \"A Little Bit Me, A Little Bit You\", composed and written by Neil Diamond, as a single with an early version of \"She Hangs Out\", a song recorded in New York with Davy Jones's vocals, as the B-side. (This single was only released in Canada and was withdrawn after a couple of weeks.) Kirshner was consequently dismissed from the project.\nPropelled by the band's second single, \"I'm a Believer\" b/w \"(I'm Not Your) Steppin' Stone\", \"More of the Monkees\" became the band's biggest-selling LP. The album spent 70 weeks on the Billboard charts, staying No. 1 for 18 weeks and becoming the third-highest-selling album of the 1960s. \"I'm a Believer\" was written by Neil Diamond. The Monkees' recording of the single hit the number-one spot on the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart for the week ending December 31, 1966, remaining there for seven weeks. \"I'm a Believer\" became the biggest-selling single for all of 1967.\nThe Monkees' UK tour in 1967 received a chilly reception; the front pages of several UK and international music papers proclaimed that the group members did not always play their own instruments or sing the backing vocals in the studio. They were derisively dubbed the \"Pre-Fab Four\" and the \"Sunday Mirror\" called them a \"disgrace to the pop world\". However, George Harrison praised the Monkees' self-produced musical attempts. Peter Tork was later one of the musicians on Harrison's album \"Wonderwall Music\", playing Paul McCartney's five-string banjo. Nesmith attended the Beatles' recording session for \"A Day in the Life\" at Abbey Road Studios. At that time, he reportedly asked John Lennon, \"Do you think we're a cheap imitation of the Beatles, your movies and your records?\" Lennon replied, \"I think you're the greatest comic talent since the Marx Brothers. I've never missed one of your programs\".\n\"Headquarters\" and \"Pisces, Aquarius, Capricorn &amp; Jones Ltd.\".\nIn February 1967, after Kirshner was dismissed as musical supervisor, Nesmith hired Chip Douglas to produce the Monkees' next album, \"Headquarters\". This album was the first on which the Monkees primarily played their own instruments, with exceptions for most bass and horn parts. Douglas handled music direction, engineered recordings, and played bass on most tracks. \"Headquarters\" and its follow-up, \"Pisces, Aquarius, Capricorn &amp; Jones Ltd.\", provided much of the music for the second season of the Monkees' television series.\nIn March 1967, \"The Girl I Knew Somewhere\", written by Nesmith and performed by Dolenz, Nesmith, Tork, and bassist John London, was released as the B-side to \"A Little Bit Me, a Little Bit You\". The A-side peaked at No. 2 on the charts, while the B-side reached No. 39.\nReleased in May 1967, \"Headquarters\" contained no U.S. singles but became the Monkees' third consecutive No. 1 album. With a country-folk-rock sound, the album reflected a departure from the pop style of their earlier works under Kirshner. According to Andrew Sandoval, the album topped the charts on May 24, 1967, but was displaced by the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" the following week, holding the No. 2 spot for 11 weeks during the \"Summer of Love\". The track \"Randy Scouse Git\", written and sung by Dolenz, was released internationally as \"Alternate Title\" (owing to the controversial nature of its original title) and became a hit, reaching No. 2 in the UK and Norway.\nTork's \"For Pete's Sake\" was used as the closing theme for the Monkees' television show. Nesmith contributed songs like \"Sunny Girlfriend\", incorporating pedal steel guitar, and \"You Told Me\", with a banjo intro by Tork that parodied the Beatles' \"Taxman\". Other notable tracks included \"You Just May Be the One\", \"Shades of Gray\", \"Forget that Girl\", and \"No Time\". The band wrote six of the album's 12 tracks, along with two experimental pieces, \"Band 6\" and \"Zilch\".\nThe \"Los Angeles Times\" praised the album, stating, \"The Monkees Upgrade Album Quality\" and \"The Monkees are getting better. \"Headquarters\" has more interesting songs and a better quality level [than previous albums]... None of the tracks is a throwaway... The improvement trend is laudable.\"\nThe collaborative approach on \"Headquarters\" was short-lived. Nesmith later commented: Everybody in the press and in the hippie movement had got us into their target window as being illegitimate and not worthy of consideration as a musical force (or) certainly any kind of cultural force... We were under siege; wherever we went there was such resentment for us. We were constantly mocked and humiliated by the press... Really gettin\u2019 beat up pretty good. We all knew what was going on inside. Kirshner had been purged. We\u2019d gone to try to make Headquarters and found out that it was only marginally okay and that our better move was to just go back to the original songwriting and song-making strategy of the first albums except with a clear indication of how (the music) came to be... The rabid element and the hatred that was engendered is almost impossible to describe. It lingers to this day among people my own age...\nTork disagreed with Nesmith's assessment of \"Headquarters\", stating, \"I don't think the \"Pisces\" album was as groovy to listen to as \"Headquarters\". Technically it was much better, but I think it suffers for that reason.\" Tork favored working as a unified band, but Dolenz soon lost interest in drumming. \"Dolenz was 'incapable of repeating a triumph,'\" Tork commented in a DVD release of the second season. Producer Chip Douglas noted Dolenz's drumming required extensive editing, calling it \"shaky\".\nBy late 1967, the band members pursued divergent musical directions. Nesmith gravitated toward country-rock, while Jones leaned into Broadway-style performances. \"Pisces, Aquarius, Capricorn &amp; Jones Ltd.\", released in November 1967, marked a return to heavy use of session musicians, including the Wrecking Crew, Louie Shelton, Glen Campbell, Stephen Stills, and Neil Young. Despite this, the Monkees retained creative control over song selection and production.\n\"Pisces\" was their fourth consecutive No. 1 album, holding the top spot for five weeks. The album featured hits like \"Pleasant Valley Sunday\" (No. 3) and \"Words\" (No. 11). It also included early use of the Moog synthesizer on tracks like \"Daily Nightly\" and \"Star Collector\". Nesmith's \"What Am I Doing Hangin' 'Round?\" became a milestone in the development of country-rock. Nesmith reflected, \"\"One of the things that I really felt was honest was country-rock. I wanted to move the Monkees more into that because ... if we get closer to country music, we'll get closer to blues, and country blues, and so forth. ... It had a lot of un-country things in it: a familiar change from a I major to a VI minor\u2014those kinds of things. So it was a little kind of a new wave country song. It didn't sound like the country songs of the time, which was Buck Owens.\"\nTheir next single, \"Daydream Believer\", with a piano intro by Tork, reached No. 1. Its B-side, \"Goin' Down\", featured Nesmith and Tork on guitars and Dolenz on lead vocals. The Monkees simultaneously held No. 1 positions on the singles and album charts.\nBoth \"Headquarters\" and \"Pisces, Aquarius, Capricorn &amp; Jones Ltd.\" returned to the charts during the Monkees' 1986 reunion, remaining there for 17 weeks.\n\"The Birds, The Bees &amp; The Monkees\".\nNo longer desiring to work as a group, the Monkees dropped Chip Douglas as a producer, and starting in November 1967, they largely produced their own sessions. Although credited to the whole band, the songs were mostly solo efforts. In a couple of cases, Boyce and Hart had returned from the first two albums to produce, but credit was given to the Monkees due to contractual requirements.\nPropelled by the hit singles \"Daydream Believer\" and \"Valleri\", along with Nesmith's self-penned top 40 hit \"Tapioca Tundra\", \"The Birds, The Bees &amp; The Monkees\" reached No. 3 on the Billboard charts shortly after it was released in April 1968. It was the first album released after NBC announced they were not renewing \"The Monkees\" for a third season. The album cover\u2014a quaint collage of items in a knickknack shelf\u2014was chosen over the Monkees' objections. It was the last Monkees' album to be released in separate, dedicated mono and stereo mixes. During the 1986 reunion, it returned to the Billboard charts for 11 weeks.\nBeyond television and \"Head\".\n\"The Monkees\" was cancelled in 1968.\nAlso in 1968, the Monkees starred in \"Head\", an American satirical musical adventure film written and produced by Jack Nicholson and Bob Rafelson and directed by Rafelson.\nThe plot and peak moments of the film came together at an Ojai, California, resort where the Monkees, Rafelson, and Nicholson brainstormed into a tape recorder, reportedly with the aid of a quantity of marijuana. Nicholson then took the tapes and used them as the basis for his screenplay, which according to Rafelson he structured while under the influence of LSD. When the band learned that they would not be allowed to direct themselves or to receive screenwriting credit, Dolenz, Jones, and Nesmith staged a one-day walkout, leaving Tork the only Monkee on the set the first day. The strike ended after the first day when the studio agreed to a larger percentage share of the film's net for the group, but the incident damaged the Monkees' relationship with Rafelson and Bert Schneider and would effectively end their professional relationship with the producers.\nThe film was the antithesis of \"The Monkees\" television show. Rafelson and Nicholson's \"Ditty Diego-War Chant\" (recited at the start of the film by the group) ruthlessly parodies Boyce and Hart's \"Monkees Theme\". A sparse advertising campaign (with no mention of the Monkees) hurt any chances of the film doing well, and it played briefly in half-filled theaters. In the DVD commentary, Nesmith said that everyone associated with the Monkees \"had gone crazy\" by this time. They were each using the platform of the Monkees to push their own disparate career goals, to the detriment of the Monkees project. Nesmith added that \"Head\" was Rafelson and Nicholson's intentional effort to \"kill\" the Monkees, so that they would no longer be bothered with the matter.\nA poor audience response at an August 1968 screening in Los Angeles forced the producers to edit the picture from its original 110-minute length. The 86-minute \"Head\" premiered in New York City on November 6, 1968; the film later debuted in Hollywood on November 20. It was not a commercial success. This was in part because \"Head\" comprehensively demolished the group's carefully groomed public image while the counterculture audience they had been reaching for rejected the Monkees' efforts out of hand. Receiving mixed critical reviews and virtually non-existent box office receipts, the film succeeded in alienating the band's teenage fanbase while failing to attract a more adult audience. Rafelson and Schneider severed all ties to the band amid the bitterness that ensued over the commercial failure of \"Head\". At the time, Rafelson told the press, \"I grooved on those four in very special ways while at the same time thinking they had absolutely no talent.\"\nThe film's soundtrack album reached No. 45 on the Billboard charts and No. 24 in Canada. \"PopMatters\" described \"Head\" as \"a hypnogogic hallucination of a 60's pop record\" whose composition encompassed musique concr\u00e8te pieces and six new songs in the genres of psychedelic, Broadway and lo-fi rock. It was the first Monkees album to not include a song written by Tommy Boyce and Bobby Hart. Some of the album showcases the songwriting skills of band members, particularly Tork, whose acid rock song \"Long Title: Do I Have to Do This All Over Again?\" and the \"Eastern-flavored\" song \"Can You Dig It?\" were described by \"AllMusic\" as being \"not only among the best of the six original compositions on the soundtrack, but also among his finest Monkees offerings, period.\"\nThe album had a mylar cover to give it a mirror-like appearance, so that the person looking at the cover would see his own head, a play on the album title \"Head\". Peter Tork said, \"That was something special... [Jack] Nicholson coordinated the record, made it up from the soundtrack. He made it different from the movie. There's a line in the movie where [Frank] Zappa says, 'That's pretty white.' Then there's another line in the movie that was not juxtaposed in the movie, but Nicholson put them together in the [soundtrack album], when Mike says, 'And the same thing goes for Christmas'... that's funny... very different from the movie... that was very important and wonderful that he assembled the record differently from the movie... It was a different artistic experience.\"\nReleased in October 1968, the single from the album, \"The Porpoise Song\", is a psychedelic pop song written by Goffin and King, with lead vocals from Micky Dolenz and backing vocals from Davy Jones, and it reached No. 62 on the Billboard charts and No. 26 on the Canadian RPM charts.\n\"Head\" developed a cult following. In 2013, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked the album at number 25 in their list of \"The 25 Greatest Soundtracks of All Time\".\nLater years and separation.\nTork's resignation, \"Instant Replay\" and \"The Monkees Present\".\nTensions within the group were increasing. Tork, citing exhaustion, quit the band by buying out the last four years of his Monkees contract at $150,000 per year. Tork departed shortly after the band's September\u2013October Far East tour in December 1968 and after the band completed work on their 1969 NBC television special, \"33\u2153 Revolutions Per Monkee\" (which rehashed many of the ideas from \"Head\", only with the Monkees playing a strangely second-string role). In the DVD commentary for the television special, Dolenz noted that after filming was complete, Nesmith gave Tork a gold watch as a going-away present, engraved \"From the guys down at work.\" Most of the songs from the \"33 1/3 Revolutions Per Monkee\" TV Special were not officially released until over 40 years later, on the 2010 and 2011 Rhino Handmade Deluxe boxed sets of \"Head\" and \"Instant Replay\".\nIn February 1969, the Monkees' seventh album, \"Instant Replay,\" without Tork's involvement beyond playing guitar on \"I Won't Be the Same Without Her\", was released, which reached No. 32 on the charts, and No. 45 in Canada. The single from the album was \"Tear Drop City\", which peaked at No. 56 on the U.S. Billboard chart, No. 27 on the Canadian chart, and No. 34 on the Australian chart. Dolenz contributed the biggest and longest Monkees' production, \"Shorty Blackwell\", a song celebrating his cat. Dolenz called it his \"feeble attempt at something to do with \"Sgt. Pepper.\"\" In April 1969, the single \"Someday Man\" b/w \"Listen to the Band\" was released, which had the unique distinction of the B-side, a Nesmith-composed country-rock song, charting higher (No. 63) than the Jones-sung A-side (No. 81). In Canada, \"Someday Man\" was No. 74 and \"Listen to the Band\" reached No. 53.\nThe final album with Nesmith from the Monkees' original incarnation was their eighth album, \"The Monkees Present\", released in October 1969, which peaked at No. 100 on the Billboard charts. It included the Nesmith composed country-rock singles \"Listen to the Band\" and \"Good Clean Fun\" (released in September 1969)(No. 80 Canada). Other notable songs include the Dolenz composition \"Little Girl\", which featured Louie Shelton on electric guitar joining Dolenz on acoustic guitar.\nIn the summer of 1969, the three remaining Monkees embarked on a tour with the backing of the soul band Sam and the Goodtimers. Concerts for this tour were longer sets than their earlier performances tours, with many shows running over two hours. Although the tour was met with some positive critical reception (\"Billboard\" in particular praised it), other critics were not favorable of the mixing of the Monkees' pop music with the Goodtimers' R&amp;B approach. Toward the end of the tour, some dates were canceled due to poor ticket sales. The tour failed to re-establish the band commercially, with no single entering the Top 40 in 1969. Dolenz remarked that the tour \"was like kicking a dead horse. The phenomenon had peaked\".\nNesmith's resignation, \"Changes\" and disbandment.\nOn April 14, 1970, Nesmith joined Dolenz and Jones for the last time as part of the original incarnation of the Monkees to film a Kool-Aid commercial. The commercial featured the trio throwing Nerf balls around a mock living room. Nesmith left the group to continue recording songs with his own country-rock group called Michael Nesmith &amp; the First National Band, which he had started recording with on February 10, 1970.\n\"Changes\", the ninth and final album by the Monkees released during its original incarnation, spawned the single \"Oh My My\" (US No. 98), which was accompanied by a music film promo (produced/directed by Dolenz). Dolenz contributed one of his own compositions, \"Midnight Train\", which was used in the re-runs of the Monkees TV series. The \"Oh My My\" b/w \"I Love You Better\" single from the \"Changes\" album was the last single issued under the Monkees name in the United States until 1986. Originally released in June 1970, \"Changes\" failed to chart in Billboard's Top 200 until the Monkees' 1986 reunion, when it stayed on the charts for four weeks (reaching No. 152).\nSeptember 22, 1970 marked the final recording session by the Monkees before the band broke up. On that date, Jones and Dolenz recorded \"Do It in the Name of Love\" and \"Lady Jane\". The single was not mixed until February 19, 1971, and was released later that year. The two remaining Monkees then lost the rights to use the name in several countries, the U.S. included. The single was not credited to the Monkees in the U.S., but to a misspelled \"Mickey Dolenz and Davy Jones\".\nBoth Jones and Dolenz pursued careers as solo artists in the years following the original breakup of the Monkees. However, Jones and Dolenz also toured as a duo in the 1970s.\nIn a 1977 interview, Nesmith falsely claimed that the Monkees outsold the Beatles and the Rolling Stones combined in 1967. This inaccurate information was later repeated in newspapers and magazines.\nReunions and revivals.\n1980s renaissance.\nInitially dismissed by critics in the late 1960s as a fabricated and talentless pop group, The Monkees experienced a significant resurgence in critical and commercial popularity during the mid-1980s. This revival was catalyzed by a marathon of their original television series, titled \"Pleasant Valley Sunday\", broadcast on MTV on February 23, 1986. Simultaneously, Nickelodeon began daily reruns of the show, reintroducing the band to a new generation. These promotional efforts sparked a resurgence of \"Monkeemania\", leading to a successful concert tour that expanded from smaller venues to becoming one of the most prominent live acts of 1986 and 1987.\nThe initial spark of the reunion occurred in February and March 1986, when Peter Tork and Davy Jones performed together in Australia. In May 1986, Micky Dolenz, Davy Jones, and Peter Tork announced their \"20th Anniversary Tour\", which began in North America in June. The tour's success prompted additional performances in Australia, Europe, and North America, culminating in September 1989. These tours solidified the band's renewed status in popular culture.\nThe Monkees' original albums saw renewed sales, complemented by the release of a new greatest hits compilation, which achieved platinum certification. The success of the band during this period led to the release of their first single since 1971, \"That Was Then, This Is Now\". The track reached No. 20 on Billboard magazine's charts. However, Davy Jones declined to participate in recording the track and two other new songs included in the compilation album \"Then &amp; Now... The Best of The Monkees\". Some releases credited the songs to \"The Monkees\", while others specified \"Micky Dolenz and Peter Tork (of The Monkees),\" creating friction among the group members during their 1986 tour. Jones often exited the stage when these songs were performed. Despite the tension, Jones contributed to the band's follow-up album, \"Pool It!\" (1987).\nTo promote \"Pool It!\", Rhino Records released \"Heart and Soul: The Official Monkee Videography\", featuring contemporary music videos, interviews, and additional content.\nDuring the 1980s revival, Nesmith made several notable appearances with the band, but remained largely absent due to commitments with his Pacific Arts video production company. He did not contribute to any of the Monkees' studio recordings during this period.\n1990s reunions.\nThe Monkees' eleventh album \"Justus\" was released in 1996. It was the first album since 1968 on which all four original members performed and produced, and it would be the last studio album in which all four Monkees directly participated (Jones's death would necessitate the use of archival recordings on later albums). \"Justus\" was produced by the Monkees, and all of its songs were written by one or two of the four Monkees. The album was recorded using only the four Monkees for all instruments and vocals, which was the inspiration for the album title and spelling (\"Justus\" = Just Us).\nThe trio of Dolenz, Jones, and Tork reunited again for a successful 30th anniversary tour of American amphitheaters in 1996. Nesmith joined them onstage in Los Angeles to promote the new songs from \"Justus\". For the first time since the brief 1986 reunion, Nesmith returned to the concert stage for a tour of the United Kingdom in 1997, highlighted by two sold-out concerts at Wembley Arena in Wembley Park, London. In 1967, the Monkees had been the first group to headline on their own at the Empire Pool, as the Arena was then called. This was followed by a 1997 US tour featuring Tork, Jones, and Dolenz.\nThe full quartet also appeared in an ABC television special entitled \"Hey, Hey, It's the Monkees\", which was written and directed by Nesmith and spoofed the original series that had made them famous. Following the UK tour, Nesmith declined to continue future performances with the Monkees.\n2000s reunions.\nAfter the 1997 tours, the group took another hiatus until they once again reunited in 2001 to tour the United States. However, this tour was also accompanied by public sniping. Dolenz and Jones had announced that they had \"fired\" Tork for his constant complaining and threatening to quit. Tork was quoted as confirming this, as well as stating that he wanted to tour with his own band, Shoe Suede Blues. Tork told WENN News that he \"couldn't handle the backstage problems\"; he added that because he was a recovering alcoholic, he was troubled by the overindulgence in alcohol by other members of the tour crew. Tork later stated in 2011 that alcohol played only a small role in his 2001 departure. He added, \"I take full responsibility for the backstage problems on the 2001 tour. We were getting along pretty well until I had a meltdown. I ticked the other guys off good and proper... I really just behaved inappropriately, honestly. I apologized to them.\"\n45th anniversary tour and Jones's death.\n\"\" (without Nesmith) commenced on May 12, 2011, in Liverpool, England, before moving to North America in June and July for a total of 43 performances. Monkees biographer Andrew Sandoval noted, \"Once they hit the stage, the old magic was apparent. For the next three months...[they brought] the music and memories to fans in the band's grandest stage show in decades\". The tour grossed approximately $4\u00a0million.\nOn August 8, 2011, the band canceled ten last-minute shows due to what was initially reported as \"internal group issues and conflicts\", though Tork later confirmed \"there were some business affairs that couldn't be coordinated correctly. We hit a glitch and there was just this weird dislocation at one point\".\nJones clarified that \"the (45th Anniversary) tour was only supposed to go until July. And it was great, the best time we've had because we're all on the same page now. We jelled onstage and off. But then more dates were being added. And more... Some of these shows were 2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 hours long... The audiences were great. But, let's face it, we're not kids.\"\nThe 45th anniversary tour was the last Monkees tour with Jones, who died of a heart attack at age 66 on February 29, 2012.\nReunion with Nesmith.\nOn August 8, 2012, the surviving trio announced a series of U.S. shows for November and December, commencing in Escondido, California and concluding in New York City. The brief tour marked the first time Nesmith performed with the Monkees since 1997. Jones's memory was honored throughout the shows via recordings and video. During one point, the band went quiet and a recording of Jones singing \"I Wanna Be Free\" played while footage of him was screening behind the band. For Jones's signature song, \"Daydream Believer\", Dolenz said that the band had discussed who should sing the song and had concluded that it should be the fans, saying \"It doesn't belong to us anymore. It belongs to you.\"\nThe fall 2012 tour was very well received by both fans and critics, resulting in the band's scheduling a 24-date summer tour for 2013. Dubbed \"A Midsummer's Night with the Monkees\", the concerts also featured Nesmith, Dolenz, and Tork. \"The reaction to the last tour was euphoric\", Dolenz told \"Rolling Stone\" magazine. \"It was pretty apparent there was a demand for another one.\" A third tour with Nesmith followed in 2014.\nIn March 2014, the Monkees were inducted into the Pop Music Hall of Fame.\n\"Good Times!\" and 50th anniversary.\nDolenz and Tork toured as the Monkees in 2015 without Nesmith's participation. Nesmith stated that he was busy with other ventures, although Dolenz said that he was welcome to join them.\nIn February 2016, Dolenz announced that the Monkees would be releasing a new album, titled \"Good Times!\", as a celebration of their 50th anniversary. \"Good Times!\" featured contributions by all three surviving members, as well as a posthumous contribution from Jones through vocals he had recorded in the 1960s. The album was released in May 2016 to considerable success, reaching No. 14 on the Billboard 200.\nWith the release of the album, the band, featuring Dolenz and Tork, commenced their 50th anniversary tour. Nesmith did not participate in most of the tour, again citing other commitments. He did, however, make a few appearances throughout the summer of 2016, appearing virtually via Skype to perform \"Papa Gene's Blues\" at one concert and in person for a four-song encore at another. In September, he replaced Tork on the tour for two dates while Tork attended to a family emergency. After Tork returned to the tour, Nesmith performed with the band for a concert at the Pantages Theatre in Hollywood on September 16.\nThe Mike and Micky Show, \"Christmas Party\", and Tork's death.\nOn February 20, 2018, a new tour was announced as \"The Monkees Present: The Mike and Micky Show\", their first tour as a duo; Tork was unable to participate due to health problems (a fact that was not revealed until after his death). Though the pair played Monkees music and promoted the tour under the Monkees banner, Dolenz and Nesmith respected Tork's absence by insisting that the shows be billed as a separate duo rather than being billed as official Monkees shows. Nesmith stated, \"There's no pretense there about Micky and I being the Monkees. We're not.\"\nThe tour was cut short in June 2018 due to Nesmith undergoing quadruple bypass heart surgery following a health issue that had persisted since early in the tour. After a month-long stay in the hospital, he and Dolenz announced March 2019 as make-up dates for the missed shows.\nThe Monkees released a Christmas album, \"Christmas Party\", on October 12, 2018. The album features a mix of holiday standards and original songs written by contemporary artists. In addition to newly recorded material from the three surviving Monkees, two previously recorded songs featuring vocals from Jones were also included.\nTork died of cancer on February 21, 2019. After Tork's death, Dolenz and Nesmith's rescheduled shows (and additional shows) of \"The Mike and Micky Tour\" were billed as Monkees shows.\n\"Dolenz Sings Nesmith\", farewell tour, and Nesmith's death.\nIn May 2021, Dolenz released a solo album, \"Dolenz Sings Nesmith\", featuring songs written by Nesmith and produced by Christian Nesmith.\nFollowing the success of the Mike and Micky Show, Dolenz and Nesmith announced a follow-up tour, An Evening with the Monkees, to begin in early 2020. The tour was delayed, however, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On May 4, 2021, it was announced that the rescheduled dates would be billed as a farewell tour. \"The Monkees Farewell Tour\" consisted of over 40 dates in the US from September to November; because of restrictions due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, they were unable to play shows in Canada, the UK or Australia. The final date and final show for the Monkees Farewell Tour was held on November 14, 2021, at the Greek Theatre in Los Angeles.\nNesmith died of heart failure on December 10, 2021, less than a month after the final date of the 2021 tour. Nesmith's death left Dolenz as the only surviving member of the Monkees.\nMicky Dolenz.\nIn early 2022, Dolenz announced that he would embark on a series of April 2022 concert dates called the \"Micky Dolenz Celebrates the Monkees 2022 Tour\". \nAs of October 2025, Dolenz continues to tour throughout the United States. His new tour is entitled, \"Micky Dolenz of The Monkees: Songs &amp; Stories.\"\nImpact and legacy.\nThe Monkees were selected specifically to appeal to the youth market as American television's response to the Beatles. Andrew Sandoval wrote the following in \"The Hollywood Reporter\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The Monkees] pioneered the music video format and paved the way for every boy band that followed in their wake, from New Kids on the Block to 'N Sync to the Jonas Brothers, while Davy set the stage for future teen idols David Cassidy and Justin Bieber. As pop stars go, you would be hard pressed to find a successful artist who didn't take a page from the Monkees' playbook, even generations later. Monkee money also enabled Rafelson and Schneider to finance \"Easy Rider\" and \"Five Easy Pieces\", which made Jack Nicholson a star. In fact, the Monkees series was the opening salvo in a revolution that brought on the New Hollywood cinema, an influence rarely acknowledged but no less impactful.\nThe \"Chicago Tribune\" interviewed Davy Jones, who said, \"We touched a lot of musicians, you know. I can't tell you the amount of people that have come up and said, 'I wouldn't have been a musician if it hadn't been for the Monkees.' It baffles me even now\".\nThe Monkees found unlikely fans among musicians of the punk rock period of the mid-1970s. Many of these punk performers had grown up on TV reruns of the series, and sympathized with the anti-industry, anti-establishment trend of their career. Sex Pistols and Minor Threat both recorded versions of \"(I'm Not Your) Steppin' Stone\" and it was often played live by Toy Love. Japanese new wave pop group the Plastics recorded a synthesizer and drum-machine version of \"Last Train to Clarksville\" for their 1979 album \"Welcome Back\".\nGlenn A. Baker, author of \"Monkeemania: The True Story of the Monkees\", described the Monkees as \"rock's first great embarrassment\" in 1986:\nLike an illegitimate child in a respectable family, the Monkees are destined to be regarded forever as rock's first great embarrassment; misunderstood and maligned like a mongrel at a ritzy dog show, or a test tube baby at the Vatican... The fact was ignored that session players were being heavily employed by the Beach Boys, the Beatles, the Mamas and the Papas, the Byrds and other titans of the age. However, what could \"not\" be ignored, as rock disdained its pubescent past, was a group of middle-aged Hollywood businessmen had actually assembled their concept of a profitable rock group and foisted it upon the world. What mattered was that the Monkees had success handed to them on a silver plate.\n\"Mediaite\" columnist Paul Levinson noted that \"The Monkees were the first example of something created in a medium\u2014in this case, a rock group on television\u2014that jumped off the screen to have big impact in the real world.\"\nWhen commenting on the death of Jones on February 29, 2012, \"Time\" magazine contributor James Poniewozik praised the television show, saying the following:\n... even if the show never meant to be more than entertainment and a hit-single generator, we shouldn't sell \"The Monkees\" short. It was far better TV than it had to be; during an era of formulaic domestic sitcoms and wacky comedies, it was a stylistically ambitious show, with a distinctive visual style, absurdist sense of humor and unusual story structure. Whatever Jones and the Monkees were meant to be, they became creative artists in their own right, and Jones' chipper Brit-pop presence was a big reason they were able to produce work that was commercial, wholesome and yet impressively weird.\nThe band released four chart-topping albums and three chart-topping songs (\"Last Train to Clarksville\", \"I'm a Believer\", and \"Daydream Believer\"), and sold at least 21\u00a0million records in the US. In fact, the band's four number one albums all reached the top of the charts in 1967. As of 2021, no other band has had four number one albums in the same calendar year.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Criterion Collection, which has a stated goal to release \"a continuing series of important classic and contemporary films, [and] has been dedicated to gathering the greatest films from around the world and publishing them in editions that offer the highest technical quality and award-winning, original supplements\" recognized the Monkees' film \"Head\" as meeting their criteria when they fully restored and released it on DVD and Blu-ray in 2010. They stated that \"Head\" was \"way, way ahead of its time\" and \"arguably the most authentically psychedelic film made in 1960s Hollywood\". \"Head\" dodged commercial success on its release but has since been reclaimed as one of the great cult objects of its era.\"\nIn the book \"Hey, Hey We're The Monkees\", Rafelson wrote that, with \"Head\", he explored unprecedented cinematic techniques, including filming actors underwater, the use of polarization, and inventing \"double-matte experiences\". \"When it was shown in France, the head of the Cinematheque overly praised the movie as a cinematic masterpiece, and from that point on, this movie began to acquire an underground reputation.\"\nIn 2010, Nick Vernier Band created a digital \"Monkees reunion\" through the release of \"Mister Bob (featuring the Monkees),\" a new song produced under license from Rhino Entertainment, containing vocal samples from the band's recording \"Zilch\".\nThe contract bridge convention known as either Last Train or Last Train to Clarksville was so named by its inventor, Jeff Meckstroth, after the Monkees' song.\nComic books.\nA comic book series, \"The Monkees\", was published in the United States by Dell Comics, which ran for 17 issues from 1967 to 1969.\nIn the United Kingdom, a \"Daily Mirror\" \"Crazy Cartoon Book\" featured four comic stories as well as four photos of the Monkees, all in black and white; it was published in 1967.\nBiopic.\nIn 2000, VH-1 produced the television biopic \"\".\nMusical.\nA stage musical opened in the UK at the Manchester Opera House on Friday March 30, 2012, and was dedicated to Davy Jones (the Jones family attended the official opening on April 3). The production is a Jukebox musical and starred Stephen Kirwan, Ben Evans, Tom Parsons and Oliver Savile as actors playing the parts of the Monkees (respectively Dolenz, Jones, Nesmith, Tork) who are hired by an unscrupulous businessman to go on a world tour pretending to be the real band. The show includes 18 Monkees songs plus numbers by other 60s artists. It ran in Manchester as part of the \"Manchester Gets it First\" program until April 14, 2012, before a UK tour. Following its Manchester run, the show appeared in the Glasgow King's Theatre and the Sunderland Empire Theatre.\nAwards and achievements.\nGrammy Awards.\nThe Grammy Awards is an accolade by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (NARAS) of the United States to recognize outstanding achievement in the music industry. It shares recognition of the music industry as that of the other performance arts: Emmy Awards (television), the Tony Awards (stage performance), and the Academy Awards (motion pictures).\nControversies.\nRock and Roll Hall of Fame.\nVarious magazines and news outlets, such as \"Time\", NPR, \"Goldmine\", Yahoo! Music and MSNBC have argued that the Monkees belong in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In 1992, Davy Jones told \"People\" that he knew that the Monkees would never make it into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In June 2007, Peter Tork complained to the \"New York Post\" that Jann Wenner had \"blackballed\" the Monkees from being inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Tork contended that Wenner held a grudge against the Monkees because the band members did not always write their own songs or play their own instruments during their early years.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31418", "revid": "16416757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31418", "title": "Thermobaric weapon", "text": "Device producing a high-temperature explosion\nA thermobaric weapon, also called an aerosol bomb, or erroneously a vacuum bomb, is a type of explosive munition that works by dispersing an aerosol cloud of gas, liquid or powdered explosive. This allows the chemical combustion to proceed using atmospheric oxygen, so that the weapon does not need to include an oxidizer.\nThe fuel is usually a single compound, rather than a mixture of multiple substances. Many types of thermobaric weapons can be fitted to hand-held launchers, and can also be launched from airplanes.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"thermobaric\" is derived from the Greek words for 'heat' and 'pressure': \"thermobarikos\" (\u03b8\u03b5\u03c1\u03bc\u03bf\u03b2\u03b1\u03c1\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2), from \"thermos\" (\u03b8\u03b5\u03c1\u03bc\u03cc\u03c2) 'hot' + \"baros\" (\u03b2\u03ac\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2) 'weight, pressure' + suffix \"-ikos\" (-\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2) '-ic'.\nOther terms used for the family of weapons are high-impulse thermobaric weapons, heat and pressure weapons, vacuum bombs, and fuel-air explosives (FAE).\nMechanism.\nMost conventional explosives consist of a fuel\u2013oxidiser premix, but thermobaric weapons consist only of fuel and as a result are significantly more energetic than conventional explosives of equal weight. Their reliance on atmospheric oxygen makes them unsuitable for use under water, at high altitude, and in adverse weather. They are, however, considerably more effective when used in enclosed spaces such as tunnels, buildings, and non-hermetically sealed field fortifications (foxholes, bunkers).\nThe initial explosive charge detonates as it hits its target, opening the container and dispersing the fuel mixture as a cloud. The typical blast wave of a thermobaric weapon lasts significantly longer than that of a conventional explosive.\nIn contrast to an explosive that uses oxidation in a confined region to produce a blast front emanating from a single source, a thermobaric flame front accelerates to a large volume, which produces pressure fronts within the mixture of fuel and oxidant and then also in the surrounding air.\nThermobaric explosives apply the principles underlying accidental unconfined vapor cloud explosions, which include those from dispersions of flammable dusts and droplets. Such dust explosions happened most often in flour mills and their storage containers, grain bins (corn silos etc.), and earlier in coal mines, prior to the 20th century. Accidental unconfined vapor cloud explosions now happen most often in partially or completely empty oil tankers, refinery tanks, and vessels, such as the Buncefield fire in the United Kingdom in 2005, where the blast wave woke people from its centre.\nA typical weapon consists of a container packed with a fuel substance, the centre of which has a small conventional-explosive \"scatter charge\". Fuels are chosen on the basis of the exothermicity of their oxidation, ranging from powdered metals, such as aluminium or magnesium, to organic materials, possibly with a self-contained partial oxidant. The most recent development involves the use of nanofuels.\nA thermobaric bomb's effective yield depends on a combination of a number of factors such as how well the fuel is dispersed, how rapidly it mixes with the surrounding atmosphere and the initiation of the igniter and its position relative to the container of fuel. In some designs, strong munitions cases allow the blast pressure to be contained long enough for the fuel to be heated well above its autoignition temperature so that once the container bursts, the superheated fuel autoignites progressively as it comes into contact with atmospheric oxygen.\nConventional upper and lower limits of flammability apply to such weapons. Close in, blast from the dispersal charge, compressing and heating the surrounding atmosphere, has some influence on the lower limit. The upper limit has been demonstrated to influence the ignition of fogs above pools of oil strongly. That weakness may be eliminated by designs in which the fuel is preheated well above its ignition temperature so that its cooling during its dispersion still results in a minimal ignition delay on mixing. The continual combustion of the outer layer of fuel molecules, as they come into contact with the air, generates added heat which maintains the temperature of the interior of the fireball, and thus sustains the detonation.\nIn confinement, a series of reflective shock waves is generated, which maintain the fireball and can extend its duration to between 10\u00a0and\u00a050\u00a0ms as exothermic recombination reactions occur. Further damage can result as the gases cool and pressure drops sharply, leading to a partial vacuum. This rarefaction effect has given rise to the misnomer \"vacuum bomb\". Piston-type afterburning is also believed to occur in such structures, as flame-fronts accelerate through it.\nFuel\u2013air explosive.\nA fuel\u2013air explosive (FAE) device consists of a container of fuel and two separate explosive charges. After the munition is dropped or fired, the first explosive charge bursts open the container at a predetermined height and disperses the fuel in a cloud that mixes with atmospheric oxygen (the size of the cloud varies with the size of the munition). The cloud of fuel flows around objects and into structures. The second charge then detonates the cloud and creates a massive blast wave. The blast wave can destroy reinforced buildings, equipment, and kill or injure people. The blast wave's antipersonnel effect is magnified in confined spaces, such as foxholes, tunnels, bunkers and caves.\nEffects.\nConventional countermeasures such as barriers (sandbags) and personnel armour are not effective against thermobaric weapons. A Human Rights Watch report of 1 February 2000 quotes a study made by the US Defense Intelligence Agency:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to a US Central Intelligence Agency study, \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the effect of an FAE explosion within confined spaces is immense. Those near the ignition point are obliterated. Those at the fringe are likely to suffer many internal, invisible injuries, including burst eardrums and crushed inner ear organs, severe concussions, ruptured lungs and internal organs, and possibly blindness.\nAnother Defense Intelligence Agency document speculates that, because the \"shock and pressure waves cause minimal damage to brain tissue... it is possible that victims of FAEs are not rendered unconscious by the blast, but instead suffer for several seconds or minutes while they suffocate\".\nDevelopment.\nGerman.\nThe first attempts occurred during the First World War when incendiary shells (in German 'Brandgranate') used a slow but intense burning material, such as tar impregnated tissue and gunpowder dust. These shells burned for approximately 2 minutes after the shell exploded and spread the burning elements in every direction.\nIn World War II, the German Wehrmacht attempted to develop a thermobaric weapon, under the direction of the Austrian physicist Mario Zippermayr.\nThe weapon was claimed by a weapons specialist (K.L. Bergmann) to have been tested on the Eastern front under the code-name \"Taifun B\" and was ready for deployment during the Normandy invasion in June, 1944. Apparently, canisters of a charcoal, aluminium and aviation fuel would have been launched, followed with a secondary launch of incendiary rockets. It was destroyed by a Western artillery barrage minutes before being fired just before Operation Cobra.\nUnited States.\nFAEs were developed by the United States for use in the Vietnam War. The CBU-55 FAE fuel-air cluster bomb was mostly developed by the US Naval Weapons Center at China Lake, California.\nCurrent American FAE munitions include the following:\nThe XM1060 40-mm grenade is a small-arms thermobaric device, which was fielded by US forces in Afghanistan in 2002, and proved to be popular against targets in enclosed spaces, such as caves. Since the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the US Marine Corps has introduced a thermobaric \"Novel Explosive\" (SMAW-NE) round for the Mk 153 SMAW rocket launcher. One team of Marines reported that they had destroyed a large one-story masonry type building with one round from . The AGM-114N Hellfire II, uses a Metal Augmented Charge (MAC) warhead, which contains a thermobaric explosive fill that uses aluminium powder coated or mixed with PTFE layered between the charge casing and a PBXN-112 explosive mixture. When the PBXN-112 detonates, the aluminium mixture is dispersed and rapidly burns. The result is a sustained high pressure that is extremely effective against people and structures.\nSoviet, later Russian.\nFollowing FAEs developed by the United States for use in the Vietnam War, Soviet Union scientists quickly developed their own FAE weapons. Since Afghanistan, research and development has continued, and Russian forces now field a wide array of third-generation FAE warheads, such as the RPO-A. The Russian armed forces have developed thermobaric ammunition variants for several of their weapons, such as the TBG-7V thermobaric grenade with a lethality radius of , which can be launched from a rocket propelled grenade (RPG) RPG-7. The GM-94 is a pump-action grenade launcher designed mainly to fire thermobaric grenades for close combat. The grenade weighed and contained of explosive, its lethality radius is , but due to the deliberate \"fragmentation-free\" design of the grenade, a distance of is considered safe.\nThe RPO-A and upgraded RPO-M are infantry-portable rocket propelled grenades designed to fire thermobaric rockets. The RPO-M, for instance, has a thermobaric warhead with a TNT equivalence of and destructive capabilities similar to a high-explosive fragmentation artillery shell. The RShG-1 and the RShG-2 are thermobaric variants of the RPG-27 and RPG-26 respectively. The RShG-1 is the more powerful variant, with its warhead having a lethality radius and producing about the same effect as of TNT. The RMG is a further derivative of the RPG-26 that uses a tandem-charge warhead, with the precursor high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT) warhead blasting an opening for the main thermobaric charge to enter and detonate inside. The RMG's precursor HEAT warhead can penetrate 300\u00a0mm of reinforced concrete or over 100\u00a0mm of rolled homogeneous armour, thus allowing the -diameter thermobaric warhead to detonate inside.\nOther examples include the semi-automatic command to line of sight (SACLOS) or millimeter-wave active radar homing guided thermobaric variants of the 9M123 Khrizantema, the 9M133F-1 thermobaric warhead variant of the 9M133 Kornet, and the 9M131F thermobaric warhead variant of the 9K115-2 Metis-M, all of which are anti-tank missiles. The Kornet has since been upgraded to the Kornet-EM, and its thermobaric variant has a maximum range of and has a TNT equivalence of . The 9M55S thermobaric cluster warhead rocket was built to be fired from the BM-30 Smerch MLRS. A dedicated carrier of thermobaric weapons is the purpose-built TOS-1, a 24-tube MLRS designed to fire thermobaric rockets. A full salvo from the TOS-1 will cover a rectangle . The Iskander-M theatre ballistic missile can also carry a thermobaric warhead.\nMany Russian Air Force munitions have thermobaric variants. The S-8 rocket has the S-8DM and S-8DF thermobaric variants. The S-8's brother, the S-13, has the S-13D and S-13DF thermobaric variants. The S-13DF's warhead weighs only , but its power is equivalent to of TNT. The KAB-500-OD variant of the KAB-500KR has a thermobaric warhead. The ODAB-500PM and ODAB-500PMV unguided bombs carry a fuel\u2013air explosive each. ODAB-1500 is a larger version of the bomb. The KAB-1500S GLONASS/GPS guided bomb also has a thermobaric variant. Its fireball will cover a radius and its lethal zone is a radius. The 9M120 Ataka-V and the 9K114 Shturm ATGMs both have thermobaric variants.\nIn September 2007, Russia exploded the largest thermobaric weapon ever made, and claimed that its yield was equivalent to that of a nuclear weapon. Russia named this particular ordnance the \"Father of All Bombs\" in response to the American-developed Massive Ordnance Air Blast (MOAB) bomb, which has the backronym \"Mother of All Bombs\" and once held the title of the most powerful non-nuclear weapon in history.\nIraq.\nIraq was alleged to possess the technology as early as 1990.\nIsrael.\nIsrael was alleged to possess thermobaric technology as early as 1990, according to Pentagon sources.\nSpain.\nIn 1983, a program of military research was launched with collaboration between the Spanish Ministry of Defence (Directorate General of Armament and Material, DGAM) and Explosivos Alaveses (EXPAL) which was a subsidiary of Uni\u00f3n Explosivos R\u00edo Tinto (ERT). The goal of the programme was to develop a thermobaric bomb, the BEAC (\"Bomba Explosiva de Aire-Combustible\"). A prototype was tested successfully in a foreign location out of safety and confidentiality concerns. The Spanish Air and Space Force has an undetermined number of BEACs in its inventory.\nChina.\nIn 1996, the People's Liberation Army (PLA) began development of the PF-97, a portable thermobaric rocket launcher, based on the Soviet RPO-A Shmel. Introduced in 2000 it is reported to weigh 3.5\u00a0kg and contains 2.1\u00a0kg of thermobaric filler. An improved version called the PF-97A was introduced in 2008.\nChina is reported to have other thermobaric weapons, including bombs, grenades and rockets. Research continues on thermobaric weapons capable of reaching 2,500 degrees.\nBrazil.\nIn 2004, under the request of the \"Estado Maior da Aeron\u00e1utica\" (Military Staff of Aeronautics) and the \"Diretoria de Material Aeron\u00e1utico e B\u00e9lico\" (Board of Aeronautical and Military Equipment) the \"Instituto de Aeronautica e Espa\u00e7o\" (Institute of Aeronautics and Space) started developing a thermobaric bomb called Trocano .\nTrocano is a thermobaric weapon similar in design to the United States' MOAB weapon or Russia's FOAB. Like the US weapon, the Trocano was designed to be pallet-loaded into a C-130 Hercules aircraft, and deployed using a parachute to drag it from the C-130's cargo bay and separate the bomb from its pallet.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 2009, the British Ministry of Defence (MoD) acknowledged that Army Air Corps (AAC) AgustaWestland Apaches had used AGM-114 Hellfire missiles purchased from the United States against Taliban forces in Afghanistan. The MoD stated that 20 missiles, described as \"blast fragmentation warheads\", were used in 2008 and a further 20 in 2009. MoD officials told \"Guardian\" journalist Richard Norton-Taylor that the missiles were \"particularly designed to take down structures and kill everyone in the buildings\", as AAC AgustaWestland Apaches were previously equipped with weapon systems deemed ineffective to combat the Taliban. The MoD also stated that \"British pilots' rules of engagement were strict and everything a pilot sees from the cockpit is recorded.\"\nIn 2018, the MoD accidentally divulged the details of General Atomics MQ-9 Reapers utilised by the Royal Air Force (RAF) during the Syrian civil war, which revealed that the drones were equipped with AGM-114 Hellfire missiles. The MoD had sent a report to a British publication, \"Drone Wars\", in response to a freedom of information request. In the report, it was stated that AGM-114N Hellfire missiles which contained a thermobaric warhead were used by RAF attack drones in Syria.\nIndia.\nBased on the high-explosive squash head (HESH) round, a 120\u00a0mm thermobaric round was developed in the 2010s by the Indian Ministry of Defence. This HESH round packs thermobaric explosives into the tank shells to increase the effectiveness against enemy bunkers and light armoured vehicles.\nThe design and the development of the round was taken up by Armament Research and Development Establishment (ARDE). The rounds were designed for the Arjun MBT. The TB rounds contains fuel rich explosive composition called thermobaric explosive. As the name implies, the shells, when they hit a target, produce blast overpressure and heat energy for hundreds of milliseconds. The overpressure and heat causes damage to enemy fortified structures like bunkers and buildings and for soft targets like enemy personnel and light armoured vehicles.\nSerbia.\nThe company Balkan Novoteh, formed in 2011, provides the Thermobaric hand grenade TG-1 to the market.\nMilitary Technical Institute in Belgrade has developed a technology for producing cast-cured thermobaric PBX explosives. Since recently, the Factory of Explosives and Pyrotechnics TRAYAL Corporation has been producing cast-cured thermobaric PBX formulations.\nUkraine.\nIn 2017 Ukroboronprom's Scientific Research Institute for Chemical Products in conjunction with Artem State Enterprise (aka Artem Holding Company) announced to the market its new product, the RGT-27S. These can be combined with the RPV-16 grenade launcher, a demonstration of which was witnessed by Oleksandr Turchynov. The grenades, of approximately 600 grams, \"create a two second fire cloud with a volume of not less than 13 m\u00b3, inside of which the temperature reaches 2,500 degrees. This temperature allows not only for the destruction of the enemy, but are also able to disable lightly armored vehicles.\" The firm showed them at the Azerbaijan International Defense Exhibition in 2018.\nIn 2024, Ukraine started using drones rigged with thermobaric explosives to strike Russian positions in the Russo-Ukrainian War.\nHistory.\nAttempted prohibitions.\nMexico, Switzerland and Sweden presented in 1980 a joint motion to the United Nations to prohibit the use of thermobaric weapons, to no avail.\nUnited Nations Institute for Disarmament Research categorises these weapons as \"enhanced blast weapons\" and there was pressure to regulate these around 2010, again to no avail.\nMilitary use.\nUnited States.\nFAEs such as first-generation CBU-55 fuel\u2013air weapons saw extensive use in the Vietnam War. A second generation of FAE weapons were based on those, and were used by the United States in Iraq during Operation Desert Storm. A total of 254 CBU-72s were dropped by the United States Marine Corps, mostly from A-6Es. They were targeted against mine fields and personnel in foxholes, but were more useful as a psychological weapon.\nThe US military used thermobaric weapons in Afghanistan. On 3 March 2002, a single laser guided thermobaric bomb was used by the United States Air Force against cave complexes in which Al-Qaeda and Taliban fighters had taken refuge in the Gardez region of Afghanistan. The SMAW-NE was used by the US Marines during the First Battle of Fallujah and the Second Battle of Fallujah. The AGM-114N Hellfire II was first used by US forces in 2003 in Iraq.\nSoviet Union.\nFAEs were reportedly used against China in the 1969 Sino-Soviet border conflict.\nThe TOS-1 system was test fired in Panjshir Valley during the Soviet\u2013Afghan War in the late 1980s. MiG-27 attack aircraft of the 134th APIB used ODAB-500S/P fuel\u2013air bombs against Mujahideen forces in Afghanistan, but they were found to be unreliable and dangerous to ground crew.\nRussia.\nRussian military forces reportedly used ground-delivered thermobaric weapons during the Battle for Grozny (first and second Chechen Wars) to attack dug-in Chechen fighters. The use of TOS-1 heavy MLRS and \"RPO-A Shmel\" shoulder-fired rocket system during the Chechen Wars is reported to have occurred. Russia used the RPO-A Shmel in the First Battle of Grozny, whereupon it was designated as a very useful round.\nIt was thought that, during the September 2004 Beslan school hostage crisis, a multitude of handheld thermobaric weapons were used by the Russian Armed Forces in their efforts to retake the school. The RPO-A and either the TGB-7V thermobaric rocket from the RPG-7 or rockets from either the RShG-1 or the RShG-2 is claimed to have been used by the Spetsnaz during the initial storming of the school. At least three and as many as nine RPO-A casings were later found at the positions of the Spetsnaz. In July 2005 the Russian government admitted to the use of the RPO-A during the crisis.\nDuring the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, CNN reported that Russian forces were moving thermobaric weapons into Ukraine. On 28 February 2022, Ukraine's ambassador to the United States accused Russia of deploying a thermobaric bomb. Russia has claimed to have used the weapon in March 2024 against Ukrainian soldiers in an unspecified location (denied by Ukraine), and during the August 2024 Ukrainian incursion into Kursk Oblast.\nUnited Kingdom.\nDuring the War in Afghanistan, British forces, including the Army Air Corps and Royal Air Force, used thermobaric AGM-114N Hellfire missiles against the Taliban. In the Syrian civil war, British military drones used AGM-114N Hellfire missiles; in the first three months of 2018, British drones fired 92 Hellfire missiles in Syria.\nIsrael.\nA report by Human Rights Watch claimed Israel has used thermobaric weaponry in the past including the 2008\u20132009 conflict in Gaza. Moreover, Euro-Med Human Rights Monitor states that Israel appears to be using thermobaric weaponry in the current Gaza war. Both organizations claim that the use of this weaponry in densely populated neighborhoods violates international humanitarian law due to its damaging affects on civilians and civilian structures.\"\" The Eurasian Times reported that an Israeli AH-64D Apache attack helicopter was photographed with a 'mystery' warhead with a red band that was speculated to be a thermobaric warhead capable of destroying Hamas tunnels and multi-story buildings.\nSyria.\nReports by the rebel fighters of the Free Syrian Army claim the Syrian Air Force used such weapons against residential area targets occupied by the rebel fighters, such as during the Battle of Aleppo and in Kafar Batna. Others contend that in 2012 the Syrian government used an ODAB-500PM bomb in Azaz. A United Nations panel of human rights investigators reported that the Syrian government had used thermobaric bombs against the rebellious town of Al-Qusayr in March 2013.\nThe Russia and Syrian governments have used thermobaric bombs and other thermobaric munitions during the Syrian civil war against insurgents and insurgent-held civilian areas.\nUkraine.\nMikhail Tolstykh, a top rank pro-Russian officer in the war in Donbas was killed on 8 February 2017 at his office in Donetsk by an RPO-A rocket fired by members of the Security Service of Ukraine. In March 2023 soldiers from the 59th Motorised Brigade of Ukraine showed off the destruction of a derelict Russian infantry fighting vehicle by a thermobaric RGT-27S2 hand grenade delivered by Mavic 3 drone.\nNon-state actor use.\nThermobaric and fuel\u2013air explosives have been used in guerrilla warfare since the 1983 Beirut barracks bombing in Lebanon, which used a gas-enhanced explosive mechanism that was probably propane, butane, or acetylene. The explosive used by the bombers in the US 1993 World Trade Center bombing incorporated the FAE principle by using three tanks of bottled hydrogen gas to enhance the blast.\nJemaah Islamiyah bombers used a shock-dispersed solid fuel charge, based on the thermobaric principle, to attack the Sari nightclub during the 2002 Bali bombings in Indonesia.\nInternational law.\nInternational law does not prohibit the use of thermobaric munitions, fuel-air explosive devices, or vacuum bombs against military targets. As of \u00a02024[ [update]], all past attempts to regulate or restrict thermobaric weapons have failed.\nAccording to some scholars , thermobaric weapons are not intrinsically indiscriminate by nature, as they are often engineered for precision targeting capabilities . This precision aspect serves to provide humanitarian advantages by potentially minimizing collateral damage and also lessens the amount of munitions needed to effectively engage with the chosen military goals. Nonetheless, authors holding this view recommend that the use of thermobaric weapons in populated areas should be minimised due to their wide-area impact and multiple harm mechanisms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31419", "revid": "49626882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31419", "title": "Tabasco sauce", "text": "American hot sauce brand\nTabasco is an American brand of hot sauce made from vinegar, tabasco peppers, and salt. It is produced by the McIlhenny Company of Avery Island in southern Louisiana, having been created over 150 years ago by Edmund McIlhenny. Originally, the tabasco peppers were grown only on Avery Island; they are now primarily cultivated in Central America, South America, and Africa. The Tabasco sauce brand also has multiple varieties, including the original red sauce, habanero, jalape\u00f1o, chipotle, sriracha, and scorpion. Tabasco products are sold in more than 195 countries and territories, and packaged in 36 languages and dialects.\nHistory.\nAccording to the company's official history, Tabasco was first produced in 1868 by Edmund McIlhenny, a Maryland-born former banker who had moved to Louisiana around 1840. However, as Jeffrey Rothfeder's book \"McIlhenny's Gold\" points out, some of the McIlhenny Company's official history is disputed, and the politician Maunsel White was producing a tabasco pepper sauce two decades before McIlhenny. A 2007 book review by Mark Robichaux of \"The Wall Street Journal\" quotes Rothfeder's book:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The story actually begins in the pre-Civil War era with a New Orleans plantation owner named Maunsel White, who was famous for the food served at his sumptuous dinner parties. Mr. White's table no doubt groaned with the region's varied fare\u2014drawing inspiration from European, Caribbean, and Cajun sources\u2014but one of his favorite sauces was of his own devising, made from a pepper named for its origins in the Mexican state of Tabasco. White added it to various dishes and bottled it for his guests. Although the McIlhennys have tried to dismiss the possibility, it seems clear now that in 1849, a full two decades before Edmund McIlhenny professed to discover the Tabasco pepper, White was already growing Tabasco chilies on his plantation.\nRothfeder cited January 26, 1850, letter to the \"New Orleans Daily Delta\" newspaper crediting White as having introduced \"Tobasco red pepper\" (sic) to the Southern United States and asserting that the McIlhenny was at least inspired by White's recipe. Jean Andrews, in her book \"Peppers: The Domesticated Capsicums\", goes further to declare\u2014citing United States Circuit Court testimony from 1922\u2014that prior to his death in 1862, \"White gave some [pepper] pods, along with his recipe, to his friend Edmund McIlhenny, during a visit to White's Deer Range Plantation.\" To distribute his, Edmund McIlhenny initially obtained unused cologne bottles from a New Orleans glass supplier. On his death in 1890, McIlhenny was succeeded by his eldest son, John Avery McIlhenny, who expanded and modernized the business, but resigned after only a few years to join Theodore Roosevelt's 1st US Volunteer Cavalry Regiment, the Rough Riders. On John's departure, brother Edward Avery McIlhenny, a self-taught naturalist fresh from an Arctic adventure, assumed control of the company and also focused on expansion and modernization, running the business from 1898 until his death in 1949. Walter S. McIlhenny, in turn, succeeded his uncle Edward Avery McIlhenny, serving as president of McIlhenny Company from 1949 until his death in 1985. Edward McIlhenny Simmons then ran the company as president and CEO for several years, remaining as board chairman until his death in 2012. Paul McIlhenny became company president in 1998 and was chairman until his death in 2013. In 2012, McIlhenny cousin Tony Simmons assumed the company's presidency and, in June 2019, his cousin Harold Osborn was chosen as the next president and CEO. McIlhenny was one of just a few U.S. companies to have received a royal warrant of appointment that certified the company as a supplier to Queen Elizabeth II. McIlhenny was one of the 850 companies around the world that have been officially designated as suppliers to the queen by such warrants. The warrant held was \"Supplier of Tabasco HM The Queen\u00a0\u2014 Master of the Household\u00a0\u2014 Granted in 2009\". In 2005, Avery Island was hit hard by Hurricane Rita, and the family constructed a -high levee around the low side of the factory and invested in back-up generators.\nProduction.\nOriginally, all peppers used in Tabasco sauce were grown on Avery Island. Over time, growers were selected throughout Louisiana to accommodate demand and during the 1960s, the company established farms in various Latin American countries. As of 2013[ [update]], peppers grown on the island are used to produce seed stock, which is then shipped to foreign growers. More predictable weather and readily available farmland in these locales allow a constant, year-round supply. This ensures the availability of peppers should severe weather or other problems occur at a particular growing location. Following company tradition, peppers are picked by hand. To ensure ripeness, pickers compare peppers to a little red stick (\"le petit b\u00e2ton rouge\"); peppers that match the color of the stick are then introduced into the sauce production process. Peppers are ground into a mash on the day of harvest and placed along with salt in white oak barrels previously used for whiskey of various distilleries. To prepare the barrel, the inside of the barrel is decharred (top layer of wood is removed), torched, and cleaned, to minimize the presence of any residual whiskey. The barrels are then used in warehouses on Avery Island for aging the mash. After aging for up to three years, the mash is strained to remove skins and seeds. The resulting liquid is then mixed with distilled vinegar, stirred occasionally for a month, and then bottled as a finished sauce. Tabasco has released a Tabasco reserve edition with peppers aged for up to eight years, mixed with wine vinegar. Tabasco Diamond Reserve Edition was a limited bottling released in 2018 to commemorate the brand's 150th anniversary. This sauce consists of peppers that have been aged for up to 15 years, then mixed with sparkling white wine vinegar. For many years, the salt used in Tabasco production came from the Avery Island salt dome, the largest such structure along the Louisiana coast.\nVarieties.\nSeveral sauces are produced under the Tabasco brand name. A few of the varieties include:\nDiscontinued sauces.\nThe habanero, chipotle, and garlic sauces include the tabasco peppers blended with other peppers, whereas the jalape\u00f1o variety does not include tabasco peppers. None of these sauces, however, has the three-year aging process the flagship product uses. The brand also produces a selection of Tabasco Chocolate.\nPackaging.\nTabasco brand pepper sauce is sold in more than 195 countries and territories and is packaged in 36 languages and dialects. The Tabasco bottle is still modeled after the cologne-style bottles used for the first batch of sauce in 1868. As many as 720,000 two-ounce (57\u00a0ml) bottles of Tabasco sauce are produced daily at the Tabasco factory on Avery Island. Bottles range from the common two-ounce and five-ounce (59\u00a0ml and 148\u00a0ml) bottles, up to a jug for food-service businesses, and down to a miniature bottle. Also, portion-control packets of Tabasco sauce are produced. These one-eighth-ounce bottles of Tabasco, bearing the presidential seal, are served on Air Force One. The US military has included Tabasco sauce in Meals, Ready-to-Eat (MREs) since the 1980s. The Australian, British and Canadian armies also issue small bottles of Tabasco sauce in their rations.\nUses.\nMcIlhenny Company produces or has produced Tabasco brand products that contain pepper seasoning, including chocolate, popcorn, nuts, olives, mayonnaise, mustard, steak sauce, Worcestershire sauce, soy sauce, teriyaki sauce, Sriracha sauce, marinating sauce, barbecue sauce, chili sauce, pepper jelly, and Bloody Mary mix. McIlhenny Company also permits other brands to use and advertise Tabasco sauce as an ingredient in their products (a common marketing practice called \"co-branding\"), including Spam, Hormel chili, Slim Jim beef sticks, Heinz ketchup, A1 steak sauce, Plochman's mustard, Lawry's salt, Zapp's potato chips, Heluva Good dip, and Vlasic Pickles. Cheez-It crackers for a long time used McIlhenny's Tabasco Green Pepper Sauce until 2018, when Kellogg's replaced it with their own hot sauce. The original red Tabasco sauce has a shelf life of three years when stored in a cool and dry place; other Tabasco flavors have shorter shelf lives. Tabasco appeared on the menu of NASA's Space Shuttle program and went into orbit on the shuttles. It was on Skylab and on the International Space Station and is popular with astronauts as a means of countering the blandness of food in space.\nCookbooks.\nDuring the Vietnam War, Brigadier General Walter S. McIlhenny issued \"The Charlie Ration Cookbook\". (Charlie ration or \"C-rats\" was the name for the field meal then given to troops.) This cookbook came wrapped around a two-ounce bottle of Tabasco sauce, placed in a water-resistant container. It instructed troops on how to use C-rations to make such meals as \"Combat Zone Burgoo\" and \"Breast of Chicken under Bullets.\" Soldiers also requested their families to send them Tabasco sauce in \"care packages\" from home. During the 1990s, the U.S. military began to include miniature bottles of Tabasco sauce in its MREs. Eventually, miniature bottles of Tabasco sauce were included in two-thirds of all MRE menus. During the same period, McIlhenny Company issued a new military-oriented cookbook using characters from the comic strip \"Beetle Bailey\". Titled \"The Unofficial MRE Cookbook\", it was offered free of charge to U.S. troops.\nToxicity.\nIn a 1982 article titled \"Pepper Sauce Toxicity\", Tabasco pepper sauce's toxicity was evaluated based on red peppers and vinegar. Sprague-Dawley rats (laboratory rats) were used as test subjects. The oral median lethal dose in male lab rats was determined to be 23.58 mL/kg body weight (BW) with an upper limit of 29.75 mL/kg BW and a lower limit of 18.70 mL/kg BW. The median lethal dose in the female lab rats was found to be 19.52 mL/kg BW (15.64 mL/kg BW lower, 24.35 mL/kg BW upper). The sauce was found to be a mild skin irritant and a moderate to severe eye irritant. The toxicity to the eye is mainly caused by vinegar.\nIn art and culture.\nIn 1894, composer George W. Chadwick wrote the \"Burlesque Opera of Tabasco\", a musical comedy that conductor Paul Mauffray revived in 2018 with support from McIlhenny Company. \nTabasco has appeared in many movies and cartoons, as well as on television. It featured in two James Bond films in the 1970s, \"The Man with the Golden Gun\" and \"The Spy Who Loved Me\", as well as a shot of the iconic bottle in Sidney Lumet's 1974 film \"Murder on the Orient Express\". Some appearances date as far back as the Our Gang short \"Birthday Blues\" in 1932 and Charlie Chaplin's \"Modern Times\" in 1936. In \"Back to the Future Part III\", the saloon bartender uses Tabasco as an ingredient for an instant hangover cure he calls \"wake-up juice\". Tabasco sauce was also an important element in the television series \"Roswell\" about alien/human hybrid teenagers who craved foods that were sweet and spicy and often carried bottles of Tabasco sauce with them. When the network tried to cancel the series in the first season, thousands of fans mailed bottles of Tabasco to the network to show their support. The series continued for three seasons.\nIn the 2009 Disney animated film \"The Princess and the Frog\", Tiana is seen using Tabasco sauce for her gumbo soup. Later on, in 2024, Tiana's Bayou Adventure also features Tabasco sauce as part of the Disneyland and Disney World attraction and is used in Tiana's Palace restaurant meals.\nIn the \"Leykis 101\" segment of his talk radio show, Tom Leykis advocated for men putting Tabasco sauce in their condoms after sexual intercourse to act as a spermicide and prevent a woman potentially \"stealing the sperm\" and using it to impregnate herself. In 2022, a story circulated widely on the internet that the rapper Drake did this after having sex with an Instagram model. However, Tabasco's usefulness as a spermicide is questionable.\nThe company was featured in a 2011 episode of the Canadian documentary series \"How It\u2019s Made\", detailing how its signature hot sauce is produced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31420", "revid": "207616", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31420", "title": "Thanksgiving Day", "text": ""}
{"id": "31421", "revid": "32763026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31421", "title": "Turkic", "text": "Turkic may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "31422", "revid": "33582079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31422", "title": "Talc", "text": "Phyllosilicate mineral in the pyrophyllite-talc group\nTalc, or talcum, is a clay mineral composed of hydrated magnesium silicate, with the chemical formula . Talc in powdered form, often combined with corn starch, is used as baby powder. This mineral is used as a thickening agent and lubricant. It is an ingredient in ceramics, paints, and roofing material. It is a main ingredient in many cosmetics. It occurs as foliated to fibrous masses, and in an exceptionally rare crystal form. It has a perfect basal cleavage and an uneven flat fracture, and it is foliated with a two-dimensional platy form.\nThe Mohs scale of mineral hardness, based on scratch hardness comparison, defines value 1 as the hardness of talc, the softest mineral. When scraped on a streak plate, talc produces a white streak, though this indicator is of little importance, because most silicate minerals produce a white streak. Talc is translucent to opaque, with colors ranging from whitish grey to green with a vitreous and pearly luster. Talc is not soluble in water, and is slightly soluble in dilute mineral acids.\nSoapstone is a metamorphic rock composed predominantly of talc.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"talc\" derives from \"t\u0101lk\". In ancient times, the word was used for various related minerals, including talc, mica, and selenite.\nFormation.\nTalc dominantly forms from the metamorphism of magnesian minerals such as serpentine, pyroxene, amphibole, and olivine, in the presence of carbon dioxide and water. This is known as \"talc carbonation\" or \"steatization\" and produces a suite of rocks known as talc carbonates.\nTalc is primarily formed by hydration and carbonation by this reaction:\nserpentine2 Mg3Si2O5(OH)4 + carbon dioxide3 CO2 \u2192 talcMg3Si4O10(OH)2 + magnesite3 MgCO3 + water3 H2O\nTalc can also be formed via a reaction between dolomite and silica, which is typical of skarnification of dolomites by silica-flooding in contact metamorphic aureoles:\ndolomite3 CaMg(CO3)2 + silica4 SiO2 + waterH2O \u2192 talcMg3Si4O10(OH)2 + calcite3 CaCO3 + carbon dioxide3 CO2\nTalc can also be formed from magnesium chlorite and quartz in blueschist and eclogite metamorphism by the following metamorphic reaction:\nchlorite + quartz \u2192 kyanite + talc + water\nTalc is also found as a diagenetic mineral in sedimentary rocks where it can form from the transformation of metastable hydrated magnesium-clay precursors such as kerolite, sepiolite, or stevensite that can precipitate from marine and lake water in certain conditions.\nIn this reaction, the ratio of talc and kyanite depends on aluminium content, with more aluminous rocks favoring production of kyanite. This is typically associated with high-pressure, low-temperature minerals such as phengite, garnet, and glaucophane within the lower blueschist facies. Such rocks are typically white, friable, and fibrous, and are known as\nwhiteschist.\nTalc is a trioctahedral layered mineral; its structure is similar to pyrophyllite, but with magnesium in the octahedral sites of the composite layers. The crystal structure of talc is described as \"TOT\", meaning that it is composed of parallel \"TOT\" layers weakly bonded to each other by weak van der Waals forces. The \"TOT\" layers in turn consist of two tetrahedral sheets (\"T\") strongly bonded to the two faces of a single trioctahedral sheet (\"O\"). It is the weak bonding between \"TOT\" layers that gives talc its perfect basal cleavage and softness.\nThe tetrahedral sheets consist of silica tetrahedra, which are silicon ions surrounded by four oxygen ions. The tetrahedra each share three of their four oxygen ions with neighboring tetrahedra to produce a hexagonal sheet. The remaining oxygen ion (the \"apical\" oxygen ion) is available to bond with the trioctahedral sheet.\nThe trioctahedral sheet has the structure of a sheet of the mineral brucite. Apical oxygens take the place of some of the hydroxyl ions that would be present in a brucite sheet, bonding the tetrahedral sheets tightly to the trioctahedral sheet.\nTetrahedral sheets have a negative charge, since their bulk composition is . The trioctahedral sheet has an equal positive charge, since its bulk composition is The combined TOT layer thus is electrically neutral.\nBecause the hexagons in the T and O sheets are slightly different in size, the sheets are slightly distorted when they bond into a TOT layer. This breaks the hexagonal symmetry and reduces it to monoclinic or triclinic symmetry. However, the original hexahedral symmetry is discernible in the pseudotrigonal character of talc crystals.\nOccurrence.\nTalc is a common metamorphic mineral in metamorphic belts that contain ultramafic rocks, such as soapstone (a high-talc rock), and within whiteschist and blueschist metamorphic terranes. Prime examples of whiteschists include the Franciscan Metamorphic Belt of the western United States, the western European Alps especially in Italy, certain areas of the Musgrave Block, and some collisional orogens such as the Himalayas, which stretch along Pakistan, India, Nepal, and Bhutan.\nTalc carbonate ultramafics are typical of many areas of the Archaean cratons, notably the komatiite belts of the Yilgarn craton in Western Australia. Talc-carbonate ultramafics are also known from the Lachlan Fold Belt, eastern Australia, from Brazil, the Guiana Shield, and from the ophiolite belts of Turkey, Oman, and the Middle East.\nChina is the key world talc and steatite-producing country with an output of about 2.2\u00a0million tonnes (2016), which accounts for 30% of total global output. The other major producers are Brazil (12%), India (11%), the U.S. (9%), France (6%), Finland (4%), Italy, Russia, Canada, and Austria (2%, each).\nNotable economic talc occurrences include the Mount Seabrook talc mine, Western Australia, formed upon a polydeformed, layered ultramafic intrusion. The France-based Luzenac Group is the world's largest supplier of mined talc. Its largest talc mine at Trimouns near Luzenac in southern France produces 400,000\u00a0tonnes of talc per year.\nConflict mineral.\nExtraction in disputed areas of Nangarhar province, Afghanistan, has led the international monitoring group Global Witness to declare talc a conflict resource, as the profits are used to fund armed confrontation between the Taliban and Islamic State.\nUses.\nTalc is used in many industries, including paper making, plastic, paint and coatings (e.g. for metal casting molds), rubber, food, electric cable, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, and ceramics. A coarse grayish-green high-talc rock is soapstone or steatite, used for stoves, sinks, electrical switchboards, etc. It is often used for surfaces of laboratory table tops and electrical switchboards because of its resistance to heat, electricity, and acids.\nIn finely ground form, talc finds use as a cosmetic (talcum powder), as a lubricant, and as a filler in paper manufacture. It is used to coat the insides of inner tubes and rubber gloves during manufacture to keep the surfaces from sticking. Talcum powder, with heavy refinement, has been used in baby powder, an astringent powder used to prevent diaper rash (nappy rash). The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that parents avoid using baby powder because it poses a risk of respiratory problems, including breathing trouble and serious lung damage if inhaled. The small size of the particles makes it difficult to keep them out of the air while applying the powder. Zinc oxide-based ointments are a much safer alternative.\nSoapstone (massive talc) is often used as a marker for welding or metalworking.\nTalc is also used as food additive or in pharmaceutical products as a glidant. In medicine, talc is used as a pleurodesis agent to prevent recurrent pleural effusion or pneumothorax. In the European Union, the additive number is E553b. Talc may be used in the processing of white rice as a buffing agent in the polishing stage.\nBecause of its low shear strength, talc is one of the oldest known solid lubricants. It also has some limited use as a friction-reducing additive in lubricating oils.\nTalc is widely used in the ceramics industry in both bodies and glazes. In low-fire art-ware bodies, it imparts whiteness and increases thermal expansion to resist crazing. In stonewares, small percentages of talc are used to flux the body and therefore improve strength and vitrification. It is a source of MgO flux in high-temperature glazes (to control melting temperature). It is also employed as a matting agent in earthenware glazes and can be used to produce magnesia mattes at high temperatures.\nISO standard for quality (ISO 3262)\nPatents are pending on the use of magnesium silicate as a cement substitute. Its production requirements are less energy-intensive than ordinary Portland cement (at a heating requirement of around 650\u00a0\u00b0C for talc compared to 1,500\u00a0\u00b0C for limestone to produce Portland cement), while it absorbs far more carbon dioxide as it hardens. This results in a negative carbon footprint overall, as the cement substitute removes 0.6 tonnes of CO2 per tonne used. This contrasts with a positive carbon footprint of 0.4 tonnes per tonne of conventional cement.\nTalc is sometimes used as an adulterant to illegal heroin, to expand volume and weight and thereby increase its street value. With intravenous use, it may lead to pulmonary talcosis, a granulomatous inflammation in the lungs.\nSterile talc powder.\nSterile talc powder (NDC 63256-200-05) is a sclerosing agent used in the procedure of pleurodesis. This can be helpful as a cancer treatment to prevent pleural effusions (an abnormal collection of fluid in the space between the lungs and the thoracic wall). It is inserted into the space via a chest tube, causing it to close up, so fluid cannot collect there. The product can be sterilized by dry heat, ethylene oxide, or gamma irradiation.\nSafety.\nSuspicions have been raised that talc use contributes to certain types of disease, mainly cancers of the ovaries and lungs. According to the IARC, talc containing asbestos is classified as a group 1 agent (carcinogenic to humans), talc use in the perineum is classified as group 2B (possibly carcinogenic to humans), and talc not containing asbestos is classified as group 2A (probably carcinogenic to humans). Reviews by Cancer Research UK and the American Cancer Society conclude that some studies have found a link, but other studies have not.\nThe studies discuss pulmonary issues, lung cancer, and ovarian cancer. One of these, published in 1993, was a US National Toxicology Program report, which found that cosmetic grade talc containing no asbestos-like fibres was correlated with tumor formation in rats forced to inhale talc for 6 hours a day, five days a week over at least 113 weeks. A 1971 paper found particles of talc embedded in 75% of the ovarian tumors studied. In 2018, Health Canada issued a warning against inhaling talcum powder or women's using it perineally.\nIn contrast, however, research published in 1995 and 2000 concluded that, although it was plausible that talc could cause ovarian cancer, no conclusive evidence had been shown. Further, a 2008 European Journal of Cancer Prevention review of ovarian cancer and talc use studies pointed out that, although many of them examined the duration, frequency, and accumulation of hygienic talc use, few found a positive association among these factors and some found a negative one: \"It may be argued that the overall null findings associated with talc-dusted diaphragms and condom use is more convincing evidence for a lack of a carcinogenic effect, especially given the lack of an established correlation between perineal dusting frequency and ovarian tissue talc concentrations and the lack of a consistent dose-response relationship with ovarian cancer risk.\" Instead, the authors credited powdered talc with \"a high degree of safety.\"\nSimilarly, in a 2014 article published in a leading cancer journal, the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, researchers reported the results of a survey of 61,576 postmenopausal women, more than half of whom had used talc powder perineally. The researchers compared the subjects' reports of their own talc use with their reports of having had ovarian cancer diagnosed by their doctors, and found, regardless of subjects' age and tubal ligation status, \"Ever use of perineal powder ... was not associated with risk of ovarian cancer compared with never use,\" nor was any greater individual cancer risk associated with longer use of talc powder. On this basis, the article concluded, \"perineal powder use does not appear to influence ovarian cancer risk.\" The Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel concluded in 2015 that talc, in the concentrations currently used in cosmetics, is safe.\nIn July 2024, the International Agency for Research on Cancer listed talc as \"probably\" carcinogenic for humans. The study is based on limited evidence it could cause ovarian cancer in humans.\nIndustrial grade.\nIn the United States, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health have set occupational exposure limits to respirable talc dusts at 2\u00a0mg/m3 over an eight-hour workday. At levels of 1000\u00a0mg/m3, inhalation of talc is considered immediately dangerous to life and health.\nFood grade.\nThe United States Food and Drug Administration considers talc (magnesium silicate) generally recognized as safe (GRAS) to use as an anticaking agent in table salt in concentrations smaller than 2%.\nAssociation with asbestos.\nOne particular issue with commercial use of talc is its frequent co-location in underground deposits with asbestos ore. Asbestos is a general term for different types of fibrous silicate minerals, desirable in construction for their heat resistant properties. There are six varieties of asbestos; the most common variety in manufacturing, white asbestos, is in the serpentine family. Serpentine minerals are sheet silicates; although not in the serpentine family, talc is also a sheet silicate, with two sheets connected by magnesium cations. The frequent co-location of talc deposits with asbestos may result in contamination of mined talc with white asbestos, which poses serious health risks when dispersed into the air and inhaled. Stringent quality control since 1976, including separating cosmetic- and food-grade talc from that destined for industrial use, has largely eliminated this issue, but it remains a potential hazard requiring mitigation in the mining and processing of talc. A 2010 US FDA survey failed to find asbestos in a variety of talc-containing products. A 2018 Reuters investigation asserted that pharmaceuticals company Johnson &amp; Johnson knew for decades that there was asbestos in its baby powder, and in 2020 the company stopped selling its baby powder in the US and Canada. There were calls for Johnson &amp; Johnson's largest shareholders to force the company to end global sales of baby powder, and hire an independent firm to conduct a racial justice audit as it had been marketed to African American and overweight women. On August 11, 2022, the company announced it would stop making talc-based powder by 2023 and replace it with cornstarch-based powders. The company said the talc-based powder is safe to use and does not contain asbestos.\nLitigation.\nIn 2006 the International Agency for Research on Cancer classified talcum powder as a possible human carcinogen if used in the female genital area. Despite this, no federal agency in the US acted to remove talcum powder from the market or add warnings.\nIn February 2016, as the result of a lawsuit against Johnson &amp; Johnson (J&amp;J), a St. Louis jury awarded $72 million to the family of an Alabama woman who died from ovarian cancer. The family claimed that the use of talcum powder was responsible for her cancer.\nIn May 2016, a South Dakota woman was awarded $55 million as the result of another lawsuit against J&amp;J. The woman had used Johnson &amp; Johnson's Baby Powder for more than 35 years before being diagnosed with ovarian cancer in 2011.\nIn October 2016, a St. Louis jury awarded $70.1 million to a Californian woman with ovarian cancer who had used Johnson's Baby Powder for 45 years.\nIn August 2017, a Los Angeles jury awarded $417 million to a Californian woman, Eva Echeverria, who developed ovarian cancer as a \"proximate result of the unreasonably dangerous and defective nature of talcum powder\", her lawsuit against Johnson &amp; Johnson stated. On 20 October 2017, Los Angeles Superior Court judge Maren Nelson dismissed the verdict. The judge stated that Echeverria proved there is \"an ongoing debate in the scientific and medical community about whether talc more probably than not causes ovarian cancer and thus (gives) rise to a duty to warn\", but not enough to sustain the jury's imposition of liability against Johnson &amp; Johnson stated, and concluded that Echeverria did not adequately establish that talc causes ovarian cancer.\nIn July 2018, a court in St. Louis awarded a $4.7bn claim ($4.14bn in punitive damages and $550m in compensatory damages) against J&amp;J to 22 claimant women, concluding that the company had suppressed evidence of asbestos in its products for more than four decades.\nAt least 1,200 to 2,000 other talcum powder-related lawsuits were pending as of 2016[ [update]].\nIn 2020 J&amp;J stopped sales of its talcum-based baby powder, which it had been selling for 130 years. J&amp;J created a subsidiary responsible for the claims in an effort to resolve the lawsuits in bankruptcy court. In 2023 J&amp;J proposed a nearly $9bn settlement with 50,000 claimants saying the claims were \"specious\" but it wanted to move on from the issue, but judges blocked the plans, ruling that the subsidiary was not in financial distress and could not use the bankruptcy system to resolve the lawsuits.\nIn July 2023 J&amp;J sued researchers who linked talc to cancer, alleging they used junk science to disparage the company's products, while defendants say the lawsuits are meant to silence scientists.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31423", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31423", "title": "Tom Collins", "text": "Cocktail made from gin, lemon juice, sugar and club soda\nThe Tom Collins is a Collins cocktail made from gin, lemon juice, sugar, and carbonated water. This \"gin and sparkling lemonade\" drink is typically served in a Collins glass over ice with a cherry garnish. A non-alcoholic \"Collins mix\" mixer is produced, enjoyed by some as a soft drink.\nThe drink is a variant of the similar John Collins.\nHistory.\nThe earliest publication of any Collins, as well as any Fizz recipe, are both located in the same book, American bartender and author Harry Johnson's 1882 \"Harry Johnson's\" \"New and Improved Bartender\u2019s Manual, or How to Mix Drinks of the Present Style, in English and German.\" The book includes a Tom Collins calling for Old Tom gin and a John Collins calling for Holland Gin, most likely what is now known as Geni\u00e8vre.\nJohnson's recipe for Tom Collins from 1882 is as follows:\nCocktail historian David Wondrich stated that there are several other earlier mentions of this version of the drink and that it does bear a striking resemblance to the gin punches served at London clubs like the Garrick in the first half of the 19th century.\nClearly unaware of the drink's actual origins, in August 1891, British physician Sir Morell Mackenzie wrote an article in the influential 19th century magazine \"Fortnightly Review\" claiming that England was the originating country for the Tom Collins cocktail and a person named John Collins was its creator. In the article, Mackenzie quoted an old song called \"John Collins\". However, the British weekly magazine \"Punch\" immediately disparaged Mackenzie's efforts, noting in August 1891 that the title of the song actually was \"Jim Collins\" and that Mackenzie otherwise inaccurately quoted and characterized the song.\nConfusion over the cocktail's origins continued as American writer Charles Montgomery Skinner noted in 1898 that the Tom Collins had made its way to the \"American bars\" in England, France, and Germany, where the American invention stimulated curiosity in Europe and served as a reflection of American art.\nAs time passed, interest in the Tom Collins diminished and its origins became lost. Early on, during the 1920s era of Prohibition in the United States, the American journalist and student of American English, H. L. Mencken, said:The origin of the ... Tom-Collins ... remains to be established; the historians of alcoholism, like the philologists, have neglected them. But the essentially American character of [this and other drinks] is obvious, despite the fact that a number have gone over into English. The English, in naming their drinks, commonly display a far more limited imagination. Seeking a name, for example, for a mixture of whiskey and soda-water, the best they could achieve was \"whiskey-and-soda\". The Americans, introduced to the same drink, at once gave it the far more original name of \"highball\".\nAn alternate history of the Tom Collins places its origin in St. Louis (see under \"Others\" below). \nJohn Collins.\nA drink known as a John Collins has existed since the 1860s at the very least. It is believed to have originated with a headwaiter of that name who worked at Limmer's Old House in Conduit Street in Mayfair, which was a popular London hotel and coffee house around 1790\u20131817.\nThe following rhyme was written by Frank and Charles Sheridan about John Collins:\n&lt;poem&gt;My name is John Collins, head waiter at Limmer's,\nCorner of Conduit Street, Hanover Square,\nMy chief occupation is filling brimmers\nFor all the young gentlemen frequenters there.&lt;/poem&gt;\nDrinks historian David Wondrich has speculated that the original recipe that was introduced to New York in the 1850s would have been very similar to the gin punches that are known to have been served at fashionable London clubs such as the Garrick during the first half of the 19th century. He states that these would have been along the lines of \"gin, lemon juice, chilled soda water, and maraschino liqueur\".\nThe specific call for Old Tom gin in the 1869 recipe is a likely cause for the subsequent name change to \"Tom Collins\" in Jerry Thomas's 1887 recipe. Earlier versions of the gin punch are likely to have used Dutch gin instead.\nSome confusion regarding the origin of the drink and the cause for its change of name has arisen in the past due to the following:\nThe Tom Collins Hoax of 1874.\nIn 1874, people in New York; Pennsylvania; and elsewhere in the United States would start a conversation with, \"Have you seen Tom Collins?\" After the listener predictably reacts by explaining that they did not know a Tom Collins, the speaker would assert that Tom Collins was talking about the listener to others and that Tom Collins was \"just around the corner\", \"in a [local] bar\", or somewhere else near. The conversation about the nonexistent Tom Collins was a proven hoax of exposure. In The Great Tom Collins hoax of 1874, as it became known, the speaker would encourage the listener to act foolishly by reacting to patent nonsense that the hoaxer deliberately presents as reality. In particular, the speaker intended the listener to become agitated at the idea of someone talking about them to others such that the listener would rush off to find the purportedly nearby Tom Collins. Similar to the New York Zoo hoax of 1874, several newspapers propagated the very successful practical joke by printing stories containing false sightings of Tom Collins. The 1874 hoax quickly gained such notoriety that several 1874 music hall songs memorialized the event (copies of which are now in the U.S. Library of Congress).\nEarly recipes.\nThe first published Tom Collins recipe appears to have been in Harry Johnson's 1882 book, \"New and Improved Bartender\u2019s Manual or How to Mix Drinks of the Present Style\". This book contains a recipe for two Collins drinks, the John Collins and the Tom Collins. The John Collins calls for Holland Gin, which is most likely what is also known as Geni\u00e8vre, but the recipe for the Tom Collins in this book is as follows:\nTom Collins\nThree-quarters table-spoon of sugar;\n3 or 4 dashes of lime or lemon juice;\n3 or 4 pieces of broken ice;\n1 wine glass full of Old Tom gin;\n1 bottle of plain soda water;\nmix up well with a spoon, remove the ice, and serve.\nAttention must be paid not to let the foam of the soda water spread over the glass.\nIn the 1884 book, \"The Modern Bartender\u2019s Guide\" by O. H. Byron, there is a drink called a \"John Collins' Gin\" where he calls simply for gin with no specifications of which gin, lemon juice, sugar, and filled with soda. That book also has a \"Tom Collins' Brandy\", which consists of brandy, lemon juice, gum syrup and Maraschino liqueur, and filled with soda water built in the glass over ice. This book also lists a recipe for a \"Tom Collins gin and whiskey\", with the only instructions that it is \"concocted in the same manner as a brandy receipt, substituting their respective liquors\".\nAnother 1884 book, \"Scientific Barkeeping\" by E.N. Cook &amp; Co, also includes both a John Collins and a Tom Collins, the former calling for Holland gin and the latter for whiskey. There is a recipe for the Tom Collins in the 1887 posthumous edition of Jerry Thomas' \"Bar-Tender's Guide.\" Since New York based Thomas would have known about the widespread hoax and the contents of his 1876 book were developed during or right after The Great Tom Collins hoax of 1874, it was believed by George Sinclair that the hoax event was the most plausible source of the name for the Tom Collins cocktail. Classified under the heading \"Collins\" with similarly named whisky and brandy drinks, Jerry Thomas' Tom Collins gin instructed:\nTom Collins (1887)\nTake 5 or 6 dashes of gum syrup.\nJuice of a small lemon.\n1 large wine-glass of gin.\n2 or 3 lumps of ice;\nShake up well and strain into a large bar-glass. Fill up the glass with plain soda water and drink while it is lively.\nThis was distinguished from the Gin Fizz cocktail in that the three dashes of lemon juice in the gin fizz was \"fizzed\" with carbonated water to essentially form a \"gin and sodawater\" whereas the considerably more \"juice of a small lemon\" in the Tom Collins essentially formed a \"gin and sparkling lemonade\" when sweetened with the gum syrup. The type of gin used by Thomas was not specified in his 1887 book, but was most likely Old Tom if that was responsible for the change in the drink's name.\nPopularity.\nBy 1878, the Tom Collins was being served in the barrooms of New York City and elsewhere. Identified as among 'the favorite drinks which are in demand everywhere' in an advertisement for the 1878 edition of \"The Modern Bartender's Guide\" by O. H. Byron, both Tom Collins gin and whiskey and Tom Collins brandy were considered fancy drinks. In the 1891 book, \"The Flowing Bowl: When and what to Drink,\" author William Schmidt listed the Tom Collins as including:\n&lt;poem&gt;Tom Collins Gin (1891)\nThe juice of half a lemon in a large glass,\na bar-spoonful of sugar,\na drink of Tom gin; mix this well;\n2 lumps of ice,\na bottle of plain soda.\nMix well and serve.&lt;/poem&gt;\nOne turn-of-the-20th-century recipe subsequently replaced the lemon juice with lime juice.\nOthers.\nAn alternate history places the origin in St. Louis.\nModern mix.\nThe 1986 \"The Book of Cocktails\" provides a modern take on Thomas' 1876 recipe for this long drink:John (or Tom) Collins (1986)&lt;br&gt;ice cubes&lt;br&gt;2\u00a0oz. [6\u00a0cL] dry gin&lt;br&gt;2\u00a0oz. [6\u00a0cL] lemon juice&lt;br&gt;1 teaspoon sugar (gomme) syrup&lt;br&gt;soda water&lt;br&gt;slice of lemon&lt;br&gt;1 colored cherry&lt;br&gt;Place ample ice in large glass. Add gin, lemon juice and syrup. Top up with soda water and stir well. Serve with lemon slice, cherry and a straw.\nVariants.\nA simple Summer Collins is a two-ingredient cocktail consisting only of equal parts gin and lemonade, served over ice with an optional fruit garnish. The Vodka Collins uses vodka in place of gin. The South Side uses lime juice in addition to or in place of lemon and adds mint. A Rum Collins, also called a Ron Collins, uses light rum in place of gin and lime juice in place of lemon juice. A French 75 uses Champagne in lieu of soda water. The Juan Collins is made from tequila, lime juice, sugar or some other sweetening agent, and club soda. This drink typically is served in a Collins glass over ice.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31424", "revid": "751903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31424", "title": "Torpedo", "text": "Self-propelled underwater weapon\nA torpedo is an underwater ranged weapon launched above or below the water surface, self-propelled towards a target, with an explosive warhead designed to detonate either on contact with or in proximity to the target. Historically, such a device was called an automotive, automobile, locomotive, or fish torpedo; colloquially, a \"fish\".\nThe term \"torpedo\" originally applied to a variety of devices, most of which would today be called mines. From about 1900, \"torpedo\" has been used strictly to designate a self-propelled underwater explosive device.\nWhile the 19th-century battleship had evolved primarily with a view to engagements between armored warships with large-caliber guns, the invention and refinement of torpedoes from the 1860s onwards allowed small torpedo boats and other lighter surface vessels, submarines/submersibles, even improvised fishing boats or frogmen, and later light aircraft, to destroy large ships without the need of large guns, though sometimes at the risk of being hit by longer-range artillery fire.\nModern torpedoes are classified variously as lightweight, heavyweight, straight-running, autonomous homers, and wire-guided types. They can be launched from a variety of platforms. In modern warfare, a submarine-launched torpedo is almost certain to hit its target; the best defense is a counterattack using another torpedo.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"torpedo\" was first used as a name for electric rays (in the order \"Torpediniformes\"), which in turn comes from the Latin word \"torp\u0113d\u014d\" (\"lethargy\" or \"sluggishness\"). In naval usage, the American inventor David Bushnell was reported to have first used the term as the name of a submarine of his own design, the \"American Turtle or Torpedo.\" This usage likely inspired Robert Fulton's use of the term to describe his stationary mines, and later Robert Whitehead's naming of the first self-propelled torpedo.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nTorpedo-like weapons were tentatively proposed many centuries before they were successfully developed. For example, in 1275, engineer Hasan al-Rammah \u2013 who worked as a military scientist for the Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt \u2013 wrote that it might be possible to create a projectile resembling an egg, which propelled itself through water carrying \"fire\".\nEarly naval mines.\nIn modern language, a \"torpedo\" is an underwater self-propelled explosive, but historically, the term also applied to primitive naval mines and spar torpedoes. These were used on an ad-hoc basis during the early modern period up to the late 19th century.\nIn the early 17th century, the Dutchman Cornelius Drebbel, in the employ of King James I of England, invented the spar torpedo; he attached explosives to the end of a beam affixed to one of his submarines. These were used (to little effect) during the English expeditions to La Rochelle in 1626. The first use of a torpedo by a submarine was in 1775, by the American , which attempted to lay a bomb with a timed fuse on the hull of during the American Revolutionary War, but failed in the attempt.\nIn the early 1800s, the American inventor Robert Fulton, while in France, \"conceived the idea of destroying ships by introducing floating mines under their bottoms in submarine boats\". He employed the term \"torpedo\" for the explosive charges with which he outfitted his submarine \"Nautilus\". However, both the French and the Dutch governments were uninterested in the submarine. Fulton then concentrated on developing the torpedo-like weapon independent of a submarine deployment, and in 1804 succeeded in convincing the British government to employ his \"catamaran\" against the French. An April 1804 torpedo attack on French ships anchored at Boulogne, and a follow-up attack in October, produced several explosions but no significant damage, and the weapon was abandoned.\nFulton carried out a demonstration for the US government on 20 July 1807, destroying a vessel in New York's harbor. Further development languished as Fulton focused on his \"steam-boat matters\". After the War of 1812 broke out, the Royal Navy established a blockade of the East Coast of the United States. During the war, American forces unsuccessfully attempted to destroy the British ship-of-the-line HMS \"Ramillies\" while it was lying at anchor in New London, Connecticut's harbor with torpedoes launched from small boats. This prompted the captain of \"Ramillies\", Sir Thomas Hardy, 1st Baronet, to warn the Americans to cease using this \"cruel and unheard-of warfare\" or he would \"order every house near the shore to be destroyed\". The fact that Hardy had been previously so lenient and considerate to the Americans led them to abandon such attempts with immediate effect.\nTorpedoes were used by the Russian Empire during the Crimean War in 1855 against British warships in the Gulf of Finland. They used an early form of chemical detonator. During the American Civil War, the term \"torpedo\" was used for what is today called a contact mine, floating on or below the water surface using an air-filled demijohn or similar flotation device. These devices were very primitive and apt to prematurely explode. They would be detonated on contact with the ship or after a set time, although electrical detonators were also occasionally used. In 1862, the became the first warship to be sunk by an electrically-detonated mine. Spar torpedoes were also used; an explosive device was mounted at the end of a spar up to long projecting forward underwater from the bow of the attacking vessel, which would then ram the opponent with the explosives. These were used by the Confederate submarine to sink the , although the weapon was apt to cause as much harm to its user as to its target. Rear Admiral David Farragut's famous/apocryphal command during the Battle of Mobile Bay in 1864, \"Damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead!\", refers to a minefield laid at Mobile, Alabama.\nOn 26 May 1877, during the Romanian War of Independence, the Romanian spar torpedo boat attacked and sank the Ottoman river monitor \"Seyfi\". This was the first instance in history when a torpedo boat sank its targets without also sinking.\nInvention of the modern torpedo.\nA prototype of the self-propelled torpedo was created on a commission placed by Giovanni Luppis, an Austro-Hungarian naval officer from Rijeka (modern-day Croatia), at the time a port city of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy and Robert Whitehead, an English engineer who was the manager of a town factory, \"Stabilimento Tecnico di Fiume\" (STF). In 1864, Luppis presented Whitehead with the plans of the \"Salvacoste\" (\"Coastsaver\"), a floating weapon driven by ropes from the land that had been dismissed by the naval authorities due to the impractical steering and propulsion mechanisms.\nIn 1866, Whitehead invented the first effective self-propelled torpedo, the eponymous Whitehead torpedo, the first modern torpedo. French and German inventions followed closely, and the term \"torpedo\" came to describe self-propelled projectiles that traveled under or on water. By 1900, the term no longer included mines and booby-traps, as the navies of the world added submarines, torpedo boats, and torpedo boat destroyers to their fleets.\nWhitehead was unable to improve the machine substantially, since the clockwork motor, attached ropes, and surface attack mode all contributed to a slow and cumbersome weapon. However, he kept considering the problem after the contract had finished, and eventually developed a tubular device, designed to run underwater on its own, and powered by compressed air. The result was a submarine weapon, the \"Minenschiff\" (mine ship), the first modern self-propelled torpedo, officially presented to the Austrian Imperial Naval commission on 21 December 1866.\nThe first trials were not successful, as the weapon was unable to maintain a course at a steady depth. After much work, Whitehead introduced his \"secret\" in 1868 which overcame this. It was a mechanism consisting of a hydrostatic valve and pendulum that caused the torpedo's hydroplanes to be adjusted to maintain a preset depth.\nProduction and spread.\nThe Austrian government decided to invest in the invention, and the factory in Rijeka started producing more Whitehead torpedoes. In 1870, he improved the devices to travel up to approximately at a speed of up to . Royal Navy (RN) representatives visited Rijeka for a demonstration in late 1869, and in 1870 a batch of torpedoes was ordered. In 1871, the British Admiralty paid Whitehead \u00a315,000 for certain of his developments, and production started at the Royal Laboratories in Woolwich the following year.\nThe company in Fiume went bankrupt in 1873, but was reformed as Whitehead Torpedo Works a few years later, and by 1881 it was exporting torpedoes to ten other countries. The torpedo was powered by compressed air and had an explosive charge of gun-cotton. Whitehead went on to develop more efficient devices, demonstrating torpedoes capable of in 1876, in 1886, and, finally, in 1890.\nIn the 1880s, a British committee, informed by hydrodynamicist Dr. R. E. Froude, conducted comparative tests and determined that a blunt nose, contrary to prior assumptions, did not hinder speed: in fact, the blunt nose provided a speed advantage of approximately one knot compared to the traditional pointed-nose design. This discovery allowed for larger explosive payloads and increased air storage for propulsion without compromising speed.\nWhitehead opened a new factory adjacent to Portland Harbour, England, in 1890, which continued making torpedoes until the end of World War II. Because orders from the RN were not as large as expected, torpedoes were mostly exported. A series of devices was produced at Rijeka, with diameters from upward. The largest Whitehead torpedo was in diameter and long, made of polished steel or phosphor bronze, with a gun-cotton warhead. It was propelled by a three-cylinder Brotherhood radial engine, using compressed air at around and driving two contra-rotating propellers, and was designed to self-regulate its course and depth as far as possible. By 1881, nearly 1,500 torpedoes had been produced. Whitehead also opened a factory at St Tropez in 1890 that exported torpedoes to Brazil, the Netherlands, Turkey, and Greece.\nWhitehead purchased rights to the gyroscope of Ludwig Obry in 1888, but it was not sufficiently accurate, so in 1890 he purchased a better design to improve control of his designs, which came to be called the \"Devil's Device\". The firm of L. Schwartzkopff in Germany also produced torpedoes and exported them to Russia, Japan, and Spain. In 1885, Britain ordered a batch of 50 as torpedo production at home and Rijeka could not meet demand.\nIn 1893, Royal Navy torpedo production was transferred to the Royal Gun Factory. The British later established a Torpedo Experimental Establishment at and a production facility at the Royal Naval Torpedo Factory, Greenock, in 1910. These are now closed.\nBy World War I, Whitehead's torpedo remained a worldwide success, and his company was able to maintain a monopoly on torpedo production. By that point, his torpedo had grown to a diameter of with a maximum speed of with a warhead weighing .\nWhitehead faced competition from the American Lieutenant Commander John A. Howell, whose design, driven by a flywheel, was simpler and cheaper. It was produced from 1885 to 1895, and it ran straight, leaving no wake. A Torpedo Test Station was set up in Rhode Island in 1870. The Howell torpedo was the only United States Navy model until an American company, Bliss and Williams, secured manufacturing rights to produce Whitehead torpedoes. These were put into service for the U.S. Navy in 1892. Five varieties were produced, all in diameter.\nThe Royal Navy introduced the Brotherhood wet heater engine in 1907 with the Mk. VII &amp; VII*, which greatly increased the speed and range over compressed-air engines, and wet heater type engines became the standard in many major navies up to and during the Second World War.\nTorpedo boats and guidance systems.\nShips of the line were superseded by ironclads, large steam-powered ships with heavy gun armament and heavy armor, in the mid-19th century. Ultimately this line of development led to the dreadnought category of all-big-gun battleships, starting with .\nAlthough these ships were incredibly powerful, the new weight of armor slowed them down, and the huge guns needed to penetrate that armor fired at very slow rates. The development of torpedoes allowed for the possibility that small and fast vessels could credibly threaten if not sink even the most powerful battleships. While such attacks would carry enormous risks to the attacking boats and their crews (which would likely need to expose themselves to artillery fire which their small vessels were not designed to withstand), this was offset by the ability to construct large numbers of small vessels far more quickly and for a much lower unit cost compared to a capital ship.\nThe first boat designed to fire the self-propelled Whitehead torpedo was , completed in 1877. The French Navy followed suit in 1878 with , launched in 1878, though she had been ordered in 1875. The first torpedo boats were built at the shipyards of Sir John Thornycroft and gained recognition for their effectiveness.\nAt the same time, inventors were working on building a guided torpedo. Prototypes were built by John Ericsson, John Louis Lay, and Victor von Scheliha, but the first practical guided missile was patented by Louis Brennan, an emigre to Australia, in 1877.\nIt was designed to run at a consistent depth of , and was fitted with an indicator mast that just broke the surface of the water. At night the mast had a small light, visible only from the rear. Two steel drums were mounted one behind the other inside the torpedo, each carrying several thousand metres of high-tensile steel wire. The drums connected via a differential gear to twin contra-rotating propellers. If one drum was rotated faster than the other, then the rudder was activated. The other ends of the wires were connected to steam-powered winding engines, which were arranged so that speeds could be varied within fine limits, giving sensitive steering control for the torpedo.\nThe torpedo attained a speed of using a wire in diameter, but later this was changed to to increase the speed to . The torpedo was fitted with elevators controlled by a depth-keeping mechanism, and the fore and aft rudders operated by the differential between the drums.\nBrennan traveled to Britain, where the Admiralty examined the torpedo and found it unsuitable for shipboard use. However, the War Office proved more amenable, and in early August 1881, a special Royal Engineer committee was instructed to inspect the torpedo at Chatham and report back directly to the Secretary of State for War, Hugh Childers. The report strongly recommended that an improved model be built at government expense. In 1883 an agreement was reached between the Brennan Torpedo Company and the government. The newly appointed Inspector-General of Fortifications in England, Sir Andrew Clarke, appreciated the value of the torpedo, and in spring 1883 an experimental station was established at Garrison Point Fort, Sheerness, on the River Medway, and a workshop for Brennan was set up at the Chatham Barracks, the home of the Royal Engineers. Between 1883 and 1885 the Royal Engineers held trials, and in 1886 the torpedo was recommended for adoption as a harbor defense torpedo. It was used throughout the British Empire for more than fifteen years.\nUse in conflict.\nThe Royal Navy frigate was the first naval vessel to fire a self-propelled torpedo in anger during the Battle of Pacocha against rebel Peruvian ironclad on 29 May 1877. The Peruvian ship successfully outran the device. On 16 January 1878, the Turkish steamer \"Intibah\" became the first vessel to be sunk by self-propelled torpedoes, launched from torpedo boats operating from the tender under the command of Stepan Osipovich Makarov during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877\u201378.\nIn another early use of the torpedo, during the War of the Pacific, the Peruvian ironclad Hu\u00e1scar commanded by captain Miguel Grau attacked the Chilean corvette Abtao on 28 August 1879 at Antofagasta with a self-propelled Lay torpedo only to have it reverse course. The \"Huascar\" was saved when an officer jumped overboard to divert it.\nThe Chilean ironclad was sunk on 23 April 1891 by a self-propelled torpedo from the \"Almirante Lynch\", during the Chilean Civil War of 1891, becoming the first ironclad warship sunk by this weapon. The Chinese turret ship was purportedly hit and disabled by a torpedo after numerous attacks by Japanese torpedo boats during the First Sino-Japanese War in 1894. At this time torpedo attacks were still very close range and very dangerous to the attackers.\nSeveral western sources reported that the Qing dynasty Imperial Chinese military, under the direction of Li Hongzhang, acquired \"electric torpedoes,\" which they deployed in numerous waterways, along with fortresses and numerous other modern military weapons acquired by China. At the Tientsin Arsenal in 1876, the Chinese developed the capacity to manufacture these \"electric torpedoes\" on their own. Although a form of Chinese art, the Nianhua, depict such torpedoes being used against Russian ships during the Boxer Rebellion, whether they were actually used in battle against them is undocumented and unknown.\nThe Russo-Japanese War (1904\u20131905) was the first great war of the 20th century. During the war, the Imperial Russian and Imperial Japanese navies launched nearly 300 torpedoes at each other, all of them of the \"self-propelled automotive\" type. The deployment of these new underwater weapons resulted in one battleship, two armored cruisers, and two destroyers being sunk in action, with the remainder of the roughly 80 warships being sunk by the more conventional methods of gunfire, mines, and scuttling.\nOn 27 May 1905, during the Battle of Tsushima, Admiral Rozhestvensky's flagship, the battleship , had been gunned to a wreck by Admiral T\u014dg\u014d's battleline. With the Russians sunk and scattering, T\u014dg\u014d prepared for pursuit, and while doing so ordered his torpedo boat destroyers (TBDs) (mostly referred to as just \"destroyers\" in most written accounts) to finish off the Russian battleship. \"Knyaz Suvorov\" was set upon by seventeen torpedo-firing warships, ten of which were destroyers and four torpedo boats. Twenty-one torpedoes were launched at the pre-dreadnought, and three struck home, one fired from the destroyer and two from torpedo boats \"No. 72\" and \"No. 75\". The flagship slipped under the waves shortly thereafter, taking over 900 men with her to the bottom.\nOn December 9, 1912, the Greek submarine \"Dolphin\" launched a torpedo against the Ottoman cruiser \"Medjidieh\".\nAerial torpedo.\nThe end of the Russo-Japanese War fueled new theories, and the idea of dropping lightweight torpedoes from aircraft was conceived in the early 1910s by Bradley A. Fiske, an officer in the United States Navy. Awarded a patent in 1912, Fiske worked out the mechanics of carrying and releasing the aerial torpedo from a bomber, and defined tactics that included a night-time approach so that the target ship would be less able to defend itself. Fiske determined that the notional torpedo bomber should descend rapidly in a sharp spiral to evade enemy guns, then when about above the water, the aircraft would straighten its flight long enough to line up with the torpedo's intended path. The aircraft would release the torpedo at a distance of from the target. Fiske reported in 1915 that, using this method, enemy fleets could be attacked within their harbors if there was enough room for the torpedo track.\nMeanwhile, the Royal Naval Air Service began actively experimenting with this possibility. The first successful aerial torpedo drop was performed by Gordon Bell in 1914 \u2013 dropping a Whitehead torpedo from a Short S.64 seaplane. The success of these experiments led to the construction of the first purpose-built operational torpedo aircraft, the Short Type 184, built-in 1915.\nAn order for ten aircraft was placed, and 936 aircraft were built by ten different British aircraft companies during the First World War. The two prototype aircraft were embarked upon , which sailed for the Aegean on 21 March 1915 to take part in the Gallipoli campaign. On 12 August 1915 one of these, piloted by Flight Commander Charles Edmonds, was the first aircraft in the world to attack an enemy ship with an air-launched torpedo.\nOn 17 August 1915 Flight Commander Edmonds torpedoed and sank an Ottoman transport ship a few miles north of the Dardanelles. His formation colleague, Flight Lieutenant G B Dacre, was forced to land on the water owing to engine trouble but, seeing an enemy tug close by, taxied up to it and released his torpedo, sinking the tug. Without the weight of the torpedo, Dacre was able to take off and return to \"Ben-My-Chree\".\nWorld War I.\nTorpedoes were widely used in World War I, both against shipping and against submarines. Germany disrupted the supply lines to Britain largely by use of submarine torpedoes, though submarines also extensively used guns. Britain and its allies also used torpedoes throughout the war. U-boats themselves were often targeted, twenty being sunk by torpedo. Two Royal Italian Navy torpedo boats scored a success against an Austrian-Hungarian squadron, sinking the battleship with two torpedoes.\nThe Royal Navy had been experimenting with ways to further increase the range of torpedoes during World War 1 using pure oxygen instead of compressed air, this work ultimately leading to the development of the oxygen-enriched air Mk. I intended originally for the s and battleships of 1921, both of which were cancelled due to the Washington Naval Treaty.\nInitially, the Imperial Japanese Navy purchased Whitehead or Schwartzkopf torpedoes but by 1917, like the Royal Navy, they were conducting experiments with pure oxygen instead of compressed air. Because of explosions, they abandoned the experiments but resumed them in 1926 and by 1933 had a working torpedo. They also used conventional wet heater torpedoes.\nWorld War II.\nIn the inter-war years, financial stringency caused nearly all navies to skimp on testing their torpedoes. Only the British and Japanese had fully tested new technologies for torpedoes (in particular the Type 93, nicknamed \"Long Lance\" postwar by the US official historian Samuel E. Morison) at the start of World War II. Unreliable torpedoes caused many problems for the American submarine force in the early years of the war, primarily in the Pacific Theater. \nBy contrast, during the Second World War, Japanese torpedoes were superb. Japan had placed an emphasis on the weapon following numerous successes during the First Sino-Japanese and Russo-Japanese wars. The development of 61 cm torpedoes was borne out of a concept to use them as a decisive heavy weapon to work around the limitations of the Washington Naval Treaty, alongside other advances such as radar. Furthermore, before the outbreak of war, Japan had expected to use the submarine (as opposed to the aircraft carrier) as the decisive combatant with which to harass and decimate the United States Navy, a decision which eventually proved to be disastrously incorrect. In order to equip their navy with effective torpedoes, numerous advances such as the use of pure oxygen, turbines, and regenerative cooling were experimented with. Torpedo designs were rigorously tested and ascertained to be reliable. The Japanese were also more willing to conduct dangerous experiments and accept the resulting casualties, an attitude that was also reflected in their highly realistic fleet exercises.\nAnother notable exception to the pre-war neglect of torpedo development was the , 1931-premiered Japanese Type 91 torpedo, one of several aerial torpedoes (\"Koku Gyorai\") developed and brought into service by the Japanese Empire before the war. In December of 1941, the Type 91 was by far the best aerial torpedo in the world. The Type 91 could withstand far higher airdrop speeds than its contemporaries, had an advanced PID controller, and was equipped with breakaway wooden\" Kyoban\" underwater stabilizing surfaces which detached after entering the water, making it a formidable anti-ship weapon; Germany considered manufacturing it as the LT 850 after August 1942.\nThe Royal Navy's oxygen-enriched air torpedo saw service in the two battleships, although by World War II, the use of enriched oxygen had been discontinued due to safety concerns. In the final phase of the action against , fired a pair of torpedoes from her port-side tube and claimed one hit. According to Ludovic Kennedy, \"if true, [this is] the only instance in history of one battleship torpedoing another\". The Royal Navy continued the development of oxygen-enriched air torpedoes with the 21-inch Mark VII of the 1920s designed for the s although once again these were converted to run on normal air at the start of World War II. Around this time too the Royal Navy were perfecting the Brotherhood burner cycle engine which offered a performance as good as the oxygen-enriched air engine but without the issues arising from the oxygen equipment and which was first used in the extremely successful and long-lived 21-inch Mark VIII torpedo of 1925. This torpedo served throughout WWII and remained in service until the early 1990s. The improved Mark VIII** was used in two particularly notable incidents: on 6 February 1945, the only intentional wartime sinking of one submarine by another while both were submerged took place when HMS \"Venturer\" sank the German submarine \"U-864\" with four Mark VIII** torpedoes, and on 2 May 1982 the Royal Navy submarine sank the Argentine cruiser with two Mark VIII Mod 4 torpedoes during the Falklands War. This is the only sinking of a surface ship by a nuclear-powered submarine in wartime and the second (of three) sinkings of a surface ship by any submarine since the end of World War II. The other two sinkings were of the Indian frigate and the South Korean corvette ROKS \"Cheonan\".\nMany classes of surface ships, submarines, and aircraft were armed with torpedoes. Naval strategy at the time was to use torpedoes, launched from submarines or warships, against enemy warships in a fleet action on the high seas. There were concerns that torpedoes would be ineffective against warships' heavy armor; an answer to this was to detonate torpedoes underneath a ship, badly damaging its keel and the other structural members in the hull, commonly called \"breaking its back\". This was demonstrated by magnetic influence mines in World War I. The torpedo would be set to run at a depth just beneath the ship, relying on a magnetic exploder to activate at the appropriate time.\nGermany, Britain, and the U.S. independently devised ways to do this; German and American torpedoes, however, suffered problems with their depth-keeping mechanisms, coupled with faults in magnetic pistols shared by all designs. Inadequate testing had failed to reveal the effect of the Earth's magnetic field on ships and exploder mechanisms, which resulted in premature detonation. The \"Kriegsmarine\" and Royal Navy promptly identified and eliminated the problems. In the United States Navy (USN), there was an extended wrangle over the problems plaguing the Mark 14 torpedo (and its Mark 6 exploder). Cursory trials had allowed bad designs to enter service, and both the Navy Bureau of Ordnance and the United States Congress were too busy protecting their interests to correct the errors. Fully functioning torpedoes only became available to the USN twenty-one months into the Pacific War.\nBritish submarines used torpedoes to interdict the Axis supply shipping to North Africa, while Fleet Air Arm Swordfish sank three Italian battleships at Taranto by a torpedo and (after a mistaken, but abortive, attack on ) scored one crucial hit in the hunt for the German battleship . Large tonnages of merchant shipping were sunk by submarines with torpedoes in both the Battle of the Atlantic and the Pacific War.\nTorpedo boats, such as MTBs, PT boats, or S-boats, enabled the relatively small but fast craft to carry enough firepower, in theory, to destroy a larger ship, though this rarely occurred in practice. The largest warship sunk by torpedoes from small craft in World War II was the British cruiser , sunk by Italian MAS boats on the night of 12/13 August 1942 during Operation Pedestal. Destroyers of all navies were also armed with torpedoes to attack larger ships. In the Battle off Samar, destroyer torpedoes from the escorts of the American task force \"Taffy 3\" showed effectiveness at defeating armor. Damage and confusion caused by torpedo attacks were instrumental in beating back a superior Japanese force of battleships and cruisers. In the Battle of the North Cape in December 1943, torpedo hits from British destroyers and slowed the German battleship enough for the British battleship to catch and sink her, and in May 1945 the British 26th Destroyer Flotilla (coincidentally led by \"Saumarez\" again) ambushed and sank Japanese heavy cruiser .\nAs a result of the \"Channel Dash\" of 1942, when three German warships successfully evaded Royal Navy and Royal Air Force attacks and passed the length of the English Channel from the Atlantic to the North Sea, Britain's Ministry of Aircraft Production commissioned the Helmover torpedo, a five-ton air-launched weapon, but it did not enter service until 1945 and saw no action.\nFrequency-hopping.\nDuring World War II, Hedy Lamarr and composer George Antheil developed a radio guidance system for Allied torpedoes; it intended to use frequency-hopping technology to defeat the threat of jamming by the Axis powers. As radio guidance had been abandoned some years earlier, it was not pursued. Although the US Navy never adopted the technology, it did, in the 1960s, investigate various spread-spectrum techniques. Spread-spectrum techniques are incorporated into Bluetooth technology and are similar to methods used in legacy versions of Wi-Fi. This work led to their induction into the National Inventors Hall of Fame in 2014.\nPost\u2013World War II.\nBecause of improved submarine strength and speed, torpedoes had to be given improved warheads and better motors. During the Cold War, torpedoes were an important asset with the advent of nuclear-powered submarines, which did not have to surface often, particularly those carrying strategic nuclear missiles.\nSeveral navies have launched torpedo strikes since World War II, including:\nPropulsion.\nCompressed air.\nThe Whitehead torpedo of 1866, the first successful self-propelled torpedo, used compressed air as its energy source. The air was stored at pressures of up to and fed to a piston engine that turned a single propeller at about 100 rpm. It could travel about at an average speed of . The speed and range of later models were improved by increasing the pressure of the stored air. In 1906 Whitehead built torpedoes that could cover nearly at an average speed of .\nAt higher pressures the adiabatic cooling experienced by the air as it expanded in the engine caused icing problems. This drawback was remedied by heating the air with seawater before it was fed to the engine, which increased engine performance further because the air expanded even more after heating. This was the principle used by the Brotherhood engine.\nHeated torpedoes.\nTorpedoes propelled by compressed air encountered a significant problem when attempts were made to increase their range and speed. The cold compressed air, upon entering the expansion phase in the piston chambers of the torpedo's engine, caused a rapid drop in temperature. This could freeze the engine solid, by jamming the piston heads inside the cylinders. This led to the idea of injecting a liquid fuel, like kerosene, into the compressed air and igniting it inside a separate expansion chamber. In this manner, the air is heated more and expands even further, and the burned propellant adds more gas to drive the engine. The earliest form was the \"Elswick\" heater as patented by Armstrong Whitworth in 1904. The device was demonstrated in an Fiume Mark III torpedo at Bincleaves in 1905 before an audience of British and Japanese experts. The weapon speed was more than for the otherwise-identical unheated version. Construction of such \"heated\" torpedoes started the same year by Whitehead's company.\nDry heater.\nThe earliest production version of the heated torpedo propulsion system, which became known as the Whitehead heater system, mixed the fuel and compressed air after the pressure regulator. Combustion took place in a specialized expansion chamber, with hot combustion products driving the pistons of a reciprocating engine. This had the disadvantage of badly sooting the air vessel with combustion byproducts, and could also engage in a thermal runaway, jamming the engine\u2014not from low temperature as observed with compressed air, but from excess heat. The \"dry heater\" distinction was only made after wet heater torpedoes were developed, prior to which all heated torpedoes were of the dry heater type\u2014originally simply called \"heated\".\nWet heater.\nA further improvement was the use of water to wash and cool the combustion chamber of the fuel-burning torpedo. Water would be injected into the combustion chamber, at a rate commensurate with the fuel supply rate. This water would flash to steam, with stray condensate carrying the soot combustion byproducts out through the engine. An early example was the wet heater system developed by Lieutenant Sydney Hardcastle at the Royal Gun Factory, in 1908. The compressed air bottle was partially filled with water, with an outlet at the bottom leading into the combustion chamber. This would guarantee that compressed air and water would be injected into the combustion chamber at the same pressure. The system not only solved heating problems so more fuel could be burned but also allowed additional power to be generated by feeding the resulting steam into the engine together with the combustion products. Torpedoes with such a propulsion system became known as \"wet heaters\", while heated torpedoes without steam generation were retrospectively called \"dry heaters\". Most torpedoes used in World War I and World War II were wet heaters.\nIncreased oxidant.\nThe amount of fuel that can be burned by a torpedo engine (i.e. wet engine) is limited by the amount of oxygen it can carry. Since compressed air contains only about 21% oxygen, engineers in Japan developed the Type 93 (nicknamed \"Long Lance\" postwar) for destroyers and cruisers in the 1930s. It used pure compressed oxygen instead of compressed air and had performance unmatched by any contemporary torpedo in service, through the end of World War II. However, oxygen systems posed a danger to ships carrying such torpedoes under normal operation, and more so under attack; Japan lost several cruisers partly due to catastrophic secondary explosions of Type\u00a093s.\nDuring World War II, Germany experimented with hydrogen peroxide for the same purpose.\nThe British approached the problem of providing additional oxygen for the torpedo engine by the use of oxygen-enriched air rather than pure oxygen: up to 57% instead of the 21% of normal atmospheric compressed air. This significantly increased the range of the torpedo, the Mk 1 having a range of at or at with a warhead. There was a general nervousness about the oxygen enrichment equipment, known for reasons of secrecy as \"No 1 Air Compressor Room\" on board ships, and development shifted to the highly efficient Brotherhood Burner Cycle engine that used un-enriched air.\nBurner cycle engine.\nAfter the First World War, Peter Brotherhood developed a four-cylinder burner cycle engine which was roughly twice as powerful as the older wet heater engine. It was first used in the British Mk VIII torpedoes, which were still in service in 1982. It used a modified diesel cycle, using a small amount of paraffin to heat the incoming air, which was then compressed and further heated by the piston, and then more fuel was injected. It produced about when introduced, but by the end of WWII was at , and there was a proposal to fuel it with nitric acid, in which it was projected to develop .\nWire driven.\nThe Brennan torpedo had two wires wound around internal drums joined to the propellers. Shore-based steam winches pulled the wires, which spun the internal drums and drove the propellers. An operator controlled the relative speeds of the winches, providing guidance. Such systems were used for coastal defense of the British homeland and colonies from 1887 to 1903 and were purchased by, and under the control of, the Army as opposed to the Navy. Speed was about for over .\nFlywheel.\nThe Howell torpedo used by the US Navy in the late 19th century featured a heavy flywheel that had to be spun up before launch. It was able to travel about at . The Howell had the advantage of not leaving a trail of bubbles behind it, unlike compressed air torpedoes. This gave the target vessel less chance to detect and evade the torpedo and avoided giving away the attacker's position. Additionally, it ran at a constant depth, unlike Whitehead models.\nElectric batteries.\nElectric propulsion systems avoided tell-tale bubbles. John Ericsson invented an electrically propelled torpedo in 1873; it was powered by a cable from an external power source, because batteries of the time had insufficient capacity. The Sims-Edison torpedo was similarly powered. The Nordfelt torpedo was also electrically powered and was steered by impulses down a trailing wire.\nGermany introduced its first battery-powered torpedo shortly before World War II, the G7e. It was slower and had a shorter range than the conventional G7a, but was wakeless and much cheaper. Its lead-acid rechargeable battery was sensitive to shock, required frequent maintenance before use, and required preheating for best performance. The experimental G7es, an enhancement of the G7e, used primary cells.\nThe United States had an electric design, the Mark 18, largely copied from the German torpedo (although with improved batteries), as well as FIDO, an air-dropped acoustic homing torpedo for anti-submarine use.\nModern electric torpedoes such as the Mark 24 Tigerfish, the Black Shark or DM2 series commonly use silver oxide batteries that need no maintenance, so torpedoes can be stored for years without losing performance.\nRockets.\nSeveral experimental rocket-propelled torpedoes were tried soon after Whitehead's invention but were not successful. Rocket propulsion has been implemented successfully by the Soviet Union, for example in the VA-111 Shkval, and has been recently revived in Russian and German torpedoes, as it is especially suitable for supercavitating devices.\nModern energy sources.\nModern torpedoes use a variety of propellants, including electric batteries (as with the French F21 torpedo or Italian Black Shark), monopropellants (e.g., Otto fuel II as with the US Mark 48 torpedo), and bipropellants (e.g., hydrogen peroxide plus kerosene as with the Swedish Torped 62, sulfur hexafluoride plus lithium as with the US Mark 50 torpedo, or Otto fuel II plus hydroxyl ammonium perchlorate as with the British Spearfish torpedo).\nPropeller.\nThe first of Whitehead's torpedoes had a single propeller and needed a large vane to stop it spinning about its longitudinal axis. Not long afterward the idea of contra-rotating propellers was introduced, to avoid the need for the vane. The three-bladed propeller came in 1893 and the four-bladed one in 1897. To minimize noise, today's torpedoes often use pump-jets.\nSupercavitation.\nSome torpedoes\u2014like the Russian VA-111 Shkval, Iranian Hoot, and German Unterwasserlaufk\u00f6rper/ Barracuda\u2014use supercavitation to increase speed to over . Torpedoes that do not use supercavitation, such as the American Mark 48 and British Spearfish, are limited to under , though manufacturers and the military do not always release exact figures.\nGuidance.\nTorpedoes may be aimed at the target and fired unguided, similarly to a traditional artillery shell, or they may be guided onto the target. They may be guided autonomously towards the target by some procedure, such as sound (homing), or by the operator, typically via commands sent over a signal-carrying cable (wire guidance).\nUnguided.\nThe Victorian-era Brennan torpedo could be steered onto its target by varying the relative speeds of its propulsion cables. However, the Brennan required a substantial infrastructure and was not suitable for shipboard use. Therefore, for the first part of its history, the torpedo was guided only in the sense that its course could be regulated to achieve an intended impact depth (because of the sine-wave running path of the Whitehead, this was a hit or miss proposition, even when everything worked correctly) and, through gyroscopes, a straight course. With such torpedoes the method of attack in small torpedo boats, torpedo bombers, and small submarines was to steer a predictable collision course abeam to the target and release the torpedo at the last minute, then veer away, all the time subject to defensive fire.\nIn larger ships and submarines, fire-control calculators gave a wider engagement envelope. Originally, plotting tables (in large ships), combined with specialized slide rules (known in U.S. service as the \"banjo\" and \"Is/Was\"), reconciled the speed, distance, and course of a target with the firing ship's speed and course, together with the performance of its torpedoes, to provide a firing solution. By the Second World War, all sides had developed automatic electro-mechanical calculators, exemplified by the U.S. Navy's Torpedo Data Computer. Submarine commanders were still expected to be able to calculate a firing solution by hand as a backup against mechanical failure, and because many submarines existed at the start of the war were not equipped with a TDC; most could keep the \"picture\" in their heads and do much of the calculations (simple trigonometry) mentally, from extensive training.\nAgainst high-value targets and multiple targets, submarines would launch a spread of torpedoes, to increase the probability of success. Similarly, squadrons of torpedo boats and torpedo bombers would attack together, creating a \"fan\" of torpedoes across the target's course. Faced with such an attack, the prudent thing for a target to do was to turn to parallel the course of the incoming torpedo and steam away from the torpedoes and the firer, allowing the relatively short-range torpedoes to use up their fuel. An alternative was to \"comb the tracks\", turning to parallel the incoming torpedo's course, but turning towards the torpedoes. The intention of such a tactic was still to minimize the size of the target offered to the torpedoes, but at the same time be able to aggressively engage the firer. This was the tactic advocated by critics of Jellicoe's actions at Jutland, his caution at turning away from the torpedoes being seen as the reason the Germans escaped.\nThe use of multiple torpedoes to engage single targets depletes torpedo supplies and greatly reduces a submarine's combat endurance. Endurance can be improved by ensuring that a target can be effectively engaged by a single torpedo, which gave rise to the guided torpedo.\nPattern running.\nDuring the Second World War, the Germans introduced programmable pattern-running torpedoes, which would run a predetermined pattern until they either ran out of fuel or hit something. These weapons would generally engage in a ladder search pattern, and were intended for engaging convoys of vessels, commonly encountered in the Atlantic theater. The use of pattern-running torpedoes allowed a wolfpack of U-boats to lob large numbers of shots in the general area of a moving convoy, without concern that two different U-boats may be targeting the same vessel.\nThe earlier version of the weapon, FaT (\"Fl\u00e4chenabsuchender\" - \"planar seeker\"), ran out after launch in a straight line, and then weaved backward and forwards parallel to that initial course, whilst the more advanced LuT (\"Lageunabh\u00e4ngiger\" - \"position-independent\") could transit to a preprogrammed gyrocompass angle after reaching a set distance after launch, and then enter a more complex weaving pattern.\nGermany also used the Italian LT 350 aerial torpedo for ASW. The weapon lacked an acoustic seeker head, but it would be dropped in clusters over the approximate location of a lurking enemy submarine, and would thereafter engage in a chaotic movement pattern, in order to hit the target by random chance.\nA somewhat similar concept for a chaotic underwater pattern search was experimented with by Japan during the Second World War with their K\u016brai No.6 and No.7 circling ASW bomb-torpedoes. These weapons did not possess homing capabilities, nor a propulsion system; the design resembled a dart, and would glide at high speed when launched. The functional concept envisioned multiple such weapons launched directly by an aircraft at a surfaced submarine, or at the approximate location of a submerged one. After splashdown, the weapons would move in a spiral pattern as they sank, their forward movement being enacted by the Earth's gravity.\nAcoustic homing torpedoes usually possess the capability to engage in simple search patterns at the launching entity's discretion; the most common of these are the snake (weave left and right while moving forward, to achieve a wider forward-facing detection cone) and the circle (continuously travel in a circle, for omnidirectional detection around the epicenter of the circle) search patterns. A good example of a weapon possessing both of these search patterns is the Mark 46 lightweight torpedo, used in large numbers worldwide.\nRadio and wire guidance.\nThough Luppis' original design had been rope-guided, and numerous early examples of torpedoes possessed MCLOS wire guidance and radio guidance, wire-guided torpedoes did not become common until the 1960s.\nOne of the earliest examples of an electrical wire-guided torpedo was the Lay torpedo, designed by John Louis Lay between 1867 and 1872. It would eventually be developed into the Patrick torpedo circa 1899, which was capable of speeds up to .\nThe Brennan torpedo of 1877 was a wire-guided weapon which had an all-mechanical control scheme, and also used the control wires as a source of propulsive energy. By selectively putting more or less tension on the control wires as they were payed out, the weapon could be steered left and right. Line-of-sight control was accomplished by observing a tracking mast which projected above the water from the weapon's body.\nOne of the most sophisticated early examples of a radio-controlled torpedo was the Sims-Edison torpedo (circa 1890), later known as the Sims-Shoemaker torpedo (after 1902). The weapon carried a nitrogelatin warhead and was capable of a speed of . Control signals used code sequences transmitted via radio, in a manner similar to a teletype; aside from steering, the weapon could also be remotely armed and detonated, sped up or slowed down, and halted entirely at the operator's discretion. The weapon was effectively impossible to hijack even if an identical command console were possessed by the adversary, and the brevity of command signals would have also enormously complicated radio signal detection and jamming.\nDuring the First World War, the U.S. Navy evaluated a radio controlled torpedo launched from a surface ship, called the Hammond torpedo. A later version tested in the 1930s was claimed to have an effective range of .\nThe first major example of a wire-guided torpedo which was used against live targets in warfare was the German G7ef \"Spinne\", introduced in 1944, which was a G7e variant equipped with an electronic guidance wire, controlled by means of acoustic beam riding by the launching entity. Originally intended for use by land emplacements for strait defense, later examples were deployed by submarines.\nAnother example of a guided torpedo during the Second World War was the Helmover torpedo, which was a colossal aerial torpedo with an overall mass of , carrying a warhead filled with of RDX explosive. The Helmover torpedo possessed a vertical mast which projected above the water and shone infrared lights towards the guiding aircraft to indicate its location and orientation, in a manner similar to a PAPI array. Guidance signals to the torpedo were transmitted via radio.\nThe first truly modern electronically wire-guided torpedo was the USN Mark 39, introduced in 1946. It possessed three-dimensional acoustic homing and used a control wire for mid-course guidance. In 1956, the Mark 39 would be superseded by the Mark 37, which served as a mainstay ASW weapon during the 1960s.\nAnother advancement in the field of teleoperated torpedoes was the Royal Navy Mark 23 Grog, first available in 1959, an ASW weapon which established a direct audio signal link between the hydrophones of the weapon's seeker head and the command console onboard the launching submarine. A human operator would directly listen to the sounds heard by the torpedo, allowing for sophisticated discrimination of acoustic decoys and target recognition.\nModern torpedoes use an umbilical wire, which nowadays allows the computer processing power of the submarine or ship to be used. Torpedoes such as the USN Mark 48 can operate in a variety of modes, increasing tactical flexibility.\nHoming.\nHoming \"fire and forget\" torpedoes can use passive or active guidance or a combination of both. Passive acoustic torpedoes home in on emissions from a target. Active acoustic torpedoes home in on the reflection of a signal, or \"ping\", from the torpedo or its parent vehicle; this has the disadvantage of giving away the presence of the torpedo. In semi-active mode, a torpedo can be fired to the last known position or calculated position of a target, which is then acoustically illuminated (\"pinged\") once the torpedo is within attack range.\nLater in the Second World War, torpedoes were given acoustic (homing) guidance systems, with the American Mark 24 mine and Mark 27 torpedo and the German G7es torpedo. Pattern-following and wake-homing torpedoes were also developed. Acoustic homing formed the basis for torpedo guidance after the Second World War.\nThe homing systems for torpedoes are generally acoustic, though there have been other target sensor types used. A ship's acoustic signature is not the only emission a torpedo can home in on; to engage U.S. supercarriers, the Soviet Union developed the 53\u201365 wake-homing torpedo. As standard acoustic lures cannot distract a wake-homing torpedo, the US Navy has installed the Surface Ship Torpedo Defense on aircraft carriers that use a Countermeasure Anti-Torpedo to home in on and destroy the attacking torpedo.\nWarhead and fuzing.\nThe warhead is generally some form of aluminized explosive, because the sustained explosive pulse produced by the powdered aluminum is particularly destructive against underwater targets. Torpex was popular until the 1950s, but has been superseded by PBX compositions. Nuclear torpedoes have also been developed, such as the Mark 45 torpedo. In lightweight antisubmarine torpedoes designed to penetrate submarine hulls, a shaped charge can be used. Detonation can be triggered by direct contact with the target or by a proximity fuze incorporating sonar and/or magnetic sensors.\nContact detonation.\nWhen a torpedo with a contact fuze strikes the side of the target hull, the resulting explosion creates a bubble of expanding gas, the walls of which move faster than the speed of sound in water, thus creating a shock wave. The side of the bubble which is against the hull rips away the external plating, creating a large breach. The bubble then collapses in on itself, forcing a high-speed stream of water into the breach which can destroy bulkheads and machinery in its path.\nProximity detonation.\nA torpedo fitted with a proximity fuze can be detonated directly under the keel of a target ship. The explosion creates a gas bubble which may damage the keel or underside plating of the target. However, the most destructive part of the explosion is the upthrust of the gas bubble, which will bodily lift the hull in the water. The structure of the hull is designed to resist downward rather than upward pressure, causing severe strain in this phase of the explosion. When the gas bubble collapses, the hull will tend to fall into the void in the water, creating a sagging effect. Finally, the weakened hull will be hit by the uprush of water caused by the collapsing gas bubble, causing structural failure. On vessels up to the size of a modern frigate, this can result in the ship breaking in two and sinking. This effect is likely to prove less catastrophic on a much larger hull, for instance, that of an aircraft carrier.\nDamage.\nThe damage that may be caused by a torpedo depends on the \"shock factor value\", a combination of the initial strength of the explosion and the distance between the target and the detonation. For ship hull plating, the term \"hull shock factor\" (HSF) is used, while keel damage is termed \"keel shock factor\" (KSF). If the explosion is directly underneath the keel, then HSF is equal to KSF, but explosions that are not directly underneath the ship will have a lower value of KSF.\nDirect damage.\nUsually only created by contact detonation, direct damage is a hole blown in the ship. Among the crew, fragmentation wounds are the most common form of injury. Flooding typically occurs in one or two main watertight compartments, which can sink smaller ships or disable larger ones.\nBubble-jet effect.\nThe bubble-jet effect occurs when a mine or torpedo detonates in the water a short distance away from the targeted ship. The explosion creates a bubble in the water, and due to the pressure difference, the bubble will collapse from the bottom. The bubble is buoyant, and so it rises towards the surface. If the bubble reaches the surface as it collapses, it can create a pillar of water that can go over a hundred meters into the air (a \"columnar plume\"). If conditions are right and the bubble collapses onto the ship's hull, the damage to the ship can be extremely serious; the collapsing bubble forms a high-energy jet that can break a meter-wide hole straight through the ship, flooding one or more compartments, and is capable of breaking smaller ships apart. The crew in the areas hit by the pillar are usually killed instantly. Other damage is usually limited.\nThe Baengnyeong incident, in which broke in half and sank off the coast South Korea in 2010, was caused by the bubble-jet effect, according to an international investigation.\nShock effect.\nIf the torpedo detonates at a distance from the ship, and especially under the keel, the change in water pressure causes the ship to resonate. This is frequently the most deadly type of explosion if it is strong enough. The whole ship is dangerously shaken and everything on board is tossed around. Engines rip from their beds, cables from their holders, etc. A badly shaken ship usually sinks quickly, with hundreds or even thousands of small leaks all over the ship and no way to power the pumps. The crew fares no better, as the violent shaking tosses them around. This shaking is powerful enough to cause disabling injury to knees and other joints in the body, particularly if the affected person stands on surfaces connected directly to the hull (such as steel decks).\nThe resulting gas cavitation and shock-front-differential over the width of the human body is sufficient to stun or kill divers.\nControl surfaces and hydrodynamics.\nControl surfaces are essential for a torpedo to maintain its course and depth. A homing torpedo also needs to be able to outmaneuver a target. Good hydrodynamics are needed for it to attain high speed efficiently and also to give a long range, since the torpedo has limited stored energy.\nLaunch platforms and launchers.\nTorpedoes may be launched from submarines, surface ships, helicopters, and fixed-wing aircraft, unmanned naval mines, and naval fortresses. They are also used in conjunction with other weapons; for example, the Mark 46 torpedo used by the United States is the warhead section of the ASROC, a kind of anti-submarine missile; the CAPTOR mine (CAPsulated TORpedo) is a submerged sensor platform which releases a torpedo when a hostile contact is detected.\nShips.\nOriginally, Whitehead torpedoes were intended for launch underwater and the firm was upset when they found out the British were launching them above water, as they considered their torpedoes too delicate for this. However, the torpedoes survived. The launch tubes could be fitted in a ship's bow, which weakened it for ramming, or on the broadside; this introduced problems because of water flow twisting the torpedo, so guide rails and sleeves were used to prevent it. The torpedoes were originally ejected from the tubes by compressed air, but later, slow-burning gunpowder was used. Torpedo boats originally used a frame that dropped the torpedo into the sea. Royal Navy Coastal Motor Boats of World War I used a rear-facing trough and a cordite ram to push the torpedoes into the water tail-first; they then had to move rapidly out of the way to avoid being hit by their torpedo.\nDeveloped in the run-up to the first world war, multiple-tube mounts (initially twin, later triple, and in the second world war up to quintuple in some ships) for torpedoes in rotating turntable mounts appeared. Destroyers could be found with two or three of these mounts with between five and twelve tubes in total. The Japanese went one better, covering their tube mounts with splinter protection and adding reloading gear (both unlike any other navy in the world), making them true turrets and increasing the broadside without adding tubes and top hamper (as the quadruple and quintuple mounts did). Considering that their Type 93s were very effective weapons, the IJN equipped their cruisers with torpedoes. The Germans also equipped their capital ships with torpedoes.\nSmaller vessels such as PT boats carried their torpedoes in fixed deck-mounted tubes using compressed air. These were either aligned to fire forward or at an offset angle from the centerline.\nLater, lightweight mounts for homing torpedoes were developed for anti-submarine use consisting of triple launch tubes used on the decks of ships. These were the 1960 Mk 32 torpedo launcher in the US and part of STWS (Shipborne Torpedo Weapon System) in the UK. Later, a below-decks launcher was used by the RN. This basic launch system continues to be used today with improved torpedoes and fire control systems.\nSubmarines.\nModern submarines use either swim-out systems or a pulse of water to discharge the torpedo from the tube, both of which have the advantage of being significantly quieter than previous systems, helping avoid detection of the firing from passive sonar. Earlier designs used a pulse of compressed air or a hydraulic ram.\nEarly submarines, when they carried torpedoes, were fitted with a variety of torpedo launching mechanisms in a range of locations: on the deck, in the bow or stern, amidships, with some launch mechanisms permitting the torpedo to be aimed over a wide arc. By World War II, designs favored multiple bow tubes and fewer or no stern tubes. Modern submarine bows are usually occupied by a large sonar array, necessitating midships tubes angled outward, while stern tubes have largely disappeared. The first French and Russian submarines carried their torpedoes externally in Drzewiecki drop collars. These were cheaper than tubes but less reliable. Both the United Kingdom and the United States experimented with external tubes in World War II. External tubes offered a cheap and easy way of increasing torpedo capacity without radical redesign, something neither had time or resources to do before nor early in, the war. British T-class submarines carried up to 13 torpedo tubes, up to 5 of them external. America's use was mainly limited to earlier \"Porpoise\"-, -, and -class boats. Until the appearance of the class, most American submarines only carried 4 bow and either 2 or 4 stern tubes, something many American submarine officers felt provided inadequate firepower. This problem was compounded by the notorious unreliability of the Mark 14 torpedo.\nLate in World War II, the U.S. adopted a homing torpedo (known as \"Cutie\") for use against escorts. It was basically a modified Mark 24 Mine with wooden rails to allow firing from a torpedo tube.\nAir launch.\nAerial torpedoes may be carried by fixed-wing aircraft, helicopters, or missiles. They are launched from the first two at prescribed speeds and altitudes, dropped from bomb-bays or underwing hardpoints.\nHandling equipment.\nAlthough lightweight torpedoes are fairly easily handled, the transport and handling of heavyweight torpedoes is difficult, especially in the tight spaces in a submarine. After the Second World War, some Type XXI submarines were obtained from Germany by the United States and Britain. One of the main novel developments seen was a mechanical handling system for torpedoes. Such systems were widely adopted as a result of this discovery. \nClasses and diameters.\nTorpedoes are launched in several ways:\nMany navies have two weights of torpedoes:\nIn the case of deck- or tube-launched torpedoes, the diameter of the torpedo is a key factor in determining the suitability of a particular torpedo to a tube or launcher, similar to the caliber of the gun. The size is not quite as critical as for a gun, but the diameter has become the most common way of classifying torpedoes.\nLength, weight, and other factors also contribute to compatibility. In the case of aircraft-launched torpedoes, the key factors are weight, provision of suitable attachment points, and launch speed. Assisted torpedoes are the most recent development in torpedo design, and are normally engineered as an integrated package. Versions for aircraft and assisted launching have sometimes been based on deck or tube launched versions, and there has been at least one case of a submarine torpedo tube being designed to fire an aircraft torpedo.\nAs in all munition design, there is a compromise between standardization, which simplifies manufacture and logistics, and specialization, which may make the weapon significantly more effective. Small improvements in either logistics or effectiveness can translate into enormous operational advantages.\nUse by various navies.\nList of active torpedoes by place of origin.\nModern heavyweight torpedoes are generally launched from submarines and are used to attack both surface ships and submarines. Relatively older heavyweight torpedoes were generally used to attack either surface ships or submarines. Modern lightweight torpedoes are launched from surface ships, helicopters, and fixed-wing aircraft and are used to attack submarines.\nRussia.\nIn April 2015, the \"Fizik\" (UGST) heat-seeking torpedo entered service to replace the wake-homing USET-80 developed in the 1980s, and the next-gen Futlyar entered service in 2017.\nList of key WWII torpedoes.\nThe torpedoes used by the Imperial Japanese Navy (World War II) included:\nThe torpedoes used by the World War II Kriegsmarine included:\nThe torpedoes used by the World War II Royal Navy included:\nThe torpedoes used by the World War II United States Navy included:\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "31426", "revid": "15934865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31426", "title": "The Duck family", "text": ""}
{"id": "31427", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31427", "title": "Turkish cuisine", "text": "Culinary traditions of Turkey\n%5B%5BWP%3ACSD%23G6%7CG6%5D%5D%3A%20%5B%5BWikipedia%3ATemplates%20for%20discussion/Log/none%20%7D%7D%23Template%3ATurkish%20cuisine%5D%5D\nTurkish cuisine () is largely the heritage of Ottoman cuisine (\"Osmanl\u0131 mutfa\u011f\u0131\"), European influences, Seljuk cuisine and the Turkish diaspora. Turkish cuisine, with traditional Turkic elements such as yogurt, ayran, and kaymak, gains influences from Mediterranean, Armenian, Balkan, Middle Eastern, Central Asian and Eastern European cuisines.\nTurkish cuisine shows variation across the country. The cooking of Istanbul, Bursa, \u0130zmir, and the rest of the Anatolia region inherits many elements of Ottoman court cuisine, including moderate use of spices, a preference for rice over bulgur, koftes, and a wider availability of vegetable stews (\"t\u00fcrl\u00fc\"), eggplant, stuffed dolmas and fish. The cuisine of the Black Sea Region uses fish extensively, especially the Black Sea anchovy (\"hamsi\") and includes maize dishes. The cuisine of the southeast (including Urfa, Gaziantep, Ad\u0131yaman and Adana) is famous for its variety of kebabs, \"mezes\" and dough-based desserts such as \"baklava\", \"\u015f\u00f6biyet\", \"kaday\u0131f\", \"katmer\" and \"k\u00fcnefe\".\nEspecially in the western parts of Turkey, where olive trees grow abundantly, olive oil is the major type of oil used for cooking. The cuisines of the Aegean, Marmara and Mediterranean regions are rich in vegetables, herbs, and fish. Central Anatolia has many well-known specialties, such as \"ke\u015fkek\", \"mant\u0131\" (especially from Kayseri) and \"g\u00f6zleme\". Food names directly cognate with \"mant\u0131\" are also found in Chinese (\"mantou\" or steamed bun), and it is generally considered to have originated in Mongolia during the 13th century.\nSpecialties are often named for places, and may refer to different styles of preparation. For example, \"Urfa kebap\" is less spicy and thicker than \"Adana kebap\". Although meat-based foods such as kebabs are common in Turkish cuisine abroad, meals in Turkey largely center around rice, vegetables, and bread.\nHistory.\nIn the early years of the republic, a few studies were published about regional Anatolian dishes, but cuisine did not feature heavily in Turkish folkloric studies until the 1980s when the fledgling tourism industry encouraged the Turkish state to sponsor two food symposia. The papers submitted at the symposia presented the history of Turkish cuisine on a \"historical continuum\" that dated back to Turkic origins in Central Asia and continued through the Seljuk and Ottoman periods.\nPrior to the symposia, the study of Turkish culinary culture was first popularized by the publication of S\u00fcheyl \u00dcnver's \"Fifty Dishes in Turkish History\" in 1948. This book was based on recipes found in an 18th-century Ottoman manuscript. His second book was about the 15th century palace cuisine during the reign of Sultan Mehmed II. Following the publication of \u00dcnver's book, subsequent studies were published, including a 1978 study by historian Bahaettin \u00d6gel about the Central Asian origins of Turkish cuisine.\nCulinary customs.\nBreakfast.\nA traditional Turkish breakfast is rich in variety. A typical serving consists of cheese (such as \"beyaz peynir\", \"ka\u015far\", and others), butter, olives, eggs, muhammara, tomatoes, cucumbers, jam, honey, kaymak, sucuk (optionally spicy Turkish sausage), \"past\u0131rma\", \"b\u00f6rek\", \"simit\", \"po\u011fa\u00e7a\", \"a\u00e7ma\", fried dough (\"pi\u015fi\"), and soups may be eaten as a morning meal in Turkey. A specialty for breakfast is menemen, prepared with tomatoes, green peppers, onion, olive oil and eggs. The breakfast menu can also include kuymak (depending on the province the dish is also known as \"muhlama, m\u0131hlama\" and \"ya\u011fla\u015f\") or egg with spinach or potato. Another specialty is the Balkan Turkish dish \u00e7\u0131lb\u0131r, also known as Turkish eggs, made with poached eggs and yogurt. Invariably, Turkish tea is served at breakfast. The Turkish word for breakfast, \"kahvalt\u0131\", means \"before coffee\".\nHomemade food.\nHomemade food is still preferred by Turkish people. A typical meal starts with soup (especially in wintertime), followed by a dish made of vegetables (with olive oil or ground meat), boiled meat or legumes (typically cooked with meat), often with or before Turkish pilav, pasta or bulgur pilav accompanied by a salad or cac\u0131k (a diluted cold yogurt dish with garlic, salt, and cucumber slices). In summertime many prefer a cold dish of vegetables cooked with olive oil (\"zeytinya\u011fl\u0131 yemekler\") instead of soup, either before or after the main course, which can also be a chicken, meat or fish plate.\nRestaurants.\n\"Esnaf lokantas\u0131\" (meaning restaurants for shopkeepers and tradesmen) are widespread, serving traditional Turkish home cooking at affordable prices. Some restaurants specialize in certain foods, especially \"k\u00f6fte\", \"d\u00f6ner\", \"kokore\u00e7\", \"kumpir,\" \"midye tava,\" \"b\u00f6rek\" and \"g\u00f6zleme\". Eating out has always been common in cities. Fast food is gaining popularity and many major foreign fast-food chains have opened all over Turkey.\nSummer cuisine.\nIn the hot Turkish summer, a meal often consists of fried vegetables such as \"patl\u0131can\" (eggplant/aubergine) and peppers or potatoes served with yogurt or tomato sauce. \"Menemen\" and \"\u00e7\u0131lb\u0131r\" are typical summer dishes based on eggs. Sheep cheese, cucumbers, tomatoes, watermelons and melons also make a light summer meal. Those who like helva for dessert prefer \"summer helva\", which is lighter and less sweet than the regular version.\nKey ingredients.\nFrequently used ingredients in Turkish specialties include lamb, chicken, beef, fish, rice, eggplants, green peppers, onions, garlic, lentils, beans, zucchinis, chickpeas and tomatoes. The average beef consumption per person per year is . Nuts, especially pistachios, chestnuts, almonds, hazelnuts, and walnuts, together with spices, have a special place in Turkish cuisine, and are used extensively in desserts or eaten separately. About 1.5\u00a0kg of pistachios are eaten per person per year, some packaged and some used in desserts such as baklava. Tahini is a common sauce made from sesame seeds, sold both pre-packaged or in bulk on tap. Semolina flour is used to make a cake called \"revani\" and \"irmik helvasi\".\nOlives are also common on various breakfast and meze tables. Beyaz peynir and yo\u011furt are part of many dishes including b\u00f6rek, manti, kebab and cac\u0131k.\nOils and fats.\nButter or margarine, olive oil, sunflower oil, canola oil, and corn oil are widely used for cooking. Sesame, hazelnut, peanut and walnut oils are used as well. \"Kuyruk ya\u011f\u0131\" (tail fat of sheep) is sometimes used in kebabs and meat dishes.\nFruit.\nThe diverse flora of Turkey means that fruit is varied, abundant and cheap. In Ottoman cuisine, fruit frequently accompanied meat as a side dish. Plums, apricots, pomegranates, pears, apples, grapes, figs and quinces along with many kinds of citrus are the most frequently used fruit, either fresh or dried, in Turkish cuisine. For example, \"komposto\" (compote) or \"ho\u015faf\" (from Persian \"khosh \u00e2b\", literally meaning \"nice water\") are among the main side dishes to meat or pilav. \"Dolma\" and pilav usually contain currants or raisins. \"Etli yaprak sarma\" (vine leaves stuffed with meat and rice) used to be cooked with sour plums in Ottoman cuisine. Turkish desserts do not normally contain fresh fruit, but may contain dried varieties.\nMeats.\nThe main use of meat in cooking remains the combination of ground meat and vegetable, with names such as \"k\u0131ymal\u0131 fasulye\" (beans with ground meat) or \"k\u0131ymal\u0131 \u0131spanak\" (spinach with ground meat, which is sometimes served with yo\u011furt).\nAlternatively, in coastal towns cheap fish such as \"sardalya\" (sardines) or \"hamsi\" (anchovies) are widely available, as well as many others with seasonal availability. Poultry consumption, almost exclusively of chicken and eggs, is common. Milk-fed lambs, once the most popular source of meat in Turkey, comprise a small part of contemporary consumption. \"Kuzu \u00e7evirme\", cooking milk-fed lamb on a spit, once an important ceremony, is rarely seen.\nPork is available in some stores but is not commonly eaten since most Turks are Muslims.\nDishes and foods.\nDairy products.\nYo\u011furt is an important element in Turkish cuisine. In fact, the English word yogurt or yoghurt derives from the Turkish word \"yo\u011furt\". Yo\u011furt can accompany almost all meat dishes (kebabs, k\u00f6fte), vegetable dishes (especially fried eggplant, courgette, and spinach with minced meat, along with others), \"meze\", and \"mant\u0131\" (folded triangles of dough containing minced meat). In villages, yo\u011furt is regularly eaten with pilav or bread. A thicker, higher-fat variety, \"s\u00fczme yo\u011furt\" or \"strained yogurt\", is made by straining the yo\u011furt curds from the whey. One of the most common Turkish drinks, \"ayran\", is made from yo\u011furt. Also, yo\u011furt is often used in the preparation of cakes, some soups and pastries. Ke\u015f (kashk) is a fermented and strained sour yogurt that can be consumed on its own as a cheese, or used as an ingredient in soups.\nCheeses.\nTurkey produces many varieties of cheese, mostly from sheep's milk. In general, these cheeses are not long-matured, with a comparatively low fat content. The production of many kinds of cheese is local to particular regions. There are 193 different cheeses in Turkey, but only 8 of these cheeses have geographical indication.\nDesserts.\nCuisine in the late Ottoman Empire was heavily influenced by \"alafranga\" style food, in fashion all over Europe and in Russia in the late 19th century. In the Turkish context it has been regarded as a symbol of Westernization. This influence could still be seen in the earliest cookbooks of the early Republican period like the first edition of the \"T\u00fcrk Kad\u0131nlar Tatl\u0131 Kitab\u0131\" (Turkish Women's Book of Desserts) which had recipes for Western style sponge cake (\"pandispanya\"), mille feuille, petit beurre and other western desserts. The revised edition published in 1966 devoted far more attention to traditional confectionery like \u015fekerpare, baklava and helva.\nOne of the world-renowned desserts of Turkish cuisine is baklava. Baklava is made either with pistachios or walnuts. Turkish cuisine has a range of baklava-like desserts which include \"\u015f\u00f6biyet\", \"b\u00fclb\u00fcl yuvas\u0131\", \"s\u00fctl\u00fc nuriye\", and \"burma\".\nKaday\u0131f is a common Turkish dessert that employs shredded yufka. There are different types of kaday\u0131f: tel (wire) or burma (wring) kaday\u0131f, both of which can be prepared with either walnuts or pistachios.\nAlthough carrying the label \"kaday\u0131f\", \"ekmek kaday\u0131f\u0131\" is totally different from \"tel kaday\u0131f\". \"K\u00fcnefe\" and \"ekmek kaday\u0131f\u0131\" are rich in syrup and butter, and are usually served with kaymak (clotted/scrambled butter). K\u00fcnefe contains wire kaday\u0131f with a layer of melted cheese in between and it is served hot with pistachios or walnuts.\nKatmer is made as a dessert with kaymak (clotted cream,) and like many other delicacies from Gaziantep and Kilis, is also filled and topped with pistachios.\nAmong milk-based desserts, the most popular ones are muhallebi\"/\"s\u00fctla\u00e7 (rice pudding), ke\u015fk\u00fcl, kazandibi (meaning the bottom of \"kazan\" because of its burnt surface), and tavuk g\u00f6\u011fs\u00fc (a sweet, gelatinous, milk pudding dessert quite similar to kazandibi, to which very thinly peeled chicken breast is added to give a chewy texture). A speciality from the Mediterranean region is \"haytal\u0131\", which consists of pieces of starch pudding and ice cream (or crushed ice) put in rose water sweetened with syrup.\nHelva (halva): \"un helvas\u0131\" (flour helva is usually cooked after someone has died), \"s\u00fct helvas\u0131\" (made from raw cow's milk, butter, flour and sugar) \"irmik helvas\u0131\" (cooked with semolina and pine nuts), \"ho\u015fmerim\" (cheese helva), \"yaz helvas\u0131\" (made from walnut or almond), \"tahin helvas\u0131\" (crushed sesame seeds. it is also eaten for breakfast), \"kos helva\", \"pi\u015fmaniye\" (floss halva).\nOther popular desserts include: \"Revani\" (with semolina and starch), \"\u015fekerpare\", \"dilber duda\u011f\u0131\", \"vezir parma\u011f\u0131\", \"han\u0131m g\u00f6be\u011fi\", \"kemalpa\u015fa\", \"tulumba\", \"zerde\", \"lokma\".\n\"G\u00fclla\u00e7\" is a dessert typically served at Ramadan, which consists of very thin, large dough layers put in milk and rose water, served with pomegranate seeds and walnuts. A story is told that in the kitchens of the Palace, those extra thin dough layers were prepared with \"prayers\", as it was believed that if one did not pray while opening phyllo dough, it would never be possible to obtain such thin layers.\n\"A\u015fure\" can be described as a sweet soup containing boiled beans, wheat and dried fruits. Sometimes cinnamon and rose water is added when being served. According to legend, it was first cooked on Noah's Ark and contained seven different ingredients in one dish. All the Anatolian peoples have cooked and are still cooking a\u015fure especially during the month of Muharrem.\nSome traditional Turkish desserts are fruit-based: \"ayva tatl\u0131s\u0131\" (quince), \"incir tatl\u0131s\u0131\" (fig), {{lang|tr|kabak tatl\u0131s\u0131}} (pumpkin), \"elma tatl\u0131s\u0131\" (apple) and \"armut tatl\u0131s\u0131\" (pear). Fruits are cooked in a pot or in an oven with sugar, carnations and cinnamon (without adding water). After being chilled, they are served with walnuts or pistachios and kaymak or tahini.\nHomemade cookies/biscuits are commonly called \"kurabiye\" in Turkish. The most common types are ac\u0131badem kurabiyesi (prepared only with eggs, sugar and almonds), un kurabiyesi (flour kurabiye) and cevizli kurabiye (kurabiye with walnuts). Another dough based dessert is \"ay \u00e7\u00f6re\u011fi\".\n\"Tahin-pekmez\" is a traditional combination especially in rural areas. Tahin is sesame paste and pekmez is grape syrup. These are sold separately and mixed before consumption.\nLokum (Turkish delight), which was eaten for digestion after meals and called \"rahat hulkum\" in the Ottoman era, is another well-known sweet/candy with a range of varieties.\nCezerye, cevizli sucuk (named after its sucuk/sujuk like shape, also known as Churchkhela in Circassian region) and pestil (fruit leather) are among other common sweets.\nMarzipan (\"badem ezmesi\") is another common confection in Turkey.\nAnother jelly like Turkish sweet is macun. Mesir macunu of Manisa/\u0130zmir (which was also called \"nevruziye\" as this Macun was distributed on the first day of spring in the Ottoman Palace) contains 41 different spices. It is still believed that \"mesir macunu\" is good for health and has healing effects. As with lokum, nane macunu (prepared with mint) used to be eaten as a digestive after heavy meals. Herbs and flowers having curative effects were grown in the gardens of Topkap\u0131 under the control of the chief doctor \"hekimba\u015f\u0131\" and pharmacists of the Palace who used those herbs for preparing special types of macun and sherbet.\nThere are also several types of ice creams based on salep powder or corn starch with rose water such as dondurma (Turkish gum ice cream), dried fruit ice cream, ice cream rose petals.\nDried fruit is also eaten with almonds or walnuts as a dessert. Raisins, dried figs and apricots are the most widespread dried fruits.\n\"Kaymak\" (clotted cream-butter) is often served with desserts to cut through their sweetness.\nTurkish tea or Turkish coffee, with or without sugar, is usually served after dinner or more rarely together with desserts.\nMeat dishes.\n \nKebabs.\n\"Kebab\" refers to a great variety of meat-based dishes in Turkish cuisine. Kebab in Turkey encompasses not only grilled or skewered meats, but also stews and casseroles.\nFish.\nTurkey is surrounded by seas that contain a large variety of fish. Fish are grilled, fried or cooked slowly by the \"bu\u011fulama\" (poaching) method. \"Bu\u011fulama\" is fish with lemon and parsley, covered while cooking so that it will be cooked with steam. The term \"pil\u00e2ki\" is also used for fish cooked with various vegetables, including onion in the oven. In the Black Sea region, fish are usually fried with thick corn flour. Fish are also eaten cold; as smoked (isleme) or dried (\u00e7iroz), canned, salted or pickled (l\u00e2kerda). Fish is also cooked in salt or in dough in Turkey. Paz\u0131da Levrek is a seafood speciality which consists of sea bass cooked in chard leaves. In fish restaurants, it is possible to find other fancy fish varieties like \"bal\u0131k dolma\" (stuffed fish), \"bal\u0131k iskender\" (inspired by \u0130skender kebap), fishballs or fish en papillote. Fish soup prepared with vegetables, onion and flour is common in coastal towns and cities. In Istanbul's Emin\u00f6n\u00fc and other coastal districts, grilled fish served in bread with tomatoes, herbs and onion is a popular fast food. In the inner parts of Turkey, trout \"alabal\u0131k\" is common as it is the main type of freshwater fish. Popular seafood mezes at coastlines include stuffed mussels, fried mussel and fried \"kalamar\" (squid) with tarator sauce.\nPopular sea fish in Turkey include: \nMeze.\nMeze is a selection of food served as the appetizer course with or without drinks. Some of them can be served as a main course as well.\nAside from olive, mature \"ka\u015far\" kashar cheese, white cheese, various mixed pickles tur\u015fu, frequently eaten Turkish mezes include:\nPastries.\nTurkish cuisine has a range of savoury and sweet pastries. Dough-based specialties form an integral part of traditional Turkish cuisine.\nThe use of layered dough is rooted in the nomadic character of early Central Asian Turks. The combination of domed metal \"sa\u010d\" and oklava (the Turkish rod-style rolling pin) enabled the invention of the layered dough style used in b\u00f6rek (especially in \"Su B\u00f6re\u011fi\", or 'water pastry', a salty baklava-like pastry with cheese filling), g\u00fclla\u00e7 and baklava.\n\"B\u00f6rek\" is the general name for salty pastries made with yufka (a thick phyllo dough), which consists of thin layers of dough. \"Su B\u00f6re\u011fi\", made with boiled yufka/phyllo layers, cheese and parsley, is the most frequently eaten. \"\u00c7i\u011f b\u00f6rek\" (also known as \"Tatar b\u00f6re\u011fi\") is fried and stuffed with minced meat. \"Kol b\u00f6re\u011fi\" is another well-known type of \"b\u00f6rek\" that takes its name from its shape, as do fincan (coffee cup), muska (talisman), \"G\u00fcl b\u00f6re\u011fi\" (rose) or \"Sigara b\u00f6re\u011fi\" (cigarette). Other traditional Turkish \"b\u00f6reks\" include \"Tala\u015f b\u00f6re\u011fi\" (phyllo dough filled with vegetables and diced meat), \"Puf b\u00f6re\u011fi\". \"Laz b\u00f6re\u011fi\" is a sweet type of \"b\u00f6rek\", widespread in the Black Sea Region.\n\"Poga\u010da\" is the label name for dough based salty pastries. Likewise \"\u00e7\u00f6rek\" is another label name used for both sweet and salty pastries.\n\"G\u00f6zleme\" is a food typical in rural areas, made of lavash bread or phyllo dough folded around a variety of fillings such as spinach, cheese and parsley, minced meat or potatoes and cooked on a large griddle (traditionally \"sa\u010d\").\n\"Katmer\" is another traditional rolled-out dough. It can be salty or sweet according to the filling. Katmer with pistachio and kaymak is a sweet food and one of the most popular breakfast items in Gaziantep.\nLahmacun (meaning dough with meat in Arabic) is a thin flatbread covered with a layer of spiced minced meat, tomato, pepper, onion or garlic.\nPide, which can be made with minced meat (together with onion, chopped tomatoes, parsley and spices), kashar cheese, spinach, white cheese, pieces of meat, braised meat (\"kavurma\"), sucuk, pastirma or/and eggs put on rolled-out dough, is one of the most common traditional stone-baked Turkish specialities.\n\"A\u00e7ma\" is a soft bagel found in most parts of Turkey. It is similar to simit in shape, is covered in a glaze, and is usually eaten as a part of breakfast or as a snack.\nSoups.\nA Turkish meal usually starts with a thin soup (\"\u00e7orba\"). Soups are usually named after their main ingredient, the most common types being mercimek (lentil) \u00e7orbas\u0131, yogurt, and wheat (often mashed) called tarhana \u00e7orbas\u0131. Delicacy soups are the ones that are usually not the part of the daily diet, such as \u0130\u015fkembe soup and pa\u00e7a \u00e7orbas\u0131, although the latter also used to be consumed as a nutritious winter meal. Before the popularisation of the typical Turkish breakfast, soup was the default morning meal for some people.\nThe most common soups in Turkish cuisine are:\nStuffed dishes.\nStuffed dishes, known as dolma and sarma, are a fundamental part of Turkish cuisine, offering a rich variety of flavors and textures. \nDolma is a verbal noun of the Turkish verb \"dolmak\" 'to be stuffed (or filled)', and means simply 'stuffed thing'. Vegetables like bell peppers, tomatoes, zucchini, and eggplants are commonly filled with seasoned rice, herbs, pine nuts, and currants or minced meat, as seen in biber dolmas\u0131, while grape (yaprak sarma) or cabbage leaves (lahana sarma) are wrapped around similar fillings. Hearty meat-based dishes include tavuk dolmas\u0131 (stuffed chicken) and hindi dolmas\u0131 (stuffed turkey), both filled with rice, nuts, and dried fruits, as well as kaz dolmas\u0131 (stuffed goose) and kuzu dolmas\u0131 (stuffed lamb), slow-cooked to tender perfection. Other specialties like i\u00e7li k\u00f6fte feature crispy bulgur shells filled with spiced meat and walnuts, while seafood lovers enjoy midye dolma (stuffed mussels) with rice and herbs. Melon dolma along with quince or apple dolma was one of the palace's specialties (raw melon stuffed with minced meat, onion, rice, almonds, cooked in an oven). In contemporary Turkey, a wide variety of dolma and sarma is prepared. Although it is not possible to give an exhaustive list of recipes; courgette (\"\"kabak\"), aubergine (\"patl\u0131can\"), tomato (\"domates\"), pumpkin (\"balkaba\u011f\u0131\") and chard (\"paz\u0131\"\"), constitute some. A different type of dolma is mumbar dolmas\u0131, for which the membrane of intestines of sheep is filled up with a spicy rice pilav-nut mixture. \nSarma is also a verbal noun of the Turkish verb \"sarmak\" 'to wrap', and means simply 'wrapped/wrapping'. Dolma and sarma have a special place in Turkish cuisine. They can be eaten either as a meze or a main dish. They can be cooked either as a vegetable dish or meat dish. If a meat mixture is put in, they are usually served hot with yogurt and spices such as oregano and red pepper powder with oil. If the mixture is vegan, only olive oil, rice or bulgur are used, with some nuts and raisins inside, especially blackcurrant. \"Zeytinya\u011fl\u0131 yaprak sarmas\u0131\" (stuffed leaves with olive oil) is the sarma made with vine leaves stuffed with a rice-spice mixture and cooked with olive oil. This type of dolma does not contain meat, is served cold and also referred to as \"sarma\", which means \"wrapping\" in Turkish. Dried fruit such as blackcurrant, raisins, figs or cherries, and cinnamon and allspice used to be added into the mixture to sweeten \"zeytinya\u011fl\u0131 dolma\" in Ottoman cuisine. Vine leaves (\"yaprak\") could be filled not only with rice and spices but also with meat and rice, \"etli yaprak sarma\", in which case it was often served hot with yogurt. The word \"sarma\" is also used for some types of desserts, such as \"f\u0131st\u0131k sarma\" (wrapped pistachio).\nVegetable dishes.\nStuffed vegetables are called dolma. Many vegetables are stuffed, most typically green peppers (\"biber dolmas\u0131\"), eggplants, tomatoes, zucchini (courgettes) (\"kabak dolmas\u0131\"), and vine leaves (\"yaprak dolmas\u0131\") pickled in brine. Many other vegetables and fruits are stuffed with a meat or pilav mixture. For example, artichoke dolma (\"enginar dolmas\u0131\") is an Aegean region specialty. Dolma may be stuffed with parts of the vegetable carved out for preparation, pilav with spices or minced meat.\n\"\u0130mam bay\u0131ld\u0131\" is a version of \"karn\u0131yar\u0131k\" with no minced meat inside. It can be served as a meze as well. Another popular dish of Arabic origin (the Levant region) is baba ghanoush (also called abugannush), a pur\u00e9e of smoked eggplants with tahini sauce.\n\"Mercimek k\u00f6ftesi\", although being named \"k\u00f6fte\", does not contain any meat. Instead, red lentils are the major ingredient, together with spring onion, tomato paste, and other ingredients.\n\"M\u00fccver\" is prepared with grated squash, courgette or potatoes mixed with egg, onion, dill or cheese and flour.{{clarification needed|date=November 2025}} It can be fried or baked.\nPilav can be served either as a side dish or main dish; \"bulgur pilav\u0131\" (pilav made of \"bulgur\") is also widely eaten. \nLegumes are commonly used, especially kidney beans, chickpeas, fava beans, and red and green lentils. Dishes made with \"kuru fasulye\" (white beans), \"nohut\" (chickpeas), \"mercimek\" (lentils), \"b\u00f6r\u00fclce\" (black-eyed peas), or other legumes, combined with onion, vegetables, minced meat, tomato paste and rice, have always been common due to being economical and nutritious.\n\"Tur\u015fu\" are pickles made with brine, usually with garlic added. It is often enjoyed as an appetizer. A variety of vegetables are used, from cucumber to courgette. In towns on the Aegean coast, the water of \"tur\u015fu\" is consumed as a drink.{{citation needed|date=November 2025}} The name comes from the Persian \"torshi\", which refers to pickled \"torsh\" (sour) vegetables.\n\"Siron\", usually made in areas of Elazig and Sivas by layering flatbread with yogurt and butter, creating a savory and rich flavor.\nBeverages.\nAlcoholic beverages.\nAlthough the majority of Turks profess the Islamic religion, alcoholic beverages are as widely available as anywhere. Rak\u0131 (pronounced [\u027ea\u02c8k\u026f]) is the most popular alcoholic drink in Turkey.\nThere are a few local brands of lager such as Bomonti, Marmara 34 and Efes Pilsen and a small selection of international beers that are produced in Turkey such as Skol, Beck's, Miller, Foster's, Carlsberg and Tuborg. In Turkey, craft beers became popular in present-day; Gara Guzu, Feliz Kulpa, Pablo and Graf are some Turkish craft beer brands.\nThere are a variety of local wines produced by Turkish brands such as Sevilen, Kavakl\u0131dere, Doluca, Corvus, Kayra, Pamukkale and Diren which are getting more popular with the change of climatic conditions that affect the production of wine. A range of grape varieties are grown in Turkey. For the production of red wine, the following types of grapes are mainly used; in the Marmara Region, Pinot noir, Adakaras\u0131, Papazkaras\u0131, Semillion, Kuntra, Gamay, Cinsault; in the Aegean Region, Carignane, \u00c7alkaras\u0131, Merlot, Cabernet Sauvignon, Alicante Bouschet; in the Black Sea Region and the eastern part of the country, \u00d6k\u00fczg\u00f6z\u00fc, Bo\u011fazkere; in Central Anatolia, Kalecik Karas\u0131, Papazkaras\u0131, Dimrit; in the Mediterranean Region, Sergi Karas\u0131, Dimrit. As for white wine, the grapes can be listed as follows; in the Marmara Region, Chardonnay, Riesling, Semillion, Beylerce, Yap\u0131ncak; in the Aegean Region, muscat and semillion; in the Black Sea Region, Narince; in Central Anatolia, Emir, Goat Cheese. In addition to mass production, it is quite popular to produce wines in private farms and sell them in the locality. Visitors can find different \"home made\" wines in Central Anatolia (Kapadokya/Cappadocia region \u2013 Nev\u015fehir), the Aegean coast (Sel\u00e7uk and Bozcaada (an island in the Aegean Sea)).\nAnkara was the first and only whiskey produced in Turkey. Its production started in 1964 and ended in 2011.\nNon-alcoholic beverages.\nAt breakfast and all day long Turkish people drink black tea (\"\u00e7ay\"). Tea is made with two teapots in Turkey. Strong bitter tea made in the upper pot is diluted by adding boiling water from the lower. Turkish coffee (\"kahve\") is usually served after meals or with dessert.\nAyran (yogurt drink) is the most common cold beverage, which may accompany almost all dishes in Turkey, except those with fish and other seafood. It is a mix of yogurt and water, similar to lassi. It may be served with salt, according to taste.\n\u015ealgam suyu (mild or spicy fermented black carrot juice) is another important non-alcoholic beverage that is usually combined with kebabs or served together with rak\u0131.\nBoza is a traditional winter drink, which is also known as millet wine (served cold with cinnamon and sometimes with leblebi).\nSahlep is another favorite in winter (served hot with cinnamon). Sahlep is extracted from the roots of wild orchids and may be used in Turkish ice cream as well. This was a popular drink in western Europe before coffee was brought from Africa and came to be widely known.\n\"Limonata\" (lemonade) is very popular. It is traditionally served with baklava and other sweets. Sometimes lemonade is served with strawberry flavoring. This is called \"\u00e7ilekli limonata\".\nSherbet (Turkish \"\u015ferbet,\" pronounced {{IPA|tr|\u0283e\u027e\u02c8bet|}}) is a syrup which can be made from any of a wide variety of ingredients, especially fruits, flowers, or herbs. Examples include pears, quinces, strawberries, apples, cornelian cherry, pomegranates, oranges, rose petals, rose hips, or licorice and spices. Sherbet is drunk diluted with cold water.\nLohusa \u015ferbeti is a beverage usually given to women after childbirth.\nIn classical Turkish cuisine, \"ho\u015faf\" (from the Persian \"Khosh-ab\", meaning \"fresh water\") alternatively accompanies meat dishes and \"pilav\" (pilaf)."}
{"id": "31428", "revid": "50518125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31428", "title": "Tourmaline", "text": "Cyclosilicate mineral group\nTourmaline ( ) is a crystalline silicate mineral group in which boron is compounded with elements such as aluminium, iron, magnesium, sodium, lithium, or potassium. This gemstone comes in a wide variety of colors.\nThe name is derived from the Sinhalese (), which refers to the carnelian gemstones.\nHistory.\nBrightly colored Ceylonese gem tourmalines were brought to Europe in great quantities by the Dutch East India Company, to satisfy a demand for curiosities and gems. Tourmaline was sometimes called the \"Ceylonese Magnet\" because it could attract and then repel hot ashes due to its pyroelectric properties.\nTourmalines were used by chemists in the 19th century to polarize light by shining rays onto a cut and polished surface of the gem.\nSpecies and varieties.\nCommonly encountered species and varieties of tourmaline include the following:\nSchorl.\nThe most common species of tourmaline is schorl, the sodium iron (divalent) endmember of the group. It may account for 95% or more of all tourmaline in nature. The early history of the mineral schorl shows that the name \"schorl\" was in use prior to 1400 because a village known today as Zschorlau (in Saxony, Germany) was then named \"Schorl\" (or minor variants of this name), and the village had a nearby tin mine where, in addition to cassiterite, black tourmaline was found. The first description of schorl with the name \"sch\u00fcrl\" and its occurrence (various tin mines in the Ore Mountains) was written by Johannes Mathesius (1504\u20131565) in 1562 under the title \"Sarepta oder Bergpostill\". Up to about 1600, additional names used in the German language were \"Schurel\", \"Sch\u00f6rle\", and \"Schurl\". Beginning in the 18th century, the name \"Sch\u00f6rl\" was mainly used in the German-speaking area. In English, the names \"shorl\" and \"shirl\" were used in the 18th century. In the 19th century the names \"common schorl\", \"sch\u00f6rl\", \"schorl\" and \"iron tourmaline\" were the English words used for this mineral.\nDravite.\nDravite, also called brown tourmaline, is the sodium magnesium rich tourmaline endmember. Uvite, in comparison, is a calcium magnesium tourmaline. Dravite forms multiple series, with other tourmaline members, including schorl and elbaite.\nThe name \"dravite\" was used for the first time by Gustav Tschermak (1836\u20131927), Professor of Mineralogy and Petrography at the University of Vienna, in his book \"Lehrbuch der Mineralogie\" (published in 1884) for magnesium-rich (and sodium-rich) tourmaline from village Dobrova near Unterdrauburg in the Drava river area, Carinthia, Austro-Hungarian Empire. Today this tourmaline locality (type locality for dravite) at Dobrova (near Dravograd), is a part of the Republic of Slovenia. Tschermak gave this tourmaline the name dravite, for the Drava river area, which is the district along the Drava River (in German: \"Drau\", in Latin: \"Drave\") in Austria and Slovenia. The chemical composition which was given by Tschermak in 1884 for this dravite approximately corresponds to the formula , which is in good agreement (except for the OH content) with the endmember formula of dravite as known today.\nDravite varieties include the deep green chromium dravite and the vanadium dravite.\nElbaite.\nA lithium-tourmaline elbaite was one of three pegmatitic minerals from Ut\u00f6, Sweden, in which the new alkali element lithium (Li) was determined in 1818 by Johan August Arfwedson for the first time. Elba Island, Italy, was one of the first localities where colored and colorless Li-tourmalines were extensively chemically analysed. In 1850, Karl Friedrich August Rammelsberg described fluorine (F) in tourmaline for the first time. In 1870, he proved that all varieties of tourmaline contain chemically bound water. In 1889, Scharitzer proposed the substitution of (OH) by F in red Li-tourmaline from Su\u0161ice, Czech Republic. In 1914, Vladimir Vernadsky proposed the name \"Elbait\" for lithium-, sodium-, and aluminum-rich tourmaline from Elba Island, Italy, with the simplified formula . Most likely the type material for elbaite was found at Fonte del Prete, San Piero in Campo, Campo nell'Elba, Elba Island, Province of Livorno, Tuscany, Italy. In 1933 Winchell published an updated formula for elbaite, , which is commonly used to date written as . The first crystal structure determination of a Li-rich tourmaline was published in 1972 by Donnay and Barton, performed on a pink elbaite from San Diego County, California, United States.\nChemical composition.\nThe tourmaline mineral group is chemically one of the most complicated groups of silicate minerals. Its composition varies widely because of isomorphous replacement (solid solution), and its general formula can be written as , where:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMineral species that were named before the IMA was founded in 1958 do not have an IMA number.\nThe IMA commission on new mineral names published a list of approved symbols for each mineral species in 2021.\nA revised nomenclature for the tourmaline group was published in 2011.\nPhysical properties.\nCrystal structure.\nTourmaline is a six-member ring cyclosilicate having a trigonal crystal system. It occurs as long, slender to thick prismatic and columnar crystals that are usually triangular in cross-section, often with curved striated faces. The style of termination at the ends of crystals is sometimes asymmetrical, called hemimorphism. Small slender prismatic crystals are common in a fine-grained granite called aplite, often forming radial daisy-like patterns. Tourmaline is distinguished by its three-sided prisms; no other common mineral has three sides. Prisms faces often have heavy vertical striations that produce a rounded triangular effect. Tourmaline is rarely perfectly euhedral. An exception was the fine dravite tourmalines of Yinnietharra, in western Australia. The deposit was discovered in the 1970s, but is now exhausted. All hemimorphic crystals are piezoelectric, and are often pyroelectric as well.\nA crystal of tourmaline is built up of units consisting of a six-member silica ring that binds above to a large cation, such as sodium. The ring binds below to a layer of metal ions and hydroxyls or halogens, which structurally resembles a fragment of kaolin. This in turn binds to three triangular borate ions. Units joined end to end form columns running the length of the crystal. Each column binds with two other columns offset one-third and two-thirds of the vertical length of a single unit to form bundles of three columns. Bundles are packed together to form the final crystal structure. Because the neighboring columns are offset, the basic structural unit is not a unit cell: The actual unit cell of this structure includes portions of several units belonging to adjacent columns.\nColor.\nTourmaline has a variety of colors. Iron-rich tourmalines are usually black to bluish-black to deep brown, while magnesium-rich varieties are brown to yellow, and lithium-rich tourmalines are almost any color: blue, green, red, yellow, pink, etc. Rarely, it is colorless. Bi-colored and multicolored crystals are common, reflecting variations of fluid chemistry during crystallization. Crystals may be green at one end and pink at the other, or green on the outside and pink inside; this type is called &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;watermelon tourmaline and is prized in jewelry. An excellent example of watermelon tourmaline jewelry is a brooch piece (1969, gold, watermelon tourmaline, diamonds) by Andrew Grima (British, b. Italy, 1921\u20132007), in the collection of Kimberly Klosterman and on display at the Cincinnati Art Museum. Some forms of tourmaline are dichroic; they change color when viewed from different directions.\nThe pink color of tourmalines from many localities is the result of prolonged natural irradiation. During their growth, these tourmaline crystals incorporated Mn2+ and were initially very pale. Due to natural gamma ray exposure from radioactive decay of 40K in their granitic environment, gradual formation of Mn3+ ions occurs, which is responsible for the deepening of the pink to red color.\nMagnetism.\nOpaque black schorl and yellow tsilaisite are idiochromatic tourmaline species that have high magnetic susceptibilities due to high concentrations of iron and manganese respectively. Most gem-quality tourmalines are of the elbaite species. Elbaite tourmalines are allochromatic, deriving most of their color and magnetic susceptibility from schorl (which imparts iron) and tsilaisite (which imparts manganese).\nRed and pink tourmalines have the lowest magnetic susceptibilities among the elbaites, while tourmalines with bright yellow, green and blue colors are the most magnetic elbaites. Dravite species such as green chromium dravite and brown dravite are diamagnetic. A handheld neodymium magnet can be used to identify or separate some types of tourmaline gems from others. For example, blue indicolite tourmaline is the only blue gemstone of any kind that will show a drag response when a neodymium magnet is applied. Any blue tourmaline that is diamagnetic can be identified as paraiba tourmaline colored by copper in contrast to magnetic blue tourmaline colored by iron.\nTreatments.\nSome tourmaline gems, especially pink to red colored stones, are altered by heat treatment to improve their color. Overly dark red stones can be lightened by careful heat treatment. The pink color in manganese-containing near-colorless to pale pink stones can be greatly increased by irradiation with gamma-rays or electron beams. Irradiation is almost impossible to detect in tourmalines, and does not, currently, affect the value. Heavily included tourmalines, such as rubellite and Brazilian paraiba, are sometimes clarity-enhanced. A clarity-enhanced tourmaline (especially the paraiba variety) is worth much less than an untreated gem of equal clarity.\nGeology.\nTourmaline is found in granite and granite pegmatites and in metamorphic rocks such as schist and marble. Schorl and lithium-rich tourmalines are usually found in granite and granite pegmatite. Magnesium-rich tourmalines, dravites, are generally restricted to schists and marble. Tourmaline is a durable mineral and can be found in minor amounts as grains in sandstone and conglomerate, and is part of the ZTR index for highly weathered sediments.\nLocalities.\nGem and specimen tourmaline is mined chiefly in Brazil and many parts of Africa, including Tanzania, Nigeria, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Malawi, and Namibia. It is also mined in Asia, notably in Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Indonesia as well as in Sri Lanka and India, where some placer deposit material suitable for gem use is found.\nUnited States.\nSome fine gems and specimen material have been produced in the United States, with the first discoveries in 1822, in the state of Maine. California became a large producer of tourmaline in the early 1900s. The Maine deposits tend to produce crystals in raspberry pink-red as well as minty greens. The California deposits are known for bright pinks, as well as bicolors. During the early 1900s, Maine and California were the world's largest producers of gem tourmalines. The Empress Dowager Cixi of China loved pink tourmaline and bought large quantities for gemstones and carvings from the then new Himalaya Mine, located in San Diego County, California. It is not clear when the first tourmaline was found in California. Native Americans have used pink and green tourmaline as funeral gifts for centuries. The first documented case was in 1890 when Charles Russel Orcutt found pink tourmaline at what later became the Stewart Mine at Pala, California in San Diego County.\nBrazil.\nAlmost every color of tourmaline can be found in Brazil, especially in Minas Gerais and Bahia. The new type of tourmaline, which soon became known as paraiba tourmaline, came in blue and green. Brazilian paraiba tourmaline usually contains abundant inclusions. Much of the paraiba tourmaline from Brazil does not actually come from Para\u00edba, but the neighboring state of Rio Grande do Norte. Material from Rio Grande do Norte is often somewhat less intense in color, but many fine gems are found there. It was determined that the element copper was important in the coloration of the stone.\nA large bluish-green tourmaline from Paraiba, measuring and weighing , is the world's largest cut tourmaline. Owned by Billionaire Business Enterprises, it was presented in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, on 14 October 2009.\nAfrica.\nIn the late 1990s, copper-containing tourmaline was found in Nigeria. The material was generally paler and less saturated than the Brazilian materials, although the material generally was much less included. A more recent African discovery from Mozambique has also produced tourmaline colored by copper, similar to the Brazilian paraiba. The Mozambique paraiba material usually is more intensely colored than the Nigerian and Mozambique Paraiba tourmaline have similar colors to the Brazilian Paraiba, but the prices are relatively cheaper, better clarity and larger sizes. In recent years the pricing of these beautiful gemstones has increased significantly.\nAnother highly valuable variety is chrome tourmaline, a rare type of dravite tourmaline from Tanzania. Chrome tourmaline is a rich green color due to the presence of chromium atoms in the crystal. Of the standard elbaite colors, blue indicolite gems are typically the most valuable, followed by green verdelite and pink to red rubellite.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31429", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31429", "title": "Twin paradox", "text": "Thought experiment in special relativity\nIn physics, the twin paradox is a thought experiment in special relativity involving twins, one of whom takes a space voyage at relativistic speeds and returns home to find that the twin who remained on Earth has aged more. This result appears puzzling because each twin sees the other twin as moving, and so, as a consequence of an incorrect and naive application of time dilation and the principle of relativity, each should paradoxically find the other to have aged less. However, this scenario can be resolved within the standard framework of special relativity: the travelling twin's trajectory involves two different inertial frames, one for the outbound journey and one for the inbound journey. Another way to understand the paradox is to realise the travelling twin is undergoing acceleration, thus becoming a non-inertial observer. In both views there is no symmetry between the spacetime paths of the twins. Therefore, the twin paradox is not actually a paradox in the sense of a logical contradiction.\nStarting with Paul Langevin in 1911, there have been various explanations of this paradox. These explanations \"can be grouped into those that focus on the effect of different standards of simultaneity in different frames, and those that designate the acceleration [experienced by the travelling twin] as the main reason\". Max von Laue argued in 1913 that since the travelling twin must be in two separate inertial frames, one on the way out and another on the way back, this frame switch is the reason for the ageing difference. Explanations put forth by Albert Einstein and Max Born invoked gravitational time dilation to explain the ageing as a direct effect of acceleration. However, it has been proven that neither general relativity, nor even acceleration, are necessary to explain the effect, as the effect still applies if two astronauts pass each other at the turnaround point and synchronise their clocks at that point. The situation at the turnaround point can be thought of as where a pair of observers, one travelling away from the starting point and another travelling toward it, pass by each other, and where the clock reading of the first observer is transferred to that of the second one, both maintaining constant speed, with both trip times being added at the end of their journey.\nHistory.\nIn his famous paper on special relativity in 1905, Albert Einstein deduced that for two stationary and synchronous clocks that are placed at points A and B, if the clock at A is moved along the line AB and stops at B, the clock that moved from A would lag behind the clock at B. He stated that this result would also apply if the path from A to B was polygonal or circular. Einstein considered this to be a natural consequence of special relativity, not a paradox as some suggested, and in 1911, he restated and elaborated on this result as follows (with physicist Robert Resnick's comments following Einstein's):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Einstein: If we placed a living organism in a box ... one could arrange that the organism, after any arbitrary lengthy flight, could be returned to its original spot in a scarcely altered condition, while corresponding organisms which had remained in their original positions had already long since given way to new generations. For the moving organism, the lengthy time of the journey was a mere instant, provided the motion took place with approximately the speed of light.\nResnick: If the stationary organism is a man and the travelling one is his twin, then the traveller returns home to find his twin brother much aged compared to himself. The paradox centers on the contention that, in relativity, either twin could regard the other as the traveller, in which case each should find the other younger\u2014a logical contradiction. This contention assumes that the twins' situations are symmetrical and interchangeable, an assumption that is not correct. Furthermore, the accessible experiments have been done and support Einstein's prediction.\nIn 1911, Paul Langevin gave a \"striking example\" by describing the story of a traveller making a trip at a Lorentz factor of \"\u03b3\" \n 100 (99.995% the speed of light). The traveller remains in a projectile for one year of their time, and then reverses direction. Upon return, the traveller will find that, having aged two years, 200 years have passed on Earth. During the trip, both the traveller and Earth keep sending signals to each other at a constant rate, which places Langevin's story among the Doppler shift versions of the twin paradox. The relativistic effects upon the signal rates are used to account for the different ageing rates. The asymmetry that occurred because only the traveller underwent acceleration is used to explain why there is any difference at all, because \"any change of velocity, or any acceleration has an absolute meaning\".\nMax von Laue (1911, 1913) elaborated on Langevin's explanation. Using Hermann Minkowski's spacetime formalism, Laue went on to demonstrate that the world lines of the inertially moving bodies maximise the proper time elapsed between two events. He also wrote that the asymmetric ageing is completely accounted for by the fact that the astronaut twin travels in two separate frames, while the Earth twin remains in one frame, and the time of acceleration can be made arbitrarily small compared with the time of inertial motion. Eventually, Lord Halsbury and others removed any acceleration by introducing the \"three-brother\" approach. The travelling twin transfers their clock reading to a third one, travelling in the opposite direction. Another way of avoiding acceleration effects is the use of the relativistic Doppler effect &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nNeither Einstein nor Langevin considered such results to be problematic: Einstein only called it \"peculiar\" while Langevin presented it as a consequence of absolute acceleration. Both men argued that, from the time differential illustrated by the story of the twins, no self-contradiction could be constructed. In other words, neither Einstein nor Langevin saw the story of the twins as constituting a challenge to the self-consistency of relativistic physics.\nSpecific example.\nConsider a space ship travelling from Earth to the nearest star system: a distance \"d\" \n 4 light years away, at a speed \"v\" \n 0.8\u200d\"c\" (i.e., 80% of the speed of light).\nTo make the numbers easy, the ship is assumed to attain full speed in a negligible time upon departure (even though it would actually take about 9 months accelerating at 1\u00a0\"g\" to get up to speed). Similarly, at the end of the outgoing trip, the change in direction needed to start the return trip is assumed to occur in a negligible time. This can also be modelled by assuming that the ship is already in motion at the beginning of the experiment and that the return event is modelled by a Dirac delta distribution acceleration.\nThe parties will observe the situation as follows:\nEarth perspective.\nThe Earth-based mission control reasons about the journey this way: the round trip will take \"t\" \n 2\"d\"/\"v\" \n 10 years in Earth time (\"i.e.\" everybody who stays on Earth will be 10 years older when the ship returns). The amount of time as measured on the ship's clocks and the ageing of the travellers during their trip will be reduced by the factor formula_1, the reciprocal of the Lorentz factor (time dilation). In this case \"\u03b1\" \n 0.6 and the travellers will have aged only 0.6 \u00d7 10 \n 6 years when they return.\nTravellers' perspective.\nThe ship's crew members also calculate the particulars of their trip from their perspective. They know that the distant star system and the Earth are moving relative to the ship at speed \"v\" during the trip. In their rest frame the distance between the Earth and the star system is \"\u03b1 d\" \n 0.6 \u00d7 4 \n 2.4 light years (length contraction), for both the outward and return journeys. Each half of the journey takes \"\u03b1 d\" / \"v\" \n 2.4 / 0.8 \n 3 years, and the round trip takes twice as long (6 years). Their calculations show that they will arrive home having aged 6\u00a0years. The travellers' final calculation about their ageing is in complete agreement with the calculations of those on Earth, though they experience the trip quite differently from those who stay at home.\nConclusion.\nNo matter what method they use to predict the clock readings, everybody will agree about them. If twins are born on the day the ship leaves, and one goes on the journey while the other stays on Earth, they will meet again when the traveller is 6\u00a0years old and the stay-at-home twin is 10\u00a0years old.\nResolution of the paradox in special relativity.\nThe paradoxical aspect of the twins' situation arises from the fact that at any given moment the travelling twin's clock is running slow in the earthbound twin's inertial frame, but based on the relativity principle one could equally argue that the earthbound twin's clock is running slow in the travelling twin's inertial frame. One proposed resolution is based on the fact that the earthbound twin is at rest in the same inertial frame throughout the journey, while the travelling twin is not: in the simplest version of the thought-experiment, the travelling twin switches at the midpoint of the trip from being at rest in an inertial frame which moves in one direction (away from the Earth) to being at rest in an inertial frame which moves in the opposite direction (towards the Earth). In this approach, determining which observer switches frames and which does not is crucial. Although both twins can legitimately claim that they are at rest in their own frame, only the travelling twin experiences acceleration when the spaceship engines are turned on. This acceleration, measurable with an accelerometer, makes their rest frame temporarily non-inertial. This reveals a crucial asymmetry between the twins' perspectives: although we can predict the ageing difference from both perspectives, we need to use different methods to obtain correct results.\nRole of acceleration.\nAlthough some solutions attribute a crucial role to the acceleration of the travelling twin at the time of the turnaround, others note that the effect also arises if one imagines two separate travellers, one outward-going and one inward-coming, who pass each other and synchronise their clocks at the point corresponding to \"turnaround\" of a single traveller. In this version, physical acceleration of the travelling clock plays no direct role; \"the issue is how long the world-lines are, not how bent\". The length referred to here is the Lorentz-invariant length or \"proper time interval\" of a trajectory which corresponds to the elapsed time measured by a clock following that trajectory (see section \"\" below). In Minkowski spacetime, the travelling twin must feel a different history of accelerations from the earthbound twin, even if this just means accelerations of the same size separated by different amounts of time, however \"even this role for acceleration can be eliminated in formulations of the twin paradox in curved spacetime, where the twins can fall freely along space-time geodesics between meetings\".\nAnimation illustrates the time difference between twins in the twin paradox. The black line is the world line of the stationary (or uniformly moving) twin. The red line is the world line of the accelerating and decelerating twin. The momentarily frame is co-moving along the world line of the accelerating and decelerating twin. The numbers show clocks of both twins. The clocks start simultaneously. When the twins meet again, the red clock (moving nonuniformly) is delayed compared to the black one (moving uniformly). The vertical direction indicates time, while the horizontal indicates distance, the dashed line is the spacetime of the observer. The small dots are specific events in spacetime.\nRelativity of simultaneity.\nFor a moment-by-moment understanding of how the time difference between the twins unfolds, one must understand that in special relativity there is no concept of \"absolute present\". For different inertial frames there are different sets of events that are simultaneous in that frame. This relativity of simultaneity means that switching from one inertial frame to another requires an adjustment in what slice through spacetime counts as the \"present\". In the spacetime diagram on the right, drawn for the reference frame of the Earth-based twin, that twin's world line coincides with the vertical axis (constant position in space, moving only in time). On the first leg of the trip, the second twin moves to the right (black sloped line); and on the second leg, back to the left. Blue lines show the \"planes of simultaneity\" for the travelling twin during the first leg of the journey; red lines, during the second leg. Just before turnaround, the travelling twin calculates the age of the Earth-based twin by measuring the interval along the vertical axis from the origin to the upper blue line. Just after turnaround, when recalculating, the travelling twin will measure the interval from the origin to the lower red line. In a sense, during the U-turn the plane of simultaneity jumps from blue to red and very quickly sweeps over a large segment of the world line of the Earth-based twin. When one transfers from the outgoing inertial frame to the incoming inertial frame there is a jump discontinuity in the age of the Earth-based twin (6.4 years in the example above).\nA non-spacetime approach.\nAs mentioned above, an \"out and back\" twin paradox adventure may incorporate the transfer of clock reading from an \"outgoing\" astronaut to an \"incoming\" astronaut, thus eliminating the effect of acceleration. Also, the physical acceleration of clocks does not contribute to the kinematical effects of special relativity. Rather, in special relativity, the time differential between two reunited clocks is produced purely by uniform inertial motion, as discussed in Einstein's original 1905 relativity paper, as well as in all subsequent kinematical derivations of the Lorentz transformations.\nBecause spacetime diagrams incorporate Einstein's clock synchronisation (with its lattice of clocks methodology), there will be a requisite jump in the reading of the Earth clock time made by a \"suddenly returning astronaut\" who inherits a \"new meaning of simultaneity\" in keeping with a new clock synchronisation dictated by the transfer to a different inertial frame.\nIf, instead of incorporating Einstein's clock synchronisation (lattice of clocks), the astronaut (outgoing and incoming) and the Earth-based party regularly update each other on the status of their clocks by way of sending radio signals (which travel at light speed), then all parties will note an incremental buildup of asymmetry in time-keeping, beginning at the \"turn around\" point. Prior to the \"turn around\", each party regards the other party's clock to be recording time differently from their own, but the noted difference is symmetrical between the two parties. After the \"turn around\", the noted differences are not symmetrical, and the asymmetry grows incrementally until the two parties are reunited. Upon finally reuniting, this asymmetry can be seen in the actual difference showing on the two reunited clocks.\nEquivalence of biological ageing and clock time-keeping.\nAll processes\u2014chemical, biological, measuring apparatus functioning, human perception involving the eye and brain, the communication of force\u2014are constrained by the speed of light. There is clock functioning at every level, dependent on light speed and the inherent delay at even the atomic level. Biological ageing, therefore, is in no way different from clock time-keeping. This means that biological ageing would be slowed in the same manner as a clock.\nWhat it looks like: the relativistic Doppler shift.\nIn view of the frame-dependence of simultaneity for events at different locations in space, some treatments prefer a more phenomenological approach, describing what the twins would observe if each sent out a series of regular radio pulses, equally spaced in time according to the emitter's clock. This is equivalent to asking, if each twin sent a video feed of themselves to each other, what do they see in their screens? Or, if each twin always carried a clock indicating their age, what time would each see in the image of their distant twin's clock?\nShortly after departure, the travelling twin sees the stay-at-home twin with no time delay. At arrival, the image in the ship screen shows the staying twin as 1\u00a0year after launch, because radio emitted from Earth 1\u00a0year after launch gets to the other star 4\u00a0years afterwards and meets the ship there. During this leg of the trip, the travelling twin sees their own clock advance 3\u00a0years and the clock in the screen advance 1\u00a0year, so it seems to advance at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 the normal rate, just 20\u00a0image seconds per ship minute. This combines the effects of time dilation due to motion (by factor \"\u03b1\" \n 0.6, five years on Earth are 3\u00a0years on ship) and the effect of increasing light-time-delay (which grows from 0 to 4\u00a0years).\nOf course, the observed frequency of the transmission is also &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 the frequency of the transmitter (a reduction in frequency; \"red-shifted\"). This is called the relativistic Doppler effect. The frequency of clock-ticks (or of wavefronts) which one sees from a source with rest frequency \"f\"rest is\nformula_2\nwhen the source is moving directly away. This is \"f\"obs = &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443\"f\"rest for \"v\"/\"c\" = 0.8.\nThe stay-at-home twin gets a slowed signal from the ship for 9\u00a0years, at a frequency &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 the transmitter frequency. During these 9\u00a0years, the clock of the travelling twin in the screen seems to advance 3\u00a0years, so both twins see the image of their sibling ageing at a rate only &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 their own rate. Expressed in other way, they would both see the other's clock run at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 their own clock speed. If they factor out of the calculation the fact that the light-time delay of the transmission is increasing at a rate of 0.8\u00a0seconds per second, \"both\" can work out that the other twin is ageing slower, at 60% rate.\nThen the ship turns back toward home. The clock of the staying twin shows \"1\u00a0year after launch\" in the screen of the ship, and during the 3\u00a0years of the trip back it increases up to \"10\u00a0years after launch\", so the clock in the screen seems to be advancing 3\u00a0times faster than usual.\nWhen the source is moving towards the observer, the observed frequency is higher (\"blue-shifted\") and given by\n formula_3\nThis is \"f\"obs = 3\"f\"rest for \"v\"/\"c\" = 0.8.\nAs for the screen on Earth, it shows that trip back beginning 9\u00a0years after launch, and the travelling clock in the screen shows that 3\u00a0years have passed on the ship. One year later, the ship is back home and the clock shows 6\u00a0years. So, during the trip back, \"both\" twins see their sibling's clock going 3\u00a0times faster than their own. Factoring out the fact that the light-time-delay is decreasing by 0.8\u00a0seconds every second, each twin calculates that the other twin is ageing at 60% their own ageing speed.\nThe \"x\"\u2013\"t\" (space\u2013time) diagrams at right show the paths of light signals travelling between Earth and ship (1st diagram) and between ship and Earth (2nd diagram). These signals carry the images of each twin and their age-clock to the other twin. The vertical black line is the Earth's path through spacetime and the other two sides of the triangle show the ship's path through spacetime (as in the Minkowski diagram above). As far as the sender is concerned, they transmit these at equal intervals (say, once an hour) according to their own clock; but according to the clock of the twin receiving these signals, they are not being received at equal intervals.\nAfter the ship has reached its cruising speed of 0.8\u200d\"c\", each twin would see 1\u00a0second pass in the received image of the other twin for every 3\u00a0seconds of their own time. That is, each would see the image of the other's clock going slow, not just slow by the \"\u03b5\" factor 0.6, but even slower because light-time-delay is increasing 0.8\u00a0seconds per second. This is shown in the figures by red light paths. At some point, the images received by each twin change so that each would see 3\u00a0seconds pass in the image for every second of their own time. That is, the received signal has been increased in frequency by the Doppler shift. These high frequency images are shown in the figures by blue light paths.\nAsymmetry in the Doppler shifted images.\nThe asymmetry between the Earth and the space ship is manifested in this diagram by the fact that more blue-shifted (fast ageing) images are received by the ship. Put another way, the space ship sees the image change from a red-shift (slower ageing of the image) to a blue-shift (faster ageing of the image) at the midpoint of its trip (at the turnaround, 3\u00a0years after departure); the Earth sees the image of the ship change from red-shift to blue shift after 9\u00a0years (almost at the end of the period that the ship is absent). In the next section, one will see another asymmetry in the images: the Earth twin sees the ship twin age by the same amount in the red and blue shifted images; the ship twin sees the Earth twin age by different amounts in the red and blue shifted images.\nCalculation of elapsed time from the Doppler diagram.\nThe twin on the ship sees low frequency (red) images for 3 years. During that time, the travelling twin would see the Earth twin in the image grow older by 3/3 \n 1 year. The traveller then sees high frequency (blue) images during the back trip of 3\u00a0years. During that time, the Earth twin in the image would seem to grow older by 3 \u00d7 3 \n 9 years. When the journey is finished, the image of the Earth twin has aged by 1 + 9 \n 10 years.\nThe Earth twin sees 9 years of slow (red) images of the ship twin, during which the ship twin ages (in the image) by 9/3 \n 3 years. Then, fast (blue) images are seen from Earth for the remaining 1\u00a0year until the ship returns. In the fast images, the ship twin ages by 1 \u00d7 3 \n 3 years. The total ageing of the ship twin in the images received by Earth is 3 + 3 \n 6 years, so the ship twin returns younger (6\u00a0years as opposed to 10\u00a0years on Earth).\nDistinction between what they see and what they calculate.\nTo avoid confusion, note the distinction between what each twin sees and what each would calculate. Each sees an image of their twin which they know originated at a previous time and which they know is Doppler-shifted. They do not take the elapsed time in the image as the age of their twin now.\n formula_5\nwhen the image was emitted. A similar calculation reveals that his twin was ageing at the same reduced rate of \"\u03b5f\"rest in all low frequency images.\nSimultaneity in the Doppler shift calculation.\nIt may be difficult to see where simultaneity came into the Doppler shift calculation, and indeed the calculation is often preferred because one does not have to worry about simultaneity. As seen above, the ship twin can convert the received Doppler-shifted rate to a slower rate of the clock of the distant clock for both red and blue images. When ignoring simultaneity, the ship twin might say the Earth twin was ageing at the reduced rate throughout the journey and therefore should be younger than they are. The ship twin is now back to square one, and has to take into account the change in their notion of simultaneity at the turnaround. The rate they can calculate for the image (corrected for Doppler effect) is the rate of the Earth twin's clock at the moment it was sent, not at the moment it was received. Since they receive an unequal number of red and blue shifted images, they should realise that the red and blue shifted emissions were not emitted over equal time periods for the Earth twin, and therefore they must account for simultaneity at a distance.\nViewpoint of the travelling twin.\nDuring the turnaround, the travelling twin is in an accelerated reference frame. According to the equivalence principle, the travelling twin may analyse the turnaround phase as if the stay-at-home twin were freely falling in a gravitational field and as if the travelling twin were stationary. A 1918 paper by Einstein presents a conceptual sketch of the idea. From the viewpoint of the traveller, a calculation for each separate leg, ignoring the turnaround, leads to a result in which the Earth clocks age less than the traveller. For example, if the Earth clocks age 1\u00a0day less on each leg, the amount that the Earth clocks will lag behind amounts to 2\u00a0days. The physical description of what happens at turnaround has to produce a contrary effect of double that amount: 4\u00a0days' advancing of the Earth clocks. Then the traveller's clock will end up with a net 2-day delay on the Earth clocks, in agreement with calculations done in the frame of the stay-at-home twin.\nThe mechanism for the advancing of the stay-at-home twin's clock is gravitational time dilation. When an observer finds that inertially moving objects are being accelerated with respect to themselves, those objects are in a gravitational field insofar as relativity is concerned. For the travelling twin at turnaround, this gravitational field fills the universe. In a weak field approximation, clocks tick at a rate of t' \n \"t\" (1 + \"\u03a6\" / \"c\"2) where \"\u03a6\" is the difference in gravitational potential. In this case, \"\u03a6\" \n \"gh\" where \"g\" is the acceleration of the travelling observer during turnaround and \"h\" is the distance to the stay-at-home twin. The rocket is firing towards the stay-at-home twin, thereby placing that twin at a higher gravitational potential. Due to the large distance between the twins, the stay-at-home twin's clocks will appear to be sped up enough to account for the difference in proper times experienced by the twins. It is no accident that this speed-up is enough to account for the simultaneity shift described above. The general relativity solution for a static homogeneous gravitational field and the special relativity solution for finite acceleration produce identical results.\nOther calculations have been done for the travelling twin (or for any observer who sometimes accelerates), which do not involve the equivalence principle, and which do not involve any gravitational fields. Such calculations are based only on the special theory, not the general theory, of relativity. One approach calculates surfaces of simultaneity by considering light pulses, in accordance with Hermann Bondi's idea of the k-calculus. A second approach calculates a straightforward but technically complicated integral to determine how the travelling twin measures the elapsed time on the stay-at-home clock. An outline of this second approach is given in a .\nDifference in elapsed time as a result of differences in twins' spacetime paths.\nThe following paragraph shows several things:\nLet clock \"K\" be associated with the \"stay at home twin\".\nLet clock K' be associated with the rocket that makes the trip.\nAt the departure event both clocks are set to 0.\n Phase 1: Rocket (with clock K') embarks with constant proper acceleration \"a\" during a time \"T\"a as measured by clock \"K\" until it reaches some velocity \"V\".\n Phase 2: Rocket keeps coasting at velocity \"V\" during some time \"T\"c according to clock \"K\".\n Phase 3: Rocket fires its engines in the opposite direction of \"K\" during a time \"T\"a according to clock \"K\" until it is at rest with respect to clock \"K\". The constant proper acceleration has the value \u2212\"a\", in other words the rocket is \"decelerating\".\n Phase 4: Rocket keeps firing its engines in the opposite direction of \"K\", during the same time \"T\"a according to clock \"K\", until K' regains the same speed \"V\" with respect to \"K\", but now towards \"K\" (with velocity \u2212\"V\").\n Phase 5: Rocket keeps coasting towards \"K\" at speed \"V\" during the same time \"T\"c according to clock \"K\".\n Phase 6: Rocket again fires its engines in the direction of \"K\", so it decelerates with a constant proper acceleration \"a\" during a time \"T\"a, still according to clock \"K\", until both clocks reunite.\nKnowing that the clock \"K\" remains inertial (stationary), the total accumulated proper time \u0394\"\u03c4\" of clock K' will be given by the integral function of coordinate time \u0394\"t\"\n formula_6\nwhere \"v\"(\"t\") is the \"coordinate velocity\" of clock K' as a function of \"t\" according to clock \"K\", and, e.g. during phase 1, given by\n formula_7\nThis integral can be calculated for the 6 phases:\n Phase 1 formula_8\n Phase 2 formula_9\n Phase 3 formula_8\n Phase 4 formula_8\n Phase 5 formula_9\n Phase 6 formula_8\nwhere \"a\" is the proper acceleration, felt by clock K' during the acceleration phase(s) and where the following relations hold between \"V\", \"a\" and \"T\"a:\n formula_14\n formula_15\nSo the travelling clock K' will show an elapsed time of\n formula_16\nwhich can be expressed as\n formula_17\nwhereas the stationary clock \"K\" shows an elapsed time of\n formula_18\nwhich is, for every possible value of \"a\", \"T\"a, \"T\"c and \"V\", larger than the reading of clock K':\n formula_19\nDifference in elapsed times: how to calculate it from the ship.\nIn the standard proper time formula\n formula_20\n\u0394\"\u03c4\" represents the time of the non-inertial (travelling) observer K' as a function of the elapsed time \u0394\"t\" of the inertial (stay-at-home) observer \"K\" for whom observer K' has velocity \"v\"(\"t\") at time \"t\".\nTo calculate the elapsed time \u0394\"t\" of the inertial observer \"K\" as a function of the elapsed time \u0394\"\u03c4\" of the non-inertial observer K', where only quantities measured by K' are accessible, the following formula can be used:\n formula_21\nwhere \"a(\u03c4)\" is the proper acceleration of the non-inertial observer K' as measured by themself (for instance with an accelerometer) during the whole round-trip. The Cauchy\u2013Schwarz inequality can be used to show that the inequality \u0394\"t\" &gt; \u0394\"\u03c4\" follows from the previous expression:\n formula_22\nUsing the Dirac delta function to model the infinite acceleration phase in the standard case of the traveller having constant speed \"v\" during the outbound and the inbound trip, the formula produces the known result:\n formula_23\nIn the case where the accelerated observer K' departs from \"K\" with zero initial velocity, the general equation reduces to the simpler form:\nformula_24\nwhich, in the \"smooth\" version of the twin paradox where the traveller has constant proper acceleration phases, successively given by \"a\", \u2212\"a\", \u2212\"a\", \"a\", results in\n formula_25\nwhere the convention \"c\" = 1 is used, in accordance with the above expression with acceleration phases \"T\"a \n \u0394\"t\"/4 and inertial (coasting) phases \"T\"c \n 0.\nA rotational version.\nTwins Bob and Alice inhabit a space station in circular orbit around a massive body in space. Bob suits up and exits the station. While Alice remains inside the station, continuing to orbit with it as before, Bob uses a rocket propulsion system to cease orbiting and hover where he was. When the station completes an orbit and returns to Bob, he rejoins Alice. Alice is now younger than Bob. In addition to rotational acceleration, Bob must decelerate to become stationary and then accelerate again to match the orbital speed of the space station.\nNo twin paradox in an absolute frame of reference.\nEinstein's conclusion of an actual difference in registered clock times (or ageing) between reunited parties caused Paul Langevin to posit an actual, albeit experimentally indiscernible, absolute frame of reference:\nIn 1911, Langevin wrote: \"A uniform translation in the aether has no experimental sense. But because of this it should not be concluded, as has sometimes happened prematurely, that the concept of aether must be abandoned, that the aether is non-existent and inaccessible to experiment. Only a uniform velocity relative to it cannot be detected, but any change of velocity ... has an absolute sense.\"\nIn 1913, Henri Poincar\u00e9's posthumous \"Last Essays\" were published and there he had restated his position: \"Today some physicists want to adopt a new convention. It is not that they are constrained to do so; they consider this new convention more convenient; that is all. And those who are not of this opinion can legitimately retain the old one.\"\nIn the relativity of Poincar\u00e9 and Hendrik Lorentz, which assumes an absolute (though experimentally indiscernible) frame of reference, no paradox arises due to the fact that clock slowing (along with length contraction and velocity) is regarded as an actuality, hence the actual time differential between the reunited clocks.\nIn that interpretation, a party at rest with the totality of the cosmos (at rest with the barycenter of the universe, or at rest with a possible ether) would have the maximum rate of time-keeping and have non-contracted length. All the effects of Einstein's special relativity (consistent light-speed measure, as well as symmetrically measured clock-slowing and length-contraction across inertial frames) fall into place.\nThat interpretation of relativity, which John A. Wheeler calls \"ether theory B (length contraction plus time contraction)\", did not gain as much traction as Einstein's, which simply disregarded any deeper reality behind the symmetrical measurements across inertial frames. There is no physical test which distinguishes one interpretation from the other.\nIn 2005, Robert B. Laughlin (Physics Nobel Laureate, Stanford University), wrote about the nature of space: \"It is ironic that Einstein's most creative work, the general theory of relativity, should boil down to conceptualizing space as a medium when his original premise [in special relativity] was that no such medium existed ... The word 'ether' has extremely negative connotations in theoretical physics because of its past association with opposition to relativity. This is unfortunate because, stripped of these connotations, it rather nicely captures the way most physicists actually think about the vacuum. ... Relativity actually says nothing about the existence or nonexistence of matter pervading the universe, only that any such matter must have relativistic symmetry (i.e., as measured).\"\nIn \"Special Relativity\" (1968), A. P. French wrote: \"Note, though, that we are appealing to the reality of A's acceleration, and to the observability of the inertial forces associated with it. Would such effects as the twin paradox (specifically \u2013 the time keeping differential between reunited clocks) exist if the framework of fixed stars and distant galaxies were not there? Most physicists would say no. Our ultimate definition of an inertial frame may indeed be that it is a frame having zero acceleration with respect to the matter of the universe at large.\"\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nThe \"ideal clock\" is a clock whose action depends only on its instantaneous velocity, and is independent of any acceleration of the clock."}
{"id": "31430", "revid": "337066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31430", "title": "Summary of Decameron tales", "text": " \nThis article contains summaries and commentaries of the 100 stories within Giovanni Boccaccio's \"The Decameron\".\nEach story of the \"Decameron\" begins with a short heading explaining the plot of the story. The 1903 translation headings are used in many of these summaries. Commentary on the tale itself follows.\nBefore beginning the story-telling sessions, the ten young Florentines, seven women and three men, referred to as the \"Brigata\", gather at the Basilica di Santa Maria Novella and together decide to escape the Black Death by leaving the city to stay in a villa in the countryside. Each agrees to tell one story each day for ten days. The stories are told in the garden of the first villa that the company stays at, which is located a few miles outside the city.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFirst day.\nUnder the rule of Pampinea, the first day of story-telling is open topic. Although there is no assigned theme of the tales this first day, six deal with one person censuring another and four are satires of the Catholic Church.\nFirst tale (I, 1).\nThis story is told by Panfilo.\nSer Cepparello, commonly known as Ciapelletto, a notoriously wicked man, travels on business to Burgundy, a region he is unknown in, as a favor to Musciatto Franzesi. Once there, he soon falls terminally ill. The two Florentine brothers who were housing him during his stay bring a friar from a nearby convent to hear his confession and give him his last rites. Ciappelletto proceeds to tell the friar lies about his life that make him seem very pure, while pretending to cringe over venial sins. He is completely believed by the friar, who preaches a sermon on his life after he passes away. The townspeople who hear the sermon believe that he was a holy man and revere him as a saint long after Ciapelletto dies.\nThis first tale ridicules the then-current practice of the Roman Catholic Church of canonization by the people. The earliest source of this story is found in chapter twenty-three of Saint Sulpicius Severus's biography of Saint Martin of Tours. The biography dates from around 400 AD.\nSecond tale (I, 2).\nThis story is told by Neifile.\nAbraham, a Jew of Paris, is the friend of Giannotto di Civign\u00ec, who for years has urged him to become a Christian. One day Abraham departs for Rome, telling Giannotto that he wants to see the leaders of the Church \u2013 the pope and the curia \u2013 to decide whether or not he wants to convert. Giannotto, knowing of the debauched and decadent ways of the Roman clergy, fears Abraham will never want to convert after witnessing the corruption of the Church. But when Abraham returns, he converts, concluding that if Christianity can still spread even when its hierarchy is so corrupt, it must be the true word of God.\nIn this caustic anti-Catholic story, the Jewish character converts because he logically concludes that only a religion supported by God could prosper despite the corruption of its leadership. The earliest source of this tale is in Busone da Gubbio's \"L'Avventuroso Siciliano\", written in Italian in 1311.\nThird tale (I, 3).\nThis story is told by Filomena.\nSaladin, a powerful sultan, finds that his treasury is exhausted. Melchizedek, a Jew, has money enough to cover the shortfall, but Saladin believes he is too greedy to lend it fairly. Saladin tries to trick Melchizedek into giving offense (and justifying the seizure of his wealth) by asking him whether Judaism, Christianity, or Islam is the true Word of God. Melchizedek evades the trap by comparing it to the story of a merchant who had a precious ring and three virtuous sons. Having promised the ring\u2014and with it, his estate\u2014to all three, the king had two equally precious copies made and gave one ring to each son. Thus it could not be determined who was heir to the estate. Likewise, it cannot be determined which faith is the truth. Saladin appreciates Melchizedek's wisdom and decides to be honest with him. In the end, Saladin gets his loan and repays it and Melchizedek gets Saladin's respect and gifts of praise for his intelligence.\nUnlike other Medieval and Renaissance authors, Boccaccio treats Jewish people with respect, as this story portrays the main character as wise and in a positive light. Boccaccio may have had contact with Jews while living in Naples as a young man. The oldest source is found in a French work by Stephen of Bourbon called \"The Seven Gifts of the Holy Spirit\". However, a slightly younger (c. 1321) Italian story in Bosone da Gubbio's \"L'avventuroso siciliano\" was Boccaccio's probable source. This tale was especially popular in the Renaissance and can be found in many versions all over Europe. It is also referred to as \"The Tale of the Three Rings\" and \"The Legend of the Three Rings\" and, according to Carlo Ginzburg, was quoted in the heresy trial of the Italian miller Menocchio.\nThe \"Parable of the Rings\" is also found in Lessing's play \"Nathan the Wise\".\nFourth tale (I, 4).\nDioneo, who has acquired the reputation of the most bawdy of the storytellers, narrates this tale.\nA young monk seduces a young woman and is secretly observed by an elder abbot. Realizing he has been seen, he leaves her on pretense of finishing a task. He gives the key to his room to the abbot, who then goes to seduce the girl himself. The monk hides, watches all of this, and uses the knowledge to avoid punishment. The monk and the abbot quickly rush the woman out of the monastery but often bring her back in.\nThe earliest surviving source for this anti-clerical tale is found in \"Cento Novelle Antiche\", an Italian compilation of short stories from the end of the 13th century. Boccaccio could have possibly also taken the tale from a French \"fabliau\", \"L'Evesque qui benit sa maitresse\" (\"The bishop who blesses his mistress\").\nFifth tale (I, 5).\nFiammetta tells this story.\nThe Marquis of Montferrat, on his way to the Crusades, tells King Phillip of France of his happy marriage to the beautiful Marchioness. King Phillip is entranced with the Marquis's description of her and makes an excuse to detour to Montferrat so he can seduce her. He sends a courier ahead to tell the Marchioness that he is arriving soon and would like to be hosted and dine in the estate. The Marchioness devises a plan to keep King Phillip from her. When he arrives, she throws a banquet for King Phillip composed entirely of hens. King Phillip asks whether there are any roosters. The Marchioness replies that there aren't but hens and women are the same everywhere. King Phillip, shocked by her wit and unwillingness, finishes the meal and quickly returns to the Crusade. \nThe story originates from \"One Thousand and One Nights\". The marquis and marchioness at the time of Philip's crusade were William V and Judith of Babenberg.\nSixth tale (I, 6).\nEmilia narrates yet another anti-clerical tale, the fourth of the day so far.\nA well-off man, becoming rather tipsy, rashly says that his wine is \"good enough for Christ himself\". The greedy inquisitor hears this and prosecutes him. After some time for attending to penances imposed upon him, he hears at a mass that \"you shall receive an hundredfold and shall possess eternal life\". He returns to the inquisitor and marks large amounts of \"swill\" being given to the poor. He commiserates with the inquisitor saying that if he receives 100 times as much in the afterlife, he would be drowned. This incenses the inquisitor, but also embarrasses him for his gluttony.\nSome commentators have identified the inquisitor as Pietro dell'Aquila, the inquisitor of Florence in 1345.\nSeventh tale (I, 7).\nFilostrato tells this tale.\nBergamino, an entertainer widely known for his wit and oratory, delicately censures a sudden excess of greed in Messer Cangrande della Scala by telling a story about Primasso (probably Hugh Primas) and the Abbot of Cluny.\nCangrande I della Scala is best known as Dante's benefactor, whom Dante praises in the \"Paradiso\" section of the \"Divine Comedy\", xvii, 68.\nEighth tale (I, 8).\nLauretta, inspired by the theme of the previous tale, narrates this one. \nMesser Ermino de' Grimaldi is one of the richest men in Genoa and one of the stingiest in the world. A jester gifted with great wit and sophistication comes to the city and associates with the wealthy men there. He hears of Grimaldi's miserliness and uses his wit to make Grimaldi see himself as others see him.\nNinth tale (I, 9).\nElissa continues the theme of righteous censure.\nAfter making a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, a Gascon lady is brutally assaulted by bandits on Cyprus. Through her wit, she rouses the first \"King\" of Cyprus out of lethargy and inspires him to take responsibility for the welfare of his realm.\nBoccaccio took this story directly from \"Cento Novelle Antiche\", in which the male character is also the King of Cyprus.\nTenth tale (I, 10).\nPampinea narrates the last tale of the day.\nMaster Alberto da Bologna is an accomplished 70-year-old physician who fell in love with a much younger widow he saw at an entertainment. Making his feelings indirectly obvious, the woman and her friends belittle him. Using his wit, he lures her into saying something that compromises her honor.\nSecond day.\nFilomena reigns during the second day and assigns the topic to the storytellers: Misadventures that suddenly end happily.\nFirst tale (II, 1).\nMartellino pretends to be a paralytic, and makes it appear as if he were cured by being placed upon the body of St. Arrigo. His trick is detected; he is beaten and arrested, and is in peril of hanging, but finally escapes.\nNeifile narrates this tale, which, like I, 1, ridicules the Catholic tradition of discerning the Saints. Although there is no known earlier source for this tale, the part where Martellino's friends are carrying him in on a cot references Mark 2:2 and Luke 5:19.\nSecond tale (II, 2).\nRinaldo d'Asti is robbed, arrives at Castle Guglielmo, and is entertained by a widow lady; his property is restored to him, the robbers caught and hanged, and he returns home safe and sound.\nThis story seems to originate in the \"Panchatantra\", a work originally composed in Sanskrit, and was already 1,500 years old by the time Boccaccio retold it. Filostrato tells this version of the tale.\nThird tale (II, 3).\nThree young men squander their substance and are reduced to poverty. Their nephew, returning home a desperate man, falls in love with a woman disguised as an abbot, whom he discovers to be the daughter of the King of England. She marries him, and he retrieves the losses and reestablishes the fortune of his uncles.\nPampinea narrates this tale of which no earlier version is known.\nFourth tale (II, 4).\nLandolfo Ruffolo is reduced to poverty, turns corsair, is captured by Genoese, is shipwrecked, escapes on a chest full of jewels, and, being cast ashore at Corfu, is hospitably entertained by a woman, and returns home wealthy.\nLauretta narrates.\nFifth tale (II, 5).\nAndreuccio da Perugia comes to Naples to buy horses, meets with three serious adventures in one night, comes safe out of them all, and returns home with a ruby.\nFiammetta tells this story which is actually a combination of two earlier tales. The beginning of the tale is first recorded in about 1228 by Courtois d'Arrass in his \"Boivin de Provins\". The portion of Andreuccio being trapped in the tomb of the archbishop and how he escapes comes from the \"Ephesian Tale\" by Xenophon of Ephesus, which was written in about 150 AD. That portion of the tale is so memorable that it was still being told as a true story in the cities and countryside of Europe in the early 20th century.\nSixth tale (II, 6).\nMadam Beritola loses two sons, is found with two goats on an island, goes thence to Lunigiana, where one of her sons takes service with her master, and lies with his daughter, for which he is put in prison. Sicily rebels against King Charles, the son is recognized by the mother, marries the master's daughter, and, his brother being discovered, is reinstated in great honor.\nEmilia tells this story. It resembles the story of Sir Isumbras, which dates from before 1320 and was very popular in medieval England.\nSeventh tale (II, 7).\nThe Sultan of Babylon sends one of his daughters, Alatiel, overseas to be married to the King of Algarve. By diverse adventures she comes into the hands of nine men in varied places within four years. At last she is restored to her father, whom she quits again in the guise of a virgin to be married to the King of Algarve, as it was at first intended.\nThis scandalous tale is told by Panfilo. There is no agreement on its origin, probably because of the very eclectic nature of the plot, which may have been pieced together from various sources by Boccaccio. Some suggest \"One Thousand and One Nights\" or the \"Ephesian Tale\" may have given some inspiration to the author for this tale, but not enough that either could definitely be called a source.\nEighth tale (II, 8).\nThe Count of Antwerp, laboring under a false accusation, goes into exile. He leaves his two children in different places in England, and takes service in Ireland. Returning to England an unknown man, he finds his son and daughter prosperous. He serves as a groom in the army of the King of France; his innocence is established, and he is restored to his former honors.\nElissa narrates this story, which shares its theme of a woman's vengeance for being spurned with many ancient stories. However, a direct source may be the real-life story of Pierre de La Broce and Lady of Brabant. Dante writes about the soul of the former in \"Purgatorio\", vi. A literary source may have been a Proven\u00e7al romance written in 1318 by Arnaud Vidal de Castelnaudary called \"Guillaume de la Barre\". However, the theme is so common that pinning down one main source is very difficult.\nNinth tale (II, 9).\nBernab\u00f2 of Genoa, deceived by Ambrogiuolo, loses his money and commands his innocent wife to be put to death. She escapes, habits herself as a man, and serves the Sultan. She discovers the deceiver, and brings Bernab\u00f2 to Alexandria, where the deceiver is punished. She then resumes the garb of a woman, and with her husband returns wealthy to Genoa.\nFilomena tells this story, which is best known to English readers through Shakespeare's \"Cymbeline\". The oldest known version of this story is a French romance from the 13th century called \"Roman de la Violette ou de Gerard de Nevers\" by Gilbert de Montreuil.\nTenth tale (II, 10).\nPaganino da Monaco carries off the wife of Messer Ricciardo di Chinzica, who, having learned where she is, goes to Paganino and in a friendly manner asks him to restore her. He consents, provided she be willing. She refuses to go back with her husband. Messer Ricciardo dies, and she marries Paganino.\nIn the last tale of the second day Dioneo begins his pattern of telling the last tale of the day, which he will continue until the end of the \"Decameron\". The moral of the story \u2013 that a young woman should not marry an old man \u2013 is common in late medieval vernacular literature.\nThird day.\nNeifile reigns during the third day. In these stories a person either has painfully acquired something or has lost it and then regained it.\nFirst tale (III, 1).\nMasetto da Lamporecchio feigns to be mute, and obtains a gardener's place at a convent of women, who with one accord make haste to lie with him.\nFilostrato's tale of a man's devices that he employs to enjoy the physical company of a convent of nuns was also in \"Cento Novelle Antiche\" from the 13th century.\nSecond tale (III, 2).\nA groom lies with the wife of King Agilulf, who learns the fact, keeps his own counsel, finds out the groom and shears him. The shorn shears all his fellows and so comes safe out of the scrape.\nPampinea's clever tale originates in either the \"Panchatantra\", a Sanskrit story from the 4th century AD, or the \"Histories\" of Herodotus. However, Boccaccio's version is unique in that the husband in the tale preserves both his honor and that of his wife, and emphasis on \"keeping up appearances\" that is distinct of the Renaissance merchant class, to which Boccaccio belonged.\nThird tale (III, 3).\nA married woman falls in love with a man. Unable to approach him directly, she complains to his friend, a friar, that he is pestering her, and asks him to tell him to stop. In the end, she accuses him of climbing up to her window while her husband is out of town, giving him the hint that he is safe to visit her.\nFilomena narrates this story.\nFourth tale (III, 4).\nDom Felice instructs Friar Puccio how to attain blessedness by doing a penance. Friar Puccio does the penance, and meanwhile Dom Felice has a good time with Friar Puccio's wife.\nPanfilo narrates.\nFifth tale (III, 5).\nZima gives a palfrey to Messer Francesco Vergellesi, who in return suffers him to speak with his wife. She keeps silence, he answers in her stead, and the sequel is in accordance with his answer.\nThis tale is originally found in \"Hitopadesha\", a Sanskrit collection of tales. Boccaccio, though, may have directly taken the tale from \"The Seven Wise Masters\", which, although oriental in origin, was widely circulating in Latin at the time the \"Decameron\" was written. Elissa narrates.\nSixth tale (III, 6).\nRicciardo Minutolo loves the wife of Filippello Fighinolfi, and knowing her to be jealous, makes her believe that his own wife is to meet Filippello at a Turkish bath house on the ensuing day; whereby she is induced to go thither, where, thinking to have been with her husband, she discovers that she has tarried with Ricciardo.\nFiammetta tells this tale, which like the previous one, was taken from \"The Seven Wise Masters\".\nSeventh tale (III, 7).\nTedaldo, being in disfavour with his lady, departs from Florence. He returns after a while in the guise of a pilgrim, speaks with his lady, and makes her sensible of her fault. Her husband, convicted of slaying him, he delivers from peril of death, reconciles him with his brothers, and thereafter discreetly enjoys his lady.\nEmilia narrates this tale, which has no known previous version.\nEighth tale (III, 8).\nFerondo, having taken a certain powder, is interred for dead; is disinterred by the abbot, who enjoys his wife; is put in prison and taught to believe that he is in purgatory; is then resuscitated, and rears as his own a boy begotten by the abbot upon his wife.\nLauretta's tale of the elaborate ruses that an abbot undertakes to enjoy Ferondo's wife was probably taken by Boccaccio from a French fabliau by Jean de Boves called . Boccaccio not only capitalizes on the tale to poke fun at the clerics of his day, but also at the simple-mindedness of some of his countrymen.\nNinth tale (III, 9).\nGillette of Narbonne cures the King of France of a fistula, craves for spouse Bertrand de Roussillon, who marries her against his will, and hies him in despite to Florence, where, as he courts a young woman, Gillette lies with him in her stead, and has two sons by him; for which cause he afterwards takes her into favour and entreats her as his wife.\nNeifile narrates this tale, which was written first by the Sanskrit dramatist and poet K\u0101lid\u0101sa in his \"The Recognition of \u015aakuntal\u0101\". The time of K\u0101lid\u0101sa's life is uncertain, but some scholars think that he lived in the 5th century. Boccaccio may have taken the tale from an 11th-century French version. This tale is the basis for Shakespeare's play \"All's Well That Ends Well\".\nTenth tale (III, 10).\nAlibech, a non-Christian girl of Gafsa, turns hermit, and is taught by Rustico, a monk, how the Devil is put in hell. She is afterwards conveyed thence, and becomes the wife of Neerbale.\nDioneo narrates what is by far the most obscene and bawdy tale in the \"Decameron\". Alibech, a naive young woman, wanders into the desert in an attempt to become closer to God. She happens upon the monk Rustico, and he deflowers her under the pretense of teaching her how to better please God. Alibech becomes more enthusiastic about \"putting the Devil back into Hell\" (sexual intercourse) than Rustico, almost to the point of his ruin. Meanwhile, her family and family home are incinerated, leaving her the only heir. Neerbale kidnaps her, much to Rustico's relief and Alibech's displeasure, and Alibech is made to marry Neerbale. The night before the wedding, she is questioned by other women as to how Alibech served God in the desert, and upon explaining to her ladies how the Devil is put back into Hell, is informed that Neerbale will surely know how to help her serve God once more.\nBecause of its \"graphic\" nature, this tale has at times been translated incompletely, as in John Payne's translation, where Alibech's sexual awakening is left untranslated and is accompanied with this footnote: \"The translators regret that the disuse into which magic has fallen, makes it impossible to render the technicalities of that mysterious art into tolerable English; they have therefore found it necessary to insert several passages in the original Italian.\" No known earlier versions of it exist.\nFourth day.\nBoccaccio begins this day with a defense of his work as it is thus far completed. Although he says that portions of the earlier days were circulating among the literate citizens of Tuscany while the work was in progress, this is doubtful. Instead, Boccaccio is probably just shooting down potential detractors. The reader must remember that vernacular fictional prose was not a respected genre in 14th century Italy and some of the criticisms Boccaccio combats in the introduction to the fourth day were common attitudes towards the genre. Others, however, were specific to the \"Decameron\" itself.\nOne criticism of the latter type was that it was not healthy for a man of Boccaccio's age \u2013 approximately 38 \u2013 to associate with young ladies, to whom the work is supposedly written. To defend against this criticism, Boccaccio tells a story explaining how natural it is for a man to enjoy a woman's company. In this story, Filipo Balducci is a hermit living with his son on Mount Asinaio after the death of his wife and travels occasionally to Florence for supplies. One day his son \u2013 now eighteen and having never before left the mountain \u2013 accompanies him because Filipo is too infirm to make the journey alone. While there the son becomes fascinated with women, even though he had never seen one before and Filipo regrets ever bringing his son to Florence.\nThis is commonly referred to as the 101st story of the \"Decameron\". The story originates in the \"Ramayana\", a Sanskrit epic from the 4th century BCE. The tale was quite common during the medieval era, appearing in \"Barlaam and Josaphat\" (written in the 8th century), an exemplum of Jacques de Vitry (13th century) and \"Cento Novelle Antiche\" (also 13th century), \"The Seven Wise Masters\", and Italian collection of fables called \"Fiore di virt\u00f9\" (14th century), Odo of Shirton's \"De heremita iuvene\" (12th century), and a French fabliau (13th century). The last two are the most probable sources for Boccaccio because in them the father refers to the women as \"geese\", whereas in the earlier versions he calls them \"demons\" who tempt the souls of men.\nFilostrato reigns during the fourth day, in which the storytellers tell tales of lovers whose relationship ends in disaster. This is the first day a male storyteller reigns.\nFirst tale (IV, 1).\nTancredi, Prince of Salerno and father of Ghismonda, slays his daughter's lover, Guiscardo, and sends her his heart in a golden cup: Ghismonda, the daughter, pours upon it a poisonous distillation, which she drinks and dies.\nFiammetta narrates this tale, whose earliest source is a French manuscript written by a man named Thomas. However, it is referred to in the early 12th century of Tristan and Iseult.\nSecond tale (IV, 2).\nFriar Alberto deceives a woman into believing that the Archangel Gabriel is in love with her. As an excuse to sleep with her, Friar Alberto tells her that Gabriel can enter his body. Afterward, for fear of her kinsmen, he flings himself out of her window and finds shelter in the house of a poor man. The next day the poor man leads him in the guise of a wild man into the piazza, where, being recognized, he is apprehended by his fellow friars and imprisoned.\nPampinea tells the second tale of the day, which is a very ancient tale. Supposedly it comes from an episode in the life of Alexander the Great. Other notable previous recordings of it include Josephus's \"Jewish Antiquities\", the \"Pantschantantra\", and \"One Thousand and One Arabian Nights\".\nThird tale (IV, 3).\nThree young men love three sisters, and flee with them to Crete. The eldest of the sisters slays her lover for jealousy. The second saves the life of the first by yielding herself to the Duke of Crete. Her lover slays her, and makes off with the first: the third sister and her lover are charged with the murder, are arrested and confess the crime. They escape death by bribing the guards, flee destitute to Rhodes, and die in destitution there.\nLauretta narrates this story.\nFourth tale (IV, 4).\nGerbino, in breach of the plighted faith of his grandfather, King William, attacks a ship of the King of Tunis to rescue the latter's daughter. She is killed by those aboard the ship, Gerbino slays them, and afterward he is beheaded.\nThere is no known source for Elissa's tale.\nFifth tale (IV, 5).\nLisabetta's brothers slay her lover. He appears to her in a dream and shows her where he is buried. She disinters the head and sets it in a pot of basil, whereon she daily weeps a great while. Her brothers take the pot from her and she dies shortly after.\nFilomena tells this story, one of the most famous in the \"Decameron\", and the basis of John Keats' narrative poem \"Isabella, or the Pot of Basil\".\nSixth tale (IV, 6).\nAndreuola loves Gabriotto: she tells him a dream that she has had; he tells her a dream of his own, and dies suddenly in her arms. While she and her maidservant are carrying his corpse to his house, they are taken by the Signory. She tells how the matter stands, is threatened with violence by the \"podest\u00e0\", but will not brook it. Her father hears how she is bested; and, her innocence being established, causes her to be set at large; but she, being minded to tarry no longer in the world, becomes a nun.\nPanfilo, the first male storyteller of the day to narrate, tells this tale.\nSeventh tale (IV, 7).\nSimona loves Pasquino; they are together in a garden; Pasquino rubs a leaf of sage against his teeth, and dies; Simona is arrested, and, with intent to show the judge how Pasquino died, rubs one of the leaves of the same plant against her teeth, and likewise dies.\nEmilia narrates.\nEighth tale (IV, 8).\nGirolamo loves Salvestra: yielding to his mother's prayers he goes to Paris; he returns to find Salvestra married; he enters her house by stealth, lays himself by her side, and dies; he is borne to the church, where Salvestra lays herself by his side, and dies.\nNeifile narrates.\nNinth tale (IV, 9).\nSieur Guillaume de Roussillon slays his wife's lover, Sieur Guillaume de Cabestaing, and gives her his heart to eat. When she finds out, she throws herself from a high window, dies, and is buried with her lover.\nFilostrato tells this story, which has so many similarities with tale IV, 1 that both tales could have shared sources.\nTenth tale (IV, 10).\nThe wife of a leech, deeming her lover, who has taken an opiate, to be dead, puts him in a chest, which, with him therein, two usurers carry off to their house. He comes to himself, and is taken for a thief; but, the lady's maid giving the Signory to understand that she had put him in the chest which the usurers stole, he escapes the gallows, and the usurers are fined for the theft of the chest.\nDioneo, whose stories are exempt from being governed by the theme of each day, tells this tale of Buddhist origin.\nFifth day.\nDuring the fifth day Fiammetta, whose name means small flame, sets the theme of tales where lovers pass through disasters before having their love end in good fortune.\nFirst tale (V, 1).\nCimon, by loving, waxes wise, wins his wife Iphigenia by capture on the high seas, and is imprisoned at Rhodes. He is freed by Lysimachus; and the two capture Cassandra and recapture Iphigenia in the hour of their marriage. They flee with their ladies to Crete, and having there married them, are brought back to their homes.\nLike the tale in the introduction to the fourth day, Panfilo's tale seems to derive from the story of \"Barlaam and Josaphat\".\nSecond tale (V, 2).\nGostanza loves Martuccio Gomito and after hearing that he is dead, gives way to despair, and hides her alone aboard a boat, which is wafted by the wind to Susa. She finds him alive in Tunis, and makes herself known to him. Having gained high place in the king's favour by way of his council, he marries Gostanza and returns with her to Lipari.\nEmilia narrates this tale, one part of which (the motif of using extra fine bow strings) supposedly is based on a real event, according to a chronicle by Giovanni Villani. In Villani's story's Emperor Kassan of the Tartars thus defeated the Sultan of Egypt in 1299.\nThird tale (V, 3).\nPietro Boccamazza runs away with Agnolella and encounters a gang of robbers. The girl takes refuge in the woods and is guided to a castle. Pietro is taken but escapes from the robbers. After some adventures, he arrives at the castle and marries Agnolella; they return to Rome. \nElissa tells this tale.\nFourth tale (V, 4).\nRicciardo Manardi is found by Messer Lizio da Valbona after an affair with his daughter, whom he marries, and remains at peace with her father.\nFilostrato narrates this tale, which some claim bears a resemblance to \"Lai du Laustic\" by the famed late 12th-century poet Marie de France. However, the resemblance is not strong and the story may be of either Boccaccio's invention or may come from oral tradition.\nFifth tale (V, 5).\nGuidotto da Cremona dies leaving a girl to Giacomino da Pavia. She has two lovers in Faenza, Giannole di Severino and Minghino di Mingole, who fight about her. She is discovered to be Giannole's sister, and is given to Minghino to marry.\nNeifile tells this story which has no previous literary recording.\nSixth tale (V, 6).\nGianni di Procida, being found with a damsel that he loves, and who had been given to King Frederick, is bound with her to a stake, so to be burned. He is recognized by Ruggieri dell'Oria, is freed, and marries her.\nPampinea narrates this tale.\nSeventh tale (V, 7).\nTeodoro is sold to Messer Amerigo as a slave when still a child. He is christened and brought up together with Violente, the daughter of his master. The two fall in love and Violente eventually bears a boy. Threatened with death by her outraged father she names the father who is sentenced to the gallows. Amerigo orders his daughter to choose between knife or poison and the child to be killed. Traveling Armenian dignitaries recognize the condemned by a strawberry shaped birth mark. Thus his life is saved as well as Violente's in the last minute. The couple get the blessing of their father, marry and live a happy life until old age.\nLauretta narrates.\nEighth tale (V, 8).\nIn his love for a young lady of the Traversari family, Nastagio degli Onesti squanders his wealth without being loved in return. He is entreated by his friends to leave the city, and goes away to Chiassi, where he sees a female ghost cursed to be hunted down and killed by a horseman and devoured by a pack of hounds every week. He finds out that the cursed horseman was in a similar situation to his own, and committed suicide while the woman died afterwards unrepentant for her role in his death. Nastagio then invites his kinfolk and the lady he loves to a banquet at this same place, so the ghost woman is torn to pieces before the eyes of his beloved, who, fearing a similar fate, accepts Nastagio as her husband.\nFilomena's tale may originate from the early 13th century \"Chronicle of Helinandus\". However, the tale was a widespread one and Boccaccio could have taken it from any number of sources or even oral tradition.\nNinth tale (V, 9).\nFederigo degli Alberighi, who loves but is not loved in return, spends all the money he has in courtship and is left with only a falcon, which, since he has nothing else to give her, he offers to his lady to eat when she visits his home; then she, learning of this, changes her mind, takes him for her husband, and makes him rich.\nFiammetta's tale (she is the speaker in this story, contrary to what a couple of incorrect sources may say) is also told about the legendary Hatim Tai, who lived in the 6th century and sacrificed his favorite horse to provide a meal for the ambassador of the Greek Emperor. This earliest version of the tale is of Persian origin.\nTenth tale (V, 10).\nPietro di Vinciolo goes from home to eat, and his wife brings a boy into the house to bear her company. Pietro returns, and she hides her lover under a hen-coop. Pietro explains that in the house of Ercolano, with whom he was to have supped, there was discovered a young man bestowed there by Ercolano's wife. The lady censures Ercolano's wife, but unluckily an ass treads on the fingers of the boy that is hidden under the hen-coop, so that he cries out in pain. Pietro runs to the place, sees him, and apprehends the trick played on him by his wife, which nevertheless he finally condones, because he is not himself free from blame.\nAs is custom among the ten storytellers, Dioneo tells the last and most bawdy tale of the day. This story is taken from Lucius Apuleius's 2nd-century \"The Golden Ass\".\nSixth day.\nDuring the sixth day of storytelling, Elissa is queen of the \"brigata\" and chooses for the theme stories in which a character avoids attack or embarrassment through a clever remark.\nMany stories in the sixth day do not have previous versions. Boccaccio may have invented many of them himself. He certainly was clever enough to have created the situations and the retorts.\nFirst tale (VI, 1).\nA knight offers to carry Madonna Oretta on horseback and tell her a story, but he tells it so badly that she begs him to let her dismount.\nFilomena narrates this tale, which many see as revealing Boccaccio's opinion of what makes a good or bad storyteller, just as portions of \"Hamlet\" and \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" contain Shakespeare's opinion of what makes a good or bad actor.\nSecond tale (VI, 2).\nCisti, a baker, by an apt speech gives Messer Geri Spina to know that he has by inadvertence asked that of him which he should not.\nPampinea narrates.\nThird tale (VI, 3).\nMonna Nonna de' Pulci by a ready retort silences the scarce seemly jesting of the Bishop of Florence.\nLauretta narrates.\nFourth tale (VI, 4).\nChichibio, cook to Currado Gianfigliazzi, owes his safety to a ready answer, whereby he converts Currado's wrath into laughter, and evades the evil fate with which Currado had threatened him.\nNeifile narrates.\nFifth tale (VI, 5).\nMesser Forese da Rabatta, a knowledgeable jurist, and Master Giotto, a painter, make fun of each other's poor appearance while returning from Mugello.\nPanfilo narrates this tale.\nSixth tale (VI, 6).\nMichele Scalza proves to certain young men that the Baronci are the best gentlemen in the world and the Maremma, and wins a supper.\nFiammetta narrates.\nSeventh tale (VI, 7).\nMadonna Filippa, being found by her husband with her lover, is cited before the court under a law that makes no distinction between infidelity and prostitution, punishing both by death by burning. During examination, she says that she has never denied her husband's sexual advances, which he confirms. She then asks, since he has gotten as much of her as he desires, what she should do with the surplus. This amuses the court, who acquit her and change the law to distinguish between adultery and prostitution.\nFilostrato narrates this tale.\nEighth tale (VI, 8).\nFresco admonishes his niece not to look at herself in the glass, if it is, as she says, grievous to her to see nasty folk.\nEmilia narrates. Admonitions against the sin of vanity were common in the medieval era.\nNinth tale (VI, 9).\nGuido Cavalcanti by a quip neatly rebukes certain Florentine gentlemen who had taken advantage of him.\nElissa narrates.\nTenth tale (VI, 10).\nFriar Cipolla promises to show certain country-folk a feather of the Angel Gabriel, in lieu of which he finds coals, which he claims are those with which Saint Lawrence was roasted.\nDioneo narrates this story which mocks the worship of relics. The story originates in the Sanskrit collection of stories called \"Canthamanchari\". This story\u2014a classic from the collection\u2014takes place in Certaldo, Boccaccio's hometown (and the location where he would later die). Friar Cipolla's name means \"Brother Onion,\" and Certaldo was famous in that era for its onions. In the story one can sense a certain love on Boccaccio's part for the people of Certaldo, even while he is mocking them.\nSeventh day.\nDuring the seventh day Dioneo serves as king of the \"brigata\" and sets the theme for the stories: tales in which wives play tricks on their husbands.\nFirst tale (VII, 1).\nGianni Lotteringhi hears a knocking at his door at night: he awakens his wife, who persuades him that it is a werewolf, which they fall to exorcising with a prayer; whereupon the knocking ceases.\nEmilia tells the first tale of the day. In it Boccaccio states that he heard it from an old woman who claimed it was a true story and heard it as a child. Although we will never know if Boccaccio really did hear the story from an old woman or not (it is possible), the story is certainly not true. It resembles an earlier French \"fabliau\" by Pierre Anfons called \"Le revenant\". Also, the English description of the creature as a \"werewolf\" is improper. The Italian word, \"\", describes a supernatural cat monkey creature or quite simply a ghost.\nSecond tale (VII, 2).\nHer husband returning home, Peronella hides her lover in a barrel; which, being sold by her husband, she claims she had already sold to someone currently examining it from the inside to see if it is sound. The lover jumps out, and explains that the barrel is not clean enough and that it must be cleaned properly for the purchase to take place. The husband thus cleans it, his head inside the barrel; the wife too, sticks her head in there, instructing. Meanwhile the lover has his way with the wife from behind, and afterwards has the husband carry the barrel to his house.\nFilostrato narrates this tale, which Boccaccio certainly took from Apuleius's \"The Golden Ass\", the same source as tale V, 10.\nThird tale (VII, 3).\nFriar Rinaldo lies with his godchild's mother: her husband finds him in the room with her; and they make him believe that he was curing his godson of worms by a charm.\nElissa tells this tale, which has so many similar versions in French, Italian, and Latin, that it is impossible to identify one as a potential source for this one. The relationship between a child's godparent and biological parent was considered so sacred at the time that intercourse between them was considered incest. This belief is ridiculed by Boccaccio in a later tale (VII, 10).\nFourth tale (VII, 4).\nTofano one night locks his wife out of the house. Finding that she cannot convince him to let her in, she pretends to throw herself into a well, throwing a large stone inside. Tofano comes out of the house, and runs to the spot, and she goes into the house, locks him out, and hurls abuse at him from within.\nLauretta is the narrator of this very old tale. The earliest form of it is found in the Sanskrit \"\u015aukasaptati\" (\"The Parrot's Seventy Tales\"), which was compiled in the 6th century AD. A later version from the 11th century is found in \"Disciplina Clericalis\", which was written in Latin by Petrus Alphonsi, a Jewish convert to Christianity. The tale was very popular and appears in many vernacular languages of the era.\nFifth tale (VII, 5).\nA jealous husband disguises himself as a priest, and hears his own wife's confession: she tells him that she loves a priest, who comes to her every night. The husband posts himself at the door to watch for the priest, and meanwhile the lady brings her lover in by the roof, and tarries with him.\nFiammetta's tale most likely originates from a French fabliau or a possibly Proven\u00e7al romance, both of which were recorded not too long before the \"Decameron\" was written.\nSixth tale (VII, 6).\nMadonna Isabella has with her Leonetto, her accepted lover, when she is surprised by Messer Lambertuccio, by whom she is beloved: her husband coming home about the same time, she sends Messer Lambertuccio forth of the house drawn sword in hand, and the husband afterwards escorts Leonetto home.\nPampinea narrates this version of a common medieval tale which originates from the \"Hitopadesha\" of India. Later versions pass the tale into Persian, French, Latin (in \"The Seven Wise Masters\"), and Hebrew.\nSeventh tale (VII, 7).\nLodovico tells Madonna Beatrice the love that he has for her. She sends Egano, her husband, into a garden disguised as herself, and lies with Lodovico. Afterwards, being risen, Lodovico goes to the garden and cudgels Egano.\nFilomena's humorous tale probably derives from an earlier French fabliau.\nEighth tale (VII, 8).\nA husband grows jealous of his wife, and discovers that she has warning of her lover's approach by a piece of pack-thread, which she ties to her great toe at nights. While he is pursuing her lover, she puts another woman in bed in her place. The husband, finding her there, beats her, and cuts off her hair. He then goes and calls his wife's brothers, who, holding his accusation to be false, subject him to a torrent of abuse.\nNeifile tells this tale. It comes originally from the \"Pantschatantra\" and later forms part of other tale collections in Sanskrit, Arabic, French, and Persian. Boccaccio probably used a French version of the tale.\nNinth tale (VII, 9).\nLydia, wife of Nicostratus, loves Pyrrhus, who to assure himself thereof, asks three things of her, all of which she does, and therewithal enjoys him in presence of Nicostratus, and makes Nicostratus believe that what he saw was not real.\nPanfilo narrates. Boccaccio combined two earlier folk tales into one to create this story. The test of fidelity is previously recorded in French (a \"fabliau\") and Latin (\"Lidia\", an elegiac comedy), but comes originally from India or Persia. The story of the pear tree, best known to English-speaking readers from \"The Canterbury Tales\", also originates from Persia in the \"Bahar-Danush\", in which the husband climbs a date tree instead of a pear tree. The story could have arrived in Europe through the \"One Thousand and One Nights\", or perhaps the version in book VI of the \"Masnavi\" by Rumi.\nTenth tale (VII, 10).\nTwo Sienese men love a lady, one of them being her child's godfather: the godfather dies, having promised his comrade to return to him from the other world; which he does, and tells him what sort of life is led there.\nAs usual, Dioneo narrates the last tale of the day. See the commentary for VII, 3 for information about the relation between a child's parent and godparent.\nEighth day.\nLauretta reigns during the eighth day of storytelling. During this day the members of the group tell stories of tricks women play on men or that men play on women.\nFirst tale (VIII, 1).\nGulfardo borrows money from Guasparruolo, which he has agreed to give Guasparruolo's wife, that he may lie with her. He gives the money to her, and in her presence tells Guasparruolo that he has done so, and she acknowledges that it is true.\nNeifile narrates. This tale (and the next one) comes from a 13th-century French fabliau by Eustache d'Amiens. English speakers know it best from Chaucer's \"The Shipman's Tale\". Chaucer borrowed from the same fabliau as Boccaccio did.\nSecond tale (VIII, 2).\nThe priest of Varlungo lies with Monna Belcolore: he leaves with her his cloak by way of pledge, and receives from her a mortar. He returns the mortar, and demands of her the cloak that he had left in pledge, which the good lady returns him with a gibe.\nPanfilo tells this story, which can be considered a variation of VIII, 1.\nThird tale (VIII, 3).\nCalandrino, Bruno and Buffalmacco go in quest of the heliotrope (bloodstone) beside the Mugnone. Thinking to have found it, Calandrino gets him home laden with stones. His wife chides him: whereat he waxes wroth, beats her, and tells his comrades what they know better than he.\nElissa narrates this tale, the first in which Bruno and Buffalmacco appear. The two were early Renaissance Italian painters. However, both are known far better for their love of practical jokes than for their artistic work. Boccaccio probably invented this tale himself, though, and used well known jokers as characters.\nFourth tale (VIII, 4).\nThe rector of Fiesole loves a widow lady, by whom he is not loved and, in attempting to lie with her, is tricked by the lady to have sex with her maid, with whom the lady's brothers cause him to be found by his Bishop.\nEmilia's tale originates from the fabliau \"Le Prestre et Alison\" by Guillaume Le Normand.\nFifth tale (VIII, 5).\nThree young men pull down the breeches of a judge from the Marches, while he is administering justice on the bench.\nFilostrato narrates.\nSixth tale (VIII, 6).\nBruno and Buffalmacco steal a pig from Calandrino, and induce him to deduce its recovery by means of pills of ginger and Vernaccia wine. Of the said pills they give him two, one after the other, made of dog-ginger compounded with aloes; and it then appearing as if he had had the pig himself, they constrain him to buy them off, if he would not have them tell his wife.\nFilomena narrates. Just like Bruno and Buffalmacco, Calandrino was also in reality a 14th-century Italian Renaissance painter. However, Calandrino was known as a simpleton by his contemporaries. It is possible that this tale may be true and Boccaccio recorded it first. The test that Bruno and Buffalmacco submit Calandrino to was really a medieval lie detector test and the tale is consistent with what we know about the characters of the three painters.\nSeventh tale (VIII, 7).\nA scholar loves a widow lady, who, being enamoured of another, causes him to spend a winter's night awaiting her in the snow. He afterwards by a stratagem causes her to stand for a whole day in July, naked upon a tower, exposed to the flies, the gadflies, and the sun.\nPampinea tells this story of revenge over spurned love, which has many common analogues in many languages in antiquity, the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, and early modern periods.\nEighth tale (VIII, 8).\nTwo men keep with one another: the one lies with the other's wife: the other, being aware of it, manages with the aid of his wife to have the one locked in a chest, upon which he then lies with the wife of him that is locked therein.\nFiammetta narrates this tale. Like many of the eighth day it has a theme in common with many tales from the ancient and medieval era and it is not possible to point to one source that served as Boccaccio's inspiration.\nNinth tale (VIII, 9).\nBruno and Buffalmacco prevail upon Master Simone, a physician, to betake him by night to a certain place, there to be enrolled in a company that go the course. Buffalmacco throws him into a foul ditch, and there they leave him.\nLauretta narrates another tale about Bruno and Buffalmacco and their practical jokes. This story is probably just a vehicle for Boccaccio's ability to coin word play, just as tale VI, 10 did.\nTenth tale (VIII, 10).\nA Sicilian woman cunningly conveys from a merchant that which he has brought to Palermo; he, making a show of being come back with far greater store of goods than before, borrows money of her, and leaves her in lieu thereof water and tow.\nThe story that Dioneo tells is found in Alphonsus's \"Disciplina Clericalis\" and the \"Gesta Romanorum\", both of which are written in Latin.\nNinth day.\nEmilia is queen of the brigata for the ninth day. For the second time there is no prescribed theme for the stories of the day (the only other time was during the first day).\nFirst tale (IX, 1).\nMadonna Francesca, having two lovers, the one Rinuccio, the other Alessandro, by name, and loving neither of them, induces the one to simulate a corpse in a tomb, and the other to enter the tomb to fetch him out: whereby, neither satisfying her demands, she artfully rids herself of both.\nFilomena narrates.\nSecond tale (IX, 2).\nAn abbess rises in haste and in the dark, with intent to surprise an accused nun in bed with her lover: thinking to put on her veil, she puts on instead the breeches of a priest that she has with her. The nun, after pointing out her abbess's head covering, is acquitted, and thenceforth finds it easier to meet with her lover.\nElissa is the narrator of this tale which was either taken from a fabliau by Jean de Cond\u00e9 written between 1313 and 1337, or from a story about Saint Jerome in \"The Golden Legend\", written about 1260. The former was the more likely source for Boccaccio.\nThird tale (IX, 3).\nMaster Simone, at the insistence of Bruno and Buffalmacco and Nello, makes Calandrino believe that he is pregnant. Calandrino, accordingly, gives them capons and money for medicines, and is cured without being delivered.\nFilostrato narrates this humorous story.\nFourth tale (IX, 4).\nCecco, son of Messer Fortarrigo, loses his all at play at Buonconvento, besides the money of Cecco, son of Messer Angiulieri; whom, running after him in his shirt and crying out that he has robbed him, he causes to be taken by peasants: he then puts on his clothes, mounts his palfrey, and leaves him to follow in his shirt.\nNeifile is the narrator of this tale.\nFifth tale (IX, 5).\nCalandrino falls in love with Niccolosa, the wife of the master of the house. Bruno gives him a scroll, averring that, if he touches her with it, she will do anything he says. They are discovered together by his wife, Tessa, who proceeds to beat and scratch him. Bruno and Buffalmacco, who told Tessa of the affair to begin with, laugh at Calandrino's misfortune.\nFiammetta tells this story.\nSixth tale (IX, 6).\nTwo young men lodge at an inn, of whom the one lies with the host's daughter, his wife accidentally lying with the other. He that lay with the daughter afterwards gets into her father's bed and tells him all, taking him to be his comrade. They exchange words: whereupon the good woman, apprehending the circumstances, gets her to bed with her daughter, and by divers apt words re-establishes perfect accord.\nPanfilo's tale comes from Jean Bodel's fabliau \"Gombert et les deus Clers\", a story also used by Chaucer for \"The Reeve's Tale\".\nSeventh tale (IX, 7).\nTalano di Molese dreams that a wolf tears and rends all the neck and face of his wife: he gives her warning thereof, which she heeds not, and the dream comes true.\nPampinea narrates this tale, for which no known earlier source exists.\nEighth tale (IX, 8).\nBiondello and Ciacco both live a wealthier life than they can afford, which makes them rivals. Biondello tells Ciacco the wrong location of a breakfast: for which prank Ciacco is cunningly avenged on Biondello, causing him to be shamefully beaten by Filippo Argenti. They finally come to a truce.\nLauretta acts as the narrator of this novella.\nNinth tale (IX, 9).\nTwo young men ask counsel of Solomon; the one, how he is to make himself beloved, the other, how he is to reduce an unruly wife to order. The King bids the one to love, and the other to go to the Bridge of Geese. The one bid to love finds true love in return. The other observes a mule train crossing the bridge and sees that by beating a stubborn mule, the herder persuades it to cross the bridge. Upon returning home, he employs the same tactics on his wife; beating her senseless when she refuses to make what he wants for dinner. He wakes the next day to a hot breakfast and returns home that evening to his favorite meal. It appears he has cured his wife of her stubbornness.\nEmilia narrates this tale, which probably originated in Asia.\nTenth tale (IX, 10).\nDom Gianni at the instance of his gossip Pietro uses an enchantment to transform Pietro's wife Gemmata into a mare; but, when he comes to attach the tail, Gossip Pietro, by saying that he will have none of the tail, makes the enchantment of no effect.\nDioneo's bawdy story derives from a French fabliau, \"De la demoiselle qui vouloit voler en l'air.\"\nTenth day.\nPanfilo is the king of the last day of storytelling and he orders the company to tell stories about deeds of munificence. These tales seem to escalate in their degrees of munificence until the end, where the day (and the entire \"Decameron\") reaches an apex in the story of patient Griselda.\nFirst tale (X, 1).\nA knight in the service of the King of Spain deems himself ill requited. Wherefore the King, by most cogent proof, shows him that the blame rests not with him, but with the knight's own evil fortune; after which, he bestows upon him a noble gift.\nNeifile's story is one of the most widely diffused ones in the entire collection. Its origins come from two different stories. The first part (the comparison of the king to a mule) comes from Busone de'Raffaelli da Gubbio's \"Fortunatus Siculus,\" written about 1333 in Italian. The second part (concerning the caskets, known to English speakers from Shakespeare's \"The Merchant of Venice\") originates from about 800 AD from Joannes Damascensus's account of Barlaam and Josaphat and was written in Greek. Boccaccio most likely was inspired, though, by the \"Gesta Romanorum\".\nSecond tale (X, 2).\nGhino di Tacco captures the Abbot of Cluny, cures him of a disorder of the stomach, and releases him. The abbot, on his return to the court of Rome, reconciles Ghino with Pope Boniface, and makes him prior of the Hospital.\nElissa narrates. Ghino di Tacco is the Italian equivalent of the English Robin Hood, with the difference that di Tacco was a real person whose deeds as a chief of a band of robbers passed into legend. He lived in the latter half of the 13th century. Boccaccio's tale, though, is one of many legends that grew up around him.\nThird tale (X, 3).\nNathan, an elderly rich man of Cathay, is noted for his exceeding generosity towards the guests of his house on the road leading out of the capital. Mithridanes, a wealthy young man living not far from Nathan, attempts to emulate him, but is frustrated and resolves to kill him. Falling in with Nathan unawares, Nathan advises Mithridanes how to compass his end. Following Nathan's advice, he finds the older gentleman in a copse, and recognizing him, is shame-stricken, and becomes his friend.\nFilostrato tells this tale. He attributes it to \"various Genoese\", but this may be seen as a reluctance to credit Marco Polo (as a Venetian an enemy of Florence and greatly disdained by Boccaccio personally); although no specific tale resembling this one appears in Polo's writings, his reports of Kublai Khan's generosity are likely the inspiration for the tale.\nFourth tale (X, 4).\nMesser Gentile de' Carisendi, from Modena, disinters a lady that he loves, who has been buried for dead. She, being reanimated, gives birth to a male child; and Messer Gentile restores her, with her son, to Niccoluccio Caccianimico, her husband.\nLauretta gives this story, for which there is no clear surviving source. The story is a bit similar to the Florentine legend of , set in the last decade of the 14th century, but published no earlier than at the turn of the 16th century.\nFifth tale (X, 5).\nMesser Ansaldo is in love with Madonna Dianora, a married woman, and often sends her messages of his love. She does not return his affections, and in an attempt to put him off says that she will only be his if he can prove his love by providing for her a garden as fair in January as it is in May. Messer Ansaldo hires for a great sum a necromancer, and thereby gives her the garden. Madonna Dianora tells her husband of her promise, and he says that, while he would prefer that she remain faithful to him if possible, she must keep her word to Messer Ansaldo. When Messer Ansaldo learns of this he releases her from her promise and she returns to her husband. From then on Messer Ansaldo felt only honorable affection for Madonna Dianora. The necromancer is impressed by this and refuses to take any payment from Messer Ansaldo.\nEmilia narrates. This tale is found in later manuscripts of the \"\u015aukasaptati\". It is found in several story collections from Asia and in many languages.\nSixth tale (X, 6).\nCharles I \"the Old\", King of Naples, falls in love with a young noble maiden shortly after conquering his kingdom. Soon afterward, he grows ashamed of his folly and bestows her and her sister honourably in marriage.\nFiammetta narrates.\nSeventh tale (X, 7).\nKing Pedro, being apprised of the fervent love borne him by Lisa Puccini, who thereof is sick, comforts her, and forthwith gives her in marriage to a young gentleman, and having kissed her on the brow, professes himself her knight ever after.\nPampinea tells this tale. No earlier versions are known, although there may have been a folk tale based on the adventures of Macalda di Scaletta with King Pedro.\nEighth tale (X, 8).\nSophronia, albeit she deems herself wife to Gisippus, is wife to Titus Quintius Fulvus, and goes with him to Rome, where Gisippus arrives in indigence, and deeming himself scorned by Titus, to compass his own death, avers that he has slain a man. Titus recognizes him, and to save his life, alleges that 'twas he that slew the man: whereof he that did the deed being witness, he discovers himself as the murderer. Whereby it comes to pass that they are all three liberated by Octavianus; and Titus gives Gisippus his sister to wife, and shares with him all his substance.\nFilomena narrates this story, which Boccaccio may have taken from Alphonsus's \"Disciplina clericalis.\" However, its ultimate source is from the East, although there are disputes as to exactly where or when.\nNinth tale (X, 9).\nSaladin, the Sultan, in guise of a merchant, is honourably entreated by Messer Torello. The Crusade ensuing, Messer Torello appoints a date, after which his wife may marry again: he is taken prisoner by Saladin, and by training hawks comes under Saladin's notice. Saladin recognizes him, makes himself known to him, and entreats him with all honor. Messer Torello falls sick, and by magic arts is transported in a single night to Pavia, where his wife's second marriage is then to be solemnized, and being present thereat, is recognized by her, and returns with her to his house.\nPanfilo is the narrator of this tale.\nTenth tale (X, 10).\nThe Marquis of Saluzzo, Gualtieri, overborne by the entreaties of his vassals, consents to take a wife, but, being minded to please himself in the choice of her, takes a husbandman's daughter, Griselda. He has two children by her, both of whom he makes her believe that he has put to death. Afterward, feigning to be tired of her, and to have taken another wife, he turns her out of doors in her shift, and brings his daughter into the house in guise of his bride; but, finding her patient under it all, he brings her home again, and shows her children, now grown up, and honours her, and causes her to be honoured, as Marchioness.\nDioneo tells the final (and possibly most retold) story of the \"Decameron\". Although Boccaccio was the first to record the story, he almost certainly did not invent it. Petrarch mentions having heard it many years before, but not from Boccaccio. Therefore, it was probably already circulating in oral tradition when the \"Decameron\" was written. Petrarch later retold the story in Latin, which is probably the biggest factor that contributed to its huge popularity in subsequent centuries.\nConclusion.\nThe work concludes rather abruptly. Boccaccio, as he does in the introduction of the fourth day, defends his work against detractors. However, this time he does it in a humorous and sacrilegious way.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31431", "revid": "46376176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31431", "title": "The Book of the City of Ladies", "text": "1405 book by Christine de Pizan\nThe Book of the City of Ladies, or Le Livre de la Cit\u00e9 des Dames, is a book written by Christine de Pizan believed to have been finished by 1405. Perhaps Pizan's most famous literary work, it is her second work of lengthy prose. Pizan uses the vernacular French language to compose the book, but she often uses Latin-style syntax and conventions within her French prose. The book serves as her formal response to Jean de Meun's popular \"Roman de la Rose\". Pizan combats Meun's statements about women by creating an allegorical city of ladies. She defends women by collecting a wide array of famous women throughout history. These women are \"housed\" in the City of Ladies, which is actually the book. As Pizan builds her city, she uses each famous woman as a building block for not only the walls and houses of the city, but also as building blocks for her thesis. Each woman introduced to the city adds to Pizan's argument towards women as valued participants in society. She also advocates in favour of education for women.\nChristine de Pizan also finished by 1405 \"The Treasure of the City of Ladies\" (\"Le tresor de la cit\u00e9 des dames de degr\u00e9 en degr\u00e9\", also known \"The Book of the Three Virtues\"), a manual of education, dedicated to Princess Margaret of Burgundy. This aims to educate women of all estates, the latter telling women who have husbands: \"If she wants to act prudently and have the praise of both the world and her husband, she will be cheerful to him all the time\". Her \"Book\" and \"Treasure\" are her two best-known works, along with the poem \"Ditie de Jehanne D'Arc\".\nSummary.\nPart I.\nPart I opens with Christine reading from Matheolus's \"Lamentations\", a work from the thirteenth century that addresses marriage and argues that women make men's lives miserable. Upon reading these words, Christine becomes upset and feels ashamed to be a woman: \"This thought inspired such a great sense of disgust and sadness in me that I began to despise myself and the whole of my sex as an aberration in nature\". The three Virtues then appear to Christine, and each lady tells Christine what her role will be in helping her build the City of Ladies. Lady Reason, a virtue developed by Christine for the purpose of her book, is the first to join Christine and helps her build the external walls of the city. She answers Christine's questions about why some men slander women, helping Christine to prepare the ground on which the city will be built. She tells Christine to \"take the spade of [her] intelligence and dig deep to make a trench all around [the city] \u2026 [and Reason will] help to carry away the hods of earth on [her] shoulders.\" These \"hods of earth\" are the past beliefs Christine has held. Christine, in the beginning of the text, believed that women must truly be bad because she \"could scarcely find a moral work by any author which didn't devote some chapter or paragraph to attacking the female sex. [Therefore she] had to accept [these authors] unfavourable opinion[s] of women since it was unlikely that so many learned men, who seemed to be endowed with such great intelligence and insight into all things, could possibly have lied on so many different occasions.\" Christine is not using reason to discover the merits of women. She believes all that she reads instead of putting her mind to listing all the great deeds women have accomplished. To help Christine see reason, Lady Reason comes and teaches Christine. She helps Christine dispel her own self-consciousness and the negative thoughts of past writers. By creating Lady Reason, Christine not only teaches her own allegorical self, but also her readers. She gives not only herself reason, but also gives readers, and women, reason to believe that women are not evil or useless creatures but instead have a significant place within society.\nWomen discussed.\nThe following 36 women are discussed in Part I of the \"Book of the City of Ladies\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPart II.\nIn Part II, Lady Rectitude says she will help Christine \"construct the houses and buildings inside the walls of the City of Ladies\" and fill it with inhabitants who are \"valiant ladies of great renown\". As they build, Lady Rectitude informs Christine with examples and \"stories of pagan, Hebrew, and Christian ladies\" who possessed the gift of prophecy, chastity, or devotion to their families and others. Christine and Lady Rectitude also discuss the institution of marriage, addressing Christine's questions regarding men's claims about the bad qualities women bring to marriage. Lady Rectitude corrects these misconceptions with examples of women who loved their husbands and acted virtuously, noting that those women who are evil toward their husbands are \"like creatures who go totally against their nature\". Lady Rectitude also refutes allegations that women are unchaste, inconstant, unfaithful, and mean by nature through her stories. This part ends with Christine addressing women and asking them to pray for her as she continues her work with Lady Justice to complete the city.\nWomen discussed.\nThe following 92 women are discussed in Part II of the \"Book of the City of Ladies\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPart III.\nIn Part III, Lady Justice joins with Christine to \"add the finishing touches\" to the city, including bringing a queen to rule the city. Lady Justice tells Christine of female saints who were praised for their martyrdom. At the close of this part, Christine makes another address to all women announcing the completion of the City of Ladies. She beseeches them to defend and protect the city and to follow their queen (the Virgin Mary). She also warns the women against the lies of slanderers, saying, \"Drive back these treacherous liars who use nothing but tricks and honeyed words to steal from you that which you should keep safe above all else: your chastity and your glorious good name\".\nWomen discussed.\nThe following 37 women are discussed in Part III of the \"Book of the City of Ladies\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBoccaccio's influence.\nChristine's main source for information was Giovanni Boccaccio's \"De mulieribus claris\" (On Famous Women), possibly in the French version, \"Des Cleres et Nobles Femmes\". This text was a biographical treatise on ancient famous women. Christine also cited from Boccaccio's \"Decameron\" in the latter stages of \"The City of Ladies\". The tales of Ghismonda and Lisabetta, for example, are cited from Boccaccio's \"Decameron\".\nBoccaccio's influence can be seen in Christine's stance on female education. In the tale of Rhea Ilia, Boccaccio advocates for the right of young women to choose a secular or religious life. He states that it is harmful to place young girls into convents while they are \"ignorant or too young or under coercion\". Boccaccio states that girls should be \"well brought up from childhood in their father's home and taught honesty and virtuous behavior. Then when they are grown and know full well what they are doing\" they can choose the life of monasticism. Boccaccio believes that young girls need to be taught about life and virtues before they are consecrated to God.\nWhile he does not say women should have a formal education, he is still advocating for women to have a say in their lives and the right to be well informed about their possible futures. Therefore, Boccaccio's belief in educating young girls about secular and religious life could have acted as a stepping stone for Christine's belief in female education. Boccaccio's outlook was however, according to Margaret King and Albert Rabil, \"misogynist, for it singled out for praise those women who possessed the traditional virtues of chastity, silence, and obedience. Women who were active in the public realm... were depicted as suffering terrible punishments for entering into the masculine sphere.\"\nBoccaccio's text is mainly used for Parts I and II of the book, while Part III is more reliant upon Jean de Vignay's \"Miroir historical\" (1333). This text is the French translation of the historical portions of \"Speculum Maius\", an encyclopedia by Vincent of Beauvais that was begun after 1240.\nThemes.\n\"The Book of the City of Ladies\" is an allegorical society in which the word \"lady\" is defined as a woman of noble spirit, instead of noble birth. The book, and therefore the city, contains women of past eras, ranging from pagans to ancient Jews to medieval Christian saints. The book includes discussion between Christine de Pizan and the three female Virtues which are sent to aid Christine build the city. These Virtues \u2013 Reason, Rectitude, and Justice \u2013 help Christine build the foundations and houses of the city, as well as pick the women who will reside in the city of ladies. Each woman chosen by the Virtues to live in the city acts as a positive example for other women to follow. These women are also examples of the positive influences women have had on society.\nChristine asks the virtues if women should be taught as men are and why some men think women should not be educated. Other questions that are explored are: the criminality of rape, the natural affinity in women to learn, and their talent for government.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31432", "revid": "15449111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31432", "title": "Tolerance", "text": "Tolerance or toleration is the state of tolerating, or putting up with, conditionally.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "31433", "revid": "6404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31433", "title": "Thorne Smith", "text": "American novelist (1892\u20131934)\nJames Thorne Smith, Jr. (March 27, 1892 \u2013 June 20, 1934) was an American writer of humorous supernatural fantasy fiction under the byline Thorne Smith. He is best known today for the two \"Topper\" novels, comic fantasy fiction involving sex, much drinking and ghosts. With racy illustrations, these sold millions of copies in the 1930s and were equally popular in paperbacks of the 1950s.\nLife and career.\nSmith was born in Annapolis, Maryland, the son of a Navy commodore, and attended Dartmouth College. In 1919, after being discharged from the Navy the same year, he moved to Greenwich Village, where he met Celia Sullivan whom he would marry. In need of money, he worked part-time as an advertising agent. Their first daughter Marion was born on November 14, 1922, and their second daughter June on March 4, 1924. In 1926 Smith achieved meteoric success with the publication of \"Topper\". He was an early resident of Free Acres, a social experimental community developed by Bolton Hall according to the economic principles of Henry George, in Berkeley Heights, New Jersey. He died of a heart attack in 1934 at the age of 42 while vacationing in Florida.\nSmith was a close friend of actor Roland Young, who played the character Topper in several movie adaptations of Smith's work. After Smith's death, Young wrote a short biography, \"Thorne Smith: His Life and Times\", which is now a collector's item.\n \"Topper\" was made into a 1937 film starring Cary Grant as George Kerby, Constance Bennett as Marion Kerby, and Roland Young as Cosmo Topper. Two filmed sequels followed: \"Topper Takes a Trip\", in 1939, and \"Topper Returns\", in 1941. The latter film was not based on a book. Young reprised the role in the 1945 NBC radio summer replacement series \"The Adventures of Topper\". The books were adapted into an American television series, \"Topper\", beginning in 1953, with Leo G. Carroll as Cosmo Topper, and Robert Sterling and Anne Jeffreys as the ghosts. Seventy-eight episodes were made. The pilot episode and a few of the early episodes were written by Stephen Sondheim.\nWorks.\n\"Turnabout\" was one of the inspirations for Mary Rodgers' popular young adult novel \"Freaky Friday\". As she was considering a new children\u2019s book, following several picture books for young children, she remembered \"that when I was fourteen, I\u2019d read and loved a novel called \"Turnabout\", by Thorne Smith. Vicious and hilarious, it was something I thought I could emulate in children\u2019s fiction . . . for teens.\"\nDuring World War II, \"Skin and Bones\", \"Turnabout\", \"The Night Life of the Gods\", \"The Passionate Witch\", \"The Stray Lamb\", \"The Bishop's Jaegers\", \"The Glorious Pool\", and \"Rain in the Doorway\" were all published in mass-market sized paperbacks by Armed Services Editions for distribution to the military.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31434", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31434", "title": "The Sentinel (short story)", "text": "Short story written by Arthur C. Clarke\n\"The Sentinel\" is a science fiction short story by British author Arthur\u00a0C. Clarke, written in 1948 and first published in 1951. Its plot and ideas influenced the development of the 1968 film \"\" and its .\nPublication history.\n\"The Sentinel\" was written in 1948 for a BBC competition in which it failed to place. It was first published in the magazine \"10 Story Fantasy\", in the Spring 1951 issue, under the title \"Sentinel of Eternity\". Despite the story's initial failure, it ultimately changed the course of Clarke's career. It appears in the short story collections \"Expedition to Earth\" (1953), \"The Nine Billion Names of God\" (1967), and \"The Sentinel\" (1982), as well as in \"The Lost Worlds of 2001\" (1972).\nPlot.\nThe story is set in 1996 (at the time of writing, several decades in the future). The narrator, Wilson, is a veteran selenologist on an expedition to explore the lunar surface. He comes across a mysterious pyramidal structure, surrounded by an \"invisible shield\" which blocks all attempts to approach. The structure is found to have been placed on the Moon several billion years earlier, and it is not the product of any terrestrial or lunar civilization.\nTwenty years pass before the invisible shield is successfully breached, using atomic energy. The structure is destroyed in the process, and its fragments are found to be incomprehensible, being far more advanced than any human technology. Wilson realizes that the structure was created and placed on the Moon by technologically advanced aliens from outside the Solar System.\nWilson presents his guess as to the structure's purpose: it was a \"sentinel\" which for billions of years had been transmitting signals into space. The sentinel's destruction\u2014which humans could only accomplish by mastering space travel and atomic energy\u2014will have caused its signals to cease, thereby alerting its creators to intelligent life having discovered it. Wilson expresses his belief that the aliens will soon be \"turning their gaze upon the Earth\".\nReception.\nAlgis Budrys found \"The Sentinel\" to be infuriating, saying that \"one can raise a formidable reputation for profundity by repeating, over and over again, that the universe is wide and man is very small... while our instruments show that the universe is wide, they are our instruments and we managed somehow to build them. There is no evidence whatsoever that Man is that goddamned small.\"\nSinger-songwriter Roger McGuinn wrote and performed the song \"Space Odyssey\", whose subject is \u201cThe Sentinel\u201d. It is the closing track on the 1968 album by the Byrds, \"The Notorious Byrd Brothers\", and consists mostly of a Moog synthesizer and minimal instrumental accompaniment. The vocals are delivered in a \"sea shanty\" cadence.\nInfluence on \"2001: A Space Odyssey\".\nThe story's plot and ideas were a significant influence on the development of the 1968 film \"\" by Stanley Kubrick and on the novel. Clarke and Kubrick adapted the short story and fused it with many other concepts. Clarke later expressed impatience with \"The Sentinel\" being described as the basis for the film:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am continually annoyed by careless references to \"The Sentinel\" as \"the story on which \"2001\" is based\"; it bears about as much relation to the movie as an acorn to the resultant full-grown oak. (Considerably less, in fact, because ideas from several other stories were also incorporated.) Even the elements that Stanley Kubrick and I \"did\" actually use were considerably modified. Thus the 'glittering, roughly pyramidal structure... set in the rock like a gigantic, many-faceted jewel' became\u2014after several modifications\u2014the famous black monolith. And the locale was moved from the Mare Crisium to the most spectacular of all lunar craters, Tycho\u2014easily visible to the naked eye from Earth at Full Moon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31435", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31435", "title": "The Fountains of Paradise", "text": "1979 science fiction novel by Arthur C. Clarke\nThe Fountains of Paradise is a 1979 science fiction novel by British writer Arthur C. Clarke. Set in the 22nd century, it describes the construction of a space elevator. This \"orbital tower\" is a giant structure rising from the ground and linking with a satellite in geostationary orbit at the height of approximately 36,000 kilometres (approx. 22,300 miles). Such a structure would be used to raise payloads to orbit without the expense of using rockets. The novel won both the Hugo and Nebula Awards for Best Novel.\nPlot.\nSummary.\nThe novel focuses primarily on a project known as the Orbital Tower proposed by the main character, Vannevar Morgan. The tower is to stretch from the Earth's equator to a satellite that is in geostationary orbit. Such a structure would greatly reduce the cost of sending people and supplies into space.\nThe main story is framed by two other stories. The first one tells of King Kalidasa, living thousands of years before Morgan is born, who is constructing a 'pleasure garden' complete with functioning fountains, in a significant engineering effort for the time. The other story, taking place long after Morgan has died, deals with aliens making contact with Earth.\nDue to many technical issues, there are only two locations on Earth where the Orbital Tower can be built. One is in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, and the other is Sri Kanda (a thinly veiled reference to Adam's Peak in Sri Lanka). However, there is a Buddhist temple on the island, and Mahanayake Thero, the head of the order, refuses to give permission to begin construction.\nHearing of the difficulties, a group of people living on Mars contacts Morgan and suggests that the tower be built there instead. It would be smaller than the one planned for Earth, and would reach from Mars to one of its moons, Deimos.\nAfter a few setbacks, including some fatalities, construction of the tower gets underway. Although the engineer's heart is failing, he rides up the tower to take food and oxygen to a group of stranded students and their professor. After overcoming serious difficulties he succeeds, then dies of a heart attack on the way back down.\nThemes.\nThe main theme of the novel is preceded by, and to some extent juxtaposed with, the story of the life and death of King Kashyapa I of Sri Lanka (fictionalized as King Kalidasa). It foreshadows the exploits of Vannevar Morgan in his determination to realize the space elevator.\nOther subplots include human colonization of the Solar System and the first contact with extraterrestrial intelligence.\nClarke envisions a microscopically thin (in his demonstrator sample) but strong \"hyperfilament\" that makes the elevator possible. Although the hyperfilament is constructed from \"continuous pseudo-one-dimensional diamond crystal\", Clarke later expressed his belief that another type of carbon, buckminsterfullerene, would play the role of hyperfilament in a real space elevator. The latest developments in carbon nanotube technology bring the orbital elevator closer to possible realisation.\nSetting.\nThe story is set in the fictional equatorial island country of Taprobane, which Clarke has described as \"about ninety percent congruent with the island of Sri Lanka\", south of its real-world location. The ruins of the palace at Yakkagala as described in the book very closely match the real-life ruins at Sigiriya in Sri Lanka. The mountain on which the space elevator is built is called Sri Kanda in the book, and bears a strong resemblance to the real mountain Sri Pada (Adam's Peak).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31438", "revid": "30911873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31438", "title": "Tagalog language", "text": "Austronesian language spoken in the Philippines\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nTagalog ( , ; \"Baybayin\": \u1706\u1704\u170e\u1713\u1704\u1714) is an Austronesian language spoken as a first language by the ethnic Tagalog people, who make up a quarter of the population of the Philippines, and as a second language by the majority. Its de facto standardized and codified form, officially named \"Filipino\", is the national language of the Philippines, and is one of the nation's two official languages, alongside English.\nTagalog is closely related to other Philippine languages, such as the Bikol languages, the Bisaya languages, Ilocano, Kapampangan, and Pangasinan, and more distantly to other Austronesian languages, such as the Formosan languages of Taiwan, Indonesian, Malay, Hawaiian, M\u0101ori, Malagasy, and many more.\nClassification.\nTagalog is a Central Philippine language within the Austronesian language family. Being Malayo-Polynesian, it is related to other Austronesian languages, such as Malagasy, Javanese, Indonesian, Malay, Tetum (of Timor), and Yami (of Taiwan). It is closely related to the languages spoken in the Bicol Region and the Visayas islands, such as the Bikol group and the Visayan group, including Waray-Waray, Hiligaynon and Cebuano.\nTagalog differs from its Central Philippine counterparts with its treatment of the Proto-Philippine schwa vowel . In most Bikol and Visayan languages, this sound merged with and . In Tagalog, it has merged with . For example, Proto-Philippine (adhere, stick) is Tagalog and Visayan and Bikol .\nProto-Philippine , , and merged with but is between vowels. Proto-Philippine (name) and (kiss) became Tagalog and . Adjacent to an affix, however, it becomes instead: (paid) \u2192 (to pay).\nProto-Philippine merged with . (water) and (blood) became Tagalog and .\nHistory.\nThe word \"Tagalog\" is possibly derived from the endonym \"taga-ilog\" (\"river dweller\"), composed of \"tag\u00e1-\" (\"native of\" or \"from\") and \"ilog\" (\"river\"), or alternatively, \"taga-alog\" deriving from \"alog\" (\"pool of water in the lowlands\"; \"rice or vegetable plantation\"). Linguists such as David Zorc and Robert Blust speculate that the Tagalogs and other Central Philippine ethno-linguistic groups originated in Northeastern Mindanao or the Eastern Visayas.\nPossible words of Old Tagalog origin are attested in the Laguna Copperplate Inscription from the tenth century, which is largely written in Old Malay. The first known complete book to be written in Tagalog is the \"Doctrina Christiana\" (Christian Doctrine), printed in 1593. The \"Doctrina\" was written in Spanish and two transcriptions of Tagalog; one in the ancient, then-current Baybayin script and the other in an early Spanish attempt at a Latin orthography for the language.\nThroughout the 333 years of Spanish rule, various grammars and dictionaries were written by Spanish clergymen. In 1610, the Dominican priest Francisco Blancas de San Jos\u00e9 published the \"Arte y reglas de la lengua tagala\" (which was subsequently revised with two editions in 1752 and 1832) in Bataan. In 1613, the Franciscan priest Pedro de San Buenaventura published the first Tagalog dictionary, his \"Vocabulario de la lengua tagala\" in Pila, Laguna.\nThe first substantial dictionary of the Tagalog language was written by the Czech Jesuit missionary Pablo Clain in the beginning of the 18th century. Clain spoke Tagalog and used it actively in several of his books. He prepared the dictionary, which he later passed over to Francisco Jansens and Jos\u00e9 Hernandez. Further compilation of his substantial work was prepared by P. Juan de Noceda and P. Pedro de Sanlucar and published as \"Vocabulario de la lengua tagala\" in Manila in 1754 and then repeatedly reedited, with the last edition being in 2013 in Manila.\nAmong others, \"Arte de la lengua tagala y manual tagalog para la administraci\u00f3n de los Santos Sacramentos\" (1850) in addition to early studies of the language.\nThe indigenous poet Francisco Balagtas (1788\u20131862) is known as the foremost Tagalog writer, his most notable work being the 19th-century epic \"Florante at Laura\".\nOfficial status.\nTagalog was declared the official language by the first revolutionary constitution in the Philippines, the in 1897.\nIn 1935, the Philippine constitution designated English and Spanish as official languages, but mandated the development and adoption of a common national language based on one of the existing native languages. After study and deliberation, the National Language Institute, a committee composed of seven members who represented various regions in the Philippines, chose Tagalog as the basis for the evolution and adoption of the national language of the Philippines. President Manuel L. Quezon then, on December 30, 1937, proclaimed the selection of the Tagalog language to be used as the basis for the evolution and adoption of the national language of the Philippines. In 1939, President Quezon renamed the proposed Tagalog-based national language as \"Wikang Pambans\u00e2\" (national language). Quezon himself was born and raised in Baler, Aurora, which is a native Tagalog-speaking area. Under the Japanese puppet government during World War II, Tagalog as a national language was strongly promoted; the 1943 Constitution specifying: \"The government shall take steps toward the development and propagation of Tagalog as the national language.\"\nIn 1959, the language was further renamed as \"Pilipino\". Along with English, the national language has had official status under the 1973 constitution (as \"Pilipino\") and the present 1987 constitution (as Filipino).\nControversy.\nThe adoption of Tagalog in 1937 as basis for a national language is not without its own controversies. Instead of specifying Tagalog, the national language was designated as \"Wikang Pambans\u00e2\" (\"National Language\") in 1939. Twenty years later, in 1959, it was renamed by then Secretary of Education, Jos\u00e9 E. Romero, as \"Pilipino\" to give it a national rather than ethnic label and connotation. The changing of the name did not, however, result in acceptance among non-Tagalogs, especially Cebuanos who had not accepted the selection.\nThe national language issue was revived once more during the 1971 Constitutional Convention. The majority of the delegates were in favor of scrapping the idea of a \"national language\" altogether. A compromise solution was worked out\u2014a \"universalist\" approach to the national language, to be called \"Filipino\" rather than \"Pilipino\". The 1973 constitution makes no mention of Tagalog. When a new constitution was drawn up in 1987, it named Filipino as the national language. The constitution specified that as the Filipino language evolves, it shall be further developed and enriched on the basis of existing Philippine and other languages. Filipino and Tagalog are varieties of the same language, sharing a big bulk of common lexical items, and having very similar grammatical structures.\nUse in education.\nUpon the issuance of \"Executive Order No. 134\", Tagalog was declared as basis of the National Language. On April 12, 1940, \"Executive No. 263\" was issued ordering the teaching of the national language in all public and private schools in the country.\nArticle XIV, Section 6 of the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines specifies, in part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnder Section 7, however:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2009, the Department of Education promulgated an order institutionalizing a system of mother-tongue based multilingual education (\"MLE\"), wherein instruction is conducted primarily in a student's mother tongue (one of the various regional Philippine languages) until at least grade three, with additional languages such as Filipino and English being introduced as separate subjects no earlier than grade two. In secondary school, Filipino and English become the primary languages of instruction, with the learner's first language taking on an auxiliary role. After pilot tests in selected schools, the MLE program was implemented nationwide from School Year (SY) 2012\u20132013.\nTagalog is the first language of a quarter of the population of the Philippines (particularly in Central and Southern Luzon) and the second language for the majority.\nGeographic distribution.\nIn the Philippines.\nAccording to the 2020 census, 109 million people were living in the Philippines. The vast majority have some basic level of understanding of Filipino. The Tagalog homeland, Katagalugan, covers much of the central to southern parts of the island Luzon \u2014 particularly in Aurora, Bataan, Batangas, Bulacan, Cavite, Laguna, Metro Manila, Nueva Ecija, Quezon, and Rizal. Tagalog is also spoken natively by inhabitants living on the islands of Marinduque and Mindoro, as well as Palawan to a lesser extent. Significant minorities of Filipino speakers are found in the other Central Luzon provinces of Pampanga and Tarlac, Camarines Norte and Camarines Sur in Bicol Region, the Cordillera city of Baguio, southeast Pangasinan in Ilocos Region, and various parts of Mindanao especially in the island's urban areas. Filipino is also the predominant language of Cotabato City in Mindanao, making it the only place outside of Luzon with a Filipino-speaking majority. It is also the main lingua franca in Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.\nAccording to the 2000 Philippine Census, approximately 96% of the household population who were able to attend school could speak Filipino; and about 28% of the total population spoke it natively.\nThe following regions and provinces of the Philippines are majority Tagalog-speaking, overlapping with Filipino-speaking (from north to south):\nOutside the Philippines.\nTagalog serves as the common language among Overseas Filipinos, though its use overseas is usually limited to communication among Filipino ethnic groups. The largest concentration of Tagalog speakers outside the Philippines is found in the United States, where the 2020 census reported (based on data collected in 2018) that it was the fourth most-spoken non-English language at home with over 1.7 million speakers, behind Spanish, French, and Chinese (with figures for Cantonese and Mandarin combined).\nA study based on data from the United States Census Bureau's 2015 American Consumer Survey shows that Tagalog is the most commonly spoken non-English language after Spanish in California, Nevada, and Washington states.\nTagalog is one of three recognized languages in San Francisco, California, along with Spanish and Chinese, making all essential city services be communicated using these languages along with English. In Hawaii, state-funded entities are required to provide oral and written translations for everything in Tagalog and Ilocano. Nevada provides Tagalog Election ballots.\nOther countries with significant concentrations of overseas Filipinos and Tagalog speakers include Saudi Arabia with 938,490, Canada with 676,775, Japan with 313,588, United Arab Emirates with 541,593, Kuwait with 187,067, and Malaysia with 620,043.\nDialects.\nAt present, no comprehensive dialectology has been done in the Tagalog-speaking regions, though there have been descriptions in the form of dictionaries and grammars of various Tagalog dialects. Ethnologue lists Manila, Lubang, Marinduque, Bataan (Western Central Luzon), Batangas, Bulacan (Eastern Central Luzon), Tanay-Paete (Rizal-Laguna), and \"Tayabas\" (Quezon) as dialects of Tagalog; however, there appear to be four main dialects, of which the aforementioned are a part: Northern (exemplified by the Bulacan dialect), Central (including Manila), Southern (exemplified by Batangas), and Marinduque.\nSome example of dialectal differences are:\nPerhaps the most divergent Tagalog dialects are those spoken in Marinduque. Linguist Rosa Soberano identifies two dialects, western and eastern, with the former being closer to the Tagalog dialects spoken in the provinces of Batangas and Quezon.\nOne example is the verb conjugation paradigms. While some of the affixes are different, Marinduque also preserves the imperative affixes, also found in Visayan and Bikol languages, that have mostly disappeared from most Tagalog early 20th century; they have since merged with the infinitive.\nThe Manila Dialect is the basis for the national language.\nOutside of Luzon, a variety of Tagalog called Soccsksargen Tagalog (Sox-Tagalog, also called Kabacan Tagalog) is spoken in Soccsksargen, a southwestern region in Mindanao, as well as Cotabato City. This \"hybrid\" Tagalog dialect is a blend of Tagalog (including its dialects) with other languages where they are widely spoken and varyingly heard such as Hiligaynon (a regional lingua franca), Ilocano, Cebuano as well as Maguindanaon and other indigenous languages native to region, as a result of migration from Panay, Negros, Cebu, Bohol, Siquijor, Ilocandia, Cagayan Valley, Cordillera Administrative Region, Central Luzon, Calabarzon, Mindoro and Marinduque since the turn of 20th century, therefore making the region a melting pot of cultures and languages.\nPhonology.\nTagalog has 21 phonemes: 16 are consonants and 5 are vowels. Native Tagalog words follow CV(C) syllable structure, though more complex consonant clusters are permitted in loanwords.\nVowels.\nTagalog has five vowels and four diphthongs. Tagalog originally had three vowel phonemes, , , and . Tagalog is now considered to have five vowel phonemes following the introduction of two marginal phonemes from Spanish, /o/ and /e/.\nNevertheless, simplification of pairs and is likely to take place, especially in some Tagalog as second language, remote location and working class registers.\nThe four diphthongs are , , , and . Long vowels are not written apart from pedagogical texts, where an acute accent is used: \"\u00e1 \u00e9 \u00ed \u00f3 \u00fa.\"\nThe table above shows all the possible realizations for each of the five vowel sounds depending on the speaker's origin or proficiency. The five general vowels are in bold.\nConsonants.\nBelow is a chart of Tagalog consonants. All the stops are unaspirated. The velar nasal occurs in all positions including at the beginning of a word. Loanword variants using these phonemes are italicized inside the angle brackets.\nGlottal stop is not indicated. Glottal stops are most likely to occur when:\nStress and final glottal stop.\nStress is a distinctive feature in Tagalog. Primary stress occurs on either the final or the penultimate syllable of a word. Vowel lengthening accompanies primary or secondary stress except when stress occurs at the end of a word.\nTagalog words are often distinguished from one another by the position of the stress or the presence of a final glottal stop. In formal or academic settings, stress placement and the glottal stop are indicated by a diacritic () above the final vowel. The penultimate primary stress position () is the default stress type and so is left unwritten except in dictionaries.\nWriting system.\nTagalog, like other Philippines languages today, is written using the Latin alphabet. Prior to the arrival of the Spanish in 1521 and the beginning of their colonization in 1565, Tagalog was written in an abugida\u2014or alphasyllabary\u2014called Baybayin. This system of writing gradually gave way to the use and propagation of the Latin alphabet as introduced by the Spanish. As the Spanish began to record and create grammars and dictionaries for the various languages of the Philippine archipelago, they adopted systems of writing closely following the orthographic customs of the Spanish language and were refined over the years. Until the first half of the 20th century, most Philippine languages were widely written in a variety of ways based on Spanish orthography.\nIn the late 19th century, a number of educated Filipinos began proposing for revising the spelling system used for Tagalog at the time. In 1884, Filipino doctor and student of languages Trinidad Pardo de Tavera published his study on the ancient Tagalog script \"Contribucion para el Estudio de los Antiguos Alfabetos Filipinos\" and in 1887, published his essay \"El Sanscrito en la lengua Tagalog\" which made use of a new writing system developed by him. Meanwhile, Jose Rizal, inspired by Pardo de Tavera's 1884 work, also began developing a new system of orthography (unaware at first of Pardo de Tavera's own orthography). A major noticeable change in these proposed orthographies was the use of the letter \u27e8k\u27e9 rather than \u27e8c\u27e9 and \u27e8q\u27e9 to represent the phoneme .\nIn 1889, the new bilingual Spanish-Tagalog \"La Espa\u00f1a Oriental\" newspaper, of which Isabelo de los Reyes was an editor, began publishing using the new orthography stating in a footnote that it would \"use the orthography recently introduced by ... learned Orientalis\". This new orthography, while having its supporters, was also not initially accepted by several writers. Soon after the first issue of \"La Espa\u00f1a\", Pascual H. Poblete's \"Revista Cat\u00f3lica de Filipina\" began a series of articles attacking the new orthography and its proponents. A fellow writer, Pablo Tecson was also critical. Among the attacks was the use of the letters \"k\" and \"w\" as they were deemed to be of German origin and thus its proponents were deemed as \"unpatriotic\". The publishers of these two papers would eventually merge as \"La Lectura Popular\" in January 1890 and would eventually make use of both spelling systems in its articles. Pedro Laktaw, a schoolteacher, published the first Spanish-Tagalog dictionary using the new orthography in 1890.\nIn April 1890, Jose Rizal authored an article \"Sobre la Nueva Ortografia de la Lengua Tagalog\" in the Madrid-based periodical La Solidaridad. In it, he addressed the criticisms of the new writing system by writers like Pobrete and Tecson and the simplicity, in his opinion, of the new orthography. Rizal described the orthography promoted by Pardo de Tavera as \"more perfect\" than what he himself had developed. The new orthography was, however, not broadly adopted initially and was used inconsistently in the bilingual periodicals of Manila until the early 20th century. The revolutionary society Kata\u00e1s-taasan, Kagalang-galang Katipunan ng\u0303 mg\u0303\u00e1 Anak ng\u0303 Bayan or Katipunan made use of the k-orthography and the letter k featured prominently on many of its flags and insignias.\nIn 1937, Tagalog was selected to serve as basis for the country's national language. In 1940, the \"Balaril\u00e2 ng Wikang Pambans\u00e2\" () of grammarian Lope K. Santos introduced the Abakada alphabet. This alphabet consists of 20 letters and became the standard alphabet of the national language. The orthography as used by Tagalog would eventually influence and spread to the systems of writing used by other Philippine languages (which had been using variants of the Spanish-based system of writing). In 1987, the Abakada was dropped and replaced by the expanded Filipino alphabet.\nBaybayin.\nTagalog was written in an abugida (alphasyllabary) called Baybayin prior to the Spanish colonial period in the Philippines, in the 16th century. This particular writing system was composed of symbols representing three vowels and 14 consonants. Belonging to the Brahmic family of scripts, it shares similarities with the Old Kawi script of Java and is believed to be descended from the script used by the Bugis in Sulawesi.\nAlthough it enjoyed a relatively high level of literacy, Baybayin gradually fell into disuse in favor of the Latin alphabet taught by the Spaniards during their rule.\nThere has been confusion of how to use Baybayin, which is actually an abugida, or an alphasyllabary, rather than an alphabet. Not every letter in the Latin alphabet is represented with one of those in the Baybayin alphasyllabary. Rather than letters being put together to make sounds as in Western languages, Baybayin uses symbols to represent syllables.\nA \"kudl\u00edt\" resembling an apostrophe is used above or below a symbol to change the vowel sound after its consonant. If the kudlit is used above, the vowel is an \"E\" or \"I\" sound. If the kudlit is used below, the vowel is an \"O\" or \"U\" sound. A special kudlit was later added by Spanish missionaries in which a cross placed below the symbol to get rid of the vowel sound all together, leaving a consonant. Previously, the consonant without a following vowel was simply left out (for example, \"bund\u00f3k\" being rendered as \"budo\"), forcing the reader to use context when reading such words.\nExample:\nLatin alphabet.\nAbecedario.\nUntil the first half of the 20th century, Tagalog was widely written in a variety of ways based on Spanish orthography consisting of 32 letters called 'ABECEDARIO' (Spanish for \"alphabet\"). The additional letters beyond the 26-letter English alphabet are: ch, ll, ng, \u00f1, n\u0360g / \u00f1g, and rr.\nAbakada.\nWhen the national language was based on Tagalog, grammarian Lope K. Santos introduced a new alphabet consisting of 20 letters called \"Abakada\" in school grammar books called \"balaril\u00e2\". The only letter not in the English alphabet is ng.\nRevised alphabet.\nIn 1987, the Department of Education, Culture and Sports issued a memo stating that the Philippine alphabet had changed from the Pilipino-Tagalog Abakada version to a new 28-letter alphabet to make room for loans, especially family names from Spanish and English. The additional letters beyond the 26-letter English alphabet are: \u00f1, ng.\n\"ng\" and \"mga\".\nThe genitive marker \"ng\" and the plural marker \"mga\" (e.g. \"Iyan ang mga dam\u00edt ko.\" (Those are my clothes)) are abbreviations that are pronounced \"nang\" and \"mang\u00e1\" . \"Ng\", in most cases, roughly translates to \"of\" (ex. \"Siy\u00e1 ay kapat\u00edd ng nanay ko.\" She is the sibling \"of\" my mother) while \"nang\" usually means \"when\" or can describe how something is done or to what extent (equivalent to the suffix \"-ly\" in English adverbs), among other uses. \nIn the first example, \"nang\" is used in lieu of the word \"noong\" (when; \"Noong si Hudas ay madul\u00e1s\"). In the second, \"nang\" describes that the person woke up (\"gumising\") early (\"maaga\"); \"gumising nang maaga\". In the third, \"nang\" described up to what extent that Juan improved (\"gumal\u00edng\"), which is \"greatly\" (\"nang todo\"). In the latter two examples, the ligature \"na\" and its variants \"-ng\" and \"-g\" may also be used (\"Gumising na maaga/Maagang gumising\"; \"Gumal\u00edng na todo/Todong gumal\u00edng\").\nThe longer \"nang\" may also have other uses, such as a ligature that joins a repeated word:\n\"p\u00f4/h\u00f4\" and \"op\u00f2/oh\u00f2\".\nThe words originated from the word \".\" and \".\" (\"Lord.\"). When combined with the basic affirmative \"yes\" (from Proto-Malayo-Polynesian *heqe), the resulting forms are and .\n\" and \" are specifically used to denote a high level of respect when addressing older persons of close affinity like parents, relatives, teachers and family friends. \" and \" are generally used to politely address older neighbours, strangers, public officials, bosses and nannies, and may suggest a distance in societal relationship and respect determined by the addressee's social rank and not their age. However, \" and \" can be used in any case in order to express an elevation of respect.\nUsed in the affirmative:\n may also be used in negation.\nVocabulary and borrowed words.\nTagalog vocabulary is mostly of native Austronesian or Tagalog origin, such as most of the words that end with the diphthong -iw, (e.g. giliw) and words that exhibit reduplication (e.g. halo-halo, patpat, etc.). Besides inherited cognates, this also accounts for innovations in Tagalog vocabulary, especially traditional ones within its dialects. Tagalog has also incorporated many Spanish and English loanwords; the necessity of which increases in more technical parlance.\nIn precolonial times, Trade Malay was widely known and spoken throughout Maritime Southeast Asia, contributing a significant number of Malay vocabulary into the Tagalog language. Malay loanwords, identifiable or not, may often already be considered native as these have existed in the language before colonisation.\nTagalog also includes loanwords from Indian languages (Sanskrit and Tamil, mostly through Malay), Chinese languages (mostly Hokkien, followed by Cantonese, Mandarin, etc.), Japanese, Arabic and Persian.\nEnglish has borrowed some words from Tagalog, such as abaca, barong, balisong, boondocks, jeepney, Manila hemp, pancit, ylang-ylang, and yaya. Some of these loanwords are more often used in Philippine English.\nTagalog has contributed several words to Philippine Spanish, like \"barangay\" (from \"balan\u0360gay,\" meaning \"barrio\"), the \"abac\u00e1\", \"cogon\", \"palay\", \"dalaga\" etc.\nTaglish (Englog).\n\"Taglish\" and \"Englog\" are names given to a mix of English and Tagalog. The amount of English vs. Tagalog varies from the occasional use of English loan words to changing language in mid-sentence. Such code-switching is prevalent throughout the Philippines and in various languages of the Philippines other than Tagalog.\nCode-mixing also entails the use of foreign words that are \"Filipinized\" by reforming them using Filipino rules, such as verb conjugations. Users typically use Filipino or English words, whichever comes to mind first or whichever is easier to use.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nUrbanites are the most likely to speak like this.\nThe practice is common in television, radio, and print media as well. Advertisements from companies like Wells Fargo, Wal-Mart, Albertsons, McDonald's and Western Union have contained Taglish.\nComparisons with Austronesian languages.\nBelow is a chart of Tagalog and a number of other Austronesian languages comparing thirteen words.\nReligious literature.\nReligious literature remains one of the most dynamic components to Tagalog literature. The first Bible in Tagalog, then called \"Ang Biblia\" (\"the Bible\") and now called \"Ang Dating Biblia\" (\"the Old Bible\"), was published in 1905. In 1970, the Philippine Bible Society translated the Bible into modern Tagalog. Even before the Second Vatican Council, devotional materials in Tagalog had been in circulation. There are at least four circulating Tagalog translations of the Bible\nWhen the Second Vatican Council, (specifically the Sacrosanctum Concilium) permitted the universal prayers to be translated into vernacular languages, the Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines was one of the first to translate the Roman Missal into Tagalog. The Roman Missal in Tagalog was published as early as 1982. In 2012, the Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines revised the 41-year-old liturgy with an English version of the Roman Missal, and later translated it in the vernacular to several native languages in the Philippines. For instance, in 2024, the Roman Catholic Diocese of Malolos uses the Tagalog translation of the Roman Missal entitled \"Ang Aklat ng Mabuting Balita.\"\nJehovah's Witnesses were printing Tagalog literature at least as early as 1941 and \"The Watchtower\" (the primary magazine of Jehovah's Witnesses) has been published in Tagalog since at least the 1950s. New releases are now regularly released simultaneously in a number of languages, including Tagalog. The official website of Jehovah's Witnesses also has some publications available online in Tagalog. The revised bible edition, the \"New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures,\" was released in Tagalog on 2019 and it is distributed without charge both printed and https://.\nTagalog is quite a stable language, and very few revisions have been made to Catholic Bible translations. Also, as Protestantism in the Philippines is relatively young, liturgical prayers tend to be more ecumenical.\nExample texts.\nLord's Prayer.\nIn Tagalog, the Lord's Prayer is known by its incipit, \"Am\u00e1 Namin\" (literally, \"Our Father\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUniversal Declaration of Human Rights.\nThis is Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (\"Pangkalahat\u00e1ng Pagpapahay\u00e1g ng Karapat\u00e1ng Pantao\")\nAll human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\nNumbers.\nNumbers (/) in Tagalog follow two systems. The first consists of native Tagalog words and the other are Spanish-derived. (This may be compared to other East Asian languages, except with the second set of numbers borrowed from Spanish instead of Chinese.) For example, when a person refers to the number \"seven\", it can be translated into Tagalog as \" or \" (Spanish: ).\nMonths and days.\nMonths and days in Tagalog are also localised forms of Spanish months and days. \"Month\" in Tagalog is \"buw\u00e1n\" (also the word for moon) and \"day\" is \"araw\" (the word also means sun). Unlike Spanish, however, months and days in Tagalog are always capitalised.\nTime.\nTime expressions in Tagalog are also Tagalized forms of the corresponding Spanish. \"Time\" in Tagalog is \"panah\u00f3n\" or \"oras\".\nCommon phrases.\nProverbs.\n\"Ang hind\u00ee marunong luming\u00f3n sa pin\u00e1nggalingan ay hind\u00ee makar\u00e1rat\u00edng sa paroroonan.\" \n(\u2014\u2009Jos\u00e9 Rizal)\nOne who knows not how to look back to whence he came will never get to where he is going.\n\"Unang kag\u00e1t, tinapay pa rin.\"First bite, still bread.All fluff, no substance.\n\"Tao ka nang humar\u00e1p, bilang tao kit\u00e1ng haharapin.\"You reach me as a human, I will treat you as a human and never act as a traitor.(A proverb in Southern Tagalog that has made people aware of the significance of sincerity in Tagalog communities.)\n\"Hul\u00ed man daw (raw) at magal\u00edng, nak\u00e1hah\u00e1bol pa rin.\"If one is behind but capable, one will still be able to catch up.\n\"Magbir\u00f4 ka na sa las\u00edng, huw\u00e1g lang sa bagong gising.\"Make fun of someone drunk, if you must, but never one who has just awakened.\n\"Aanh\u00edn pa ang dam\u00f3 kung pat\u00e1y na ang kabay\u00f2?\"What use is the grass if the horse is already dead?\n\"Ang sak\u00edt ng kalingkingan, damd\u00e1m ng bu\u00f3ng kataw\u00e1n.\"The pain in the pinkie is felt by the whole body.\nIn a group, if one goes down, the rest follow.\n\"Nasa hul\u00ed ang pagsisisi.\"Regret is always in the end.\n\"Pagk\u00e1hab\u00e0-hab\u00e0 man ng prusisy\u00f3n, sa simbahan pa rin ang tul\u00f3y.\"The procession may stretch on and on, but it still ends up at the church.\n\"Kung 'd\u00ee m\u00e1da\u00e1n sa sant\u00f3ng dasalan, daanin sa sant\u00f3ng paspasan.\"If it cannot be got through holy prayer, get it through blessed force.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31439", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31439", "title": "Tokamak", "text": "Magnetic confinement device used to produce thermonuclear fusion power\nA tokamak (; ) is a machine which uses a powerful magnetic field generated by external magnets to confine plasma in the shape of an axially symmetrical torus. The tokamak is the leading candidate of magnetic confinement fusion designs being developed to produce controlled thermonuclear fusion power.\nTokamaks use a combination of a central solenoid and toroidal and poloidal magnets to shape a ring of plasma. This is heated by a range of methods, including neutral-beam injection, electron and ion cyclotron resonance, lower hybrid resonance. Nuclear fusion may be achieved, measured by neutron detectors. Due to requiring a continuously changing magnetic field, modern tokamaks sustain \"plasma discharges\" on the timescales of seconds or minutes.\nThe world's largest tokamak by radius and plasma current is the JT-60SA in Japan. Other operational experiments include WEST in France and EAST in China. The International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) tokamak is the primary global effort to research fusion power, under construction in France, and aimed for completion by 2034. Many smaller designs, and offshoots like the spherical tokamak, continue to be used to investigate performance parameters and other issues. Commercial fusion companies have also proposed tokamak construction in recent years, including Commonwealth Fusion Systems' SPARC design.\nTokamaks were first conceptualized by Soviet physicists Andrei Sakharov and Igor Tamm. Experiments were constructed from 1951 at Kurchatov Institute in Moscow led by Lev Artsimovich. Their 1958 T-1 device is sometimes considered the first tokamak. The same year, the USSR, US, and UK began sharing fusion research.\nA \"tokamak stampede\" occurred after 1968, when British Culham Laboratory scientists verified high performance results of the Kurchatov Institute's T-3 tokamak. It had been demonstrated that a stable plasma equilibrium requires magnetic field lines that wind around the torus in a helix shape. The z-pinch and stellarator concepts of magnetic confinement had attempted this, but demonstrated serious instabilities. The safety factor (labelled \"q\" in mathematical notation) guided tokamak development: tokamaks with \"q &gt; 1\" strongly suppressed these instabilities.\nBy the mid-1970s, dozens of tokamaks were in use around the world. The Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL) in the US became another center of research, beginning with the 1975 Princeton Large Torus. In the late 1970s, the Kurchatov Institute tested the first superconducting magnets and divertors in tokamaks, ubiquitous in modern large designs.\nThe Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor (TFTR),\nand the Joint European Torus (JET)\nwere the first to run experiments with an admixture of rare tritium to deuterium, previous reactors demonstrated fusion in a deuterium plasma.\nBoth reactors developed understanding of alpha particles' role in heating fusion plasma. JET also researched the high-confinement mode, and set magnetic confinement fusion power records standing as of 2025[ [update]], for energy gain factor (\"Q\" = 0.67), total energy output (69\u00a0MJ), and fusion power (16 MW).\nThese machines demonstrated new problems that limited their performance. Solving these would require a much larger and more expensive machine, beyond the abilities of any one country. After an initial agreement between Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev in November 1985, the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) project emerged; construction of the complex began in Cadarache, France in 2013, and tokamak assembly began in 2020.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe word \"tokamak\" is a transliteration of the Russian word , an acronym of either:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nor:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe term \"tokamak\" was coined in 1957 by Igor Golovin, a student of academician Igor Kurchatov. It originally sounded like \"tokamag\" (\"\u0442\u043e\u043a\u0430\u043c\u0430\u0433\") \u2014 an acronym of the words \"\"to\"roidal \"cha\"mber \"mag\"netic\" (\"\"\u0442\u043e\"\u0440\u043e\u0438\u0434\u0430\u043b\u044c\u043d\u0430\u044f \"\u043a\u0430\"\u043c\u0435\u0440\u0430 \"\u043c\u0430\u0433\"\u043d\u0438\u0442\u043d\u0430\u044f\"), but Natan Yavlinsky, the author of the first toroidal system, proposed replacing \"-mag\" with \"-mak\" for euphony. Later, this name was borrowed by many languages.\nThe acronym \"\u0442\u043e\u043a\u0430\u043c\u0430\u0433\" ends in a \u0433, which normally represents a voiced velar stop [g] in Russian orthography, but in Russian this sound devoices to a voiceless velar stop [k] (otherwise written \u043a) at the end of a word, so both spellings are pronounced identically.\nHistory.\nFirst steps.\nIn 1934, Mark Oliphant, Paul Harteck and Ernest Rutherford were the first to achieve fusion on Earth, using a particle accelerator to shoot deuterium nuclei into metal foil containing deuterium or other atoms. This allowed them to measure the nuclear cross section of various fusion reactions, and determined that the deuterium\u2013deuterium reaction occurred at a lower energy than other reactions, peaking at about 100,000\u00a0electronvolts (100\u00a0keV).\nAccelerator-based fusion is not practical because the reactor cross section is tiny; most of the particles in the accelerator will scatter off the fuel, not fuse with it. These scatterings cause the particles to lose energy to the point where they can no longer undergo fusion. The energy put into these particles is thus lost, and it is easy to demonstrate this is much more energy than the resulting fusion reactions can release.\nTo maintain fusion and produce net energy output, the bulk of the fuel must be raised to high temperatures so its atoms are constantly colliding at high speed; this gives rise to the name \"thermonuclear\" due to the high temperatures needed to bring it about. In 1944, Enrico Fermi calculated the reaction would be self-sustaining at about 50,000,000 K; at that temperature, the rate that energy is given off by the reactions is high enough that they heat the surrounding fuel rapidly enough to maintain the temperature against losses to the environment, continuing the reaction.\nDuring the Manhattan Project, the first practical way to reach these temperatures was created, using an atomic bomb. In 1944, Fermi gave a talk on the physics of fusion in the context of a then-hypothetical hydrogen bomb. However, some thought had already been given to \"controlled\" fusion, and James L. Tuck and Stanislaw Ulam had attempted such using shaped charges driving a metal foil infused with deuterium, although without success.\nThe first attempts to build a practical fusion machine took place in the United Kingdom, where George Paget Thomson had selected the pinch effect as a promising technique in 1945. After several failed attempts to gain funding, he gave up and asked two graduate students, Stanley (Stan) W. Cousins and Alan Alfred Ware (1924\u20132010), to build something out of surplus radar equipment. This successfully operated in 1948, but showed no clear evidence of fusion and failed to gain the interest of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment.\nLavrentiev's letter.\nIn 1950, Oleg Lavrentiev, then a Soviet Army sergeant stationed on Sakhalin, wrote a letter to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The letter outlined the idea of using an atomic bomb to ignite fusion fuel, and then went on to describe a system that used electrostatic fields to contain hot plasma in a steady state for energy production.\nThe letter was sent to Andrei Sakharov for comment. Sakharov noted that \"the author formulates a very important and not necessarily hopeless problem\", and found that his main concern in the arrangement was that the plasma would hit the electrode wires, and that \"wide meshes and a thin current-carrying part which will have to reflect almost all incident nuclei back into the\nreactor.\"\nSome indication of the importance given to Lavrentiev's letter can be seen in the speed with which it was processed; the letter was received by the Central Committee on 29 July, Sakharov sent his review in on 18 August, by October, Sakharov and Igor Tamm had completed the first detailed study of a fusion reactor, and they had asked for funding to build it in January 1951.\nMagnetic confinement.\nWhen heated to fusion temperatures, the electrons in atoms dissociate, resulting in a fluid of nuclei and electrons known as plasma. Unlike electrically neutral atoms, a plasma is electrically conductive, and can, therefore, be manipulated by electrical or magnetic fields.\nSakharov's concern about the electrodes led him to consider using magnetic confinement instead of electrostatic. In the case of a magnetic field, the particles will circle around the lines of force. As the particles are moving at high speed, their resulting paths look like a helix. If one arranges a magnetic field so lines of force are parallel and close together, the particles orbiting adjacent lines may collide, and fuse.\nSuch a field can be created in a solenoid, a cylinder with magnets wrapped around the outside. The combined fields of the magnets create a set of parallel magnetic lines running down the length of the cylinder. This arrangement prevents the particles from moving sideways to the wall of the cylinder, but it does not prevent them from running out the end. The obvious solution to this problem is to bend the cylinder around into a donut shape, or torus, so that the lines form a series of continual rings. In this arrangement, the particles circle endlessly.\nSakharov discussed the concept with Igor Tamm, and by the end of October 1950 the two had written a proposal and sent it to Igor Kurchatov, the director of the atomic bomb project within the USSR, and his deputy, Igor Golovin. However, this initial proposal ignored a fundamental problem; when arranged along a straight solenoid, the external magnets are evenly spaced, but when bent around into a torus, they are closer together on the inside of the ring than the outside. This leads to uneven forces that cause the particles to drift away from their magnetic lines.\nDuring visits to the Laboratory of Measuring Instruments of the USSR Academy of Sciences (LIPAN), the Soviet nuclear research centre, Sakharov suggested two possible solutions to this problem. One was to suspend a current-carrying ring in the centre of the torus. The current in the ring would produce a magnetic field that would mix with the one from the magnets on the outside. The resulting field would be twisted into a helix, so that any given particle would find itself repeatedly on the outside, then inside, of the torus. The drifts caused by the uneven fields are in opposite directions on the inside and outside, so over the course of multiple orbits around the long axis of the torus, the opposite drifts would cancel out. Alternately, he suggested using an external magnet to induce a current in the plasma itself, instead of a separate metal ring, which would have the same effect.\nIn January 1951, Kurchatov arranged a meeting at LIPAN to consider Sakharov's concepts. They found widespread interest and support, and in February a report on the topic was forwarded to Lavrentiy Beria, who oversaw the atomic efforts in the USSR. For a time, nothing was heard back.\nRichter and the birth of fusion research.\nOn 25 March 1951, Argentine President Juan Per\u00f3n announced that a former German scientist, Ronald Richter, had succeeded in producing fusion at a laboratory scale as part of what is now known as the Huemul Project. Scientists around the world were excited by the announcement, but soon concluded it was not true; simple calculations showed that his experimental setup could not produce enough energy to heat the fusion fuel to the needed temperatures.\nAlthough dismissed by nuclear researchers, the widespread news coverage meant politicians were suddenly aware of, and receptive to, fusion research. In the UK, Thomson was suddenly granted considerable funding. Over the next months, two projects based on the pinch system were up and running. In the US, Lyman Spitzer read the Huemul story, realized it was false, and set about designing a machine that would work. In May he was awarded $50,000 to begin research on his stellarator concept. Jim Tuck had returned to the UK briefly and saw Thomson's pinch machines. When he returned to Los Alamos he also received $50,000 directly from the Los Alamos budget.\nSimilar events occurred in the USSR. In mid-April, Dmitri Efremov of the Scientific Research Institute of Electrophysical Apparatus stormed into Kurchatov's study with a magazine containing a story about Richter's work, demanding to know why they were beaten by the Argentines. Kurchatov immediately contacted Beria with a proposal to set up a separate fusion research laboratory with Lev Artsimovich as director. Only days later, on 5 May, the proposal had been signed by Joseph Stalin.\nNew ideas.\nBy October, Sakharov and Tamm had completed a far more detailed consideration of their original proposal, calling for something with a major radius (of the torus as a whole) of and a minor radius (the interior of the cylinder) of . The proposal suggested the system could produce of tritium a day, or breed of U233 a day.\nAs the idea was further developed, it was realized that a current in the plasma could create a field that was strong enough to confine the plasma as well, removing the need for the external coils. At this point, the Soviet researchers had re-invented the pinch system being developed in the UK, although they had come to this design from a very different starting point.\nOnce the idea of using the pinch effect for confinement had been proposed, a much simpler solution became evident. Instead of a large toroid, one could simply induce the current into a linear tube, which could cause the plasma within to collapse down into a filament. This had a huge advantage; the current in the plasma would heat it through normal resistive heating, but this would not heat the plasma to fusion temperatures. However, as the plasma collapsed, the adiabatic process would result in the temperature rising dramatically, more than enough for fusion. With this development, only Golovin and Natan Yavlinsky continued considering the more static toroidal arrangement.\nInstability.\nOn 4 July 1952, Nikolai Filippov's group measured neutrons being released from a linear pinch machine. Lev Artsimovich demanded that they check everything before concluding fusion had occurred, and during these checks, they found that the neutrons were not from fusion at all. This same linear arrangement had also occurred to researchers in the UK and US, and their machines showed the same behaviour. But the great secrecy surrounding the type of research meant that none of the groups were aware that others were also working on it, let alone having the identical problem.\nAfter much study, it was found that some of the released neutrons were produced by instabilities in the plasma. There were two common types of instability, the \"sausage\" that was seen primarily in linear machines, and the \"kink\" which was most common in the toroidal machines. Groups in all three countries began studying the formation of these instabilities and potential ways to address them. Important contributions to the field were made by Martin David Kruskal and Martin Schwarzschild in the US, and Shafranov in the USSR.\nOne idea that came from these studies became known as the \"stabilized pinch\". This concept added additional coils to the outside of the chamber, which created a magnetic field that would be present in the plasma before the pinch discharge. In most concepts, the externally induced field was relatively weak, and because a plasma is diamagnetic, it penetrated only the outer areas of the plasma. When the pinch discharge occurred and the plasma quickly contracted, this field became \"frozen in\" to the resulting filament, creating a strong field in its outer layers. In the US, this was known as \"giving the plasma a backbone\".\nSakharov revisited his original toroidal concepts and came to a slightly different conclusion about how to stabilize the plasma. The layout would be the same as the stabilized pinch concept, but the role of the two fields would be reversed. Instead of weak externally induced magnetic fields providing stabilization and a strong pinch current responsible for confinement, in the new layout, the external field would be much more powerful in order to provide the majority of confinement, while the current would be much smaller and responsible for the stabilizing effect.\nSteps toward declassification.\nIn 1955, with the linear approaches still subject to instability, the first toroidal device was built in the USSR. TMP was a classic pinch machine, similar to models in the UK and US of the same era. The vacuum chamber was made of ceramic, and the spectra of the discharges showed silica, meaning the plasma was not perfectly confined by magnetic field and hitting the walls of the chamber. Two smaller machines followed, using copper shells. The conductive shells were intended to help stabilize the plasma, but were not completely successful in any of the machines that tried it.\nWith progress apparently stalled, in 1955, Kurchatov called an All Union conference of Soviet researchers with the ultimate aim of opening up fusion research within the USSR. In April 1956, Kurchatov travelled to the UK as part of a widely publicized visit by Nikita Khrushchev and Nikolai Bulganin. He offered to give a talk at Atomic Energy Research Establishment, at the former RAF Harwell, where he shocked the hosts by presenting a detailed historical overview of the Soviet fusion efforts. He took time to note, in particular, the neutrons seen in early machines and warned that neutrons did not mean fusion.\nUnknown to Kurchatov, the British ZETA stabilized pinch machine was being built at the far end of the former runway. ZETA was, by far, the largest and most powerful fusion machine to date. Supported by experiments on earlier designs that had been modified to include stabilization, ZETA intended to produce low levels of fusion reactions. This was apparently a great success, and in January 1958, they announced the fusion had been achieved in ZETA based on the release of neutrons and measurements of the plasma temperature.\nVitaly Shafranov and Stanislav Braginskii examined the news reports and attempted to figure out how it worked. One possibility they considered was the use of weak \"frozen in\" fields, but rejected this, believing the fields would not last long enough. They then concluded ZETA was essentially identical to the devices they had been studying, with strong external fields.\nFirst tokamaks.\nBy this time, Soviet researchers had decided to build a larger toroidal machine along the lines suggested by Sakharov. In particular, their design considered one important point found in Kruskal's and Shafranov's works; if the helical path of the particles made them circulate around the plasma's circumference more rapidly than they circulated the long axis of the torus, the kink instability would be strongly suppressed.\nToday this basic concept is known as the \"safety factor\". The ratio of the number of times the particle orbits the major axis compared to the minor axis is denoted \"q\", and the \"Kruskal-Shafranov Limit\" stated that the kink will be suppressed as long as \"q\" &gt; 1. This path is controlled by the relative strengths of the externally induced magnetic field compared to the field created by the internal current. To have \"q\" &gt; 1, the external magnets must be much more powerful, or alternatively, the internal current has to be reduced.\nFollowing this criterion, design began on a new reactor, T-1, which today is known as the first real tokamak. T-1 used both stronger external magnetic fields and a reduced current compared to stabilized pinch machines like ZETA. The success of the T-1 resulted in its recognition as the first working tokamak.\nFor his work on \"powerful impulse discharges in a gas, to obtain unusually high temperatures needed for thermonuclear processes\", Yavlinskii was awarded the Lenin Prize and the Stalin Prize in 1958. Yavlinskii was already preparing the design of an even larger model, later built as T-3. With the apparently successful ZETA announcement, Yavlinskii's concept was viewed very favourably.\nDetails of ZETA became public in a series of articles in \"Nature\" later in January. To Shafranov's surprise, the system did use the \"frozen in\" field concept. He remained sceptical, but a team at the Ioffe Institute in St. Petersburg began plans to build a similar machine known as Alpha. Only a few months later, in May, the ZETA team issued a release stating they had not achieved fusion, and that they had been misled by erroneous measures of the plasma temperature.\nT-1 began operation at the end of 1958. It demonstrated very high energy losses through radiation. This was traced to impurities in the plasma due to the vacuum system causing outgassing from the container materials. In order to explore solutions to this problem, another small device was constructed, T-2. This used an internal liner of corrugated metal that was baked at to cook off trapped gasses.\nAtoms for Peace and the doldrums.\nAs part of the second Atoms for Peace meeting in Geneva in September 1958, the Soviet delegation released many papers covering their fusion research. Among them was a set of initial results on their toroidal machines, which at that point had shown nothing of note.\nThe \"star\" of the show was a large model of Spitzer's stellarator, which immediately caught the attention of the Soviets. In contrast to their designs, the stellarator produced the required twisted paths in the plasma without driving a current through it, using a series of external coils (producing internal magnetic fields) that could operate in the steady state rather than the pulses of the induction system that produced the axial current. Kurchatov began asking Yavlinskii to change their T-3 design to a stellarator, but they convinced him that the current provided a useful second role in heating, something the stellarator lacked.\nAt the time of the show, the stellarator had suffered a long string of minor problems that were just being solved. Solving these revealed that the diffusion rate of the plasma was much faster than theory predicted. Similar problems were seen in all the contemporary designs, for one reason or another. The stellarator, various pinch concepts and the magnetic mirror machines in both the US and USSR all demonstrated problems that limited their confinement times.\nFrom the first studies of controlled fusion, there was a problem lurking in the background. During the Manhattan Project, David Bohm had been part of the team working on isotopic separation of uranium. In the post-war era he continued working with plasmas in magnetic fields. Using basic theory, one would expect the plasma to diffuse across the lines of force at a rate inversely proportional to the square of the strength of the field, meaning that small increases in force would greatly improve confinement. But based on their experiments, Bohm developed an empirical formula, now known as Bohm diffusion, that suggested the rate was linear with the magnetic force, not its square.\nIf Bohm's formula was correct, there was no hope one could build a fusion reactor based on magnetic confinement. To confine the plasma at the temperatures needed for fusion, the magnetic field would have to be orders of magnitude greater than any known magnet. Spitzer ascribed the difference between the Bohm and classical diffusion rates to turbulence in the plasma, and believed the steady fields of the stellarator would not suffer from this problem. Various experiments at that time suggested the Bohm rate did not apply, and that the classical formula was correct.\nBut by the early 1960s, with all of the various designs leaking plasma at a prodigious rate, Spitzer himself concluded that the Bohm scaling was an inherent quality of plasmas, and that magnetic confinement would not work. The entire field descended into what became known as \"the doldrums\", a period of intense pessimism.\nProgress in the 1960s.\nIn contrast to the other designs, the experimental tokamaks appeared to be progressing well, so well that a minor theoretical problem was now a real concern. In the presence of gravity, there is a small pressure gradient in the plasma, formerly small enough to ignore but now becoming something that had to be addressed. This led to the addition of yet another set of coils in 1962, which produced a vertical magnetic field that offset these effects. These were a success, and by the mid-1960s the machines began to show signs that they were beating the Bohm limit.\nAt the 1965 Second International Atomic Energy Agency Conference on fusion at the UK's newly opened Culham Centre for Fusion Energy, Artsimovich reported that their systems were surpassing the Bohm limit by 10 times. Spitzer, reviewing the presentations, suggested that the Bohm limit may still apply; the results were within the range of experimental error of results seen on the stellarators, and the temperature measurements, based on the magnetic fields, were simply not trustworthy.\nThe next major international fusion meeting was held in August 1968 in Novosibirsk. By this time two additional tokamak designs had been completed, TM-2 in 1965, and T-4 in 1968. Results from T-3 had continued to improve, and similar results were coming from early tests of the new reactors. At the meeting, the Soviet delegation announced that T-3 was producing electron temperatures of 1000\u00a0eV (equivalent to 10 million degrees Celsius) and that confinement time was at least 50 times the Bohm limit.\nThese results were at least 10 times that of any other machine. If correct, they represented an enormous leap for the fusion community. Spitzer remained skeptical, noting that the temperature measurements were still based on the indirect calculations from the magnetic properties of the plasma. Many concluded they were due to an effect known as runaway electrons, and that the Soviets were measuring only those extremely energetic electrons and not the bulk temperature. The Soviets countered with several arguments suggesting the temperature they were measuring was Maxwellian, and the debate raged.\nCulham Five.\nIn the aftermath of ZETA, the UK teams began the development of new plasma diagnostic tools to provide more accurate measurements. Among these was the use of a laser to directly measure the temperature of the bulk electrons using Thomson scattering. This technique was well known and respected in the fusion community; Artsimovich had publicly called it \"brilliant\". Artsimovich invited Bas Pease, the head of Culham, to use their devices on the Soviet reactors. At the height of the Cold War, in what is still considered a major political manoeuvre on Artsimovich's part, British physicists were allowed to visit the Kurchatov Institute, the heart of the Soviet nuclear bomb effort.\nThe British team, nicknamed \"The Culham Five\", arrived late in 1968. After a lengthy installation and calibration process, the team measured the temperatures over a period of many experimental runs. Initial results were available by August 1969; the Soviets were correct, their results were accurate. The team phoned the results home to Culham, who then passed them along in a confidential phone call to Washington. The final results were published in \"Nature\" in November 1969. The results of this announcement have been described as a \"veritable stampede\" of tokamak construction around the world.\nOne serious problem remained. Because the electrical current in the plasma was much lower and produced much less compression than a pinch machine, this meant the temperature of the plasma was limited to the resistive heating rate of the current. First proposed in 1950, Spitzer resistivity stated that the electrical resistance of a plasma was reduced as the temperature increased, meaning the heating rate of the plasma would slow as the devices improved and temperatures were pressed higher. Calculations demonstrated that the resulting maximum temperatures while staying within \"q\" &gt; 1 would be limited to the low millions of degrees. Artsimovich had been quick to point this out in Novosibirsk, stating that future progress would require new heating methods to be developed.\nUS turmoil.\nOne of the people attending the Novosibirsk meeting in 1968 was Amasa Stone Bishop, one of the leaders of the US fusion program. One of the few other devices to show clear evidence of beating the Bohm limit at that time was the multipole concept. Both Lawrence Livermore and the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL), home of Spitzer's stellarator, were building variations on the multipole design. While moderately successful on their own, T-3 greatly outperformed either machine. Bishop was concerned that the multipoles were redundant and thought the US should consider a tokamak of its own.\nWhen he raised the issue at a December 1968 meeting, directors of the labs refused to consider it. Melvin B. Gottlieb of Princeton was exasperated, asking \"Do you think that this committee can out-think the scientists?\" With the major labs demanding they control their own research, one lab found itself left out. Oak Ridge had originally entered the fusion field with studies for reactor fueling systems, but branched out into a mirror program of their own. By the mid-1960s, their DCX designs were running out of ideas, offering nothing that the similar program at the more prestigious and politically powerful Livermore did not. This made them highly receptive to new concepts.\nAfter a considerable internal debate, Herman Postma formed a small group in early 1969 to consider the tokamak. They came up with a new design, later christened Ormak, that had several novel features. Primary among them was the way the external field was created in a single large copper block, fed power from a large transformer below the torus. This was as opposed to traditional designs that used electric current windings on the outside. They felt the single block would produce a much more uniform field. It would also have the advantage of allowing the torus to have a smaller major radius, lacking the need to route cables through the donut hole, leading to a lower \"aspect ratio\", which the Soviets had already suggested would produce better results.\nTokamak race in the US.\nIn early 1969, Artsimovich visited MIT, where he was hounded by those interested in fusion. He finally agreed to give several lectures in April and then allowed lengthy question-and-answer sessions. As these went on, MIT itself grew interested in the tokamak, having previously stayed out of the fusion field for a variety of reasons. Bruno Coppi was at MIT at the time, and following the same concepts as Postma's team, came up with his own low-aspect-ratio concept, Alcator. Instead of Ormak's toroidal transformer, Alcator used traditional ring-shaped magnetic field coils but required them to be much smaller than existing designs. MIT's Francis Bitter Magnet Laboratory was the world leader in magnet design and they were confident they could build them.\nDuring 1969, two additional groups entered the field. At General Atomics, Tihiro Ohkawa had been developing multipole reactors, and submitted a concept based on these ideas. This was a tokamak that would have a non-circular plasma cross-section; the same math that suggested a lower aspect-ratio would improve performance also suggested that a C or D-shaped plasma would do the same. He called the new design Doublet. Meanwhile, a group at University of Texas at Austin was proposing a relatively simple tokamak to explore heating the plasma through deliberately induced turbulence, the Texas Turbulent Tokamak.\nWhen the members of the Atomic Energy Commissions' Fusion Steering Committee met again in June 1969, they had \"tokamak proposals coming out of our ears\". The only major lab working on a toroidal design that was not proposing a tokamak was Princeton, who refused to consider it in spite of their Model C stellarator being just about perfect for such a conversion. They continued to offer a long list of reasons why the Model C should not be converted. When these were questioned, a furious debate broke out about whether the Soviet results were reliable.\nWatching the debate take place, Gottlieb had a change of heart. There was no point moving forward with the tokamak if the Soviet electron temperature measurements were not accurate, so he formulated a plan to either prove or disprove their results. While swimming in the pool during the lunch break, he told Harold Furth his plan, to which Furth replied: \"well, maybe you're right.\" After lunch, the various teams presented their designs, at which point Gottlieb presented his idea for a \"stellarator-tokamak\" based on the Model C.\nThe Standing Committee noted that this system could be complete in six months, while Ormak would take a year. It was only a short time later that the confidential results from the Culham Five were released. When they met again in October, the Standing Committee released funding for all of these proposals. The Model C's new configuration, soon named Symmetrical Tokamak, intended to simply verify the Soviet results, while the others would explore ways to go well beyond T-3.\nHeating: US takes the lead.\nExperiments on the Symmetric Tokamak began in May 1970, and by early the next year they had confirmed the Soviet results and then surpassed them. The stellarator was abandoned, and PPPL turned its considerable expertise to the problem of heating the plasma. Two concepts seemed to hold promise. PPPL proposed using magnetic compression, a pinch-like technique to compress a warm plasma to raise its temperature, but providing that compression through magnets rather than current. Oak Ridge suggested neutral beam injection, small particle accelerators that would shoot fuel atoms through the surrounding magnetic field where they would collide with the plasma and heat it.\nPPPL's Adiabatic Toroidal Compressor (ATC) began operation in May 1972, followed shortly thereafter by a neutral-beam equipped Ormak. Both demonstrated significant problems, but PPPL leapt past Oak Ridge by fitting beam injectors to ATC and provided clear evidence of successful heating in 1973. This success \"scooped\" Oak Ridge, who fell from favour within the Washington Steering Committee.\nBy this time a much larger design based on beam heating was under construction, the Princeton Large Torus, or PLT. PLT was designed specifically to \"give a clear indication whether the tokamak concept plus auxiliary heating can form a basis for a future fusion reactor\". PLT was an enormous success, continually raising its internal temperature until it hit 60 million Celsius (8,000\u00a0eV, eight times T-3's record) in 1978. This is a key point in the development of the tokamak; fusion reactions become self-sustaining at temperatures between 50 and 100 million Celsius, PLT demonstrated that this was technically achievable.\nThese experiments, especially PLT, put the US far in the lead in tokamak research. This is due largely to budget; a tokamak cost about $500,000 and the US annual fusion budget was around $25 million at that time. They could afford to explore all of the promising methods of heating, ultimately discovering neutral beams to be among the most effective.\nDuring this period, Robert Hirsch took over the Directorate of fusion development in the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission. Hirsch felt that the program could not be sustained at its current funding levels without demonstrating tangible results. He began to reformulate the entire program. What had once been a lab-led effort of mostly scientific exploration was now a Washington-led effort to build a working power-producing reactor. This was given a boost by the 1973 oil crisis, which led to greatly increased research into alternative energy systems.\n1980s: great hope, great disappointment.\nBy the late-1970s, tokamaks had reached all the conditions needed for a practical fusion reactor; in 1978 PLT had demonstrated ignition temperatures, the next year the Soviet T-7 successfully used superconducting magnets for the first time, Doublet proved to be a success and led to almost all future designs adopting this \"shaped plasma\" approach. It appeared all that was needed to build a power-producing reactor was to put all of these design concepts into a single machine, one that would be capable of running with the radioactive tritium in its fuel mix.\nDuring the 1970s, four major second-generation proposals were funded worldwide. The Soviets continued their development lineage with the T-15, while a pan-European effort was developing the Joint European Torus (JET) and Japan began the JT-60 effort (originally known as the \"Breakeven Plasma Test Facility\"). In the US, Hirsch began formulating plans for a similar design, skipping over proposals for another stepping-stone design directly to a tritium-burning one. This emerged as the Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor (TFTR), run directly from Washington and not linked to any specific lab. Originally favouring Oak Ridge as the host, Hirsch moved it to PPPL after others convinced him they would work the hardest on it because they had the most to lose.\nThe excitement was so widespread that several commercial ventures to produce commercial tokamaks began around this time. Best known among these, in 1978, Bob Guccione, publisher of Penthouse Magazine, met Robert Bussard and became the world's biggest and most committed private investor in fusion technology, ultimately putting $20 million of his own money into Bussard's Compact Tokamak. Funding by the Riggs Bank led to this effort being known as the Riggatron.\nTFTR won the construction race and began operation in 1982, followed shortly by JET in 1983 and JT-60 in 1985. JET quickly took the lead in critical experiments, moving from test gases to deuterium and increasingly powerful \"shots\". But it soon became clear that none of the new systems were working as expected. A host of new instabilities appeared, along with a number of more practical problems that continued to interfere with their performance. On top of this, dangerous \"excursions\" of the plasma hitting with the walls of the reactor were evident in both TFTR and JET. Even when working perfectly, plasma confinement at fusion temperatures, the so-called \"fusion triple product\" continued to be far below what would be needed for a practical reactor design.\nThrough the mid-1980s the reasons for many of these problems became clear, and various solutions were offered. However, these would significantly increase the size and complexity of the machines. A follow-on design incorporating these changes would be both enormous and vastly more expensive than either JET or TFTR. A new period of pessimism descended on the fusion field.\nITER.\nAt the same time these experiments were demonstrating problems, much of the impetus for the US's massive funding disappeared; in 1986 Ronald Reagan declared the 1970s energy crisis was over, and funding for advanced energy sources had been slashed in the early 1980s.\nSome thought of an international reactor design had been ongoing since June 1973 under the name INTOR, for INternational TOkamak Reactor. This was originally started through an agreement between Richard Nixon and Leonid Brezhnev, but had been moving slowly since its first real meeting on 23 November 1978.\nDuring the Geneva Summit in November 1985, Reagan raised the issue with Mikhail Gorbachev and proposed reforming the organization. \"... The two leaders emphasized the potential importance of the work aimed at utilizing controlled thermonuclear fusion for peaceful purposes and, in this connection, advocated the widest practicable development of international cooperation in obtaining this source of energy, which is essentially inexhaustible, for the benefit for all mankind.\"\nThe next year, an agreement was signed between the US, Soviet Union, European Union and Japan, creating the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor organization.\nDesign work began in 1988, and since that time the ITER reactor has been the primary tokamak design effort worldwide.\nHigh Field Tokamaks.\nIt has been known for a long time that stronger field magnets would enable high energy gain in a much smaller tokamak, with concepts such as https://, and the Compact Ignition Tokamak (CIT) being proposed decades ago.\nThe commercial availability of high temperature superconductors (HTS) in the 2010s opened a promising pathway to building the higher field magnets required to achieve ITER-like levels of energy gain in a compact device. To leverage this new technology, the MIT Plasma Science and Fusion Center (PSFC) and MIT spinout Commonwealth Fusion Systems (CFS) successfully built and tested the https:// in 2021 to demonstrate the necessary 20 Tesla magnetic field needed to build SPARC, a device designed to achieve a similar fusion gain as ITER but with only ~1/40th ITER's plasma volume.\nBritish startup Tokamak Energy is also planning on building a net-energy tokamak using HTS magnets, but with the spherical tokamak variant.\nThe joint EU/Japan JT-60SA reactor achieved first plasma on October 23, 2023, after a two-year delay caused by an electrical short.\nDesign.\nBasic problem.\nPositively charged ions and negatively charged electrons in a fusion plasma are at very high temperatures, and have correspondingly large velocities. In order to maintain the fusion process, particles from the hot plasma must be confined in the central region, or the plasma will rapidly cool. Magnetic confinement fusion devices exploit the fact that charged particles in a magnetic field experience a Lorentz force and follow helical paths along the field lines.\nThe simplest magnetic confinement system is a solenoid. A plasma in a solenoid will spiral about the lines of field running down its center, preventing motion towards the sides. However, this does not prevent motion towards the ends. The obvious solution is to bend the solenoid around into a circle, forming a torus. However, it was demonstrated that such an arrangement is not uniform; for purely geometric reasons, the field on the outside edge of the torus is lower than on the inside edge. This asymmetry causes the electrons and ions to drift across the field, and eventually hit the walls of the torus.\nThe solution is to shape the lines so they do not simply run around the torus, but twist around like the stripes on a barber pole or candycane. In such a field any single particle will find itself at the outside edge where it will drift one way, then as it follows its magnetic line around the torus it will find itself on the inside edge, where it will drift the other way. This cancellation is not perfect, but calculations showed it was enough to allow the fuel to remain in the reactor for a useful time.\nTokamak solution.\nThe two first solutions to making a design with the required twist were the stellarator which did so through a mechanical arrangement, twisting the entire torus, and the z-pinch design which ran an electrical current through the plasma to create a second magnetic field to the same end. Both demonstrated improved confinement times compared to a simple torus, but both also demonstrated a variety of effects that caused the plasma to be lost from the reactors at rates that were not sustainable.\nThe tokamak is essentially identical to the z-pinch concept in its physical layout. Its key innovation was the realization that the instabilities that were causing the pinch to lose its plasma could be controlled. The issue was how \"twisty\" the fields were; fields that caused the particles to transit inside and out more than once per orbit around the long axis torus were much more stable than devices that had less twist. This ratio of twists to orbits became known as the \"safety factor\", denoted \"q\". Previous devices operated at \"q\" about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443, while the tokamak operates at \"q\" \u226b 1. This increases stability by orders of magnitude.\nWhen the problem is considered even more closely, the need for a vertical (parallel to the axis of rotation) component of the magnetic field arises. The Lorentz force of the toroidal plasma current in the vertical field provides the inward force that holds the plasma torus in equilibrium.\nOther issues.\nEarly tokamaks had an ion temperature limited by the empirical Artsimovich formula:\nformula_1\nWhile the tokamak addresses the issue of plasma stability in a gross sense, plasmas are also subject to a number of dynamic instabilities. One of these, the kink instability, is strongly suppressed by the tokamak layout, a side-effect of the high safety factors of tokamaks. The lack of kinks allowed the tokamak to operate at much higher temperatures than previous machines, and this allowed a host of new phenomena to appear.\nOne of these, the banana orbits, is caused by the wide range of particle energies in a tokamak \u2013 much of the fuel is hot, but a certain percentage is much cooler. Due to the high twist of the fields in the tokamak, particles following their lines of force rapidly move towards the inner edge and then outer. As they move inward they are subject to increasing magnetic fields due to the smaller radius concentrating the field. The low-energy particles in the fuel will reflect off this increasing field and begin to travel backwards through the fuel, colliding with the higher energy nuclei and scattering them out of the plasma. This process causes fuel to be lost from the reactor, although this process is slow enough that a practical reactor is still well within reach.\nAnother instability is tearing instability. In 2024 researchers used reinforcement learning against a multimodal dynamic model to measure and forecast such instabilities based on signals from multiple diagnostics and actuators at 25 millisecond intervals. This forecast was used to reduce tearing instabilities in DIII-D6, in the US. The reward function balanced the conflicting objectives of maximum plasma pressure and instability risks. In particular, the plasma actively tracked the stable path while maintaining H-mode performance.\nBreakeven, \"Q\", and ignition.\nOne of the first goals for any controlled fusion device is to reach \"breakeven\", the point where the energy being released by the fusion reactions is equal to the amount of energy being used to maintain the reaction. The ratio of output to input energy is denoted \"Q\", and breakeven corresponds to a \"Q\" of 1. A \"Q\" of more than one is needed for the reactor to generate net energy, but for practical reasons, it is desirable for it to be much higher.\nOnce breakeven is reached, further improvements in confinement generally lead to a rapidly increasing \"Q\". That is because some of the energy being given off by the fusion reactions of the most common fusion fuel, a 50-50 mix of deuterium and tritium, is in the form of alpha particles. These can collide with the fuel nuclei in the plasma and heat it, reducing the amount of external heat needed. At some point, known as \"ignition\", this internal self-heating is enough to keep the reaction going without any external heating, corresponding to an infinite \"Q\".\nIn the case of the tokamak, this self-heating process is maximized if the alpha particles remain in the fuel long enough to guarantee they will collide with the fuel. As the alphas are electrically charged, they are subject to the same fields that are confining the fuel plasma. The amount of time they spend in the fuel can be maximized by ensuring their orbit in the field remains within the plasma. It can be demonstrated that this occurs when the electrical current in the plasma is about 3\u00a0MA.\nAdvanced tokamaks.\nIn the early 1970s, studies at Princeton into the use of high-power superconducting magnets in future tokamak designs examined the layout of the magnets. They noticed that the arrangement of the main toroidal coils meant that there was significantly more tension between the magnets on the inside of the curvature where they were closer together. Considering this, they noted that the tensional forces within the magnets would be evened out if they were shaped like a D, rather than an O. This became known as the \"Princeton D-coil\".\nThis was not the first time this sort of arrangement had been considered, although for entirely different reasons. The safety factor varies across the axis of the machine; for purely geometrical reasons, it is always smaller at the inside edge of the plasma closest to the machine's center because the long axis is shorter there. That means that a machine with an average \"q\" = 2 might still be less than 1 in certain areas. In the 1970s, it was suggested that one way to counteract this and produce a design with a higher average \"q\" would be to shape the magnetic fields so that the plasma only filled the outer half of the torus, shaped like a D or C when viewed end-on, instead of the normal circular cross section.\nOne of the first machines to incorporate a D-shaped plasma was the JET, which began its design work in 1973. This decision was made both for theoretical reasons as well as practical; because the force is larger on the inside edge of the torus, there is a large net force pressing inward on the entire reactor. The D-shape also had the advantage of reducing the net force, as well as making the supported inside edge flatter so it was easier to support. Code exploring the general layout noticed that a non-circular shape would slowly drift vertically, which led to the addition of an active feedback system to hold it in the center. Once JET had selected this layout, the General Atomics Doublet III team redesigned that machine into the D-IIID with a D-shaped cross-section, and it was selected for the Japanese JT-60 design as well. This layout has been largely universal since then.\nOne problem seen in all fusion reactors is that the presence of heavier elements causes energy to be lost at an increased rate, cooling the plasma. During the very earliest development of fusion power, a solution to this problem was found, the \"divertor\", essentially a large mass spectrometer that would cause the heavier elements to be flung out of the reactor. This was initially part of the stellarator designs, where it is easy to integrate into the magnetic windings. However, designing a divertor for a tokamak proved to be a very difficult design problem.\nAnother problem seen in all fusion designs is the heat load that the plasma places on the wall of the confinement vessel. There are materials that can handle this load, but they are generally undesirable and expensive heavy metals. When such materials are sputtered in collisions with hot ions, their atoms mix with the fuel and rapidly cool it. A solution used on most tokamak designs is the \"limiter\", a small ring of light metal that projected into the chamber so that the plasma would hit it before hitting the walls. This eroded the limiter and caused its atoms to mix with the fuel, but these lighter materials cause less disruption than the wall materials.\nWhen reactors moved to the D-shaped plasmas it was quickly noted that the escaping particle flux of the plasma could be shaped as well. Over time, this led to the idea of using the fields to create an internal divertor that flings the heavier elements out of the fuel, typically towards the bottom of the reactor. There, a pool of liquid lithium metal is used as a sort of limiter; the particles hit it and are rapidly cooled, remaining in the lithium. This internal pool is much easier to cool, due to its location, and although some lithium atoms are released into the plasma, its very low mass makes it a much smaller problem than even the lightest metals used previously.\nAs machines began to explore this newly shaped plasma, they noticed that certain arrangements of the fields and plasma parameters would sometimes enter what is now known as the high-confinement mode, or H-mode, which operated stably at higher temperatures and pressures. Operating in the H-mode, which can also be seen in stellarators, is now a major design goal of the tokamak design.\nFinally, it was noted that when the plasma had a non-uniform density it would give rise to internal electrical currents. This is known as the \"bootstrap current\". This allows a properly designed reactor to generate some of the internal current needed to twist the magnetic field lines without having to supply it from an external source. This has a number of advantages, and modern designs all attempt to generate as much of their total current through the bootstrap process as possible.\nBy the early 1990s, the combination of these features and others collectively gave rise to the \"advanced tokamak\" concept. This forms the basis of modern research, including ITER.\nPlasma disruptions.\nTokamaks are subject to events known as \"disruptions\" that cause confinement to be lost in milliseconds. There are two primary mechanisms. In one, the \"vertical displacement event\" (VDE), the entire plasma moves vertically until it touches the upper or lower section of the vacuum chamber. In the other, the \"major disruption\", long wavelength, non-axisymmetric magnetohydrodynamical instabilities cause the plasma to be forced into non-symmetrical shapes, often squeezed into the top and bottom of the chamber.\nWhen the plasma touches the vessel walls it undergoes rapid cooling, or \"thermal quenching\". In the major disruption case, this is normally accompanied by a brief increase in plasma current as the plasma concentrates. Quenching ultimately causes the plasma confinement to break up. In the case of the major disruption the current drops again, the \"current quench\". The initial increase in current is not seen in the VDE, and the thermal and current quench occurs at the same time. In both cases, the thermal and electrical load of the plasma is rapidly deposited on the reactor vessel, which has to be able to handle these loads. ITER is designed to handle 2600 of these events over its lifetime.\nFor modern high-energy devices, where plasma currents are on the order of 15 megaamperes in ITER, it is possible the brief increase in current during a major disruption will cross a critical threshold. This occurs when the current produces a force on the electrons that is higher than the frictional forces of the collisions between particles in the plasma. In this event, electrons can be rapidly accelerated to relativistic velocities, creating so-called \"runaway electrons\" in the relativistic runaway electron avalanche. These retain their energy even as the current quench is occurring on the bulk of the plasma.\nWhen confinement finally breaks down, these runaway electrons follow the path of least resistance and impact the side of the reactor. These can reach 12 megaamps of current deposited in a small area, well beyond the capabilities of any mechanical solution. In one famous case, the Tokamak de Fontenay aux Roses had a major disruption where the runaway electrons burned a hole through the vacuum chamber.\nThe occurrence of major disruptions in running tokamaks has always been rather high, of the order of a few percent of the total numbers of the shots. In currently operated tokamaks, the damage is often large but rarely dramatic. In the ITER tokamak, it is expected that the occurrence of a limited number of major disruptions will definitively damage the chamber with no possibility to restore the device. The development of systems to counter the effects of runaway electrons is considered a must-have piece of technology for the operational level ITER.\nA large amplitude of the central current density can also result in internal disruptions, or sawteeth, which do not generally result in termination of the discharge.\nDensities over the Greenwald limit, a bound depending on the plasma current and the minor radius, typically leads to disruptions. It has been exceeded up to factors of 10, but it remains an important concept describing the phenomenology of the transition of the plasma flow, which still needs to be understood.\nPlasma heating.\nIn an operating fusion reactor, part of the energy generated will serve to maintain the plasma temperature as fresh deuterium and tritium are introduced. However, in the startup of a reactor, either initially or after a temporary shutdown, the plasma will have to be heated to its operating temperature of greater than 10 keV (over 100 million degrees Celsius). In current tokamak (and other) magnetic fusion experiments, insufficient fusion energy is produced to maintain the plasma temperature, and constant external heating must be supplied. Chinese researchers set up the Experimental Advanced Superconducting Tokamak (EAST) in 2006, which can supposedly sustain a plasma temperature of 100 million degree Celsius for initiating fusion between hydrogen atoms, according to a November 2018 test.\nOhmic heating ~ inductive mode.\nSince the plasma is an electrical conductor, it is possible to heat the plasma by inducing a current through it; the induced current that provides most of the poloidal field is also a major source of initial heating.\nThe heating caused by the induced current is called ohmic (or resistive) heating; it is the same kind of heating that occurs in an electric light bulb or in an electric heater. The heat generated depends on the resistance of the plasma and the amount of electric current running through it. But as the temperature of heated plasma rises, the resistance decreases and ohmic heating becomes less effective. It appears that the maximum plasma temperature attainable by ohmic heating in a tokamak is 20\u201330 million degrees Celsius. To obtain still higher temperatures, additional heating methods must be used.\nThe current is induced by continually increasing the current through an electromagnetic winding linked with the plasma torus: the plasma can be viewed as the secondary winding of a transformer. This is inherently a pulsed process because there is a limit to the current through the primary (there are also other limitations on long pulses). Tokamaks must therefore either operate for short periods or rely on other means of heating and current drive.\nMagnetic compression.\nA gas can be heated by sudden compression. In the same way, the temperature of a plasma is increased if it is compressed rapidly by increasing the confining magnetic field. In a tokamak, this compression is achieved simply by moving the plasma into a region of higher magnetic field (i.e., radially inward). Since plasma compression brings the ions closer together, the process has the additional benefit of facilitating attainment of the required density for a fusion reactor.\nMagnetic compression was an area of research in the early \"tokamak stampede\", and was the purpose of one major design, the ATC. The concept has not been widely used since then, although a somewhat similar concept is part of the General Fusion design.\nNeutral-beam injection.\nNeutral-beam injection involves the introduction of high energy (rapidly moving) atoms or molecules into an ohmically heated, magnetically confined plasma within the tokamak.\nThe high energy atoms originate as ions in an arc chamber before being extracted through a high voltage grid set. The term \"ion source\" is used to generally mean the assembly consisting of a set of electron emitting filaments, an arc chamber volume, and a set of extraction grids. A second device, similar in concept, is used to separately accelerate electrons to the same energy. The much lighter mass of the electrons makes this device much smaller than its ion counterpart. The two beams then intersect, where the ions and electrons recombine into neutral atoms, allowing them to travel through the magnetic fields.\nOnce the neutral beam enters the tokamak, interactions with the main plasma ions occur. This has two effects. One is that the injected atoms re-ionize and become charged, thereby becoming trapped inside the reactor and adding to the fuel mass. The other is that the process of being ionized occurs through impacts with the rest of the fuel, and these impacts deposit energy in that fuel, heating it.\nThis form of heating has no inherent energy (temperature) limitation, in contrast to the ohmic method, but its rate is limited to the current in the injectors. Ion source extraction voltages are typically on the order of 50\u2013100 kV, and high voltage, negative ion sources (-1 MV) are being developed for ITER. The ITER Neutral Beam Test Facility in Padova will be the first ITER facility to start operation.\nWhile neutral beam injection is used primarily for plasma heating, it can also be used as a diagnostic tool and in feedback control by making a pulsed beam consisting of a string of brief 2\u201310 ms beam blips. Deuterium is a primary fuel for neutral beam heating systems and hydrogen and helium are sometimes used for selected experiments.\nRadio-frequency heating.\nHigh-frequency electromagnetic waves are generated by oscillators (often by gyrotrons or klystrons) outside the torus. If the waves have the correct frequency (or wavelength) and polarization, their energy can be transferred to the charged particles in the plasma, which in turn collide with other plasma particles, thus increasing the temperature of the bulk plasma. Various techniques exist including electron cyclotron resonance heating (ECRH) and ion cyclotron resonance heating. This energy is usually transferred by microwaves.\nParticle inventory.\nPlasma discharges within the tokamak's vacuum chamber consist of energized ions and atoms. The energy from these particles eventually reaches the inner wall of the chamber through radiation, collisions, or lack of confinement. The heat from the particles is removed via conduction through the chamber's inner wall to a water-cooling system, where the heated water proceeds to an external cooling system through convection.\nTurbomolecular or diffusion pumps allow for particles to be evacuated from the bulk volume and cryogenic pumps, consisting of a liquid helium-cooled surface, serve to effectively control the density throughout the discharge by providing an energy sink for condensation to occur. When done correctly, the fusion reactions produce large amounts of high energy neutrons. Being electrically neutral and relatively tiny, the neutrons are not affected by the magnetic fields nor are they stopped much by the surrounding vacuum chamber.\nThe neutron flux is reduced significantly at a purpose-built neutron shield boundary that surrounds the tokamak in all directions. Shield materials vary but are generally materials made of atoms which are close to the size of neutrons because these work best to absorb the neutron and its energy. Good candidate materials include those with much hydrogen, such as water and plastics. Boron atoms are also good absorbers of neutrons. Thus, concrete and polyethylene doped with boron make inexpensive neutron shielding materials.\nOnce freed, the neutron has a relatively short half-life of about 10 minutes before it decays into a proton and electron with the emission of energy. When the time comes to actually try to make electricity from a tokamak-based reactor, some of the neutrons produced in the fusion process would be absorbed by a liquid metal blanket and their kinetic energy would be used in heat transfer processes to ultimately turn a generator.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31440", "revid": "9475572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31440", "title": "Turbopump", "text": "Pump driven by a gas turbine\nA turbopump is a fluid pump with two main components: a liquid pump driven by a gas turbine, usually both mounted on the same shaft, or sometimes geared together. They were initially developed in Germany in the early 1940s. The most common purpose of a turbopump is to produce a high-pressure fluid for feeding a combustion chamber. While other use cases exist, they are most commonly found in liquid rocket engines. Turbopump fed systems scale much more favorably in large rockets than pressure fed systems, which require increasingly thick and heavy tanks to supply high chamber pressures in the engines. \nThere are two types of pumps that have been used in turbopumps: most common are centrifugal pumps, where the pumping is done by throwing fluid outward at high speed, while much rarer are axial flow pump, where alternating rotating and static blades progressively raise the pressure of a fluid. Axial flow pumps have small diameters but give relatively modest pressure increases. Although multiple compression stages are needed, axial flow pumps can work well for low density fluids. Centrifugal pumps are far more powerful for high-density fluids but require large diameters for low density fluids. \nDesign Principles.\nHydrodynamic Design.\nThe pump side of turbopumps consist of impellers that spin at very high speeds (thousands of RPM) in order to pump liquid propellants. Impellers are mounted on a central shaft, which also has a turbine mounted to it (or in some cases geared off on a different shaft). The turbine \"supplies\" shaft power, which is then \"consumed\" by the impellers in order to impart energy to the liquid propellants. Impellers mostly impart this energy by accelerating the liquid to a high velocity. However the ultimate goal is not a fast liquid, but a high pressure one; so surrounding the impeller is either a volute or a diffuser - these are specially shaped housings to decelerate the flow which then consequently dramatically increases its pressure (via Bernoulli's principle). The liquid is then discharged to the rest of the rocket engine, or in some cases to a second impeller and volute/diffuser stage which increases the pressure even further.\nTurbopumps on liquid rocket engines virtually always have inducers as well, upstream of the impellers. Inducers are spiral shaped pumping elements that serve to gently raise the pressure of the incoming fluid enough to prevent it cavitating when it reaches the impeller. In many cases the impeller and inducer are manufactured as a single component, with a gradual transition between the axial spiral and the radial blades.\nAerodynamic Design.\nThe turbine side of turbopumps consist of one or more stages, where each stage has a stator and a rotor. Individual rotor discs in a turbine are more commonly referred to as wheels in the modern day. These turbines are virtually always of the axial type, because of the very high gas flow (volumetrically) needed to supply enough shaft power for a liquid rocket engine. Contrast this with turbochargers, which usually feature radial turbine designs because of their much lower gas flow.\nUpstream of the turbine is the turbine manifold, which collects gas from whatever source that rocket engine's cycle has upstream of it, and then disperses it circumferentially along the rim of the turbine. It then flows from the manifold axially downwards to the stages of the turbine. Stators are typically bladed, though it is also quite common (where pressure drop is particularly high, as in gas generator cycles) to forgo blades and drill angled nozzles directly off of the manifold itself to then impinge on the turbine wheel.\nDownstream of the turbine varies based on cycle - in closed cycles it leads to the main injector of the engine, where (depending on whether the turbine is fuel-rich or ox-rich), one of the propellants can be injected into the main combustion chamber \"as a gas\" which can be very advantageous for promoting propellant atomization and mixing. In open cycles it is dumped to atmosphere. This can either mean dumped overboard directly off the side of the engine, or it can also lead to a manifold on the rocket engine nozzle which then injects it in the main flowpath, far downstream of the throat where ambient pressure is much lower than the chamber. The purpose here is to provide extra film cooling to the nozzle, since the hot gas leaving the turbine is nevertheless much cooler than the gas in the main combustion chamber. the latter option is common in vacuum optimized open cycle engines because they have much larger nozzles (with correspondingly large areas that need cooling, often without a regen jacket at its furthest extremes). It is important to note that the dumped gas from the turbine can still provide a non-negligible portion of the engine thrust. For this reason even if it is dumped overboard directly, there will usually still be a housing and a mild converging-diverging nozzle downstream of the turbine to take full advantage of the extra thrust opportunity. There is also an opportunity to extract waste heat from the flow at this point via heat exchangers; useful for heating up repressurizing gas for the tanks, for example.\nCycle Design.\nTurbomachinery / engine cycle design looks very different in liquid rocket engines compared to air-breathing engines (turbojets) for essentially one main reason:\n Turbine materials cannot survive combustion chamber temperatures.\n Rocket engine cycles are all various workarounds to this fundamental problem.\nThe first ever turbopump (by Goddard, early 1930's) \"did\" partially put the turbine into the main combustion chamber flow. Tests were unsuccessful because of melting, and the industry has moved on from this paradigm ever since. \nThe turbine of a turbopump is always driven by high pressure gas. The exact source of this gas is the primary differentiator between the various rocket engine cycles. Air-breathing engines (turbojets and similar) mount their turbine downstream of the burner and take direct advantage of the full flow and pressure of the engine. Rocket engines have never been able to do this because their mixture ratios are much closer to stoichiometric (since oxidizer comes at a premium; it must be carried with the rocket) and thus the flame temperature in the combustion chamber is dramatically higher. They are so high that nearly all possible materials would melt, and even the few that do have very little structural strength left at these temperatures.\nFor this reason, rocket engine cycles are all various schemes to circumvent this and supply hot gas to the turbine that is nevertheless much \"cooler\" than the main combustion chamber gas. Gas generator and staged combustion cycles do this by mounting an entirely separate and smaller combustion chamber to the engine, termed the gas generator (whose gas is ultimately dumped overboard) or the preburner (whose \"pre-burnt\" gas eventually reaches the main combustion chamber after passing through the turbine). These smaller chambers run very far from stoichiometric, either with way too much fuel or way too much oxidizer. Hence, one can have \"fuel rich\" and \"ox rich\" gas generator and staged combustion cycles. One could also have two preburners, one fuel rich and one ox rich, which is termed \"full flow staged combustion\".\nBeyond these, there are also expander cycles, where liquid propellant is heated (usually fuel) in the regenerative cooling loop of the main combustion chamber, to the point of boiling, and then fed as gas to the turbine. The last major cycle is the tap off cycle, where a portion of the main combustion gas is \"tapped off\" and routed to the turbine. Because of the aforementioned temperature problem, tap off cycles require large dedicated heat exchangers to rapidly cool the re-routed gas before it reaches the turbine.\nMechanical Design.\nThe collection of all rotating components in a turbopump (i.e. the impellers, inducers, wheels, shaft, parts of the seals, and various spacers) are collectively known as the \"rotor\". The rotor is spinning at extreme angular velocities: shaft speeds in the tens of thousands of RPM are common. Nominally the only mechanical connection between the rotor and the rest of the turbopump is via the bearings. Most common by far are ball bearings, with some modern exceptions pivoting to hydrodynamic bearings. The goal of bearing selection is to minimize friction - both because high friction can wear out the bearing, and also because any frictional energy losses are dissipated as heat that must be carried away rapidly to not destroy the bearing. The extra challenge in turbopump design is that the local environment in the pumps is very often at cryogenic temperatures, which virtually all greases and oils normally used to lubricate bearings are not compatible with (they freeze). Therefore turbopump bearings do not use lubricants at all in the traditional sense. Rather they are installed as bare metal, and some amount of cold propellant is intentionally routed \"through\" them (i.e. where the balls are) to dissipate the heat generated by their friction. This bearing cooling circuit is a \"secondary flow\" that the hydrodynamic designer must also design in addition to the \"primary flow\" of the propellant through the inducer/impeller/volute.\nTurbopumps can be very sensitive to the exact placement of components and the loads/stresses developed in them. Hydrodynamic considerations typically demand very tight clearances between the impellers / inducers and the pump housings, as well as aerodynamic considerations demanding tight clearances between turbine wheels and stators / manifolds. Furthermore, rotordynamics demands a high stiffness coupling of the rotating components with the shaft, especially when it comes to the turbine wheel.\nThese considerations and more demand high precision and high stiffness mechanical design. Bolted joints are generally the default method by which to join parts; some turbopumps have welded joints as well but require more careful consideration and analysis because of their generally lower stiffness, potential for thermally induced warpage of the parts during the welding process, as well as increased risk of fatigue over the life of the turbopump. In order for the rotor to act structurally as one rigid object, all of the components are stacked into one long stackup that envelops the entire shaft and then is preloaded onto it from both ends. This moderately loads the ball bearings, which are usually of the angular contact type, which increases their stiffness. Typically the preload is supplied one end by a bolt clamping onto the nose of the inducer and threaded into the end of the shaft below it. Depending on the exact configuration of the turbopump, the other end could be another inducer (for the other propellant), or a turbine wheel which will also have preloaded bolt(s) onto the end of the shaft.\nDesign of the shaft itself is driven by the need to carry high torque; the more torque it can carry the more power can be transferred from the turbine to the pump(s). Shaft power is the product of shaft speed and shaft torque. This high torque requirement drives the designer to maximizing the polar moment of inertia of the shaft. It is not uncommon for shafts to be hollow, as this maximizes this polar moment of inertia for a given weight of material. Shaft also need to transfer torque to the components of the rotor stackup. This can be accomplished via keyways, which carry less torque but are easier to manufacture, splines which generally carry higher torque but more difficult to manufacture, or shear pins, which are common for components attached to the circular face of the shaft (i.e. turbine wheels).\nSeal Design.\nTurbopumps need to keep fuel and oxidizer apart from each other; otherwise there is high risk of ignition in the turbopump that will cascade into a total failure of the rocket engine. Secondarily they also need to keep propellants out of the turbine cavity; to avoid wastage and also to avoid changing the conditions of the gas flow through the turbine. They especially want to keep oxidizer out of a turbine running fuel-rich, and fuel out of a turbine running ox-rich. This is because leakage in this case would push the oxidizer/fuel (OF) ratio of the working gas closer to stoichiometric, increasing its flame temperature which may be too much for the turbine materials to handle. For these reasons turbopumps always have dynamic seals around their shafts, where one part of the seal is attached to the rotor and corotating with it, while the other part is statically attached to the housing.\nThe dynamic seals in turbopumps have quite specialized requirements compared to seals in most systems. They must support very high shaft speeds on shaft of significant diameter, meaning rubbing velocities are very high. They usually need to be cryogenically compatible as well, and oxygen-compatible on the seals exposed to the oxidizer side. This eliminates the possibility of elastomer based seals, which will embrittle (and cannot hold up at these speeds anyways). Spring loaded and other compression type seals are also not practical at these speeds.\nIn practice, turbopumps primarily use three seals: labyrinth seals, face seals, and carbon ring seals. Labyrinth seals are a non-contact type where the fluid is routed through a circuitous path that minimizes the seal's discharge coefficient, and thus minimizes leakage through it. Labyrinth seals leak the most of the three types, and so are seldom used in isolation. Face seals consist of two metal sealing faces that are lapped to a very smooth finish and are pressed together during assembly. These face seals are typically of the non-contact \"lift-off\" variety, where they develop a thin microfilm of leakage fluid between them during operation that minimizes friction between the static and rotating face. Carbon ring seals are contact seals that consist of multiple carbon static segments around the shaft. They are pressed tightly around the shaft and during operation will intentionally \"wear in\" to provide a precision sealing surface with minimal leakage.\nIn practice all three of these seal types will leak to some extent. A large part of seal design is providing safe flow paths for this leakage. Most imperative is that the interpropellant seal (IPS), which the vast majority of engines have at least one of, does not leak fuel and oxidizer together. This is often accomplished by having a central cavity that is continuously purged with inert gas (e.g. helium, nitrogen) at a higher pressure than the propellants on either side, so that the IPS will leak that inert buffer gas \"outwards from\" the cavity instead of propellants \"inwards to\" the cavity. The only engines that are able to forgo an IPS entirely are full flow staged combustion cycles, because they have one entirely fuel rich turbopump and one entirely ox rich turbopump that do not interact with each other.\nRotordynamic Design.\nA major driver of turbopump mechanical design and shaft speed selection (which by extension affects hydrodynamic and aerodynamic design), is its rotordynamics. At high speed the rotor can start precessing in its bearings, which can induce large stresses and cause failure. This phenomenon is referred to as whirling. Of paramount importance is to avoid running the shaft near to critical speeds, defined as speeds that will excite natural frequencies in the design. \nBeyond tuning the speed, one can mitigate whirling by avoiding cantilevering large masses (e.g. impellers or turbine wheels) being cantilevered away from bearings. From a rotordynamic perspective, the ideal turbopump has bearings at the extreme ends of the shaft and all the rotor components between them (the RD-180 turbopump gets somewhat close to doing this). In most engines this kind of design is usually impractical; for example it creates rather complex flow paths. Instead the engineer's task is to minimize the cantilevered length, and increase the stiffness of the load path between the cantilevered components and the bearings - hence the desire to preload rotor components onto the shaft.\nWhen first assembled, rotors will usually have some amount of imbalance, where the center of mass does not precisely coincide with the center of rotation on the shaft. Because of this, rotors must be balanced before they are installed into the turbopump. The typical method is subtractive, where the rotor is spun in a balancing machine and then small amounts of material are progressively removed (e.g. via grinding or similar) from the turbine wheel. This is done in a strategic way to reduce the moment of inertia of the rotor below some set value.\nImpellers.\nA few criteria are used when sizing and designing impellers. The first is specific speed - this is a dimensionless parameter characterizing the impeller discharge, for which certain ranges of values are empirically known to indicate different impeller designs would be optimal.\nformula_1\nformula_2\nformula_6 is the imperial version, common in US literature. formula_7 is common in European literature. formula_8 is the dimensionless version, but is not yet commonly seen in pump literature. The second parameter is similar: the suction specific speed. This characterizes the impeller's inlet (suction) conditions, and is used to quantify the required inducer and tank pressures upstream of the impeller.\nformula_9\nNPSH is net positive suction head; NPSHR is the amount of head \"required\" to be generated in the fluid before it reaches the impeller inlet in order to not excessively cavitate in the impeller. \"Excessive\" is often defined as the level of cavitation that would degrade the pump's discharge head by 3% \u2013 hence it is common to see NPSHR defined as NPSH3%.\nAnother key parameter is the impeller's head coefficient formula_10. This characterizes how effective a given tip speed formula_11 is at generating head. Head coefficient is typically selected (for a given specific speed) from empirical curves generated by previous industry experience.\nformula_12 in some sources; formula_13 in others.\nCentrifugal (Radial) Impellers.\nCentrifugal impellers are optimal on a range of 500 &lt; formula_6 &lt; 2500 (numbers are approximate and vary by source).\nMost turbopumps have centrifugal impellers - the fluid enters the pump along its rotational axis and the impeller accelerates the fluid to high speed. The fluid then passes through a volute (which spirals outwards to the outlet) or a diffuser, which is a ring with multiple diverging channels. This causes a large increase in dynamic pressure as fluid velocity is lost. The volute or diffuser turns the high kinetic energy into high pressures (hundreds of bar is not uncommon), and if the outlet backpressure is not too high, high flow rates can be achieved.\nThe development of the contours of the impeller blades, especially their inlet and outlet angles, is a major driver of the turbopump's overall hydrodynamic performance. Impeller blade geometry development begins with Euler's pump equation:\n formula_15\nMixed Flow Impellers.\nBetween the specific-speed ranges of radial and axial impellers, nominally lie mixed flow impellers. These are rare to nonexistent in turbopumps. They have increased manufacturing complexity and it is easier to adjust one's specific speed out of this range towards radial or axial designs.\nAxial Impellers.\nAxial impellers are optimal on a range of 8000 &lt; formula_6 &lt; 20,000 (numbers are approximate and vary by source).\nIn this case the shaft essentially has (sometimes multiple) rotor wheels and stators along the shaft, and then pumps the fluid in a direction parallel with the main axis of the pump. Compared to centrifugal impellers, axial impellers trade lower head generation for higher volumetric flowrates of propellants. For this reason they can be attractive for pumping liquid hydrogen, because of its significantly lower density than essentially all other propellants which use centrifugal pump designs.\nThe only pure axial pump to have ever flown operationally was on the J-2 engine of the Saturn V upper stages. This is of course not counting inducers, which are ubiquitous, and in some uncommon cases is the sole pumping element (e.g. the RS-25 low pressure fuel turbopump).\nInducers.\nVirtually all turbopumps since about 1955 feature inducers, upstream of the impellers. The inducer is an axial, spiral design that raises the fluid pressure enough to prevent cavitation when it reaches the entrance to the impeller. The head pressure that the fluid rises over the length of the inducer is termed the NPSHA (NPSH available). This must be above the NPSHR of the impeller: NPSHmargin = NPSHA / NPSHR. Turbopumps also require a certain NPSH before it even reaches the inducer, again termed the NPSHR for the inducer (so the inducer and impeller both have their own individual NPSHR). This is achieved by pressurizing the propellant tanks to some extent; a few bar is typical. Inducers for cryogenic propellants usually cannot be designed to have zero NPSHR because a rocket usually fills cryogenic propellants at their saturated state, meaning NPSHA in the tank is zero. This gives no margin and thus cavitation at the inducer blades becomes likely. This can possibly be overcome with subcooled / densified propellants (e.g. Falcon 9). Regardless, some tank pressure is often desirable for structural stability of the rocket itself and so increases the NPSHA, reducing the NPSHR of the inducer (and so probably its axial length) as a side benefit.\nVolutes and Diffusers.\nLiquid leaving the blades of an impeller has very high velocity but relatively low static pressure. The goal of the pump housing is to reverse this situation: slowing the flow and raising the static pressure of the liquid to a very high point by the time it is discharged to the rest of the rocket engine.\nThe exit fluid passages in a pump housing are either shaped into a volute design (most common), a diffuser design, or a combination of both. The goal with either is to provide a smooth flow path for fluid to leave the impeller without large pressure variations along its circumference. The cross section of a volute smoothly ramps progressively larger along the azimuth of the pump, accepting more and more fluid from the impeller exit along it length. It terminates at a discharge that is piped to the rest of the engine. The separation between the discharge and the rest of the volute is known as the tongue or cutwater. \nTurbines.\nTurbopumps, by definition, are driven by gas turbines. There is a fundamental tradeoff between the turbine's pitch-line radius formula_22, the shaft speed formula_23, and the supplied gas flow formula_24. Improving one factor necessitates making the other(s) worse to maintain sufficient power output formula_25 into the shaft and the pump:\nformula_26\nassuming the ideal case of zero post-swirl of the working gas leaving the turbine. Turbines are typically either of an impulse design (common in gas generator and other open cycles) or of a reaction design (common in staged combustion and other closed cycles). They can consist of one or more stages, where each stage has both a stator, which can be bladed or nozzles, and a wheel (sometimes referred to as a rotor in older papers and aero focused papers).\nImpulse Turbines for Open Cycles.\nOpen cycles aim to increase efficiency by minimizing mass flow through the turbine, making up for it by maximizing pressure drop. This is because the mass flow is dumped overboard, a performance hit. Comparatively, maximizing pressure drop is easy to do because it dumps to ambient pressure, which will be significantly lower than the gas generator (GG) chamber pressure. This is true even if GG pressure were the same value as the main chamber pressure, which the pumps have to work hard enough to discharge to anyways. These considerations drive the designer towards impulse designs on the turbine, with gas flow expanded via converging-diverging blades or nozzles to supersonic velocities that then impinge on the turbine wheel.\nReaction Turbines for Closed Cycles.\nClosed cycles aim to increase efficiency by minimizing pressure drop across the turbine, making up for it by maximizing mass flow. This is because the downstream pressure must be higher than the main chamber pressure. It is often significantly higher because of injector and regen jacket pressure losses. Consequently, the only method for increasing pressure drop is to increase chamber pressure in the preburner much higher than the main chamber. This puts significantly more load on the pumps which must have a high pressure discharge for the preburner. Comparatively, high mass flow is easy to accomplish because none is being dumped overboard - so it is common to route the entire mass flow of one propellant through the preburner and turbine. Full flow staged combustion cycles take this a step further by routing the entire mass flow (hence 'full flow') of both propellants through preburners and turbines, taking advantage of essentially 100% of possible mass flow through the engine to generate shaft power for the turbopumps. These considerations drive the designer towards reaction type designs on the turbine where gas flow is subsonically expelled from, and reacting against, the wheel blades.\nTurbopumps as a full system.\nTurbopumps have a reputation for being difficult to design for optimal performance. Low efficiency may be acceptable in some applications, but in rocketry this is a severe problem. Turbopumps in rockets are important and problematic enough that launch vehicles using one have been caustically described as a \"turbopump with a rocket attached\".\nCommon problems include:\nTurbopumps typically require significant testing and refinement to achieve good results. It should be ensured that they can survive a full service life, with significant margin. Some engines also require multiple restarts to be demonstrated; potentially tens to hundreds of restarts in reusable rocket engines. Turbopumps can be susceptible to significant high cycle fatigue (HCF) because they spin so fast - where a resonating turbine wheel is accumulating one or more cycles \"for every revolution\". Even static components can still be susceptible to low cycle fatigue (LCF) over many restarts.\nHistory.\nInvention and early development.\nHigh-pressure pumps for large missiles had been discussed by rocket pioneers such as Hermann Oberth as early as the 1920's. The turbopump does not have a clear undisputed inventor. Rather they were developed independently in the United States and Germany in the 1930's, where each team had little to no knowledge of the other. The earliest prototype of a turbopump of any kind appears from the historical record to be by the American Robert Goddard and his team, circa 1934. These early turbopump tests were not successful, as it ran straight into the fundamental problem of turbopumps: the turbine was driven directly off of the main combustion chamber gas, and it quickly melted. Using this knowledge, Goddard iterated and gradually invented the gas generator cycle, culminating in a new turbopump that successfully propelled his \"P-Series\" (pump series) rocket on a flight in 1940 using liquid oxygen and gasoline.\nThis flight however was already preempted by a successful one in Germany (albeit monopropellant; Goddard's turbopump would have been the first bipropellant one to fly). Hellmuth Walker began development of turbopumps for rocket power aircraft in 1937, and achieved a successful first flight of the aircraft RII-203 in 1939 using hydrogen peroxide monopropellant. This was quickly followed the same year by the DFS 194 and the He 176. These were found to have disappointing thrust values, which was traced back to poor suction performance causing significant cavitation in the impellers. This spurred the invention of the inducer, which was added to all subsequent Walker turbopumps; notably soon after for the Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet, the only rocket-powered aircraft to ever be used in active combat. In mid-1935 Wernher von Braun had initiated a fuel pump project at the southwest German firm \"Klein, Schanzlin &amp; Becker\" that was experienced in building large fire-fighting pumps. This would evolve by around 1940 into the V-2 rocket design, which used hydrogen peroxide decomposed through a Walter steam generator to power the turbopump which pumped ethanol and liquid oxygen into the bipropellant combustion chamber. This was a major advance in the scale of turbopumps compared to the Me-163. The first engine fired successfully in 1942, and on August 16, 1942, a trial rocket stopped in mid-air and crashed due to a failure in the turbopump. The first successful V-2 launch was shortly after on October 3, 1942.\nPostwar Acceleration.\nTurbopump development in the Soviet Union began in earnest in 1943, and achieved a successful first flight by 1947; accelerated towards the end by knowledge gained from the Me-163 and V-2 programs via Operation Osoaviakhim.\nSimilarly, turbopump development in the US accelerated from the experimental designs of Goddard into a much larger industrial effort via expertise gained through Operation Paperclip. Around this time serious effort was put into the development of liquid hydrogen as a propellant - spearheaded by a program for turbopump development at Aerojet led by George Bosco. During the second half of 1947, Bosco and his group learned about the pump work of others and made preliminary design studies. Aerojet representatives visited Ohio State University where Florant was working on hydrogen pumps, and consulted Dietrich Singelmann, a German pump expert at Wright Field. Bosco subsequently used Singelmann's data in designing Aerojet's first hydrogen pump. By mid-1948, Aerojet had selected centrifugal pumps for both liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen. They obtained some German radial-vane pumps from the Navy and tested them during the second half of the year. By the end of 1948, Aerojet had designed, built, and tested a liquid hydrogen pump (15 cm diameter). Initially, it used ball bearings that were run clean and dry, because the cryogenic temperature made conventional lubrication impractical. \nThe pump was first operated at low shaft speeds to allow its parts to chill in to its cryogenic operating temperature. Once chilled, an attempt was made to accelerate shaft speed from 5000 to 35000 rpm. Both the bearings and the impeller quickly failed. A new attempt implemented precision bearings, lubricated by an atomized stream of oil and nitrogen. On the next run, the bearings worked satisfactorily but the brazed impeller flew apart form the stresses; a new one was then milled from aluminum. The next two runs with the new pump ran but showed generated no significant flow or head. This was traced to the exit diffuser which was small and insufficiently cooled, limiting flow rate. This was corrected by adding vent holes in the pump housing; which were opened during chill down to let air escape quickly. With this fix, two successful runs were made in March 1949: a flow rate of 0.25 kg/s and discharge pressure of 26 bar approximately agreed with predictions.\nLater Iteration.\nGas generator cycles dominated engine design from the Goddard early days through the 1960's (with a handful of early engines like the V-2 and derivatives being a catalyst-driven cycle more specifically). The American RL10 saw the advent of the expander cycle in 1962, and the Soviet RD-253 was the beginning of the staged combustion cycle in 1965. The American J-2S (a derivative of the GG cycle J-2) pioneered the tap-off cycle in a late 1960s test campaign, though it never flew.\nThe RS-25 took the staged combustion cycle to new heights. These would serve as the space shuttle main engines (SSME), and their turbopumps spun at over 30,000 rpm, delivering 150 lb/s (68 kg/s) of liquid hydrogen and 896 lbm/s (406 kg/s) of liquid oxygen to the engine. It technically featured four separate turbopumps; with both the ox side and fuel side featuring a smaller boost pump before their main pumps, to increase suction performance in a design demanding very high head / shaft speeds.\nWhile not technically a turbopump (in that it lacks a turbine), the Electron Rocket's Rutherford became the first engine to use an electrically-driven pump in flight in 2018.\nTurbopump Examples.\nWhere two values are given, fuel side listed first and oxidizer side listed second.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31441", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31441", "title": "Tragedy of the anticommons", "text": "Type of resource coordination breakdown\nThe tragedy of the anticommons is a type of coordination breakdown, in which a commons does not emerge, even when general access to resources or infrastructure would be a social good. It is a mirror-image of the older concept of tragedy of the commons, in which numerous rights holders' combined use exceeds the capacity of a resource and depletes or destroys it. The \"tragedy of the anticommons\" covers a range of coordination failures, including patent thickets and submarine patents. Overcoming these breakdowns can be difficult, but there are assorted means, including eminent domain, laches, patent pools, or other licensing organizations.\nThe two 'tragedies' may be compared as follows:\nThe term originally appeared in Michael Heller's 1998 article of the same name and is the thesis of his 2008 book. The model was formalized by James M. Buchanan and Yong Yoon. In a 1998 \"Science\" article, Heller and Rebecca S. Eisenberg, while not disputing the role of patents in general in motivating invention and disclosure, argue that biomedical research was one of several key areas where competing patent rights could actually prevent useful and affordable products from reaching the marketplace.\nExamples.\nIn early aviation, the Wright brothers held patents on certain aspects of aircraft, while Glenn Curtiss held patents on ailerons which was an advance on the Wrights' system, but antipathy between the patent holders prevented their use. The government was forced to step in and create a patent pool during World War I.\nIn his 1998 \"Harvard Law Review\" article, Michael Heller noted that there were a lot of open air kiosks but also a lot of empty stores in many Eastern European cities after the fall of communism. Upon investigation, he concluded that it was difficult or even impossible for a startup retailer to negotiate successfully for the use of that space because many different agencies and private parties had rights over the use of store space. Even though all the persons with ownership rights were losing money with the empty stores, and stores were in great demand, competing interests got in the way.\nHeller says that the rise of the \"robber barons\" in medieval Germany was the result of the tragedy of the anticommons. Nobles commonly attempted to collect tolls on stretches of the Rhine passing by or through their fiefs, building towers alongside the river and stretching iron chains to prevent boats from carrying cargo up and down the river without paying a fee. Repeated attempts by the Holy Roman Empire, including several over the centuries by the Emperor, to regulate toll collection on the Rhine failed. And it was not until the establishment of the Rhine League of the Emperor with certain nobles and clergy that the robber barons' control over the Rhine was crushed. River tolls on the Rhine, increasingly imposed by states rather than individual lords, remained a sticking point in relations and commerce in the Rhine basin until the establishment of the Central Commission for Navigation on the Rhine in 1815.\nHeller and Rebecca S. Eisenberg are academic law professors who believe that biological patents create a \"tragedy of the anticommons\", \"in which people underuse scarce resources because too many owners can block each other.\" Others claim that patents have not created this \"anticommons\" effect on research, based on surveys of scientists.\nThe housing crisis in many western cities can also be characterized as a tragedy of the anticommons. Zoning and planning processes give neighborhood groups, environmental groups and other stakeholders significant power over whether new housing projects move forward and on what terms. This creates a situation where many stakeholders have the right to exclude others from use of a private resource. In many cases zoning and planning processes make it impossible for private landholders to construct new housing, especially multi-family housing. This results in high prices, reduced inventory and significant homelessness.\nThe Institute of Medicine highlighted an example of the tragedy of the anticommons in the context of data sharing clinical trial data in the medical field. Some notable challenges included protecting patient privacy, balancing conflicting interests, lack of standardization in data, ensuring data quality and integrity, and legal and regulatory barriers, which all contributed to issues regarding coordination and collaboration down the line. This exemplifies the tragedy of the anticommons because the lower potential efficiency of clinical operation, as well as the satisfaction of patients, is compromised due to an underutilization of clinical data. \nThe legal battles between Apple Inc. and Samsung can be viewed as an example of the tragedy of the anticommons, specifically in intellectual property rights. Both Apple and Samsung own numerous patents related to mobile devices, and the 10-year long legal dispute has been centred around patent infringement. This situation is a prime example of the tragedy of the anticommons, in the sense where many owners of a resource have the ability to exclude others from using it, leading to the underutilization of that resource. Apple Inc. and Samsung's limitations on their ability to innovate is an overall detriment to them, as well as the common people. \nSeveral patent disputes halted the production of the COVID-19 vaccine during its inception. Some notable cases include Pfizer vs. Moderna, Bharat Biotech vs. Serum Institute of India, and Moderna vs. Arbutus. These three cases are potentially a case of the tragedy of the anticommons. While the COVID-19 vaccine response was relatively quick, this was primarily due to scientists, doctors, ethics approval boards, manufacturers and regulatory agencies moving quickly in the state of emergency. A patent dispute, in the sense of the tragedy of the anticommons, may have slowed down the production process, and limited the technology available, to competing firms. Patent disputes related to the COVID-19 vaccine are complex and often involve multiple parties and legal jurisdictions. The issues involved can be highly technical and may take years to resolve.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31442", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31442", "title": "The Tragedy of the Anticommons", "text": ""}
{"id": "31444", "revid": "42964511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31444", "title": "Thealogy", "text": "Study and reflection upon the feminine divine from a feminist perspective\nThealogy is the study of the divine through feminist and other feminine-centered perspectives. The term encompasses a range of approaches that prioritize female experiences and symbols in theological discourse, including but not limited to feminist theory. The concept was introduced by Valerie Saiving, Isaac Bonewits (1976) and Naomi Goldenberg (1979) as a neologism (new word). Its use then widened to mean all feminine ideas of the sacred, which Charlotte Caron usefully explained in 1993: \"reflection on the divine in feminine or feminist terms\". By 1996, when Melissa Raphael published \"Thealogy and Embodiment\", the term was well established.\nAs a neologism, the term derives from two Greek words: , , meaning 'goddess', the feminine equivalent of , 'god' (from PIE root ); and , , plural , often found in English as the suffix \"-logy\", meaning 'word, reason, plan'; and in Greek philosophy and theology, the divine reason implicit in the cosmos.\nThealogy has areas in common with feminist theology \u2013 the study of God from a feminist perspective, often emphasizing monotheism. The relation is an overlap, as thealogy is not limited to one deity (in spite of its etymology); the two fields have been described as both related and interdependent.\nHistory of the term.\nThe term's origin and initial use is open to ongoing debate. Patricia 'Iolana traces the early use of the neologism to 1976, crediting both Valerie Saiving and Isaac Bonewits for its initial use. The coinage of \"thealogian\" on record by Bonewits in 1976 has been promoted.\nIn the 1979 book \"Changing of the Gods\", Naomi Goldenberg introduces the term as a future possibility with respect to a distinct discourse, highlighting the masculine nature of theology. Also in 1979, in the first revised edition of \"Real Magic\", Bonewits defined \"thealogy\" in his Glossary as \"Intellectual speculations concerning the nature of the Goddess and Her relations to the world in general and humans in particular; rational explanations of religious doctrines, practices and beliefs, which may or may not bear any connection to any religion as actually conceived and practiced by the majority of its members\". In the same glossary, he defined \"theology\" with nearly identical words, changing the feminine pronouns with masculine pronouns appropriately.\nCarol P. Christ used the term in \"Laughter of Aphrodite\" (1987), claiming that those creating thealogy could not avoid being influenced by the categories and questions posed in Christian and Jewish theologies. She further defined thealogy in her 2002 essay, \"Feminist theology as post-traditional thealogy\", as \"the reflection on the meaning of the Goddess\".\nIn her 1989 essay \"On Mirrors, Mists and Murmurs: Toward an Asian American Thealogy\", Rita Nakashima Brock defined thealogy as \"the work of women reflecting on their experiences of and beliefs about divine reality\". And again in 1989, Ursula King notes thealogy's growing usage as a fundamental departure from traditional male-oriented theology, characterized by its privileging of symbols over rational explanation.\nIn 1993, Charlotte Caron's inclusive and clear definition of thealogy as a \"reflection on the divine in feminine and feminist terms\" appeared in \"To Make and Make Again\". By this time, the concept had gained considerable status among Goddess adherents.\nAs academic discipline.\nSituated in relationship to the fields of theology and religious studies, thealogy is a discourse that critically engages the beliefs, wisdom, practices, questions, and values of the Goddess community, both past and present. Similar to theology, thealogy grapples with questions of meaning, include reflecting on the nature of the divine, the relationship of humanity to the environment, the relationship between the spiritual and sexual self, and the nature of belief. However, in contrast to theology, which often focuses on an exclusively logical and empirical discourse, thealogy embraces a postmodern discourse of personal experience and complexity.\nThe term suggests a feminist approach to theism and the context of God and gender within Paganism, Neopaganism, Goddess Spirituality and various nature-based religions. However, thealogy can be described as religiously pluralistic, as thealogians come from various religious backgrounds that are often hybrid in nature. In addition to Pagans, Neopagans, and Goddess-centred faith traditions, they are also Christian, Jewish, Buddhist, Muslim, Quakers, etc. or define themselves as Spiritual Feminists. As such, the term \"thealogy\" has also been used by feminists within mainstream monotheistic religions to describe in more detail the feminine aspect of a monotheistic deity or trinity, such as God/dess Herself, or the Heavenly Mother of the Latter Day Saint movement.\nIn 2000, Melissa Raphael wrote the text \"Introducing Thealogy: Discourse on the Goddess\" for the series Introductions in Feminist Theology. Written for an academic audience, it purports to introduce the main elements of thealogy within the context of Goddess feminism. She situates thealogy as a discourse that can be engaged with by Goddess feminists\u2014those who are feminist adherents of the Goddess who may have left their church, synagogue, or mosque\u2014or those who may still belong to their originally established religion. In the book, Raphael compares and contrasts thealogy with the Goddess movement. In 2007, Paul Reid-Bowen wrote the text \"Goddess as Nature: Towards a Philosophical Thealogy\", which can be regarded as another systematic approach to thealogy, but which integrates philosophical discourse.\nIn the past decade, other thealogians like Patricia 'Iolana and D'vorah Grenn have generated discourses that bridge thealogy with other academic disciplines. 'Iolana's Jungian thealogy bridges analytical psychology with thealogy, and Grenn's metaformic thealogy is a bridge between matriarchal studies and thealogy.\nContemporary thealogians include Carol P. Christ, Melissa Raphael, Asphodel Long, Beverly Clack, Charlotte Caron, Naomi Goldenberg, Paul Reid-Bowen, Rita Nakashima Brock, and Patricia 'Iolana.\nCriticisms.\nAt least one Christian theologian dismisses thealogy as the creation of a new deity made up by radical feminists. Paul Reid-Bowen and Chaone Mallory point out that essentialism is a problematic slippery slope when Goddess feminists argue that women are inherently better than men or inherently closer to the Goddess. In his book \"Goddess Unmasked: The Rise of Neopagan Feminist Spirituality\", Philip G. Davis levies a number of criticisms against the Goddess movement, including logical fallacies, hypocrisies, and essentialism.\nThealogy has also been criticized for its objection to empiricism and reason. In this critique, thealogy is seen as flawed by rejecting a purely empirical worldview for a purely relativistic one. Meanwhile, scholars like Harding and Haraway seek a middle ground of feminist empiricism.\nArt and culture.\nArtist Edwina Sandys' bronze statue of a bare-breasted female Crucifixion statue, \"Christa\", was removed from the Cathedral of Saint John the Divine at the order of the Jesus Suffragan Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of New York during Holy Week in 1984. The bishop accused the Cathedral Dean of \"descrating our symbols\" even though viewer reaction had been \"overwhelmingly positive.\" In 2016, Sandy's \"Christa\" was reinstalled at the cathedral, on the altar, as the centerpiece of the \"groundbreaking\" \"The Christa Project: Manifesting Divine Bodies.\" The Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of New York wrote an article for the cathedral's booklet stating, \"In an evolving, growing, learning church, we may be ready to see 'Christa' not only as a work of art but as an object of devotion, over our altar, with all of the challenges that may come with that for many visitors to the cathedral, or indeed, perhaps for all of us.\" This exhibition of more than 50 contemporary works that \"interpret \u2013 or reinterpret \u2013 the symbolism associated with the image of Jesus\", in order to provide \"an excellent vehicle for thinking about sacred incarnation, and one that reaches out to humans of all genders, races, religions and sexual orientations\" included work by Fredericka Foster, Kiki Smith, Genesis Breyer P-Orridge and Eiko Otake.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31446", "revid": "14673771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31446", "title": "Torpedo boat", "text": "Small, fast naval ship designed to carry torpedoes into battle\nA torpedo boat is a relatively small and fast naval ship designed to carry torpedoes into battle. The first designs were steam-powered craft dedicated to ramming enemy ships with explosive spar torpedoes. Later evolutions launched variants of self-propelled Whitehead torpedoes.\nTorpedo boats were (and still are) chiefly small inshore crafts created to counter the threat of battleships and other slow and heavily armed warships by using speed, agility, and powerful torpedoes. They presented an attractive alternative for smaller nations to the overwhelming cost and industrial strains involved in building a like number of capital ships to counter an enemy fleet. A swarm of expendable torpedo boats attacking en masse could overwhelm a larger ship's ability to fight them off using its large but cumbersome guns. A fleet of torpedo boats could pose a dire threat to an adversary's capital ships, albeit only in the coastal areas to which their small size and limited fuel load restricted them.\nThe introduction of fast torpedo boats in the late 19th century was a serious concern to the era's naval strategists, introducing the concept of tactical asymmetric warfare. In response, navies operating large ships introduced firstly batteries of small-calibre quick-firing guns on board large warships for 'anti-torpedo' defence, before developing small but seaworthy ships, mounting light quick-firing guns, to accompany the fleet and counter torpedo boats. These small ships, which came to be called \"torpedo boat destroyers\" (and later simply \"destroyers\"), initially were largely defensive, primarily meeting the torpedo boat threat with their own guns outside of the range at which battleships would be vulnerable. In time they became larger and took on more roles, including making their own torpedo attacks on valuable enemy ships as well as defending against submarines and aircraft. Later yet they were armed with guided missiles and eventually became the predominant type of surface warship in the modern era.\nToday, the old concept of a very small, fast, and cheap surface combatant with powerful offensive weapons is taken up by the \"fast attack craft\".\nSpar torpedo boats.\nThe American Civil War saw a number of innovations in naval warfare, including an early type of torpedo boat, armed with spar torpedoes. In 1861, President Abraham Lincoln instituted a naval blockade of Southern ports, which crippled the South's efforts to obtain war materiel from abroad. The South also lacked the means to construct a naval fleet capable of taking on the Union Navy on even terms. One strategy to counter the blockade saw the development of torpedo boats, small fast boats designed to attack the larger capital ships of the blockading fleet as a form of asymmetrical warfare.\nThe class of torpedo boats were steam powered with a partially enclosed hull. They were not true submarines but were \"semi-submersible\"; when ballasted, only the smokestack and few inches of the hull were above the water line. CSS Midge was a \"David\"-class torpedo boat. CSS \"Squib\" and represented another class of torpedo boats that were also low built but had open decks and lacked the ballasting tanks found on the \"David\"s.\nThe Confederate torpedo boats were armed with spar torpedoes. This was a charge of powder in a waterproof case, mounted to the bow of the torpedo boat below the water line on a long spar. The torpedo boat attacked by ramming her intended target, which stuck the torpedo to the target ship by means of a barb on the front of the torpedo. The torpedo boat would back away to a safe distance and detonate the torpedo, usually by means of a long cord attached to a trigger.\nIn general, the Confederate torpedo boats were not very successful. Their low sides made them susceptible to swamping in high seas, and even to having their boiler fires extinguished by spray from their own torpedo explosions. Torpedo misfires (too early) and duds were common. In 1864, Union Navy Lieutenant William B. Cushing fitted a steam launch with a spar torpedo to attack the Confederate ironclad . Also the same year the Union launched , a purpose-built craft with a number of technical innovations including variable ballast for attack operations and an extensible and reloadable torpedo placement spar.\nSelf-propelled torpedo.\nA prototype self-propelled torpedo was created by a commission placed by Giovanni Luppis, an Austrian naval officer from Rijeka, then a port city of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and Robert Whitehead, an English engineer who was the manager of a town factory. In 1864, Luppis presented Whitehead with the plans of the \"Salvacoste\" (\"coastsaver\"), a floating weapon driven by ropes from the land that had been dismissed by the naval authorities due to the impractical steering and propulsion mechanisms.\nWhitehead was unable to improve the machine substantially, since the clockwork motor, attached ropes, and surface attack mode all contributed to a slow and cumbersome weapon. However, he kept considering the problem after the contract had finished, and eventually developed a tubular device, designed to run underwater on its own, and powered by compressed air. The result was a submarine weapon, the \"Minenschiff\" (\"mine ship\"), the first modern self-propelled torpedo, officially presented to the Austrian Imperial Naval commission on December 21, 1866.\nThe first trials were not successful as the weapon was unable to maintain a course on a steady depth. After much work, Whitehead introduced his \"secret\" in 1868 which overcame this. It was a mechanism consisting of a hydrostatic valve and pendulum that caused the torpedo's hydroplanes to be adjusted so as to maintain a preset depth.\nFirst torpedo boats.\nDuring the mid-19th century, the ships of the line were superseded by large steam powered ships with heavy gun armament and heavy armour, called ironclads. Ultimately this line of development led to the dreadnought class of all-big-gun battleship, starting with .\nAt the same time, the weight of armour slowed the battleships, and the huge guns needed to penetrate enemy armour fired at very slow rates. This allowed for the possibility of a small and fast ship that could attack the battleships, at a much lower cost. The introduction of the torpedo provided a weapon that could cripple, or even sink, any battleship.\nThe first warship of any kind to carry self-propelled torpedoes was HMS \"Vesuvius\" of 1873. The first seagoing vessel \"designed\" to fire the self-propelled Whitehead torpedo was . The boat was built by John Thornycroft at Church Wharf in Chiswick for the Royal Navy. It entered service in 1876 and was armed with self-propelled Whitehead torpedoes.\nAs originally built, \"Lightning\" had two drop collars to launch torpedoes; these were replaced in 1879 by a single torpedo tube in the bow. She also carried two reload torpedoes amidships. She was later renamed \"Torpedo Boat No. 1\". The French Navy followed suit in 1878 with \"Torpilleur No 1\", launched in 1878 though she had been ordered in 1875.\nAnother early such ship was the Norwegian warship , ordered from Thornycroft shipbuilding company, England, in either 1872 or 1873, and built at Thornycroft's shipyard at Church Wharf in Chiswick on the River Thames. Managing a speed of , she was one of the fastest boats afloat when completed. The Norwegians initially planned to arm her with a spar torpedo, but this may never have been fitted. \"Rap\" was outfitted with launch racks for the new self-propelled Whitehead torpedoes in 1879.\nUse in combat.\nIn the late 19th century, many navies started to build torpedo boats in length, armed with up to three torpedo launchers and small guns. They were powered by steam engines and had a maximum speed of . They were relatively inexpensive and could be purchased in quantity, allowing mass attacks on fleets of larger ships. The loss of even a squadron of torpedo boats to enemy fire would be more than outweighed by the sinking of a capital ship.\nThe Russo-Japanese War of 1904\u20131905 was the first great naval war of the 20th century. It was the first practical testing of the new steel battleships, cruisers, destroyers, submarines, and torpedo boats. During the war the Imperial Russian Navy in addition to their other warships, deployed 86 torpedo boats and launched 27 torpedoes (from all warships) in three major campaigns, scoring 5 hits.\nThe Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN), like the Russians, often combined their torpedo boats (the smaller of which possessed only hull numbers, although the larger 1st class boats were named) with their torpedo boat destroyers (TBDs) (often simply referring to them as \"destroyers\") and launched over 270 torpedoes (counting the opening engagement at Port Arthur naval base on 8 February 1904) during the war. The IJN deployed approximately 21 TBs during the conflict, and on 27 May 1905 the Japanese torpedo boat destroyers and TBs launched 16 torpedoes at the battleship , Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky's flagship at the battle of Tsushima. Admiral T\u014dg\u014d Heihachir\u014d, the IJN commander, had ordered his torpedo boats to finish off the enemy flagship, already gunned into a wreck, as he prepared to pursue the remnants of the Russian battle fleet.\nOf the 16 torpedoes launched by the TBDs and TBs at the Russian battleship, only four hit their mark, two of those hits were from torpedo boats \"#72\" and \"#75\". By evening, the battleship rolled over and sank to the bottom of the Tsushima Straits. By war's end, torpedoes launched from warships had sunk one battleship, two armored cruisers, and two destroyers. The remaining over 80 warships would be sunk by guns, mines, scuttling, or shipwreck.\nTorpedo boat destroyers.\nThe introduction of the torpedo boat resulted in a flurry of activity in navies around the world, as smaller, quicker-firing guns were added to existing ships to ward off the new threat. In the mid-1880s there were developed torpedo gunboats, the first vessel design for the explicit purpose of hunting and destroying torpedo boats. Essentially very small cruisers, torpedo gunboats were equipped with torpedo tubes and an adequate gun armament, intended for hunting down smaller enemy boats.\nThe first example of this was , designed by Nathaniel Barnaby in 1885. The gunboat was armed with torpedoes and designed for hunting and destroying smaller torpedo boats. She was armed with a single 4-inch/25-pounder breech-loading gun, six 3-pounder QF guns and four torpedo tubes, arranged with two fixed tubes at the bow and a set of torpedo dropping carriages on either side. Four torpedo reloads were carried.\nA number of torpedo gunboat classes followed, including the , the , the and the \u2013 all built for the Royal Navy during the 1880s and the 1890s. In 1891, a Chilean torpedo gunboat managed to sink the ironclad with a torpedo at the battle of Caldera Bay during the Chilean Civil War of 1891. This marked a milestone in naval history, as it was the first time an ironclad warship had been sunk by a self-propelled torpedo.\nIn the late 1890s, torpedo boats had been made obsolete by their more successful contemporaries, the torpedo boat destroyers, which were much faster. The first ships to bear the formal designation \"torpedo boat destroyer\" (TBD) were the of two ships and of two ships of the Royal Navy, ordered from Yarrows in 1892 by Rear Admiral Jackie Fisher. These were basically enlarged torpedo boats, with speed equal to or surpassing the torpedo boats, but were armed with heavier guns that could attack them before they were able to close on the main fleet.\n and were both built by Thornycroft. They were armed with one 12-pounder gun and three 6-pounder guns, with one fixed 18-in torpedo tube in the bow plus two more torpedo tubes on a revolving mount behind the two funnels. Later the bow torpedo tube was removed and two more 6-pounder guns added instead. They produced from a pair of Thornycroft water-tube boilers, giving them a top speed of 27 knots, giving the range and speed to travel effectively with a battle fleet.\nAfter the Russo-Japanese War, these ships became known simply as destroyers. Destroyers became so much more useful, having better seaworthiness and greater capabilities than torpedo boats, that they eventually replaced most torpedo boats. However, the London Naval Treaty after World War I limited tonnage of warships, but placed no limits on ships of under 600 tons. The French, Italian, Japanese and German Navies developed torpedo boats around that displacement, 70 to 100 m long, armed with two or three guns of around 100\u00a0mm (4\u00a0in) and torpedo launchers. For example, the Royal Norwegian Navy s were in fact of a torpedo boat size, while the Italian s were closer in size to a destroyer escort. After World War II they were eventually subsumed into the revived corvette classification.\nThe Kriegsmarine torpedo boats were classified \"Torpedoboot\" with \"T\"-prefixed hull numbers. The classes designed in the mid-1930s, such as the Torpedo boat type 35, had few guns, relying almost entirely upon their torpedoes. This was found to be inadequate in combat, and the result was a \"fleet torpedo boat\" class (\"Flottentorpedoboot\"), which were significantly larger, up to 1,700 tons, comparable to small destroyers. This class of German boats could be highly effective, as in the action in which the British cruiser was sunk off Brittany by a torpedo salvo launched by the s T23 and T27.\nMotor torpedo craft.\nBefore World War I steam torpedo boats which were larger and more heavily armed than hitherto were being used. The new internal combustion engine generated much more power for a given weight and size than steam engines, and allowed the development of a new class of small and fast boats. These powerful engines could make use of planing hull designs and were capable of the much higher speed of under appropriate sea conditions than displacement hulls. The boat could carry two to four torpedoes fired from simple fixed launchers and several machine guns.\nDuring the First World War, three junior officers of the Harwich Force suggested that small motor boats carrying a torpedo might be capable of travelling over the protective minefields and attacking ships of the Imperial German Navy at anchor in their bases. In 1915, the Admiralty produced a Staff Requirement requesting designs for a Coastal Motor Boat for service in the North Sea. These boats were expected to have a high speed, making use of the lightweight and powerful petrol engines then available. The speed of the boat when fully loaded was to be at least and sufficient fuel was to be carried to give a considerable radius of action.\nThey were to be armed in a variety of ways, with torpedoes, depth charges or for laying mines. Secondary armament would have been provided by light machine guns, such as the Lewis gun. The CMBs were designed by Thornycroft, who had experience in small fast boats. Engines were not proper maritime internal combustion engines (as these were in short supply) but adapted aircraft engines from firms such as Sunbeam and Napier. A total of 39 such vessels were built.\nIn 1917 Thornycroft produced an enlarged overall version. This allowed a heavier payload, and now two torpedoes could be carried. A mixed warload of a single torpedo and four depth charges could also be carried, the depth charges released from individual cradles over the sides, rather than a stern ramp. Speeds from were possible, depending on the various petrol engines fitted. At least two unexplained losses due to fires in port are thought to have been caused by a build-up of petrol vapour igniting.\nItalian torpedo boats sank the Austrian-Hungarian in 1917, and in 1918. During the civil war in Russia, British torpedo boats made raids on Kronstadt harbour damaging two battleships and sinking a cruiser.\nSuch vessels remained useful through World War II. The Royal Navy's Motor Torpedo Boats (MTBs), Kriegsmarine 'S-Boote' (\"Schnellboot\" or \"fast-boat\": the British termed them E-boats), (Italian) M.A.S. and M.S., Soviet Navy and U.S. PT boats (standing for \"Patrol Torpedo\") were all of this type.\nA classic fast torpedo boat action was the Channel Dash in February 1942 when German \"E-boats\" and destroyers defended the flotilla of , , and several smaller ships as they passed through the Channel.\nBy World War II torpedo boats were seriously hampered by higher fleet speeds; although they still had a speed advantage, they could only catch the larger ships by running at very high speeds over very short distances, as demonstrated in the Channel Dash. An even greater threat was the widespread arrival of patrol aircraft, which could hunt down torpedo boats long before they could engage their targets.\nDuring World War II United States naval forces employed fast wooden PT boats in the South Pacific in a number of roles in addition to the originally envisioned one of torpedo attack. PT boats performed search and rescue, reconnaissance, ferry and courier work as well as attack and smoke screening duties. They took part in fleet actions and they worked in smaller groups and singly to harry enemy supply lines. Late in the Pacific War when large targets became scarce, many PT boats replaced two or all four of their torpedo tubes with additional guns for engaging enemy coastal supply boats and barges, isolating enemy-held islands from supply, reinforcement or evacuation.\nThe most significant military ship sunk by a torpedo boat during World War II was the cruiser which was attacked by two Italian torpedo boats (M.S. 16 and M.S. 22) during Operation Pedestal on 13 August 1942. It seems that the torpedo that mortally struck \"Manchester\" was launched by M.S. 22 (commanded by Franco Mezzadra) from a distance of about 600 meters.\nFast attack craft today.\nBoats similar to torpedo boats are still in use, but are armed with long-range anti-ship missiles that can be used at ranges between 30 and 70\u00a0km. This reduces the need for high-speed chases and gives them much more room to operate in while approaching their targets.\nAircraft are a major threat, making the use of boats against any fleet with air cover very risky. The low height of the radar mast makes it difficult to acquire and lock onto a target while maintaining a safe distance. As a result, fast attack craft are being replaced for use in naval combat by larger corvettes, which are able to carry radar-guided anti-aircraft missiles for self-defense, and helicopters for over-the-horizon targeting.\nAlthough torpedo boats have disappeared from the majority of the world's navies, they remained in use until the late 1990s and early 2000s in a few specialised areas, most notably in the Baltic. The close confines of the Baltic and ground clutter effectively negated the range benefits of early ASMs. Operating close to shore in conjunction with land based air cover and radars, and in the case of the Norwegian navy hidden bases cut into fjord sides, torpedo boats remained a cheap and viable deterrent to amphibious attack. Indeed, this is still the operational model followed by the Chinese Navy with its for the protection of its coastal and estuarial waters.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31447", "revid": "12607721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31447", "title": "The Book of the Courtier", "text": "1528 book by Baldassare Castiglione\nThe Book of the Courtier ( ) by Baldassare Castiglione is a lengthy philosophical dialogue on the topic of what constitutes an ideal courtier or (in the third chapter) court lady, worthy to befriend and advise a prince or political leader. Inspired by the Spanish court during his time as Ambassador of the Holy See (1524\u20131529), Castiglione set the narrative of the book in his years as a courtier in the Duchy of Urbino. The book quickly became enormously popular and was assimilated by its readers into the genre of prescriptive courtesy books or books of manners\u2014dealing with issues of etiquette, self-presentation, and morals, particularly at princely, or royal courts\u2014books such as Giovanni Della Casa's \"Il Galateo\" (1558) and Stefano Guazzo's \"The Civil Conversation\" (1574). \"The Book of the Courtier\" was much more than that, however, having the character of a drama, an open-ended philosophical discussion, and an essay. It has also been seen as a veiled political allegory.\nThe book portrays the small courts of the High Renaissance which were vanishing in the Italian Wars \u2014 with a reverent tribute to the friends of Castiglione's youth. It pays tribute in particular to the chastely married Duchess Elisabetta Gonzaga of Urbino, to whom Castiglione had addressed a sequence of Platonic sonnets, and who died in 1526. The work was composed over the course of twenty years, beginning in 1508, and ultimately published in 1528 by the Aldine Press in Venice just before the author's death. An influential English translation by Thomas Hoby was published in 1561.\nPrinciples.\nThe book is organized as a series of conversations supposed to have taken place over four nights in 1507 between the courtiers of the Duchy of Urbino, at a time when Castiglione was himself a member of the Duke's Court (although he is not portrayed as one of the interlocutors). The nature of an ideal courtier is debated between the many characters on the basis of various qualities, such as the need for noble rank, physical prowess, modesty, and pleasant physique, among other attributes. Different characters grant different levels of importance to these various qualities throughout the discussion.\nThe ideal courtier is described as having a cool mind, a good voice (with beautiful, elegant and brave words) along with proper bearing and gestures. At the same time though, the courtier is expected to have a warrior spirit, to be athletic, and have good knowledge of the humanities, Classics and fine arts. Over the course of four evenings, members of the court try to describe the perfect gentleman of the court. In the process, they debate the nature of nobility, humor, women, and love.\nReception.\n\"The Book of the Courtier\" was widely distributed around Europe, with editions printed in six languages and in twenty European centers. The 1561 English translation by Thomas Hoby had a great influence on the English upper class's conception of English gentlemen. \"The Courtier\" enjoyed influence for some generations, not least in Elizabethan England following its first translation by Sir Thomas Hoby in 1561, a time when Italian culture was very much in fashion.\nRhetoric.\nOf the many qualities Castiglione's characters attribute to their perfect courtier, oratory and the manner in which the courtier presents himself while speaking is amongst the most highly discussed. Wayne Rebhorn, a Castiglione scholar, states that the courtier's speech and behavior in general is \"designed to make people marvel at him, to transform himself into a beautiful spectacle for others to contemplate.\" As explained by Count Ludovico, the success of the courtier depends greatly on his reception by the audience from the first impression. This partly explains why the group considers the courtier's dress so vital to his success.\nCastiglione's characters opine about how their courtier can impress his audience and win its approval. Similar to the Classical Roman rhetoricians Cicero and Quintilian, Castiglione stresses the importance of delivery while speaking. In Book I, the Count states that when the courtier speaks he must have a \"sonorous, clear, sweet and well sounding\" voice that is neither too effeminate nor too rough and be \"tempered by a calm face and with a play of the eyes that shall give an effect of grace\" (Castiglione 1.33). This grace, or \"grazia\", becomes an important element in the courtier's appearance to the audience. Edoardo Saccone states in his analysis of Castiglione, \"\"grazia\" consists of, or rather is obtained through, \"sprezzatura\".\"\nAccording to the Count, \"sprezzatura\" is the most important rhetorical device the courtier needs. Peter Burke describes \"sprezzatura\" in \"The Book of the Courtier\" as \"nonchalance\", \"careful negligence\", and \"effortless and ease\". The ideal courtier is someone who \"conceals art, and presents what is done and said as if it was done without effort and virtually without thought\" (31).\nThe Count advocates the courtier engage in \"sprezzatura,\" or this \"certain nonchalance\", in all the activities he participates in, especially speech. In Book I, he states, \"Accordingly we may affirm that to be true art which does not appear to be art; nor to anything must we give greater care than to conceal art, for if it is discovered, it quite destroys our credit and brings us into small esteem\" (Castiglione 1.26). The Count reasons that by obscuring his knowledge of letters, the courtier gives the appearance that his \"orations were composed very simply\" as if they sprang up from \"nature and truth [rather] than from study and art\" (1.26). This much more natural appearance, even though it is not natural by any means, is more advantageous to the courtier.\nThe Count contends that if the courtier wants to attain \"grazia\" and be esteemed as excellent, it would be in his best interest to have this appearance of nonchalance. By failing to employ \"sprezzatura,\" he destroys his opportunity for grace. By applying \"sprezzatura\" to his speech and everything else he does, the courtier appears to have \"grazia\" and impresses his audience, thereby achieving excellence and perfection (Saccone 16).\nAnother feature of rhetoric which Castiglione discusses is the role of written language and style. Castiglione declined to imitate Boccaccio and write in Tuscan Italian, as was customary at the time; instead he wrote in the Italian used in his native Lombardy (he was born near Mantua): as the Count says, \"certainly it would require a great deal of effort on my part if in these discussions of ours I wished to use those old Tuscan words which the Tuscans of today have discarded; and what's more I'm sure you would all laugh at me\" (Courtier 70). Here, the use of the old and outdated Tuscan language is seen as a form of excess rather than a desirable trait. Castiglione states that had he followed Tuscan usage in his book, his description of sprezzatura would appear hypocritical, in that his effort would be seen as lacking in nonchalance (Courtier 71).\nFederico responds to the Count's assessment of the use of spoken language by posing the question as to what is the best language in which to write rhetoric. The Count's response is that the language does not matter, but rather the rhetoric's style, authority, and grace (Courtier 71). Robert J. Graham, a Renaissance literary scholar, notes that \"questions of whose language is privileged at any given historical moment are deeply implicated in matters of personal, social and cultural significance\", which he states is the primary reason for Castiglione's usage of the native vernacular. This also illustrates the Count's response to the relativity of language in Latin. With the role of language set, Castiglione begins to describe the style and authority in which the courtier must write in order to become successful.\nThe Count explains, \"It is right that greater pains would be taken to make what is written more polished and correct... they should be chosen from the most beautiful of those employed in speech\" (Courtier 71). This is where the style of which the courtier writes encourages the persuasiveness or success of a speech. The success of a written speech, in contrast to the spoken speech, hinges on the notion that \"we are willing to tolerate a great deal of improper and even careless usage\" in oral rhetoric than written rhetoric. The Count explains that along with proper word usage, an ideal courtier must have a proper sense of style and flow to their words. These words must be factual yet entertaining as the Count states, \"then, it is necessary to arrange what is to be said or written in its logical order, and after that to express it well in words that, if I am not mistaken, should be appropriate, carefully chosen, clear and well formed, but above all that are still in popular use\" (Courtier 77). This form of emphasis on language is noted by Graham as; \"Although the Count is aware that more traditional aspects of the orator (appearance, gestures, voice, etc.)\u00a0... all this will be futile and of little consequence if the ideas conveyed by these words themselves are not witty or elegant to the requirements of the situation\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31448", "revid": "36986459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31448", "title": "Traceroute", "text": "Computer network diagnostic tool\n \nIn computing, codice_1 and codice_2 are diagnostic command-line interface commands for displaying possible routes (paths) and transit delays of packets across an Internet Protocol (IP) network. \nThe command reports the round-trip times of the packets received from each successive host (remote node) along the route to a destination. The sum of the mean times in each hop is a measure of the total time spent to establish the connection. The command aborts if all (usually three) sent packets are lost more than twice.\nPing, however, only computes the final round-trip times from the destination point.\nFor Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6), the tool sometimes has the name codice_3 and codice_4.\nImplementations.\nA command is available in many modern operating systems, generally named codice_1 in Unix-like systems such as FreeBSD, macOS, and Linux and named codice_2 in Windows and ReactOS.\nThe functionality was available graphically in macOS, but has been deprecated since the release of macOS Big Sur.\nWindows NT-based operating systems also provide PathPing, which combines the functionality of ping with that of tracert. \nThe ReactOS version was developed by Ged Murphy and is licensed under the GPL.\nOn Unix-like operating systems, traceroute sends, by default, a sequence of User Datagram Protocol (UDP) packets, with destination port numbers ranging from 33434 to 33534; the implementations of traceroute shipped with Linux, FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, DragonFly BSD, and macOS include an option to use ICMP Echo Request packets (\"-I\"), or any arbitrary protocol (\"-P\") such as UDP, TCP using TCP SYN packets, or ICMP.\nOn Windows, tracert sends ICMP Echo Request packets, rather than the UDP packets traceroute sends by default.\nThe time-to-live (TTL) value, also known as \"hop limit\", is used in determining the intermediate routers being traversed towards the destination. Traceroute sends packets with TTL values that gradually increase from packet to packet, starting with TTL value of one. Routers decrement TTL values of packets by one when routing and discard packets whose TTL value has reached zero, returning the ICMP error message ICMP Time Exceeded. For the first set of packets, the first router receives the packet, decrements the TTL value and drops the packet because it then has TTL value zero. The router sends an ICMP Time Exceeded message back to the source. The next set of packets are given a TTL value of two, so the first router forwards the packets, but the second router drops them and replies with ICMP Time Exceeded. Proceeding in this way, traceroute uses the returned ICMP Time Exceeded messages to build a list of routers that packets traverse, until the destination is reached and returns an ICMP Destination Unreachable message if UDP packets are being used or an ICMP Echo Reply message if ICMP Echo messages are being used.\nThe timestamp values returned for each router along the path are the delay (latency) values, typically measured in milliseconds for each packet.\nThe sender expects a reply within a configured number of seconds. If a packet is not acknowledged within the expected interval, an asterisk is displayed. \nThe Internet Protocol does not require packets to take the same route towards a particular destination, thus hosts listed might be hosts that other packets have traversed. If the host at hop #N does not reply, the hop is skipped in the output.\nIf a network has a firewall and operates both Windows and Unix-like systems, more than one protocol must be enabled inbound through the firewall for traceroute to work and receive replies.\nSome traceroute implementations use TCP packets, such as \"tcptraceroute\" and layer four traceroute (lft). PathPing is a utility introduced with Windows NT that combines ping and traceroute functionality. MTR is an enhanced version of ICMP traceroute available for Unix-like and Windows systems. The various implementations of traceroute all rely on ICMP Time Exceeded (type 11) packets being sent to the source.\nOn Linux, \"tracepath\" is a utility similar to traceroute, with the primary difference of not requiring superuser privileges.\nCisco's implementation of traceroute also uses a sequence of UDP datagrams, each with incrementing TTL values, to an invalid port number at the remote host; by default, UDP port 33434 is used. An extended version of this command (known as the \"extended traceroute\" command) can change the destination port number used by the UDP probe messages.\nUsage.\nMost implementations include options to specify the number of queries to send per hop, time to wait for a response, the hop limit and port to use. Invoking traceroute with no options displays the list of available options\nFor Linux, \"man traceroute\" presents more details, including the displayed error flags. \nFor example:\n$ traceroute -w 3 -q 1 -m 16 example.com\ntraceroute to example.com (93.184.216.34), 16 hops max, 52 byte packets\n 1 192.x.x.x (192.x.x.x) 5.152 ms\n 2 10.x.x.x (10.x.x.x) 12.767 ms\n 3 172.x.x.x (172.x.x.x) 11.638 ms\n 4 172.x.x.x (172.x.x.x) 13.193 ms\n 5 xxx.x.x.x.cox.net (68.x.x.x) 20.624 ms\n 6 xxx.xxx.xxx.edgecastcdn.net (192.x.x.x) 56.205 ms\n 7 xxx.xxx.xxx.edgecastcdn.net (192.x.x.x) 24.573 ms\n 8 *\n 9 *\n10 93.x.x.x (93.x.x.x) 22.810 ms\n11 93.x.x.x (93.x.x.x) 20.235 ms\nIn the example above, selected options are to wait for three seconds (instead of five), send out only one query to each hop (instead of three), limit the maximum number of hops to 16 before giving up (instead of 30), with \"example.com\" as the final host. On line 8 and 9 (TTLs 8 and 9) it shows asterisks where the router did not respond within the timeout.\nValue.\nTraceroute can help identify incorrect routing table definitions or firewalls that may be blocking ICMP traffic, A correct traceroute response does not guarantee connectivity for applications as a firewall may permit ICMP packets but not permit packets of other protocols.\nTraceroute is used by penetration testers to gather information about network infrastructure and IP address ranges around a given host.\nTraceroute can be used to optimize data download. If there are multiple mirrors available for the same resource, each mirror can be traced to find the fastest.\nOrigins.\nThe traceroute manual page states that the original traceroute program was written by Van Jacobson in 1987 from a suggestion by Steve Deering, and that Guy Almes and Matt Mathis also had the idea concurrent with Deering. The author of the ping program, Mike Muuss, states on his website that traceroute was written using kernel ICMP support that he had earlier coded to enable raw ICMP sockets when he first wrote the ping program.\nLimitations.\nTraceroute has multiple limitations. Traceroute does not discover paths at the router level, but at the interface level. Another limitation appears when routers do not respond to probes or when routers have a limit for ICMP responses. In the presence of traffic load balancing, traceroute may indicate a path that does not actually exist; to minimize this problem there is a traceroute modification called Paris-traceroute, which maintains the flow identifier of the probes to avoid load balancing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31449", "revid": "41373646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31449", "title": "Time to live", "text": "Time limit of messages in network engineering\nTime to live (TTL) or hop limit is a mechanism which limits the lifespan or lifetime of data in a computer or network. TTL may be implemented as a counter or timestamp attached to or embedded in the data. Once the prescribed event count or timespan has elapsed, data is discarded or revalidated. In computer networking, TTL prevents a data packet from circulating indefinitely. In computing applications, TTL is commonly used to improve the performance and manage the caching of data.\nDescription.\nThe original DARPA Internet Protocol's RFC describes TTL as: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Time to Live is an indication of an upper bound on the lifetime of an internet datagram. It is set by the sender of the datagram and reduced at the points along the route where it is processed. If the time to live reaches zero before the internet datagram reaches its destination, the internet datagram is destroyed. The time to live can be thought of as a self destruct time limit.\nIP packets.\nUnder the Internet Protocol, TTL is an 8-bit field. In the IPv4 header, TTL is the 9th octet of 20. In the IPv6 header, it is the 8th octet of 40. The maximum TTL value is 255, the maximum value of a single octet. A recommended initial value is 64.\nThe time-to-live value can be thought of as an upper bound on the time that an IP datagram can exist in an Internet system. The TTL field is set by the sender of the datagram, and reduced by every router on the route to its destination. If the TTL field reaches zero before the datagram arrives at its destination, then the datagram is discarded and an Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) error datagram (11 - Time Exceeded) is sent back to the sender. The purpose of the TTL field is to avoid a situation in which an undeliverable datagram keeps circulating on an Internet system, and such a system eventually becoming swamped by such \"immortals\".\nIn theory, under IPv4, time to live is measured in seconds, although every host that passes the datagram must reduce the TTL by at least one unit. In practice, the TTL field is reduced by one on every hop. To reflect this practice, the field is renamed \"hop limit\" in IPv6.\nDNS records.\nTTLs also occur in the Domain Name System (DNS), where they are set by an authoritative name server for a particular resource record. When a caching (recursive) nameserver queries the authoritative nameserver for a resource record, it will cache that record for the time (in seconds) specified by the TTL. If a stub resolver queries the caching nameserver for the same record before the TTL has expired, the caching server will simply reply with the already cached resource record rather than retrieve it from the authoritative nameserver again. TTL for NXDOMAIN (non-existent domain) responses is set from the minimum of the MINIMUM field of the SOA record and the TTL of the SOA itself, and indicates how long a resolver may cache the negative answer.\nShorter TTLs can cause heavier loads on an authoritative name server, but can be useful when changing the address of critical services like web servers or MX records, and therefore are often lowered by the DNS administrator prior to a service being moved, in order to reduce possible disruptions.\nThe units used are seconds. An older common TTL value for DNS was 86400 seconds, which is 24 hours. A TTL value of 86400 would mean that, if a DNS record was changed on the authoritative nameserver, DNS servers around the world could still be showing the old value from their cache for up to 24 hours after the last update by client.\nNewer DNS methods that are part of a disaster recovery (DR) system may have some records deliberately set extremely low on TTL. For example, a 300-second TTL would help key records expire in 5 minutes to help ensure these records are flushed quickly worldwide. This gives administrators the ability to edit and update records in a timely manner. TTL values are \"per record\" and setting this value on specific records is sometimes honored automatically by all standard DNS systems worldwide. However, a problem persists in that some caching DNS nameservers set their own TTLs regardless of the authoritative records, thus it cannot be guaranteed that all downstream DNS servers have the new records after the TTL has expired.\nHTTP.\nTime to live may also be expressed as the date and time on which a record expires. The codice_1 header in HTTP responses, the codice_2 header field in both requests and responses and the codice_3 field in HTTP cookies express time-to-live in this way.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31450", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31450", "title": "Time to Live", "text": ""}
{"id": "31452", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31452", "title": "The Seafarers of Catan", "text": ""}
{"id": "31453", "revid": "48576020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31453", "title": "Tel Aviv", "text": "City in Central Israel\nTel Aviv, officially Tel Aviv-Yafo, and also known as Tel Aviv-Jaffa, is the most populous city in the Gush Dan metropolitan area of Israel. Located on the Israeli Mediterranean coastline and with a population of 495,230, it is the economic and technological center of the country and a global high-tech hub. If East Jerusalem is considered part of Israel, Tel Aviv is the country's second-most-populous city, after Jerusalem; if not, Tel Aviv is the most populous city, ahead of West Jerusalem.\nTel Aviv is governed by the Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality, headed by Mayor Ron Huldai, and is home to most of Israel's foreign embassies. It is a beta+ world city and is ranked 53rd in the 2022 Global Financial Centres Index. Tel Aviv has the third- or fourth-largest economy and the largest economy per capita in the Middle East. Tel Aviv is ranked the 4th top global startup ecosystem hub. The city currently has the highest cost of living in the world. Tel Aviv receives over 2.5\u00a0million international visitors annually. Tel Aviv is home to Tel Aviv University, the largest university in the country with more than 30,000 students.\nThe city was founded in 1909 by the Yishuv (Jewish residents) and initially given the Hebrew name \"Ahuzat Bayit\" (, lit. 'House Estate' or 'Homestead'), namesake of the Jewish association which established the neighbourhood as a modern housing estate on the outskirts of the ancient port city of Jaffa (\"Yafo\" in Hebrew), then part of the Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem within the Ottoman Empire. Its name was changed the following year to Tel Aviv, after the biblical name Tel Abib (lit. \"Tell of Spring\") adopted by Nahum Sokolow as the title for his Hebrew translation of Theodor Herzl's 1902 novel \"Altneuland\" (\"Old New Land\"). Other Jewish suburbs of Jaffa had been established before Tel Aviv, the oldest among them being Neve Tzedek. Tel Aviv was given township status within the Jaffa Municipality in 1921, and became independent from Jaffa in 1934. Immigration by mostly Jewish refugees meant that the growth of Tel Aviv soon outpaced that of Jaffa, which had a majority Arab population at the time. In 1948, the Israeli Declaration of Independence was proclaimed in the city, with Tel Aviv named as the founding capital of Israel \u2013 a function it retained officially until 1950. After the 1947\u20131949 Palestine war, Tel Aviv began the municipal annexation of parts of Jaffa, fully unified with Jaffa under the name Tel Aviv in April 1950, and was formally renamed to Tel Aviv-Yafo in August 1950.\nTel Aviv's White City, designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2003, comprises the world's largest concentration of International Style buildings, including Bauhaus and other related modernist architectural styles. Popular attractions include Old Jaffa, the Eretz Israel Museum, the Museum of Art, Yarkon Park, and the city's promenade and beach.\nEtymology and origins.\n\"Tel Aviv\" is the Hebrew title of Theodor Herzl's 1902 novel (\"Old New Land\"), as translated from German by Nahum Sokolow. Sokolow had adopted the name of a Mesopotamian site near the city of Babylon mentioned in Ezekiel: \"Then I came to them of the captivity at Tel Abib [Tel Aviv], that lived by the river Chebar, and to where they lived; and I sat there overwhelmed among them seven days.\" The name was chosen in 1910 from several suggestions, including \"Herzliya\". It was found fitting as it embraced the idea of a renaissance in the ancient Jewish homeland. \"Aviv\" (, or \"Abib\") is a Hebrew word that can be translated as \"spring\", symbolizing renewal, and \"tell\" (or \"tel\") is an artificial mound created over centuries through the accumulation of successive layers of civilization built one over the other and symbolizing the ancient.\nAlthough founded in 1909 as a small settlement on the sand dunes north of Jaffa, Tel Aviv was envisaged as a future city from the start. Its founders hoped that in contrast to what they perceived as the squalid and unsanitary conditions of neighbouring Arab towns, Tel Aviv was to be a clean and modern city, inspired by the European cities of Warsaw and Odesa. The marketing pamphlets advocating for its establishment stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In this city we will build the streets so they have roads and sidewalks and electric lights. Every house will have water from wells that will flow through pipes as in every modern European city, and also sewerage pipes will be installed for the health of the city and its residents.\u2014\u200a\nHistory.\nJaffa.\nThe walled city of Jaffa is modern-day Tel Aviv-Yafo's only urban centre that existed in early modern times. Jaffa was an important port city in the region for millennia. Archaeological evidence shows signs of human settlement there starting in roughly 7,500 BC. The city was established around 1,800 BC at the latest. Its natural harbour has been used since the Bronze Age. By the time Tel Aviv was founded as a separate city during Ottoman rule of the region, Jaffa had been ruled by the Canaanites, Egyptians, Philistines, Israelites, Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, Phoenicians, Ptolemies, Seleucids, Hasmoneans, Romans, Byzantines, the early Islamic caliphates, Crusaders, Ayyubids, and Mamluks before coming under Ottoman rule in 1515. It had been fought over numerous times. The city is mentioned in ancient Egyptian documents, as well as the Hebrew Bible.\nOther ancient sites in Tel Aviv include: Tell Qasile, Tel Gerisa, Abattoir Hill, Tel Hashash, and Tell Qudadi.\nDuring the First Aliyah in the 1880s, when Jewish immigrants began arriving in the region in significant numbers, new Jewish neighborhoods were founded outside Jaffa on the current territory of Tel Aviv. The first was Neve Tzedek, founded in 1887 by Mizrahi Jews due to overcrowding in Jaffa and built on lands owned by Aharon Chelouche. Other neighborhoods were Neve Shalom (1890), Yafa Nof (1896), Achva (1899), Ohel Moshe (1904), Kerem HaTeimanim (1906), and others. Once Tel Aviv received city status in the 1920s, those neighborhoods joined the newly formed municipality, now becoming separated from Jaffa.\nFoundation in Late Ottoman period (1904\u20131917).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical States\n Ottoman Empire 1909\u20131917 Occupied Enemy Territory Administration 1917\u20131920 Mandatory Palestine 1920\u20131948 Israel 1948\u2013present\nThe Second Aliyah led to further expansion. In 1906, a group of Jews, among them residents of Jaffa, followed the initiative of Akiva Aryeh Weiss and banded together to form the \"Ahuzat Bayit\" (lit.\u2009'homestead') society. One of the society's goals was to form a \"Hebrew urban centre in a healthy environment, planned according to the rules of aesthetics and modern hygiene\". The urban planning for the new city was influenced by the garden city movement. The first 60 plots were purchased in Kerem Djebali (Karm al-Jabali) near Jaffa by Jacobus Kann, a Dutch citizen, who registered them in his name to circumvent the Turkish prohibition on Jewish land acquisition. Meir Dizengoff, later Tel Aviv's first mayor, also joined the Ahuzat Bayit society. His vision for Tel Aviv involved peaceful co-existence with Arabs.\nOn 11 April 1909, 66 Jewish families gathered on a desolate sand dune to parcel out the land by lottery using seashells. This gathering is considered the official date of the establishment of Tel Aviv. The lottery was organised by Akiva Aryeh Weiss, president of the building society. Weiss collected 120 sea shells on the beach, half of them white and half of them grey. The members' names were written on the white shells and the plot numbers on the grey shells. A boy drew names from one box of shells and a girl drew plot numbers from the second box. A photographer, Abraham Soskin (b. 1881 in Russia, made \"aliyah\" 1906), documented the event. The first water well was later dug at this site, located on what is today Rothschild Boulevard, across from Dizengoff House. Within a year, Herzl, Ahad Ha'am, Yehuda Halevi, Lilienblum, and Rothschild streets were built; a water system was installed; and 66\u00a0houses (including some on six subdivided plots) were completed. At the end of Herzl Street, a plot was allocated for a new building for the Herzliya Hebrew High School, founded in Jaffa in 1906. The cornerstone for the building was laid on 28 July 1909. The town was originally named Ahuzat Bayit (\"Homestead\" in Hebrew). On 21 May 1910, the name Tel Aviv was adopted. The flag and city arms of Tel Aviv (see above) contain under the red Star of David 2 words from the biblical book of Jeremiah: \"I (God) will build You up again and you will be rebuilt.\" (Jer 31:4) Tel Aviv was planned as an independent Hebrew city with wide streets and boulevards, running water for each house, and street lights.\nBy 1914, Tel Aviv had grown to more than . In 1915 a census of Tel Aviv was conducted, recording a population 2,679. However, growth halted in 1917 when the Ottoman authorities expelled the residents of Jaffa and Tel Aviv as a wartime measure. A report published in \"The New York Times\" by United States Consul Garrels in Alexandria, Egypt described the Jaffa deportation of early April 1917. The orders of evacuation were aimed chiefly at the Jewish population. Jews were free to return to their homes in Tel Aviv at the end of the following year when, with the end of World War I and the defeat of the Ottomans, the British took control of Palestine.\nThe town had rapidly become an attraction to immigrants, with a local activist writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The immigrants were attracted to Tel Aviv because they found in it all the comforts they were used to in Europe: electric light, water, a little cleanliness, cinema, opera, theatre, and also more or less advanced schools... busy streets, full restaurants, cafes open until 2 a.m., singing, music, and dancing.\nBritish administration (1917\u20131934).\nTel Aviv, along with the rest of the Jaffa municipality, was conquered by the British imperial army in late 1917 during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign of World War I and became part of British-administered Mandatory Palestine until 1948.\nTel Aviv, established as suburb of Jaffa, received \"township\" or local council status within the Jaffa Municipality in 1921. According to a census conducted in 1922 by the British Mandate authorities, Tel Aviv had a population of 15,185 (15,065 Jews, 78 Muslims and 42 Christians). The population of Tel Aviv had increased to around 34,000 by 1925. The 1931 census recorded Tel Aviv as having a population of 46,101 (45,564 Jews, 288 with no religion, 143 Christians, and 106 Muslims) in 12,545 houses.\nWith increasing Jewish immigration during the British administration, friction between Arabs and Jews in Palestine increased. On 1 May 1921, the Jaffa riots resulted in the deaths of 48 Arabs and 47 Jews and injuries to 146 Jews and 73 Arabs. In the wake of this violence, many Jews left Jaffa for Tel Aviv.\nTel Aviv began to develop as a commercial center. In 1923, Tel Aviv was the first town to be wired to electricity in Palestine, followed by Jaffa later in the same year. The opening ceremony of the Jaffa Electric Company powerhouse, on 10 June 1923, celebrated the lighting of the two main streets of Tel Aviv.\nIn 1925, the Scottish biologist, sociologist, philanthropist and pioneering town planner Patrick Geddes drew up the Geddes Plan for Tel Aviv, a master plan for Tel Aviv which was adopted by the city council led by Meir Dizengoff. Geddes's plan for developing the northern part of the township was based on Ebenezer Howard's garden city movement. The plan consisted of four main features: a hierarchical system of streets laid out in a grid, large blocks consisting of small-scale domestic dwellings, the organization of these blocks around central open spaces, and the concentration of cultural institutions to form a civic center. While most of the northern area of Tel Aviv was built according to this plan, the influx of European refugees in the 1930s necessitated the construction of taller apartment buildings on a larger footprint in the city.\nBen Gurion House was built in 1930\u201331, part of a new workers' housing development. At the same time, Jewish cultural life was given a boost by the establishment of the Ohel Theatre and the decision of Habima Theatre to make Tel Aviv its permanent base in 1931.\n1934 municipal independence from Jaffa.\nTel Aviv was granted the status of an independent municipality separate from Jaffa in 1934. The Jewish population rose dramatically during the Fifth Aliyah after the Nazis came to power in Germany. Many new Jewish immigrants to Palestine disembarked in Jaffa, and remained in Tel Aviv, turning the city into a center of urban life. Friction during the 1936\u201339 Arab revolt led to the opening of a local Jewish port, Tel Aviv Port, independent of Jaffa, in 1938. It closed on 25 October 1965. Lydda Airport (later Ben Gurion Airport) and Sde Dov Airport opened between 1937 and 1938. According to the Jewish Virtual Library, the Jewish population of Tel Aviv had risen to 150,000 by 1937, compared to Jaffa's mainly Arab 69,000\u00a0residents, and by 1939 rose to 160,000, which was over a third of Palestine's total Jewish population. The village statistics of 1938 listed Tel Aviv's population as 140,000, all Jews.\nMany German Jewish architects trained at the Bauhaus, the Modernist school of architecture in Germany, and left Germany during the 1930s. Some, like Arieh Sharon, came to Palestine and adapted the architectural outlook of the Bauhaus and similar schools to the local conditions there, creating what is recognized as the largest concentration of buildings in the International Style in the world.\nTel Aviv's White City emerged in the 1930s, and became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2003. During World War II, Tel Aviv was hit by Italian airstrikes on 9 September 1940, which killed 137 people in the city.\nThe village statistics of 1945 listed Tel Aviv's population as 166,660, consisting of 166,000 Jews, 300 \"other\", 230 Christians, and 130 Muslims.\nDuring the Jewish insurgency in Mandatory Palestine, Jewish Irgun and Lehi guerrillas launched repeated attacks against British military, police, and government targets in the city. In 1946, following the King David Hotel bombing, the British carried out Operation Shark, in which the entire city was searched for Jewish militants and most of the residents questioned, during which the entire city was placed under curfew. During the March 1947 martial law in Mandatory Palestine, Tel Aviv was placed under martial law by the British authorities for 15 days, with the residents kept under curfew for all but three hours a day as British forces scoured the city for militants. In spite of this, Jewish guerrilla attacks continued in Tel Aviv and other areas under martial law in Palestine.\nAccording to the 1947 UN Partition Plan for dividing Palestine into Jewish and Arab states, Tel Aviv was to be included in the proposed Jewish state. Jaffa with, as of 1945, a population of 101,580 people\u201453,930 Muslims, 30,820 Jews and 16,800 Christians\u2014was designated as part of the Arab state. Civil War broke out in the country and in particular between the neighbouring cities of Tel Aviv and Jaffa, which had been assigned to the Jewish and Arab states respectively. After several months of siege, on 13 May 1948, Jaffa fell and the Arab population fled en masse.\nState of Israel.\nAfter Israel declared Independence on 14 May 1948, Tel Aviv was the temporary government center of the State of Israel. The city was repeatedly bombed by Egyptian warplanes and shelled by Egyptian warships during the Israeli War of Independence, killing around 150 people. The most significant attack was the bombing of the central bus station, in which 42 people were killed. On 3 June 1948, the Israeli Air Force scored its first aerial victory over Tel Aviv when Israeli fighter pilot Modi Alon shot down two Egyptian bombers during a raid. The city was also the scene of fighting between the Israel Defense Forces and Irgun during the Altalena Affair, in which the IDF stopped an Irgun attempt to import arms for its own use.\nIn December 1949, the Israeli government relocated to Jerusalem. Due to the international dispute over the status of Jerusalem, most embassies remained in or near Tel Aviv. The boundaries of Tel Aviv and Jaffa became a matter of contention between the Tel Aviv municipality and the Israeli government in 1948. The former wished to incorporate only the northern Jewish suburbs of Jaffa, while the latter wanted a more complete unification. The issue also had international sensitivity, since the main part of Jaffa was in the Arab portion of the United Nations Partition Plan, whereas Tel Aviv was not, and no armistice agreements had yet been signed. On 10 December 1948, the government announced the annexation to Tel Aviv of Jaffa's Jewish suburbs, the Palestinian neighborhood of Abu Kabir, the Arab village of Salama and some of its agricultural land, and the Jewish Hatikva Quarter. On 25 February 1949, the depopulated Palestinian village of al-Shaykh Muwannis was also annexed to Tel Aviv. On 18 May 1949, Manshiya and part of Jaffa's central zone were added, for the first time including land that had been in the Arab portion of the UN partition plan. The government voted on the unification of Tel Aviv and Jaffa on 4 October 1949, but the decision was not implemented until 24 April 1950 due to the opposition of Tel Aviv mayor Israel Rokach. The name of the unified city was Tel Aviv until 19 August 1950, when it was renamed Tel Aviv-Yafo in order to preserve the historical name Jaffa. Tel Aviv thus grew to . In 1949, a memorial to the 60\u00a0founders of Tel Aviv was constructed.\nIn the 1960s, some of the older buildings were demolished, making way for the country's first high-rises. The historic Herzliya Hebrew Gymnasium was controversially demolished, to make way for the Shalom Meir Tower, which was completed in 1965, and remained Israel's tallest building until 1999. Tel Aviv's population peaked in the early 1960s at 390,000, representing 16\u00a0percent of the country's total. By the early 1970s, Tel Aviv had entered a long and steady period of continuous population decline, which was accompanied by urban decay. By 1981, Tel Aviv had entered not just natural population decline, but an absolute population decline as well. In the late 1980s the city had an aging population of 317,000. Construction activity had moved away from the inner ring of Tel Aviv, and had moved to its outer perimeter and adjoining cities. A mass out-migration of residents from Tel Aviv, to adjoining cities like Petah Tikva and Rehovot, where better housing conditions were available, was underway by the beginning of the 1970s, and only accelerated by the Yom Kippur War. Cramped housing conditions and high property prices pushed families out of Tel Aviv and deterred young people from moving in. From the beginning of 1970s, the common image of Tel Aviv became that of a decaying city, as Tel Aviv's population fell 20%.\nIn the 1970s, the apparent sense of Tel Aviv's urban decline became a theme in the work of novelists such as Yaakov Shabtai, in works describing the city such as \"Sof Davar\" (\"The End of Things\") and \"Zikhron Devarim\" (\"The Memory of Things\"). A symptomatic article of 1980 asked \"Is Tel Aviv Dying?\" and portrayed what it saw as the city's existential problems: \"Residents leaving the city, businesses penetrating into residential areas, economic and social gaps, deteriorating neighbourhoods, contaminated air \u2013 Is the First Hebrew City destined for a slow death? Will it become a ghost town?\". However, others saw this as a transitional period. In the late 1970s, mayor Shlomo Lahat partnered with an urban planning firm to make changes to the city's urban fabric. Offices which had emerged throughout the city's neighborhoods, turning them into corporate spaces, were removed. Tel Aviv's main business center became the area along the Ayalon Highway, enabling neighborhoods in the rest of the city to be revitalized. By the late 1980s, attitudes to the city's future had become markedly more optimistic. It had also become a center of nightlife and discotheques for Israelis who lived in the suburbs and adjoining cities. By 1989, Tel Aviv had acquired the nickname \"Nonstop City\", as a reflection of the growing recognition of its nightlife and 24/7 culture, and \"Nonstop City\" had to some extent replaced the former moniker of \"First Hebrew City\". The largest project built in this era was the Dizengoff Center, Israel's first shopping mall, which was completed in 1983. Other notable projects included the construction of Marganit Tower in 1987, the opening of the Suzanne Dellal Center for Dance and Theater in 1989, and the Tel Aviv Cinematheque (opened in 1973 and located to the current building in 1989).\nIn the early 1980s, 13 embassies in Jerusalem moved to Tel Aviv as part of the UN's measures responding to Israel's 1980 Jerusalem Law. Today, most national embassies are located in Tel Aviv or environs. In the 1990s, the decline in Tel Aviv's population began to be reversed and stabilized, at first temporarily due to a wave of immigrants from the former Soviet Union. Tel Aviv absorbed 42,000 immigrants from the FSU, many educated in scientific, technological, medical and mathematical fields. In this period, the number of engineers in the city doubled. Tel Aviv soon began to emerge as a global high-tech center. The construction of many skyscrapers and high-tech office buildings followed. In 1993, Tel Aviv was categorized as a world city. However, the city's municipality struggled to cope with an influx of new immigrants. Tel Aviv's tax base had been shrinking for many years, as a result of its preceding long term population decline, and this meant there was little money available at the time to invest in the city's deteriorating infrastructure and housing. In 1998, Tel Aviv was on the \"verge of bankruptcy\". Economic difficulties would then be compounded by a wave of Palestinian suicide bombings in the city from the mid-1990s, to the end of the Second Intifada, as well as the dot-com bubble, which affected the city's rapidly growing hi-tech sector. On 4 November 1995, Israel's prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, was assassinated at a rally in Tel Aviv in support of the Oslo peace accord. The outdoor plaza where this occurred, formerly known as Kikar Malchei Yisrael, was renamed Rabin Square.\nIn the Gulf War in 1991, Tel Aviv was attacked by Scud missiles from Iraq. Iraq hoped to provoke an Israeli military response, which could have destroyed the US\u2013Arab alliance. The United States pressured Israel not to retaliate, and after Israel acquiesced, the US and Netherlands rushed Patriot missiles to defend against the attacks, but they proved largely ineffective. Tel Aviv and other Israeli cities continued to be hit by Scuds throughout the war, and every city in the Tel Aviv area except for Bnei Brak was hit. A total of 74 Israelis died as a result of the Iraqi attacks, mostly from suffocation and heart attacks, while approximately 230 Israelis were injured. Extensive property damage was also caused, and some 4,000 Israelis were left homeless. It was feared that Iraq would fire missiles filled with nerve agents or sarin. As a result, the Israeli government issued gas masks to its citizens. When the first Iraqi missiles hit Israel, some people injected themselves with an antidote for nerve gas. The inhabitants of the southeastern suburb of Hatikva erected an angel-monument as a sign of their gratitude that \"it was through a great miracle, that many people were preserved from being killed by a direct hit of a Scud rocket.\"\nSince the First Intifada, Tel Aviv has suffered from Palestinian political violence. The first suicide attack in Tel Aviv occurred on 19 October 1994, on the Line 5 bus, when a bomber killed 22 civilians and injured 50 as part of a Hamas suicide campaign. On 6 March 1996, another Hamas suicide bomber killed 13 people (12 civilians and 1 soldier), many of them children, in the Dizengoff Center suicide bombing. Three women were killed by a Hamas terrorist in the Caf\u00e9 Apropo bombing on 27 March 1997.\nOne of the deadliest attacks occurred on 1 June 2001, during the Second Intifada, when a suicide bomber exploded at the entrance to the Dolphinarium discoth\u00e8que, killing 21, mostly teenagers, and injuring 132. Another Hamas suicide bomber killed six civilians and injured 70 in the Allenby Street bus bombing. Twenty-three civilians were killed and over 100 injured in the Tel Aviv central bus station massacre. Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades claimed responsibility for the attack. In the Mike's Place suicide bombing, an attack on a bar by a British Muslim suicide bomber resulted in the deaths of three civilians and wounded over 50. Hamas and Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigades claimed joint responsibility. An Islamic Jihad bomber killed five and wounded over 50 on 25 February 2005 Stage Club bombing. The most recent suicide attack in the city occurred on 17 April 2006, when 11 people were killed and at least 70 wounded in a suicide bombing near the old central bus station.\nAnother attack took place on 29 August 2011 in which a Palestinian attacker stole an Israeli taxi cab and rammed it into a police checkpoint guarding the popular Haoman 17 nightclub in Tel Aviv which was filled with 2,000 Israeli teenagers. After crashing, the assailant went on a stabbing spree, injuring eight people. Due to an Israel Border Police roadblock at the entrance and immediate response of the Border Police team during the subsequent stabbings, a much larger and fatal mass-casualty incident was avoided.\nOn 21 November 2012, during Operation Pillar of Defense, the Tel Aviv area was targeted by rockets, and air raid sirens were sounded in the city for the first time since the Gulf War. All of the rockets either missed populated areas or were shot down by an Iron Dome rocket defense battery stationed near the city. During the operation, a bomb blast on a bus wounded at least 28 civilians, three seriously. This was described as a terrorist attack by Israel, Russia, and the United States and was condemned by the United Nations, United States, United Kingdom, France and Russia, whilst Hamas spokesman Sami Abu Zuhri declared that the organisation \"blesses\" the attack. More than 300 rockets were fired towards the Tel Aviv Metropolitan area in the 2021 Israel\u2013Palestine crisis.\nNew laws were introduced to protect Modernist buildings, and efforts to preserve them were aided by UNESCO recognition of Tel Aviv's White City as a world heritage site in 2003. In the early 2000s, Tel Aviv municipality focused on attracting more young residents to the city. It made significant investment in major boulevards, to create attractive pedestrian corridors. Former industrial areas like the city's previously derelict Northern Tel Aviv Port and the Jaffa railway station, were upgraded and transformed into leisure areas. A process of gentrification began in some of the poor neighborhoods of southern Tel Aviv and many older buildings began to be renovated.\nThe demographic profile of the city changed in the 2000s, as it began to attract a higher proportion of young residents. By 2012, 28 percent of the city's population was aged between 20 and 34 years old. Between 2007 and 2012, the city's population growth averaged 6.29 percent. As a result of its population recovery and industrial transition, the city's finances were transformed, and by 2012 it was running a budget surplus and maintained a credit rating of AAA+. In the 2000s and early 2010s, Tel Aviv received tens of thousands of illegal immigrants, primarily from Sudan and Eritrea, changing the demographic profile of areas of the city. In 2009, Tel Aviv celebrated its official centennial. In addition to city- and country-wide celebrations, digital collections of historical materials were assembled. These include the History section of the official Tel Aviv-Yafo Centennial Year website; the Ahuzat Bayit collection, which focuses on the founding families of Tel Aviv, and includes photographs and biographies; and Stanford University's Eliasaf Robinson Tel Aviv Collection, documenting the history of the city. Today, the city is regarded as a strong candidate for global city status. Over the past 60\u00a0years, Tel Aviv had developed into a secular, liberal-minded center with a vibrant nightlife and caf\u00e9 culture.\nGeography.\nTel Aviv is located around on the Israeli Mediterranean coastline, in central Israel, the historic land bridge between Europe, Asia and Africa. Immediately north of the ancient port of Jaffa, Tel Aviv lies on land that used to be sand dunes and as such has relatively poor soil fertility. The land has been flattened and has no important gradients; its most notable geographical features are bluffs above the Mediterranean coastline and the Yarkon River mouth. Because of the expansion of Tel Aviv and the Gush Dan region, absolute borders between Tel Aviv and Jaffa and between the city's neighborhoods do not exist.\nThe city is located northwest of Jerusalem and south of the city of Haifa. Neighboring cities and towns include Herzliya to the north, Ramat HaSharon to the northeast, Petah Tikva, Bnei Brak, Ramat Gan and Giv'atayim to the east, Holon to the southeast, and Bat Yam to the south. The city is economically stratified between the north and south. Southern Tel Aviv is considered less affluent than northern Tel Aviv with the exception of Neve Tzedek and northern and north-western Jaffa. Central Tel Aviv is home to Azrieli Center and the important financial and commerce district along Ayalon Highway. The northern side of Tel Aviv is home to Tel Aviv University, Yarkon Park, and upscale residential neighborhoods such as Ramat Aviv and Afeka.\nEnvironment.\nTel Aviv is ranked as the greenest city in Israel. Since 2008, city lights are turned off annually in support of Earth Hour. In February 2009, the municipality launched a water saving campaign, including competition granting free parking for a year to the household that is found to have consumed the least water per person.\nIn the early 21st century, Tel Aviv's municipality transformed a derelict power station into a public park, now named \"Gan HaHashmal\" (\"Electricity Park\"), paving the way for eco-friendly and environmentally conscious designs. In October 2008, Martin Weyl turned an old garbage dump near Ben Gurion International Airport, called Hiriya, into an attraction by building an arc of plastic bottles. The site, which was renamed Ariel Sharon Park to honor Israel's former prime minister, will serve as the centerpiece in what is to become a urban wilderness on the outskirts of Tel Aviv, designed by German landscape architect, Peter Latz.\nAt the end of the 20th century, the city began restoring historical neighborhoods such as Neve Tzedek and many buildings from the 1920s and 1930s. Since 2007, the city hosts its well-known, annual Open House Tel Aviv weekend, which offers the general public free entrance to the city's famous landmarks, private houses and public buildings. In 2010, the design of the renovated Tel Aviv Port (\"Nemal Tel Aviv\") won the award for outstanding landscape architecture at the European Biennial for Landscape Architecture in Barcelona.\nIn 2014, the Sarona Market Complex opened, following an 8-year renovation project of Sarona colony.\nClimate.\nTel Aviv has a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: Csa), and enjoys plenty of sunshine throughout the year. Most precipitation falls in the form of rain between the months of October and April, with intervening dry summers, and there is almost no rainfall from June to September. The average annual temperature is , and the average sea temperature is during the winter, and during the summer. The city averages of precipitation annually.\nSummers in Tel Aviv last about five months, from June to October. August, the warmest month, averages a high of , and a low of . The high relative humidity due to the location of the city by the Mediterranean Sea, in a combination with the high temperatures, creates a thermal discomfort during the summer. Summer low temperatures in Tel Aviv seldom drop below .\nWinters are mild and wet, with most of the annual precipitation falling within the months of December, January and February as intense rainfall and thunderstorms. In January, the coolest month, the average maximum temperature is , the minimum temperature averages . During the coldest days of winter, temperatures may vary between and . Both freezing temperatures and snowfall are extremely rare in the city.\nAutumns and springs are characterized by sharp temperature changes, with heat waves that might be created due to hot and dry air masses that arrive from the nearby deserts. During heatwaves in autumn and springs, temperatures usually climb up to and even up to , accompanied with exceptionally low humidity. An average day during autumn and spring has a high of to , and a low of to .\nThe highest recorded temperature in Tel Aviv was on 17 May 1916, and the lowest is on 7 February 1950, during a cold wave that brought the only recorded snowfall in Tel Aviv.\nGovernment.\nTel Aviv is governed by a 31-member city council elected for a five-year term by in direct proportional elections, and a mayor elected for the same term by direct elections under a two-round system. Like all other mayors in Israel, no term limits exist for the Mayor of Tel Aviv. All Israeli citizens over the age of 17 with at least one year of residence in Tel Aviv are eligible to vote in municipal elections. The municipality is responsible for social services, community programs, public infrastructure, urban planning, tourism and other local affairs. The Tel Aviv City Hall is located at Rabin Square. Ron Huldai has been mayor of Tel Aviv since 1998. Huldai was reelected to a sixth term in the 2024 municipal elections, defeating former Minister of Economy Orna Barbivai. Huldai has become city's longest-serving mayor, surpassing Shlomo Lahat's 19-year term. The shortest-serving mayor was David Bloch, who served a two year term between 1925 and 1927.\nPolitically, Tel Aviv is known to be a stronghold for the left, in both local and national issues. The left wing vote is especially prevalent in the city's mostly affluent central and northern neighborhoods, though not the case for its working-class southeastern neighborhoods which tend to vote for right wing parties in national elections. Outside the kibbutzim, Meretz receives more votes in Tel Aviv than in any other city in Israel.\nDemographics.\nTel Aviv has a population of 495,230 spread over a land area of . According to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS), as of 2009[ [update]] Tel Aviv's population was growing at an annual rate of 0.5 percent. Jews of all backgrounds formed 91.8 percent of the population, Muslims and Arab Christians made up 4.2 percent, and the remainder belonged to other groups (including various Christian and Asian communities). As Tel Aviv is a multicultural city, many languages are spoken in addition to Hebrew. According to some estimates, about 50,000 unregistered African and Asian foreign workers live in the city. Compared with Westernised cities, crime in Tel Aviv is relatively low.\nAccording to Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality, the average income in the city, which had an unemployment rate of 4.6% in 2014, is 20% above the national average. The city's education standards are above the national average: of its 12th-grade students, 64.4 percent are eligible for matriculation certificates. The age profile is relatively even, with 22.2 percent aged under 20, 18.5 percent aged 20\u201329, 24 percent aged 30\u201344, 16.2 percent aged between 45 and 59, and 19.1 percent older than 60.\nTel Aviv's population reached a peak in the early 1960s at around 390,000, falling to 317,000 in the late 1980s as high property prices forced families out and deterred young couples from moving in. Since the 1990s, population has steadily grown. Today, the city's population is young and growing. In 2006, 22,000\u00a0people moved to the city, while only 18,500 left, and many of the new families had young children. Meanwhile, the average age of residents fell from 35.8 in 1983 to 34 in 2008. The population over age 65 stands at 14.6 percent compared with 19% in 1983. The population is expected to reach 535,000 in 2030. Under a master plan for the city approved by the Tel Aviv District Planning and Building Committee in 2025, the city's population will grow to 600,000 by 2035.\nReligion.\nTel Aviv has 544 active synagogues, including historic buildings such as the Great Synagogue, established in the 1930s. In 2008, a center for secular Jewish studies and a secular yeshiva opened in the city. Tensions between religious and secular Jews before the 2006 gay pride parade ended in vandalism of a synagogue. The number of churches has grown to accommodate the religious needs of diplomats and foreign workers. In 2019, the population was 89.9% Jewish, and 4.5% Arab; among Arabs, 82.8% were Muslim, 16.4% were Christian, and 0.8% were Druze. The remaining 5 percent were not classified by religion. Israel Meir Lau is Chief Rabbi of the city.\nTel Aviv is an ethnically diverse city. The Jewish population, which forms the majority group in Tel Aviv, consists of the descendants of immigrants from all parts of the world, including Ashkenazi Jews from Europe, North America, South America, Australia and South Africa, as well as Sephardic and Mizrahi Jews from Southern Europe, North Africa, India, Central Asia, West Asia, and the Arabian Peninsula. There are also a sizable number of Ethiopian Jews and their descendants living in Tel Aviv. In addition to Muslim and Arab Christian minorities in the city, several hundred Armenian Christians reside in the city, concentrated mainly in Jaffa. There are also some Christians from the former Soviet Union who immigrated to Israel with Jewish spouses and relatives. In recent years, Tel Aviv has received many non-Jewish migrants from Asia and Africa, students, foreign workers (documented and undocumented) and refugees. There are many economic migrants and refugees from African countries, primarily Eritrea and Sudan, located in the southern part of the city.\nNeighborhoods.\nTel Aviv is divided into nine boroughs that have formed naturally over the city's short history. The oldest of these is Jaffa, the ancient port city out of which Tel Aviv grew. This area is traditionally made up demographically of a greater percentage of Arabs, but recent gentrification is replacing them with a young professional and artist population. Similar processes are occurring in nearby Neve Tzedek, the original Jewish neighborhood outside of Jaffa. Ramat Aviv, a district in the northern part of the city that is largely made up of luxury apartments and includes Tel Aviv University, as of 2007 is undergoing extensive expansion and is set to absorb the beachfront property of Sde Dov Airport after its decommissioning. The area known as HaKirya is the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) headquarters and a large military base. Moreover, in the past few years, Rothschild Boulevard which is beginning in Neve Tzedek has become an attraction for tourists, businesses and startups. It features a wide, tree-lined central strip with pedestrian and bike lanes. Historically, there was a demographic split between the Ashkenazi northern side of the city, including the district of Ramat Aviv, and the southern, more Sephardi and Mizrahi neighborhoods including Neve Tzedek and Florentin.\nSince the 1980s, major restoration and gentrification projects have been implemented in southern Tel Aviv. Baruch Yoscovitz, city planner for Tel Aviv beginning in 2001, reworked old British plans for the Florentin neighborhood from the 1920s, adding green areas, pedestrian malls, and housing. The municipality invested two million shekels in the project. The goal was to make Florentin the Soho of Tel Aviv, and attract artists and young professionals to the neighborhood. Street artists, such as Dede, installation artists such as Sigalit Landau, and many others made the upbeat neighborhood their home base. Florentin is now known as a hip, \"cool\" place to be in Tel Aviv with coffeehouses, markets, bars, galleries and parties.\nHealth.\nTel Aviv is home to Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, the third-largest hospital complex in Israel. It contains Ichilov Hospital, the Ida Sourasky Rehabilitation Center, Lis Maternity and Women's Hospital, and Dana-Dwek Children's Hospital. The city also contains Assuta Medical Center, a private hospital which offers surgical and diagnostic services in all fields of medicine and has an IVF clinic.\nEducation.\nIn 2006, 51,359\u00a0children attended school in Tel Aviv, of whom 8,977\u00a0were in municipal kindergartens, 23,573 in municipal elementary schools, and 18,809 in high schools. Sixty-four percent of students in the city are entitled to matriculation, more than 5 percent higher than the national average. About 4,000 children are in first grade at schools in the city, and population growth is expected to raise this number to 6,000. As a result, 20\u00a0additional kindergarten classes were opened in 2008\u201309 in the city. A new elementary school is planned north of Sde Dov as well as a new high school in northern Tel Aviv.\nThe first Hebrew high school, called Herzliya Hebrew Gymnasium, was established in Jaffa in 1905 and moved to Tel Aviv after its founding in 1909, where a new campus on Herzl Street was constructed for it.\nTel Aviv University, the largest university in Israel, is known internationally for its physics, computer science, chemistry and linguistics departments. Together with Bar-Ilan University in neighboring Ramat Gan, the student population numbers over 50,000, including a sizeable international community. Its campus is located in the neighborhood of Ramat Aviv. Tel Aviv also has several colleges.\nThe Herzliya Hebrew Gymnasium moved from Jaffa to old Tel Aviv in 1909 and moved to Jabotinsky Street in the early 1960s. Other notable schools in Tel Aviv include Shevah Mofet, the second Hebrew school in the city, Ironi Alef High School for Arts and Alliance.\nEconomy.\nTel Aviv has been ranked as the twenty-fifth most important financial center in the world. In 1926, the country's first shopping arcade, Passage Pensak, was built there. By 1936, as tens of thousands of middle class immigrants arrived from Europe, Tel Aviv was already the largest city in Palestine. A small port was built at the Yarkon estuary, and many cafes, clubs and cinemas opened. Herzl Street became a commercial thoroughfare at this time.\nEconomic activities account for 17 percent of the GDP. In 2011, Tel Aviv had an unemployment rate of 4.4 percent. The city has been described as a \"flourishing technological center\" by \"Newsweek\" and a \"miniature Los Angeles\" by \"The Economist\". In 1998, the city was described by Newsweek as one of the 10\u00a0most technologically influential cities in the world. Since then, high-tech industry in the Tel Aviv area has continued to develop. The Tel Aviv metropolitan area (including satellite cities such as Herzliya and Petah Tikva) is Israel's center of high-tech, sometimes referred to as Silicon Wadi.\nIn 2016, the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network (GaWC) at Loughborough University reissued an inventory of world cities based on their level of advanced producer services. Tel Aviv was ranked as an alpha- world city.\nThe Kiryat Atidim high tech zone opened in 1972 and the city has become a major world high tech hub. In December 2012, the city was ranked second on a list of top places to found a high tech startup company, just behind Silicon Valley. In 2013, Tel Aviv had more than 700 startup companies and research and development centers, and was ranked the second-most innovative city in the world, behind Medell\u00edn and ahead of New York City.\nAccording to Forbes, nine of its fifteen Israeli-born billionaires live in Israel; four live in Tel Aviv and its suburbs. The cost of living in Israel is high, with Tel Aviv being its most expensive city to live in. In 2021, Tel Aviv became the world's most expensive city to live in, according to the Economist Intelligence Unit.\nShopping malls in Tel Aviv include Dizengoff Center, Ramat Aviv Mall and Azrieli Shopping Mall and markets such as Carmel Market, Ha'Tikva Market, and Bezalel Market.\nTel Aviv is home to the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange (TASE), Israel's only stock exchange, which has reached record heights since the 1990s. The Tel Aviv Stock exchange has also gained attention for its resilience and ability to recover from war and disasters. For example, the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange was higher on the last day of both the 2006 Lebanon war and the 2009 Operation in Gaza than on the first day of fighting. Many international venture-capital firms, scientific research institutes and high-tech companies are headquartered in the city. Industries in Tel Aviv include chemical processing, textile plants and food manufacturers.\nTel Aviv is ranked the 4th top global startup ecosystem hub according to the startup genome.\nTourism and recreation.\nTel Aviv receives about 2.5\u00a0million international visitors annually, the fifth-most-visited city in the Middle East &amp; Africa. In 2010, \"Knight Frank\"'s world city survey ranked it 34th globally. Tel Aviv has been named the third \"hottest city for 2011\" (behind only New York City and Tangier) by \"Lonely Planet\", third-best in the Middle East and Africa by \"Travel + Leisure magazine\" (behind only Cape Town and Jerusalem), and the ninth-best beach city in the world by \"National Geographic\". Tel Aviv is consistently ranked as one of the top LGBT destinations in the world. The city has also been ranked as one of the top 10 oceanfront cities.\nTel Aviv is known as \"the city that never sleeps\" and a \"party capital\" due to its thriving nightlife, young atmosphere and famous 24-hour culture. Tel Aviv has branches of some of the world's leading hotels, including the Crowne Plaza, Sheraton, Dan, Isrotel and Hilton. It is home to many museums, architectural and cultural sites, with city tours available in different languages. Apart from bus tours, architectural tours, Segway tours, and walking tours are also popular. Tel Aviv has 44\u00a0hotels with more than 6,500\u00a0rooms.\nThe beaches of Tel Aviv and the city's promenade play a major role in the city's cultural and touristic scene, often ranked as some of the best beaches in the world. Yarkon Park is the most visited urban park in Israel, with 16\u00a0million visitors annually. Other parks within city limits include Charles Clore Park, Independence Park, Meir Park and Dubnow Garden. About 19% of the city land consists of green spaces.\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nTel Aviv is home to different architectural styles that represent influential periods in its history. The early architecture of Tel Aviv consisted largely of European-style single-storey houses with red-tiled roofs. Neve Tzedek, the first neighbourhood to be built outside of Jaffa, is characterised by two-storey sandstone buildings. By the 1920s, a new eclectic Orientalist style came into vogue, combining European architecture with Eastern features such as arches, domes and ornamental tiles. Pagoda House (\"Beit HaPagoda\"), designed by Alexander Levy and built in 1924, is an example of this style. Municipal construction followed the \"garden city\" master plan drawn up by Patrick Geddes. Two- and three-storey buildings were interspersed with boulevards and public parks. Various architectural styles, such as Art Deco, classical and modernist also exist in Tel Aviv.\nBauhaus architecture was introduced in the 1920s and 1930s by German Jewish architects who settled in Palestine after the rise of the Nazis. Tel Aviv's White City, around the city center, contains more than 5,000\u00a0Modernist-style buildings inspired by the Bauhaus school and Le Corbusier. Construction of these buildings, later declared protected landmarks and, collectively, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, continued until the 1950s in the area around Rothschild Boulevard. Some 3,000 buildings were created in this style between 1931 and 1939 alone. In the 1960s, this architectural style gave way to office towers and a chain of waterfront hotels and commercial skyscrapers. Some of the city's Modernist buildings were neglected to the point of ruin. Before legislation to preserve this landmark architecture, many of the old buildings were demolished. Efforts are under way to refurbish Bauhaus buildings and restore them to their original condition.\nThe Shalom Meir Tower, Israel's first skyscraper, was built in Tel Aviv in 1965 and remained the country's tallest building until 1999. At the time of its construction, the building rivaled Europe's tallest buildings in height, and was the tallest in the Middle East.\nIn the mid-1990s, the construction of skyscrapers began throughout the entire city, altering its skyline. Before that, Tel Aviv had had a generally low-rise skyline. In 2010, the Tel Aviv Municipality's Planning and Construction Committee launched a new master plan for the city for 2025. It decided not to allow the construction of any additional skyscrapers in the city center, while at the same time greatly increasing the construction of skyscrapers in the east. The ban extends to an area between the coast and Ibn Gabirol Street, and also between the Yarkon River and Eilat Street. It did not extend to towers already under construction or approved. One final proposed skyscraper project was approved, while dozens of others had to be scrapped. Any new buildings there will usually not be allowed to rise above six and a half stories. However, hotel towers along almost the entire beachfront will be allowed to rise up to 25 stories. According to the plan, large numbers of skyscrapers and high-rise buildings at least 18 stories tall would be built in the entire area between Ibn Gabirol Street and the eastern city limits, as part of the master plan's goal of doubling the city's office space to cement Tel Aviv as the business capital of Israel. Under the plan, \"forests\" of corporate skyscrapers will line both sides of the Ayalon Highway. Further south, skyscrapers rising up to 40 stories will be built along the old Ottoman railway between Neve Tzedek and Florentine, with the first such tower there being the Neve Tzedek Tower. Along nearby Shlavim Street, passing between Jaffa and south Tel Aviv, office buildings up to 25 stories will line both sides of the street, which will be widened to accommodate traffic from the city's southern entrance to the center.\nArts and museums.\nIn the 1920s Tel-Aviv gradually became the center of art in Israel. In 1919, several prominent Olim from Odessa arrived in the Ruslan ship. In 1920 some of these set up the HaTomer art cooperative as well as opened the first modern art exhibition in Israel. In the 1925 following the return of Isaac Frenkel Frenel from Paris and his opening of the Histadrut art studio, and the introduction of \u00c9cole de Paris influence; Tel Aviv grew to supplement Jerusalem in its cultural importance in the visual arts; especially in respect to modern art. In the late 1920s to 1940s Tel Aviv painters were heavily influenced by the \u00c9cole de Paris, painting Tel Aviv's urban landscape, people and cafes in a manner influenced by Soutine, Pascin, Frenel, Chagall and others from the School of Paris. Tel Aviv's bohemian culture was characterized by cafes such as Kassit which attracted numerous writers and painters. Numerous exhibitions were held in the Ohel theatre and the Herzliya Hebrew Gymnasium prior to the opening of museums. Reuben Rubin and Nahum Gutman also worked and painted in the city, painting in the naive style. Tel Aviv hosts the Tel Aviv museum of art, established in 1932 in Meir Dizengoff's house, since having moved to a new larger location in 1971, as well as numerous galleries.\nIsrael has the highest number of museums per capita of any country, with three of the largest located in Tel Aviv. Among these are the Eretz Israel Museum, known for its collection of archaeology and history exhibits dealing with the Land of Israel, and the Tel Aviv Museum of Art. In 2023, the Tel Aviv Museum of Art was ranked 48th on \"The Art Magazine\"'s list of the 100 most popular museums in the world. Housed on the campus of Tel Aviv University is ANU - Museum of the Jewish People, a museum of the international Jewish diaspora that tells the story of Jewish prosperity and persecution throughout the centuries of exile. Batey Haosef Museum specializes in Israel Defense Forces military history. The Palmach Museum near Tel Aviv University offers a multimedia experience of the history of the Palmach. Right next to Charles Clore Park is a museum of the Irgun. The Israel Trade Fairs &amp; Convention Center, located in the northern part of the city, hosts more than 60\u00a0major events annually. Many offbeat museums and galleries operate in the southern areas, including the Tel Aviv Raw Art contemporary art gallery.\nEntertainment and performing arts.\nTel Aviv is a major center of culture and entertainment. Eighteen of Israel's 35 major centers for the performing arts are located in the city, including five of the country's nine large theatres, where 55% of all performances in the country and 75 percent of all attendance occurs. The Tel Aviv Performing Arts Center is home of the Israeli Opera, where Pl\u00e1cido Domingo was house tenor between 1962 and 1965, and the Cameri Theatre. With 2,482\u00a0seats, the Heichal HaTarbut is the city's largest theatre and home to the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra.\nHabima Theatre, Israel's national theatre, was closed down for renovations in early 2008, and reopened in November 2011 after major remodeling. Enav Cultural Center is one of the newer additions to the cultural scene. Other theatres in Tel Aviv are the Gesher Theatre and Beit Lessin Theater; Tzavta and Tmuna are smaller theatres that host musical performances and fringe productions. In Jaffa, the Simta and Notzar theatres specialize in fringe as well. Tel Aviv is home to the Batsheva Dance Company, a world-famous contemporary dance troupe. The Israeli Ballet is also based in Tel Aviv. Tel Aviv's center for modern and classical dance is the Suzanne Dellal Center for Dance and Theatre in Neve Tzedek.\nThe city often hosts international musicians at venues such as Yarkon Park, Expo Tel Aviv, the Barby Club, the Zappa Club and Live Park Rishon Lezion just south of Tel Aviv. The Eurovision Song Contest 2019 was held at Expo Tel Aviv (the first Israeli-hosted Eurovision held outside of Jerusalem), following Israel's win the year prior. Opera and classical music performances are held daily in Tel Aviv, with many of the world's leading classical conductors and soloists performing on Tel Aviv stages over the years.\nThe Tel Aviv Cinematheque screens art movies, premieres of short and full-length Israeli films, and hosts a variety of film festivals, among them the Festival of Animation, Comics and Caricatures, \"Icon\" Science Fiction and Fantasy Festival, the Student Film Festival, the Jazz, Film and Videotape Festival and Salute to Israeli Cinema. The city has several multiplex cinemas.\nTel Aviv is an international hub of highly active and diverse nightlife with bars, dance bars and nightclubs staying open well past midnight. The largest area for nightclubs is the Tel Aviv port, where the city's large, commercial clubs and bars draw big crowds of young clubbers from both Tel Aviv and neighboring cities. The South of Tel Aviv is known for the popular Haoman 17 club, as well as for being the city's main hub of alternative clubbing, with underground venues including established clubs like the Block Club, Comfort 13 and Paradise Garage, as well as various warehouse and loft party venues. The Allenby/Rothschild area is another popular nightlife hub, featuring such clubs as the Pasaz, Radio EPGB and the Penguin. In 2013, Absolut Vodka introduced a specially designed bottle dedicated to Tel Aviv as part of its international cities series.\nLGBT culture.\nNamed \"the best gay city in the world\" by American Airlines, Tel Aviv is one of the most popular destinations for LGBT tourists internationally, with a large LGBT community. Approximately 25% of Tel Aviv's population identify as gay. American journalist David Kaufman has described the city as a place \"packed with the kind of 'we're here, we're queer', vibe more typically found in Sydney and San Francisco\". The city hosts its well-known pride parade, the biggest in Asia, attracting over 200,000 people yearly.\nIn January 2008, Tel Aviv's municipality established the city's LGBT Community center, providing all of the municipal and cultural services to the LGBT community under one roof. In December 2008, Tel Aviv began putting together a team of gay athletes for the 2009 World Outgames in Copenhagen. In addition, Tel Aviv hosts an annual LGBT film festival, known as TLVFest.\nTel Aviv's LGBT community is the subject of Eytan Fox's 2006 film \"The Bubble\".\nFashion.\nTel Aviv has become an international center of fashion and design. It has been called the \"next hot destination\" for fashion. Israeli designers, such as swimwear company Gottex show their collections at leading fashion shows, including New York's Bryant Park fashion show. In 2011, Tel Aviv hosted its first fashion week since the 1980s, with Italian designer Roberto Cavalli as a guest of honor.\nMedia.\nThe three largest newspaper companies in Israel: , Maariv and Haaretz are all based within the city limits. Several radio stations cover the Tel Aviv area, including the city-based Radio Tel Aviv.\nThe two major Israeli television networks, Keshet Media Group and Reshet, are based in the city, as well as two of the most popular radio stations in Israel: Galatz and Galgalatz, which are both based in Jaffa. Studios of the international news channel i24news is located at Jaffa Port Customs House. An English language radio station, TLV1, is based at Kikar Hamedina.\nCuisine.\nTel Aviv is famous for its wide variety of world-class restaurants, offering traditional Israeli dishes as well as international fare. More than 100\u00a0sushi restaurants, the third highest concentration in the world, do business in the city.\nIn Tel Aviv there are some dessert specialties, the most known is the Halvah ice cream traditionally topped with date syrup and pistachios.\nSports.\nThe city has a number of football stadiums, the largest of which is Bloomfield Stadium, which contains 29,400 seats used by Hapoel Tel Aviv, Maccabi Tel Aviv and Bnei Yehuda. Another stadium in the city is the Hatikva Neighborhood Stadium. Menora Mivtachim Arena is a large multi-purpose sports indoor arena, The arena is home to the Maccabi Tel Aviv, and the Drive in Arena, a multi-purpose hall that serves as the home ground of the Hapoel Tel Aviv. National Sport Center Tel Aviv (also Hadar Yosef Sports Center) is a compound of stadiums and sports facilities. It also houses the Olympic Committee of Israel and the National Athletics Stadium with the Israeli Athletic Association.\nThe Maccabi Tel Aviv Sports Club was founded in 1906 and competes in more than 10\u00a0sport fields. Its basketball team, Maccabi Tel Aviv Basketball Club, is a world-known professional team, that holds 57 Israeli titles, has won 46\u00a0editions of the Israel cup, and has six\u00a0European Championships, and its football team Maccabi Tel Aviv Football Club has won 25 Israeli league titles and has won 24 State Cups, eight Toto Cups and two Asian Club Championships. Yael Arad, an athlete in Maccabi's judo club, won a silver medal in the 1992 Olympic Games.\nHapoel Tel Aviv Sports Club, founded in 1923, comprises more than 11 sports clubs, including Hapoel Tel Aviv Football Club (13 championships, 16 State Cups, one Toto Cup and once Asian champions) which plays in Bloomfield Stadium, and Hapoel Tel Aviv Basketball Club.\nBnei Yehuda Tel Aviv (once Israeli champion, twice State Cup winners and twice Toto Cup winner) is the Israeli football team that represents a neighborhood, the Hatikva Quarter in Tel Aviv, and not a city. Beitar Tel Aviv formerly played in the top division, the club now playing in Liga Alef. Maccabi Jaffa formerly played in the top division, the club now playing in Liga Leumit and represents the Jaffa. Shimshon Tel Aviv formerly played in the top division, the club now playing in Liga Alef. There are more Tel Aviv football teams: Hapoel Kfar Shalem, F.C. Bnei Jaffa Ortodoxim, Beitar Ezra, Beitar Jaffa, Elitzur Jaffa Tel Aviv, F.C. Roei Heshbon Tel Aviv, Gadna Tel Aviv Yehuda, Hapoel Kiryat Shalom, Hapoel Neve Golan and Hapoel Ramat Yisrael.\nTwo rowing clubs operate in Tel Aviv. The Tel Aviv Rowing Club, established in 1935 on the banks of the Yarkon River, is the largest rowing club in Israel. Meanwhile, the beaches of Tel Aviv provide a vibrant Matkot (beach paddleball) scene. Tel Aviv Lightning represent Tel Aviv in the Israel Baseball League. Tel Aviv also has an annual half marathon, run in 2008 by 10,000 athletes with runners coming from around the world.\nIn 2009, the Tel Aviv Marathon was revived after a fifteen-year hiatus, and is run annually since, attracting a field of over 18,000 runners.\nTransportation.\nTel Aviv is a major transportation hub, served by a comprehensive public transport network, with many major routes of the national transportation network running through the city. As of 2023, 56% of the residents are going to work without using cars and the plan is to expand it to 70% by the end of the decade.\nBus and taxi.\nAs with the rest of Israel, bus transport is the most common form of public transport and is very widely used. The Tel Aviv central bus station is located in the southern part of the city. The main bus network in Tel Aviv metropolitan area operated by Dan Bus Company, Metropoline, and Kavim. the Egged Bus Cooperative, Israels's largest bus company, provides intercity transportation.\nThe city is also served by local and inter-city share taxis. Many local and inter-city bus routes also have sherut taxis that follow the same route and display the same route number in their window. Fares are standardised within the region and are comparable to or less expensive than bus fares. Unlike other forms of public transport, these taxis also operate on Fridays and Saturdays (the Jewish sabbath \"Shabbat\"). Private taxis are white with a yellow sign on top. Fares are standardised and metered, but may be negotiated ahead of time with the driver.\nRail.\nThe Tel Aviv Savidor Central railway station is the main railway station of the city, and the second-busiest station in Israel. The city has five additional railway stations along the Ayalon Highway: three of them, Tel Aviv University, HaShalom (the busiest station in Israel, adjacent to Azrieli Center) and HaHagana (near the Tel Aviv central bus station), serve Tel Aviv directly, while the remaining two, Holon Junction and Holon\u2013Wolfson, are within Tel Aviv's municipal boundaries but serve the southern suburb of Holon. It is estimated that over a million\u00a0passengers travel by rail to Tel Aviv monthly. The trains do not run on Saturday and the principal Jewish festivals (Rosh Hashana (2 days), Yom Kippur, Sukkot, Simkhat Torah, Pessach (Passover) first and fifth days and Shavuot (Pentecost)). Jaffa railway station was the first railway station in the Levant. It served as the terminus for the Jaffa\u2013Jerusalem railway. The station opened in 1891 and closed in 1948. In 2005\u20132009, the station was restored and converted into an entertainment and leisure venue marketed as \"HaTachana\", Hebrew for \"the station\" (see homepage here:). The Jaffa\u2013Jerusalem railway also included the Tel Aviv Beit Hadar railway station, which was opened in 1920 and replaced in 1970, and the Tel Aviv South railway station, which was opened in 1970 to replace Beit Hadar and itself closed in 1993. The Bnei Brak railway station, while located in Bnei Brak's municipal borders, is closer to the Tel Aviv neighborhood of Ramat HaHayal than to Bnei Brak's city center and was originally called Tel Aviv North.\nTel Aviv Light Rail is a mass transit system for the Tel Aviv metropolitan area. As of 2023, two LRT lines are under construction. Work on the Red Line, the first in the project, started on September 21, 2011, following years of preparatory works, and was expected to be completed and opened in late 2022 after numerous delays, and was finally opened on August 18, 2023, after the opening day was postponed numerous times. Construction of the Purple Line started in December 2018; work on the Green Line began in 2021 and is scheduled for completion in 2028. Tel Aviv Metro is a proposed subway system for the Tel Aviv Metropolitan Area. It will augment the Tel Aviv Light Rail and Israel Railways suburban lines and 3 underground metro lines to form a rapid transit transportation solution for the city. Construction is expected to start in 2025, with the first public opening in 2032.\nRoads.\nThe main highway leading to and within the city is the Ayalon Highway (Highway 20), which runs in the eastern side of the city from north to south along the Ayalon River riverbed. Driving south on Ayalon gives access to Highway 4 leading to Ashdod, Highway 1, leading to Ben Gurion International Airport and Jerusalem and Highway 431 leading to Jerusalem, Modiin, Rehovot and the Highway 6 Trans-Israel Highway. Driving north on Ayalon gives access to the Highway 2 coastal road leading to Netanya, Hadera and Haifa. Within the city, main routes include Kaplan Street, Allenby Street, Ibn Gabirol Street, Dizengoff Street, Rothschild Boulevard, and in Jaffa the main route is Jerusalem Boulevard. Namir Road connects the city to Highway 2, Israel's main north\u2013south highway, and Begin/Jabotinsky Road, which provides access from the east through Ramat Gan, Bnei Brak and Petah Tikva. Tel Aviv, accommodating about 500,000\u00a0commuter cars daily, suffers from increasing congestion. In 2007, the Sadan Report recommended the introduction of a congestion charge similar to that of London in Tel Aviv as well as other Israeli cities. Under this plan, road users traveling into the city would pay a fixed fee.\nAir.\nThe main airport serving Greater Tel Aviv is Ben Gurion International Airport. Located in an unincorporated area between the neighbouring cities of Lod and Or Yehuda, it handled over 20\u00a0million passengers in 2017. Ben Gurion is the main hub of El Al, Arkia, Israir Airlines and Sun d'Or. The airport is southeast of Tel Aviv, on Highway 1 between Tel Aviv and Jerusalem. Sde Dov Airport (IATA: SDV), in northwestern Tel Aviv, is a domestic airport and was closed in 2019 in favor of real-estate development. All services to Sde Dov will be transferred to Ben Gurion Airport.\nCycling.\nThe Tel Aviv Municipality encourages the use of bicycles in the city. Plans called for expansion of the paths to by 2009. By 2020, the city had 140 kilometres of bicycle paths with plans to reach 300\u00a0km by 2025. The city is at the center of the Ofnidan, a network of bicycle paths throughout the Gush Dan metropolitan area.\nIn April 2011, the Tel Aviv municipality launched Tel-O-Fun, a bicycle sharing system, in which 150 stations of bicycles for rent were installed within the city limits.\nForeign relations.\nThe municipality of Tel Aviv signed agreements with many cities worldwide.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31454", "revid": "847224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31454", "title": "Clangers", "text": "British children's TV series (1969\u20131974)\nClangers (usually referred to as \"The Clangers\") is a British stop-motion animated children's television series, consisting of short films about a family of mouse-like creatures who live on, and inside, a small moon-like planet. They speak only in a whistled language, and eat green soup (supplied by the Soup Dragon) and blue string pudding. The programmes were originally broadcast on BBC1 between 1969 and 1972, followed by a special episode which was broadcast in 1974.\nThe series was made by Smallfilms, the company set up by Oliver Postgate (who was the show's writer, animator and narrator) and Peter Firmin (who was its modelmaker and illustrator). Firmin designed the characters, and Joan Firmin, his wife, knitted and \"dressed\" them. The music, often part of the story, was provided by Vernon Elliott.\nA third series, narrated by Monty Python actor Michael Palin, was broadcast in the UK in June 2015 on the BBC's CBeebies TV channel, gaining hugely successful viewing figures, following on from a short special broadcast by the BBC earlier that year. The new programmes are still made using stop-motion animation (instead of the computer-generated imagery which had replaced the original stop-motion animation in revivals of other children's shows such as \"Fireman Sam\", \"Thomas &amp; Friends\" and \"The Wombles\"). Further new series were made in 2017 and 2019.\n\"Clangers\" won the British Academy Children's Award for Pre-School Animation in 2015.\nBackground.\nThe Clangers originated in a series of children's books developed from another \"Smallfilms\" production, \"Noggin the Nog\". Publishers Kay and Ward created a series of books based on the \"Noggin the Nog\" television episodes, which was subsequently expanded into a series called \"Noggin First Reader\", aimed at teaching children to read.\nIn one of these, called \"Noggin and the Moonmouse\", published in 1967, a new horse-trough was put up in the middle of the town in the North-Lands. A spacecraft hurtled down and splash-landed in it: the top unscrewed, and out came a largish, mouse-like creature in a duffel coat, who wanted fuel for his spaceship. He showed Nooka and the children that what he needed was vinegar and soap-flakes, so they filled up the fueltank of the little spherical ship, which then \"took off in a dreadful cloud smelling of vinegar and soap-flakes, covering the town with bubbles\".\nIn 1969 (the year of NASA's first landing on the Moon), the BBC asked \"Smallfilms\" to produce a new series for colour television, but without specifying a storyline. Postgate concluded that as space exploration was topical the new series should take place in space and, inspired by the real Moon Landing, Peter Firmin designed a set which strongly resembled the Moon. Postgate adapted the Moonmouse from the 1967 story, by simply removing its tail (\"because it kept getting into the soup\"). Hence the Clangers looked similar to mice (and, from their pink colour, pigs). They wore clothes reminiscent of Roman armour, \"against the space debris that kept falling onto the planet, lost from other places, such as television sets and bits of an Iron Chicken\", and they spoke in whistled language.\nStoryline.\n\"The Clangers\" was described by Postgate as a family in space. They were small creatures living in peace and harmony on \u2013 and inside \u2013 a small, hollow planet, far, far away: nourished by Blue String Pudding, and by Green Soup harvested from the planet's volcanic soup wells by the Soup Dragon.\nThe word \"Clanger\" is said to derive from the sound made by opening the metal cover of one of the creatures' crater-like burrows, each of which was covered with an old metal dustbin lid, to protect against meteorite impacts (and space debris). In each episode there would be some problem to solve, typically concerning something invented or discovered, or some new visitor to meet. Music Trees, with note-shaped fruit, grew on the planet's surface, and music would often be an integral feature in the simple but amusing plots. In the \"Fishing\" episode, one of the Cheese Trees provided a cylindrical five-line staff for notes taken from the Music Trees.\nPostgate provided the narration, for the most part in a soft, melodic voice, describing and accounting for the curious antics of the little blue planet's knitted pink inhabitants, and providing a \"translation\", as it were, for much of their whistled dialogue. Postgate claimed that in reality when the Clangers' were whistling, they were \"swearing their little heads off\".\nProduction.\nThe first of the 26 episodes (aired as two series of 13 programmes each) was broadcast on BBC1 from 16 November 1969. The last edition of the second series was transmitted on 10 November 1972.\nHowever, there was also one final programme, a seven-minute election special entitled \"Vote for Froglet\", broadcast on 10 October 1974 (the day of the General Election). Oliver Postgate said in a 2005 interview that he wasn't sure whether the 1974 special still existed, and it has been referred to as a \"missing episode\". In fact the whole episode is available from the British Film Institute.\nThe original Mother Clanger puppet was stolen in 1972. Today, Major Clanger and the second Mother Clanger are on display at the Rupert Bear Museum.\nThe Clangers grew in size between the first and last episodes, to allow Firmin to use an Action Man model figure in the episode \"The Rock Collector\".\nBBC's CBeebies channel and the American pre-school channel, Sprout, produced a new series for broadcasting in their 2015 schedules, with Michael Palin narrating in place of the late Oliver Postgate. Sprout were major funders and co-producers having commissioned the series in tandem with the BBC, with William Shatner narrating the Sprout version.\nCharacters.\nThe principal characters are the Clangers themselves, the females wearing tabards and the males brass armour:\nVisitors.\nOther characters appeared in only one or two episodes each:\nMusic and sound effects.\nOne of the most noted aspects was the use of sound effects, with a score composed by Vernon Elliott under instructions from Postgate. Although the episodes were scripted, most of the music used in the two series was written in translation by Postgate in the form of \"musical sketches\" or graphs that he drew for Elliott, who converted the drawings into a musical score. The music was then recorded by the two, along with other musicians \u2013 dubbed the \"Clangers Ensemble\" \u2013 in a village hall, where they would often leave the windows open, leading to the sounds of birds outside being heard on some recordings. Much of the score was performed on Elliott's bassoon, and also included harp, clarinet, glockenspiel and bells.\nThe distinctive whistles made by the Clangers, performed on swanee whistles, have become as identifiable as the characters themselves, much imitated by viewers. The series creators have said that the Clangers, living in vacuum, did not communicate by sound, but rather by a type of nuclear magnetic resonance, which was translated to audible whistles for the human audience. These whistles followed the rhythm and intonation of a script in English. The action was also narrated by a voice-over from Postgate. However, when the series was shown without narration to a group of overseas students, many of them felt that the Clangers were speaking their particular language.\nPostgate recounted: \"When the BBC got the script, [they] rang me up and said \"At the beginning of episode three, where the doors get stuck, Major Clanger says 'sod it, the bloody thing\u2019s stuck again'. Well, darling, you can't say that on children's television, you know, I mean you just can't\". I said \"It's not going to be said, it's going to be whistled\", but [they] just said \"But people will know!\" I said no, that if they had nice minds, they'd think \"Oh dear, the silly thing's not working properly\". If you watch the episode, the one where the rocket goes up and shoots down the Iron Chicken, Major Clanger kicks the door to make it work and his first words are \"Sod it, the bloody thing's stuck again\". Years later, when the merchandising took off, the Golden Bear company wanted a Clanger and a Clanger phrase for it to make when you squeezed it, they got \"Sod it, the bloody thing\u2019s stuck again\"!\"\nSeries 1 episode, \"The Visitor\" features two brief extracts from the song, \"No Smokes\" (1967) by the Glasgow psychedelic band One in a Million.\nJohn Du Prez, who wrote some of the music for \"Monty Python\" (another show Michael Palin was in) composed the score for the 2015 series.\nEpisodes from the original series.\nSeries 1 (1969\u20131970).\nThe first series was transmitted on BBC1 on Sundays at 5:55pm, except for the episode \"Chicken\" which went out at 5:50pm because there was a \"Children in Need\" appeal at 6:00pm.\nSeries 2 (1971\u20131972).\nThe second series episodes were also transmitted weekly on BBC1, but in a wide variety of differing timeslots. Episodes 1 and 2 were seen at 4:50pm; episodes 3, 5 and 6 at 5:05pm; episodes 4 and 8 at 5:00pm; episode 7 at 4:40pm; episode 9 at 5:30pm; and episodes 10, 11, 12 and 13 (which followed episode 9 after a gap of more than a year) at 4:00pm.\nSpecial (1974).\nAn election special, entitled \"Vote for Froglet!\", was broadcast on the night of the October 1974 General Election.It was inspired by what Postgate referred to as the \"Winter of Discontent\" (a phrase from Shakespeare's play \"Richard III\", usually employed to refer to the winter of 1978\u201379, but Postgate was referring to the miners' strike in the winter of 1973-74), and partly by his recollections of post-war Germany.\nThis special was believed to be a lost episode for many years, but it was released in full for free by the British Film Institute to coincide with the 2017 UK General Election.\nEpisodes from the revival series.\nSeries 1 (2015\u20132016).\nEpisodes 1\u201326 were first broadcast at 5:30pm, while episodes 27\u201352 were at 6:00pm on CBeebies.\nFollowing the March 2015 special, a full series was commissioned for the summer of that year. The series was narrated by Michael Palin, and co-produced by Smallfilms with the involvement of Peter Firmin and Oliver Postgate's son, Dan. The series was directed by Chris Tichborne and Mole Hill, with music composed by John Du Prez. 52 11-minute episodes were commissioned. The voices of the Iron Chicken, the Soup Dragon, and the Baby Soup Dragon were by Dan Postgate.\nThe same year, William Shatner was chosen to be the American narrator for the series airing on the cable network Sprout.\nSeries 2 (2017-2018).\nA second series of the revival, and the fourth series overall, was released on 11 September 2017 with 26 more episodes.\nSeries 3 (2019-2020).\nA third series of the revival, and the fifth series overall was broadcast on CBeebies on 17 July 2019 with another 26 more episodes.\nReception.\nAlthough not quite as popular as \"Bagpuss\" (which in 1999 was voted in a British television poll the best children's television programme ever made), since the death of Postgate in December 2008 interest has been revived in his work, which is considered to have had a notable influence on British culture throughout the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s. In 2007, Postgate and Firmin were jointly presented with the Action for Children's Arts J. M. Barrie Award \"for a lifetime's achievement in delighting children\".\nThe first episode of the revival series, which aired on 15 June 2015, turned out to be a massive hit for CBeebies. The BBC News Entertainment and Arts magazine revealed that 65% of the episode's viewing audience of 484,000 were adults, and that it was CBeebies' most watched programme of 2015 up to that date. The rating was more than double the previous record, set by an episode of \"Alphablocks\", \"Numberjacks\", \"Waybuloo\", \"Fimbles\", \"Charlie and Lola\", \"Teletubbies\", \"The Lingo Show\" and \"The Octonauts\" that year, as well as other CBeebies favourites since the station's launch in 2002, although an episode of \"Numberjacks\" peaked at over 1 million back in 2009.\nLegacy.\nThe Soup Dragons, a Scottish alternative rock band of the late 1980s and early 1990s, took their name from the Clangers character.\nIn the 1972 \"Doctor Who\" serial \"The Sea Devils\", The Master is seen to be watching the episode \"The Rock Collector\". He states that they are fascinating creatures and even mimics their language. He is told that they are just television characters. The Master rolls his eyes.\nA Clanger (as a glove-puppet rather than a stop-motion puppet) appears as a member of the \"Puppet Government\" in \"The Goodies\" TV episode \"The Goodies Rule \u2013 O.K.?\".\nFrom the block's start until its discontinuation, the UK's Nick Jr. Classics block aired \"Clangers\" episodes specifically for parents who remembered the show.\nTiny Clanger (also as a glove-puppet) appeared on \"Sprout's Sunny Side Up Show\" in honour of the U.S. premiere of \"Clangers\".\nOther countries.\nThe series was not widely broadcast outside the UK in the 1970s, mainly because it did not require additional money from sales abroad to finance its production. However the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation showed the series in 1970 and 1982, entitled \"Romlingane\". It was narrated by Ingebrigt Davik, a popular author of children's books. It was shown on Swedish television in the late 1960s and 1970s, entitled \"Rymdlarna\". The first 13 episodes were also shown on Czechoslovak Television in August 1972, entitled \"R\u00e1mus\u00edci\" as a part of the children's evening program slot \"Ve\u010dern\u00ed\u010dek\".\nThe revived version in 2015 has received funding from Sprout, a subsidiary of NBCUniversal, and has been pre-sold to other foreign broadcasters including the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. The American transmissions are narrated by William Shatner.\nAs from 2018, it is also broadcast on the Belgian channel Ketnet. As of 2023 the 2015 UK version is on the American video on demand site Bentkey.\nSoundtrack album.\nIn 2001, a selection of the music and sound effects was compiled by Jonny Trunk from 128 musical cues held by Postgate, who contributed act one, \"The Iron Chicken and the Music Trees\", of \"A Clangers Opera\", with libretto that he had compiled.\nHome media.\nIn the early 1990s, three VHS cassettes of the \"Clangers\" were released by BBC Enterprises Ltd. Later, another six cassettes were released by Universal Pictures. A number of DVDs have also been released by Universal Pictures (original series) and Signature Entertainment (revived series).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31455", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31455", "title": "Terry Brooks", "text": "American writer of fantasy fiction\nTerence Dean Brooks (born January 8, 1944) is an American writer of fantasy fiction. He writes mainly epic fantasy, and has also written two film novelizations. He has written 23 \"New York Times\" bestsellers during his writing career, and has sold over 25 million copies of his books in print. He is one of the most successful living fantasy writers. In March 2025, he announced his semi-retirement from writing.\nEarly life.\nBrooks was born in the rural Midwestern town of Sterling, Illinois, and spent a large part of his life living there. He is an alumnus of Hamilton College, earning his B.A. in English literature in 1966. He later obtained a J.D. degree from Washington and Lee University. He was a practicing attorney before becoming a full-time author.\nCareer.\nBrooks had been a writer since high school, writing mainly in the genres of science fiction, western, fiction, and non-fiction. One day, in his early college life, he was given a copy of \"The Lord of the Rings\" by J. R. R. Tolkien, which inspired him to write in one genre. While Tolkien inspired the genre, Brooks stated during his TEDxRainier talk \"Why I Write about Elves\", as well as at the Charlotte Literary Festival that he credits the inspiration of his style of writing to William Faulkner's works. With this inspiration, he then made his debut in 1977 with \"The Sword of Shannara\".\nAfter finishing two sequels to \"The Sword of Shannara\", Brooks moved on to the series which would become known as the \"Landover\" novels. Brooks then wrote a four-book series titled \"The Heritage of Shannara\". For the next fourteen years, he wrote more \"Landover\" books, then went on to write \"The Word and Void\" trilogy. Continuing the \"Shannara\" series, Brooks wrote the prequel to \"The Sword of Shannara\", titled \"First King of Shannara\". He then wrote two series, \"The Voyage of the Jerle Shannara\" and \"High Druid of Shannara\" and finished a third, \"Genesis of Shannara\", a trilogy bridging his \"Word and Void\" and \"Shannara\" series. The sixth book in the \"Landover\" series, \"A Princess of Landover\", was released in August 2009. Returning to Shannara, a duology, \"Legends of Shannara\", taking place after the events of \"Genesis of Shannara\", was written next. The first book, entitled \"Bearers of the Black Staff\", was released in August 2010 and the second, \"The Measure of the Magic\", was released in August 2011. He next completed a trilogy entitled \"The Dark Legacy of Shannara\". The three books are; \"Wards of Faerie\" (Feb 2013), \"Bloodfire Quest\" (June 2013), and \"Witch Wraith\" (Dec 2013). He followed this with the trilogy \"Defenders of Shannara\", which include \"The High Druid's Blade\" (July 2014), \"The Darkling Child\" (June 2015), and \"The Sorcerer's Daughter\" (May 24, 2016). He then wrote the final and concluding tetralogy of the \"Shannara\" series known as \"The Fall of Shannara\". The first book in the tetralogy is \"The Black Elfstone\" and was released on June 13, 2017. The second book in the series is \"The Skaar Invasion \"released on June 19, 2018. The third book in the series is \"The Stiehl Assassin\" published on May 28, 2019. The fourth and final book in the tetralogy is \"The Last Druid\", published on October 20, 2020. In March 2025, Brooks announced his semi-retirement and that Delilah S. Dawson would be taking on the authorship of his \"Shannara\" legendarium going forward.\nA television series based on the Shannara works, entitled \"The Shannara Chronicles\", began showing on MTV in January 2016. The show starts with the second book of the original series, \"Elfstones\", as there are strong female roles which did not appear in the first book. The second season aired in 2017 on Spike TV. On January 16, 2018, it was announced that the series had been cancelled after two seasons. Producers later announced that the series is being shopped to other networks.\nBrooks has written a number of other books, based on movies, science fiction and his own life. Novels include \"Hook\", based on the movie of the same name, first published November 24, 1991, and republished in 1998. \"\" was published April 21, 1999, with four differing dust jacket covers. His own writing life is reflected in two stories, \"Sometimes the Magic Works: Lessons from a Writing Life\", published February 3, 2004, and \"Why I Write About Elves\" published in 2005. A science fiction book, \"Street Freaks\", was released on October 2, 2018. Brooks has written a number of e-book short stories which are published in a book titled \"Small Magic\" with his other short stories.\nBrooks received a World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement in 2017. He won an Inkpot Award in 1997. He was also nominated for six Locus Awards.\nPersonal life.\nBrooks resides in Seattle, Washington, with his wife, Judine.\nNovels versus short stories.\nAfter writing \"Indomitable\", a short story constituting an epilogue to \"The Wishsong of Shannara\", Terry Brooks declared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nA bibliography of Terry Brooks's works broken into the different series and listed chronologically can be found at the article Terry Brooks bibliography.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31456", "revid": "8373762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31456", "title": "Truck", "text": "Commercial or utilitarian motor vehicle\nA truck (North American and Australian English) or lorry (British English) is a motor vehicle designed to transport freight, carry specialized payloads, or perform other utilitarian work. Trucks vary greatly in size, power, and configuration, but the vast majority feature body-on-frame construction, with a cabin that is independent of the payload portion of the vehicle. Smaller varieties may be mechanically similar to some automobiles. Commercial trucks can be very large and powerful and may be configured to be mounted with specialized equipment, such as in the case of refuse trucks, fire trucks, concrete mixers, and suction excavators. In American English, a commercial vehicle without a trailer or other articulation is formally a \"straight truck\" while one designed specifically to pull a trailer is not a truck but a \"tractor\".\nThe majority of trucks currently in use are powered by diesel engines, although small- to medium-size trucks with gasoline engines exist in North America. Electrically powered trucks are more popular in China and Europe than elsewhere. In the European Union, vehicles with a gross combination mass of up to are defined as light commercial vehicles, and those over as large goods vehicles.\nHistory.\nSteam wagons.\nTrucks and cars have a common ancestor: the steam-powered \"fardier\" Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot built in 1769. However, steam wagons were not common until the mid-19th century. The roads of the time, built for horse and carriages, limited these vehicles to very short hauls, usually from a factory to the nearest railway station. The first semi-trailer appeared in 1881, towed by a steam tractor manufactured by De Dion-Bouton. Steam-powered wagons were sold in France and the United States until the eve of World War I, and 1935 in the United Kingdom, when a change in road tax rules made them uneconomic against the new diesel lorries.\nInternal combustion.\nIn 1895, Karl Benz designed and built the first internal combustion truck. Later that year some of Benz's trucks were modified to become busses by \"Netphener\". A year later, in 1896, another internal combustion engine truck was built by Gottlieb Daimler, the Daimler Motor Lastwagen. Other companies, such as Peugeot, Renault and B\u00fcssing, also built their own versions. The first truck in the United States was built by Autocar in 1899 and was available with engines. Another early American truck was built by George Eldridge of Des Moines, Iowa, in 1903. It was powered by an engine with two opposed cylinders, and had a chain drive A 1903 Eldridge truck is displayed at the Iowa 80 Trucking Museum, Walcott, Iowa. Trucks of the era mostly used two-cylinder engines and had a carrying capacity of . After World War I, several advances were made: electric starters, and 4, 6, and 8 cylinder engines.\nDiesel engines.\nAlthough it had been invented in 1897, the diesel engine did not appear in production trucks until Benz introduced it in 1923. The diesel engine was not common in trucks in Europe until the 1930s. In the United States, Autocar introduced diesel engines for heavy applications in the mid-1930s. Demand was high enough that Autocar launched the \"DC\" model (diesel conventional) in 1939. However, it took much longer for diesel engines to be broadly accepted in the US: gasoline engines were still in use on heavy trucks in the 1970s.\nElectric motors.\nElectrically powered trucks predate internal combustion ones and have been continuously available since the mid-19th-century. In the 1920s Autocar Trucks was the first of the major truck manufacturers to offer a range of electric trucks for sale. Electric trucks were successful for urban delivery roles and as specialized work vehicles like forklifts and pushback tugs. The higher energy density of liquid fuels soon led to the decline of electric-powered trucks in favor of, first, gasoline, and then diesel and CNG-fueled engines until battery technology advanced in the 2000s when new chemistries and higher-volume production broadened the range of applicability of electric propulsion to trucks in many more roles. Today, manufacturers are electrifying all trucks ahead of national regulatory requirements, with long-range over-the-road trucks being the most challenging.\nEtymology.\n\"Truck\" is used in American English; the British English equivalent is lorry.\nThe first known usage of \"truck\" was in 1611 when it referred to the small strong wheels on ships' cannon carriages, and comes from Greek \u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03c7\u03cc\u03c2 (\"trokhos\") = \"wheel\". In its extended usage, it came to refer to carts for carrying heavy loads, a meaning known since 1771. Its expanded application to \"motor-powered load carrier\" has been in usage since 1930, shortened from \"motor truck\", which dates back to 1901.\n\"Lorry\" has a more uncertain origin, but probably has its roots in the rail transport industry, where the word is known to have been used in 1838 to refer to a type of truck (a goods wagon as in British usage, not a bogie as in the American), specifically a large flat wagon. It might derive from the verb \"lurry\" (to carry or drag along, or to lug) which was in use as early as 1664, but that association is not definitive. The expanded meaning of \"lorry\", \"self-propelled vehicle for carrying goods\", has been in usage since 1911.\nInternational variance.\nIn the United States, Canada, and the Philippines, \"truck\" is usually reserved for commercial vehicles larger than regular passenger cars, but includes large SUVs, pickups, and other vehicles with an open load bed.\nIn Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, the word \"truck\" is mostly reserved for larger vehicles. In Australia and New Zealand, a pickup truck is frequently called a \"ute\" (short for \"utility\" vehicle), while in South Africa it is called a \"bakkie\" (Afrikaans: \"small open container\").\nIn the United Kingdom, India, Malaysia, Singapore, Ireland, and Hong Kong \"lorry\" is used instead of \"truck\", but only for the medium and heavy types, while \"truck\" is used almost exclusively to refer to pickups.\nTypes by size.\nUltra light.\nOften produced as variations of golf cars, with internal combustion or battery electric drive, these are used typically for off-highway use on estates, golf courses, and parks. While not suitable for highway use some variations may be licensed as slow speed vehicles for operation on streets, generally as a body variation of a neighborhood electric vehicle. A few manufactures produce specialized chassis for this type of vehicle, while Zap Motors markets a version of their Xebra electric tricycle (licensable in the U.S. as a motorcycle).\nVery light.\nPopular in Europe and Asia, many mini-trucks are factory redesigns of light automobiles, usually with monocoque bodies. Specialized designs with substantial frames such as the Italian Piaggio shown here are based upon Japanese designs (in this case by Daihatsu) and are popular for use in \"old town\" sections of European cities that often have very narrow alleyways.\nRegardless of name, these small trucks serve a wide range of uses. In Japan, they are regulated under the Kei car laws, which allow vehicle owners a break in taxes for buying a smaller and less-powerful vehicle (currently, the engine is limited to 660 cc displacement). These vehicles are used as on-road utility vehicles in Japan. These Japanese-made mini-trucks that were manufactured for on-road use are competing with off-road ATVs in the United States, and import regulations require that these mini-trucks have a speed governor as they are classified as low-speed vehicles. These vehicles have found uses in construction, large campuses (government, university, and industrial), agriculture, cattle ranches, amusement parks, and replacements for golf carts.\nMajor mini-truck manufacturers and their brands include: Daihatsu Hijet, Honda Acty, Tata Ace, Mazda Scrum, Mitsubishi Minicab, Subaru Sambar, and Suzuki Carry.\nLight.\nLight trucks are car-sized (in the US, no more than ) and are used by individuals and businesses alike. In the EU they may not weigh more than and are allowed to be driven with a driving licence for cars.\nPickup trucks, called \"utes\" in Australia and New Zealand, are common in North America and some regions of Latin America, Asia, and Africa, but not so in Europe, where this size of commercial vehicle is most often made as vans.\nMedium.\nMedium trucks are larger than light but smaller than heavy trucks. In the US, they are defined as weighing between . For the UK and the EU the weight is between . Local delivery and public service (dump trucks, garbage trucks and fire-fighting trucks) are normally around this size.\nHeavy.\nHeavy trucks are the largest on-road trucks, Class 8. These include vocational applications such as heavy dump trucks, concrete pump trucks, and refuse hauling, as well as ubiquitous long-haul 4x2 and 6\u00d74 tractor units.\nRoad damage and wear increase very rapidly with the axle weight. The number of steering axles and the suspension type also influence the amount of the road wear. In many countries with good roads a six-axle truck may have a maximum weight of or more.\nOff-road.\nOff-road trucks include standard, extra heavy-duty highway-legal trucks, typically outfitted with off-road features such as a front driving axle and special tires for applications such as logging and construction, and purpose-built off-road vehicles unconstrained by weight limits, such as the Liebherr T 282B mining truck.\nMaximum sizes by country.\nAustralia has complex regulations over weight and length, including axle spacing, type of axle/axle group, rear overhang, kingpin to rear of trailer, drawbar length, ground clearance, as well as height and width laws. These limits are some of the highest in the world, a B-double can weigh and be long, and road trains used in the outback can weigh and be long.\nThe European Union also has complex regulations. The number and spacing of axles, steering, single or dual tires, and suspension type all affect maximum weights. Length of a truck, of a trailer, from axle to hitch point, kingpin to rear of trailer, and turning radius are all regulated. In additions, there are special rules for carrying containers, and countries can set their own rules for local traffic.\nThe United States Federal Bridge Law deals with the relation between the gross weight of the truck, the number of axles, the weight on and the spacing between the axles that the truck can have on the Interstate highway system. Each State determines the maximum permissible vehicle, combination, and axle weight on state and local roads.\nUniquely, the State of Michigan has a gross vehicle weight limit of , which is twice the U.S. federal limit. A measure to change the law was defeated in the Michigan Senate in 2019.\nDesign.\nAlmost all trucks share a common construction: they are made of a chassis, a cab, an area for placing cargo or equipment, axles, suspension and roadwheels, an engine and a drivetrain. Pneumatic, hydraulic, water, and electrical systems may also be present. Many also tow one or more trailers or semi-trailers.\nCab.\nThe \"cab\", or \"cabin\" is an enclosed space where the driver is seated. A \"sleeper\" is a compartment attached to or integral with the cab where the driver can rest while not driving, sometimes seen in semi-trailer trucks.\nThere are several cab configurations:\nA further step from this is the side loading forklift that can be described as a specially fabricated vehicle with the same properties as a truck of this type, in addition to the ability to pick up its own load.\nEngines and motors.\nMost small trucks such as sport utility vehicles (SUVs), vans or pickups, and even light medium-duty trucks in North America, China, and Russia use gasoline engines (petrol engines), but many diesel engined models are now being produced. Most of the heavier trucks use four-stroke diesel engines with a turbocharger and intercooler. Huge off-highway trucks use locomotive-type engines such as a V12 Detroit Diesel two stroke engine. A large proportion of refuse trucks in the United States employ CNG (compressed natural gas) engines for their low fuel cost and reduced carbon emissions.\nA significant proportion of North American manufactured trucks use an engine built by the last remaining major independent engine manufacturer (Cummins) but most global OEMs such as Volvo Trucks and Daimler AG promote their own \"captive\" engines.\nIn the European Union, all new truck engines must comply with Euro\u00a0VI emission regulations, and Euro 7 from the late 2020s has stricter exhaust limits and also limits air pollution from brakes and tires.\nAs of 2019[ [update]] several alternative technologies are competing to displace the use of diesel engines in heavy trucks. CNG engines are widely used in the US refuse industry and in concrete mixers, among other short-range vocations, but range limitations have prevented their broader uptake in freight hauling applications. Heavy electric trucks and hydrogen-powered trucks are new to the market in 2021, but major freight haulers are interested. Although cars will be first the phase-out of fossil fuel vehicles includes trucks. According to The Economist magazine \"Electric lorries will probably run on hydrogen, not batteries, which are too expensive.\" Other researchers say that once faster chargers are available batteries will become competitive against diesel for all, except perhaps the heaviest, trucks.\nDrivetrain.\nSmall trucks use the same type of transmissions as almost all cars, having either an automatic transmission or a manual transmission with synchromesh (synchronizers). Bigger trucks often use manual transmissions without synchronizers, saving bulk and weight, although synchromesh transmissions are used in larger trucks as well. Transmissions without synchronizers, known as \"crash boxes\", require double-clutching for each shift, (which can lead to repetitive motion injuries), or a technique known colloquially as \"floating\", a method of changing gears which does not use the clutch, except for starts and stops, due to the physical effort of double-clutching, especially with non-power-assisted clutches, faster shifts, and less clutch wear.\nDouble-clutching allows the driver to control the engine and transmission revolutions to synchronize so that a smooth shift can be made; for example, when upshifting, the accelerator pedal is released and the clutch pedal is depressed while the gear lever is moved into neutral, the clutch pedal is then released and quickly pushed down again while the gear lever is moved to the next higher gear. Finally, the clutch pedal is released and the accelerator pedal pushed down to obtain the required engine speed. Although this is a relatively fast movement, perhaps a second or so while the transmission is in neutral, it allows the engine speed to drop and synchronize engine and transmission revolutions relative to the road speed. Downshifting is performed in a similar fashion, except the engine speed is now required to increase (while the transmission is in neutral) just the right amount in order to achieve the synchronization for a smooth, non-collision gear change. \"Skip changing\" is also widely used; in principle, the operation is the same as double-clutching, but it requires neutral be held slightly longer than a single-gear change.\nCommon North American setups include 9, 10, 13, 15, and 18\u00a0speeds. Automatic and automated manual transmissions for heavy trucks are becoming more and more common, due to advances both in transmission and engine power. In Europe, 8, 10, 12, and 16\u00a0gears are common on larger trucks with a manual transmission, while conventional automatic or automated manual transmissions would have anything from 5 to 12 gears. Almost all heavy truck transmissions are of the \"range and split\" (double H shift pattern) type, where range change and so\u2011called half gears or splits are air operated and always preselected before the main gear selection.\nFrame.\nA truck frame consists of two parallel boxed (tubular) or C\u2011shaped rails, or beams, held together by crossmembers. These frames are referred to as ladder frames due to their resemblance to a ladder if tipped on end. The rails consist of a tall vertical section (two if boxed) and two shorter horizontal flanges. The height of the vertical section provides opposition to vertical flex when weight is applied to the top of the frame (beam resistance). Though typically flat the whole length on heavy-duty trucks, the rails may sometimes be tapered or arched for clearance around the engine or over the axles. The holes in rails are used either for mounting vehicle components and running wires and hoses or measuring and adjusting the orientation of the rails at the factory or repair shop.\nThe frame is usually made of steel, but can be made (whole or in part) of aluminum for a lighter weight. A tow bar may be found attached at one or both ends, but heavy tractors almost always make use of a fifth wheel hitch.\nBody types.\nBox trucks have walls and a roof, making an enclosed load space. The rear has doors for unloading; a side door is sometimes fitted.\nChassis cab trucks have a fully enclosed cab at the front, with bare chassis frame-rails behind, suitable for subsequent permanent attachment of a specialized payload, like a fire-truck or ambulance body.\nConcrete mixers have a rotating drum on an inclined axis, rotating in one direction to mix, and in the other to discharge the concrete down chutes. Because of the weight and power requirements of the drum body and rough construction sites, mixers have to be very heavy duty.\nDual drive/Steer trucks are vehicles used to steer the rear of trailers.\nDump trucks (\"tippers\" in the UK) transport loose material such as sand, gravel, or dirt for construction. A typical dump truck has an open-box bed, which is hinged at the rear and lifts at the front, allowing the material in the bed to be unloaded (\"dumped\") on the ground behind the truck.\nFlatbed trucks have an entirely flat, level platform body. This allows for quick and easy loading but has no protection for the load. Hanging or removable sides are sometimes fitted, often in the form of a stakebody.\nRefrigerator trucks have insulated panels as walls and a roof and floor, used for transporting fresh and frozen cargo such as ice cream, food, vegetables, and prescription drugs. They are mostly equipped with double-wing rear doors, but a side door is sometimes fitted.\nRefuse trucks have a specialized body for collecting and, often, compacting trash collected from municipal, commercial, and industrial sites. This application has the widest use of the cab-over configuration in North America, to provide better maneuverability in tight situations. They are also among the most severe-duty and highest GVWR trucks on public roads.\nSemi-tractors (\"artics\" in the UK) have a fifth wheel for towing a semi-trailer instead of a body.\nTank trucks (\"tankers\" in the UK) are designed to carry liquids or gases. They usually have a cylindrical tank lying horizontally on the chassis. Many variants exist due to the wide variety of liquids and gases that can be transported.\nWreckers (\"recovery lorries\" in the UK) are used to recover and/or tow disabled vehicles. They are normally equipped with a boom with a cable; wheel/chassis lifts are becoming common on newer trucks.\nDriving.\nIn many countries, driving a truck requires a special driving license. The requirements and limitations vary with each different jurisdiction.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, a truck driver's license is required for any motor vehicle with a Gross Vehicle Mass (GVM) exceeding . The motor vehicles classes are further expanded as:\nThere is also a heavy vehicle transmission condition for a license class \"HC\", \"HR\", or \"MC\" test passed in a vehicle fitted with an automatic or synchromesh transmission; a driver's license will be restricted to vehicles of that class fitted with a synchromesh or automatic transmission. To have the condition removed, a person needs to pass a practical driving test in a vehicle with non-synchromesh transmission (constant mesh or crash box).\nEurope.\nDriving licensing has been harmonized throughout the European Union and the EEA (and practically all European non-member states), so that common rules apply within Europe (see European driving licence). As an overview, to drive a vehicle weighing more than for commercial purposes requires a specialist license (the type varies depending on the use of the vehicle and number of seats). For licenses first acquired after 1997, that weight was reduced to , not including trailers.\nSince 2013, the C1 license category allows driving vehicles over 3.5 and up to 7.5 tonnes. The C license category allows driving vehicles over 3.5 tonnes with a trailer up to 750\u00a0kg, and the CE category allows driving category C vehicles with a trailer over 750\u00a0kg.\nSouth Africa.\nTo drive any vehicle with a GVM exceeding , a code C1 drivers license is required. Furthermore, if the vehicle exceeds a code C license becomes necessary.\nTo drive any vehicle in South Africa towing a trailer with a GVM more than , further restrictions apply and the driver must possess a license suitable for the GVM of the total combination as well as an articulated endorsement. This is indicated with the letter \"E\" prefixing the license code.\nIn addition, any vehicle designed to carry goods or passengers may only be driven by a driver possessing a Public Driver's Permit, (or PrDP) of the applicable type. This is an additional license that is added to the DL card of the operator and subject to annual renewal unlike the five-year renewal period of a normal license.\nThe requirements for obtaining the different classes are below.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, a commercial driver's license is required to drive any type of commercial vehicle weighing or more. The federal government regulates how many hours a driver may be on the clock, how much rest and sleep time is required (e.g., 11 hours driving/14 hours on-duty followed by 10 hours off, with a maximum of 70 hours/8 days or 60 hours/7 days, 34 hours restart ) Violations are often subject to significant penalties. Instruments to track each driver's hours must sometimes be fitted.\nIn 2006, the US trucking industry employed 1.8\u00a0million drivers of heavy trucks.\nThere is a shortage of willing trained long-distance truck drivers. Part of the reason for this is the economic fallout from deregulation of the trucking industry. Michael H. Belzer, associate professor, in the economics department at Wayne State University and co-author of \"Sweatshops on Wheels: Winners and Losers in Trucking Deregulation\", argues that low pay, bad working conditions and unsafe conditions have been a direct result of deregulation. The book cites poor working conditions and an unfair pay system as responsible for high annual employee turnover in the industry.\nIn 2018, in the US, 5,096 large trucks and buses were involved in fatal crashes:\nEnvironmental effects.\nLike cars, trucks contribute to air, noise, and water pollution. Unlike cars, as of 2022[ [update]], most trucks run on diesel, and diesel exhaust is especially dangerous for health. Some countries outside the EU have different vehicle emission standards for trucks and cars.\nNOx and particulates emitted by trucks are very dangerous to health, causing thousands of early deaths annually in the US alone. As older trucks are usually the worst, many cities have banned 20th century trucks. Air pollution also threatens professional truck drivers.\nOver a quarter of global transport CO2 emissions are from road freight, in 2021 over 1700 million tonnes from medium and heavy trucks, so many countries are further restricting truck CO2 emissions to help limit climate change. Many environmental organizations favor laws and incentives to encourage the switch from road to rail, especially in Europe. Several countries have pledged that 30% of sales of trucks and buses will be zero emission by 2030.\nWith respect to noise pollution, trucks emit considerably higher sound levels at all speeds compared to typical cars; this contrast is particularly strong with heavy-duty trucks. There are several aspects of truck operations that contribute to the overall sound that is emitted. Continuous sounds are those from tires rolling on the roadway and the constant hum of their diesel engines at highway speeds. Less frequent noises, but perhaps more noticeable, are things like the repeated sharp-pitched whistle of a turbocharger on acceleration, or the abrupt blare of an exhaust brake retarder when traversing a downgrade. There has been noise regulation put in place to help control where and when the use of engine braking retarders are allowed.\nOperator health and safety.\nA truck cab is a hazard control that protects the truck operator from hazardous airborne pollutants. As an enclosure, it is an example of an engineering control. Enclosed operator cabs have been used on agriculture, mining, and construction vehicles for several decades. Most modern-day enclosed cabs have heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems for primarily maintaining a comfortable temperature and providing breathable air for their occupants. Various levels of filtration can be incorporated into the HVAC system to remove airborne pollutants such as dusts, diesel particulate matter (DPM), and other aerosols.\nTwo key elements of an effective environmental enclosure are a good filtration system and an enclosure with good integrity (sealed isolation from the outside environment). It is recommended that a filtration system filter out at least 95% or greater of airborne respirable aerosols from the intake airflow, with an additional recirculation filtering component for the inside air. Good enclosure integrity is also needed to achieve positive pressure to prevent wind-driven aerosol penetration into the enclosure\",\" as well as to minimize air leakage around the filtration system. Test methods and mathematical modeling of environmental enclosures are also beneficial for quantifying and optimizing filtration system designs, as well as maintaining optimum protection factor performance for enclosure occupants.\nOperations issues.\nTaxes.\nCommercial trucks in the US pay higher road use taxes on a state level than other road vehicles and are subject to extensive regulation. A few reasons commercial trucks pay higher road use taxes: they are bigger and heavier than most other vehicles, and cause more wear and tear per hour on roadways; and trucks and their drivers are on the road for more hours per day. Rules on use taxes differ among jurisdictions.\nDamage to pavement.\nThe life of a pavement is measured by the number of passes of a vehicle axle. It may be evaluated using the Load Equivalency Factor, which states that the damage by the pass of a vehicle axle is proportional to the 4th power of the weight, so a ten-ton axle consumes 10,000 times the life of the pavement as a one-ton axle. For that reason, loaded trucks cost the same as thousands of cars in pavement costs, and are subject to higher taxes and highway tolls.\nSafety.\nTrucking accidents.\nIn 2002 and 2004, there were over 5,000 fatalities related to trucking accidents in the United States. The trucking industry has since made significant efforts in increasing safety regulations. In 2008, the industry had successfully lowered the fatality rate to just over 4,000 deaths, but trucking accidents are still an issue that causes thousands of deaths and injuries each year. Approximately 6,000 trucking accident fatalities occur annually in the United States. Fatalities are not the only issue caused by trucking accidents. Here are some of the environmental issues that arise with trucking accidents:\nFollowing increased pressure from \"The Times\" \"Cities Fit For Cycling\" campaign and from other media in Spring 2012, warning signs are now displayed on the backs of many heavy goods vehicles (HGV). These signs are directed against a common type of accident that occurs when the large vehicle turns left at a junction: a cyclist trying to pass on the nearside can be crushed against the HGV's wheels, especially if the driver cannot see the cyclist. The signs, such as the winning design of the https:// launched in March 2012, advocate extra care when passing a large vehicle on the nearside.\nHGV safety in the EU.\nIn-vehicle speed limitation is required applying a 90\u00a0km/h limit to commercial vehicles over 3.5 tonnes.\nFront, side, and rear underrun protection is required on commercial vehicles over 3.5 tonnes.\nTrucks must be fitted with blind-spot mirrors that give drivers a wider field of vision than conventional mirrors.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31457", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31457", "title": "Tamasay", "text": "Ainu necklace\nA tamasay (or tamasai) is a bead necklace worn by Ainu women for special occasions.\nHistory.\nThe necklace is called a shitoki if it has a medallion. They are made with large glass beads the Ainu obtained through trading with Chinese merchants. The Ainu also obtained glass beads secretly made by the Matsumae Clan. \nSignificance.\nThe shitoki medallion often represents the white-tailed sea eagles that the Ainu hunt. The more strands and beads a necklace has, the more valuable it is. The necklaces are passed down through generations and are highly treasured by their owners. \nThis jewelry is especially important in ceremonies and rituals because it is believed to protect the wearer from evil spirits. In certain Ainu communities, shitoki were used decorate the skulls of deceased bears during the Iomante ceremony.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31458", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31458", "title": "Tamasai", "text": ""}
{"id": "31459", "revid": "50947795", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31459", "title": "Thomas the Apostle", "text": "Early Christian saint \u2013 one of the Twelve Apostles\nThomas the Apostle (; , meaning 'the Twin'), also known as Didymus ( 'twin'), was one of the Twelve Apostles of Jesus according to the New Testament. Thomas is commonly known as \"doubting Thomas\" because he initially doubted the resurrection of Jesus when he was told of it (as is related in the Gospel of John); he later confessed his faith (\"\") on seeing the places where the wounds appeared still fresh on the holy body of Jesus after the Crucifixion of Jesus.\nAccording to traditional accounts of the Saint Thomas Christians of Kerala, Thomas travelled outside the Roman Empire to preach the Gospel, traveling through southern India in the modern states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, and eventually reached Muziris (modern-day North Paravur and Kodungalloor) in 52 AD. He started the Church of the East in the region around the Van Province, Edessa, and Hakkari regions of Upper Mesopotamia (modern-day southeastern Turkey), presumably sometime between mid-late 30s and 45, and spent many years evangelizing both Jews and pagans in the area before heading further east in the late 40s. In 1258, some of the relics were brought to Ortona, in Abruzzo, Italy, where they have been held in the Church of Saint Thomas the Apostle. He is regarded as the patron saint of India among its Christian adherents, and the Feast of Saint Thomas on July 3 is celebrated as Indian Christians' Day. The name \"Thomas\" remains quite popular among the Saint Thomas Christians of the Indian subcontinent.\nMany churches in the Middle East and southern Asia, besides India, also mention Apostle Thomas in their historical traditions as being the first evangelist to establish those churches, the Church of the East, as well as the early church of Sri Lanka. \nGospel of John.\nThomas first speaks in the Gospel of John. In John 11:16, when Lazarus has recently died, and the apostles do not wish to go back to Judea, Thomas says: \"Let us also go, that we may die with him.\"\nThomas speaks again in John 14:5. There, Jesus had just explained that he was going away to prepare a heavenly home for his followers, and that one day they would join him there. Thomas reacted by saying, \"Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?\"\nJohn 20:24\u201329 tells how doubting Thomas was skeptical at first when he heard that Jesus had risen from the dead and appeared to the other apostles, saying, \"Except I shall see on his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.\" But when Jesus appeared later and invited Thomas to touch his wounds and behold him, Thomas showed his belief by saying, \"My Lord and my God\". Jesus then said, \"Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.\"\nNames and etymologies.\nThe name \"Thomas\" (Greek: \u0398\u03c9\u03bc\u1fb6\u03c2) given for the apostle in the New Testament is derived from the Aramaic \u05ea\u05b0\u05bc\u05d0\u05d5\u05b9\u05de\u05b8\u05d0 \"T\u02be\u014dm\u0101\" (Syriac \u072c\u0710\u0718\u073f\u0721\u0735\u0710/\u072c\u0741\u0733\u0710\u0718\u0721\u0730\u0710 \"T\u02be\u014dm\u0101\"/\"T\u0101\u02bewma\"), meaning \"the twin\" and cognate to Hebrew \u05ea\u05b0\u05bc\u05d0\u05d5\u05b9\u05dd \"t\u02be\u00f3m\". The equivalent term for twin in Greek, which is also used in the New Testament, is \u0394\u03af\u03b4\u03c5\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2 \"Didymos\".\nOther names.\nThe Nag Hammadi copy of the \"Gospel of Thomas\" begins: \"These are the secret sayings that the living Jesus spoke and Didymus, Judas Thomas, recorded.\" Early Syrian traditions also relate the apostle's full name as Judas Thomas. Some have seen in the \"Acts of Thomas\" (written in east Syria in the early 3rd century, or perhaps as early as the first half of the 2nd century) an identification of Thomas with the apostle Judas, Son of James. However, the first sentence of the Acts follows the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles in distinguishing the apostle Thomas and the apostle Judas son of James. Others, such as James Tabor, identify him as Jude, brother of Jesus mentioned by Mark. In the Book of Thomas the Contender, part of the Nag Hammadi library, he is alleged to be a twin to Jesus: \"Now, since it has been said that you are my twin and true companion, examine yourself\u2026\"\nA \"doubting Thomas\" is a skeptic who refuses to believe without direct personal experience\u2014a reference to the Gospel of John's depiction of the Apostle Thomas, who, in John's account, refused to believe the resurrected Jesus had appeared to the ten other apostles until he could see and feel Jesus' crucifixion wounds.\nFeast days.\nWhen the feast of Saint Thomas was inserted in the Roman calendar in the 9th century, it was assigned to 21 December. The \"Martyrology of St. Jerome\" mentioned the apostle on 3 July, the date to which the Roman celebration was transferred in 1969, so that it would no longer interfere with the major ferial days of Advent. Traditionalist Roman Catholics (who follow the General Roman Calendar of 1960 or earlier), the Lutheran Church, and many Anglicans (including members of the Episcopal Church as well as members of the Church of England who worship according to the 1662 edition of the Book of Common Prayer), still celebrate his feast day on 21 December. However, most modern liturgical calendars (including the Common Worship calendar of the Church of England) prefer 3 July, Thomas is remembered in the Church of England with a Festival.\nThe Eastern Orthodox venerates Thomas on the following days:\nThomas is also associated with the \"Arabian\" (or \"Arapet\") icon of the Theotokos (Mother of God), which is commemorated on 6 September. He is also associated with the Cincture of the Theotokos, which is commemorated on August 31.\nThe Malankara Orthodox Church celebrates his feast on three days, 3 July (in memory of the relic translation to Edessa, modern \u015eanl\u0131urfa), 18 December (the Day he was lanced), and 21 December (when he died).\nLater history and traditions.\n\"The Passing of Mary\", adjudged heretical by Pope Gelasius I in 494, was attributed to Joseph of Arimathea. The document states that Thomas was the only witness of the Assumption of Mary into heaven. The other apostles were miraculously transported to Jerusalem to witness her assumption. Thomas was left in India, but after her first burial, he was transported to her tomb, where he witnessed her bodily assumption into heaven, from which she dropped her girdle. In an inversion of the story of Thomas' doubts, the other apostles are skeptical of Thomas' story until they see the empty tomb and the girdle. Thomas' receipt of the girdle is commonly depicted in medieval and pre-Council of Trent Renaissance art.\nMission in India.\nAccording to traditional accounts of the Saint Thomas Christians of India, the Apostle Thomas landed in Muziris (Cranganore) in present day Kerala in 52 CE, and was martyred in Mylapore, near Madras in 72 CE. But the visit of St. Thomas is still a matter of dispute among historians.He is believed by the Saint Thomas Christian tradition to have established seven churches (communities) in Kerala at Kodungallur, Palayoor, Kottakkavu (Paravur), Kokkamangalam, Niranam, Nilackal (Chayal), Kollam, and Thiruvithamcode. Thomas baptized several families. Many families claim to have origins almost as far back as these, and the religious historian Robert Eric Frykenberg notes that: \"Whatever dubious historicity may be attached to such local traditions, there can be little doubt as to their great antiquity or to their great appeal in the popular imagination.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was to a land of dark people he was sent, to clothe them by Baptism in white robes. His grateful dawn dispelled India's painful darkness. It was his mission to espouse India to the One-Begotten. The merchant is blessed for having so great a treasure. Edessa thus became the blessed city by possessing the greatest pearl India could yield. Thomas works miracles in India, and at Edessa Thomas is destined to baptize peoples perverse and steeped in darkness, and that in the land of India.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nEphrem the Syrian, a doctor of Syriac Christianity, writes in the forty-second of his \"Carmina Nisibina\" that the Apostle was put to death in India, and that his remains were subsequently buried in Edessa, brought there by an unnamed merchant.\nAccording to Eusebius' record, Thomas and Bartholomew were assigned to Parthia and northwest India. The \"Didascalia\" (dating from the end of the 3rd century) states, \"India and all countries condering it, even to the farthest seas... received the apostolic ordinances from Judas Thomas, who was a guide and ruler in the church which he built.\"\nAccording to traditional accounts, Thomas is believed to have left northwest India when threatened by an attack and traveled by vessel to the Malabar Coast, possibly visiting southeast Arabia and Socotra en route, and landing at the former flourishing port of Muziris (modern-day North Paravur and Kodungalloor) (c. 50) in the company of a Jewish merchant Abbanes/Habban. From there, he is said to have preached the gospel throughout the Malabar coast. The various churches he founded were located mainly on the Periyar River and its tributaries and along the coast, where there were Jewish colonies.\nAlleged visit to China.\nThomas's alleged visit to China is mentioned in the books and church traditions of Saint Thomas Christians in India, some of whom claim descent from the early Christians evangelized by Thomas the Apostle in 52. For example, it is found in the Malayalam ballad \"Thoma Ramban Pattu\" (The Song of the Lord Thomas), with the earliest manuscript being from the 17th century. The sources write about Thomas coming to India, then to China, and back to India, where he died.\nIn other attested sources, the tradition of making Thomas the apostle of China is found in the \"Law of Christianity\" (Fiqh al-na\u1e63r\u0101niyya), a compilation of juridical literature by Ibn al-\u1e6cayyib (Nestorian theologian and physician who died in 1043 in Baghdad). Later, in the Nomocanon of Abdisho bar Berika (metropolitan of Nisibis and Armenia, died in 1318) and the breviary of the Chaldean Church it is written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;1. Through St. Thomas the error of idolatry vanished from India.\n2. Through St. Thomas the Chinese and Ethiopians were converted to the truth.\n3. Through St. Thomas they accepted the sacrament of baptism and the adoption of sons.\n4. Through St. Thomas they believed in and confessed the Father, the Son, and Holy Spirit.\n5. Through St. Thomas they preserved the accepted faith of the one God.\n6. Through St. Thomas the life-giving splendors rose in all India.\n7. Through St. Thomas the Kingdom of Heaven took wing and ascended to China.\u2014\u200a\nIn its nascent form, this tradition is found at the earliest in the Zuqnin Chronicle (775 CE) and may have originated in the late Sasanian period. Perhaps it originated as a 3rd-century pseudepigraphon where Thomas would have converted the Magi (in the Gospel of Matthew) to Christianity as they dwelled in the land of Shir (land of Seres, Tarim Basin, near what was the world's easternmost sea for many people in antiquity). Additionally, the testimony of Arnobius of Sicca, active shortly after 300, maintains that the Christian message had arrived in India and among the Persians, Medians, and Parthians (along with the Seres).\nPossible travel into Indonesia.\nAccording to Kurt E. Koch, Thomas the Apostle possibly traveled into Indonesia via India with Indian traders.\nParaguayan legend.\nAncient oral tradition retained by the Guaran\u00ed tribes of Paraguay claims that the Apostle Thomas was in Paraguay and preached to them under the name of Pa'\u00ed Sum\u00e9 or Avar\u00e9 Sum\u00e9 (while in Peru he was known as Tum\u00e9).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;in the estate of our college, called Paraguay, and twenty leagues distant from Asumpcion. This place stretches out on one side into a pleasant plain, affording pasture to a vast quantity of cattle; on the other, where it looks towards the south, it is surrounded by hills and rocks; in one of which a cross piled up of three large stones is visited, and held in great veneration by the natives for the sake of St. Thomas; for they believe, and firmly maintain, that the Apostle, seated on these stones as on a chair, formerly preached to the assembled Indians.\nAlmost 150 years prior to Dobrizhoffer's arrival in Paraguay, another Jesuit Missionary, F. J. Antonio Ruiz de Montoya, recollected the same oral traditions from the Paraguayan tribes. He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...The Paraguayan tribes they have this very curious tradition. They claim that a very holy man (Thomas the Apostle himself), whom they call \"Pa\u00ed Thome\", lived amongst them and preached to them the Holy Truth, wandering and carrying a wooden cross on his back.\nThe sole recorded research conducted on the subject was during Jos\u00e9 Gaspar Rodr\u00edguez de Francia's reign after the Independence of Paraguay. This is mentioned by Franz Wisner von Morgenstern, an Austro-Hungarian engineer who served in the Paraguayan armies prior and during the Paraguayan War. According to Wisner, some Paraguayan miners while working nearby some hills at the Caaguaz\u00fa Department found some stones with ancient letters carved in them. Dictator Francia sent his finest experts to inspect those stones, and they concluded that the letters carved in those stones were Hebrew-like symbols, but they couldn't translate them nor figure out the exact date when those letters were carved. No further recorded investigations exist, and according to Wisner, people believed that the letters were made by Thomas the Apostle, following the tradition.\nDeath.\nAccording to Syrian Christian tradition, Thomas was killed with a spear at St. Thomas Mount in Chennai on 3 July 72 AD, and his body was interred in Mylapore. Latin Church tradition holds 21 December as his date of death. Ephrem the Syrian states that the Apostle was killed in India, and that his relics were then taken to Edessa. This is the earliest known record of his death.\nThe records of Barbosa from the early 16th century record that the tomb was then maintained and a lamp is burning there. The St. Thomas Cathedral Basilica, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India, presently located at the tomb, was first built in the 16th century by the Portuguese, and rebuilt in the 19th century by the British. St. Thomas Mount has been a site revered by Christians since at least the 16th century.\nRelics.\nMylapore.\nTraditional accounts say that the Apostle Thomas preached not only in Kerala but also in Tamil Nadu and other parts of Southern India, and that a few relics are still kept at San Thome Basilica in Mylapore neighborhood in the central part of the city of Chennai in India. Marco Polo, the Venetian traveller and author of \"Description of the World,\" popularly known as \"Il Milione,\" is reputed to have visited Southern India in 1288 and 1292. The first date has been rejected as he was in China at the time, but the second date is generally accepted.\nEdessa.\nAccording to tradition, in 232, the greater portion of relics of the Apostle Thomas are said to have been sent by an Indian king and brought from India to the city of Edessa, Mesopotamia, on which occasion his Syriac \"Acts\" were written.\nThe Indian king is named as \"Mazdai\" in Syriac sources, and \"Misdeos\" and \"Misdeus\" in Greek and Latin sources respectively, which has been connected to the \"Bazdeo\" on the Kushan coinage of Vasudeva I, the transition between \"M\" and \"B\" being a current one in classical sources for Indian names. The martyrologist Rabban Sliba dedicated a special day to both the Indian king, his family, and Saint Thomas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Coronatio Thomae apostoli et Misdeus rex Indiae, Johannes eus filius huisque mater Tertia\" (Coronation of Thomas the Apostle, and Misdeus king of India, together with his son Johannes (thought to be a latinization of \"Vizan\") and his mother Tertia) Rabban Sliba\nIn the 4th century, the martyrium erected over his burial place brought pilgrims to Edessa. In the 380s, Egeria described her visit in a letter she sent to her community of nuns at home:\nWe arrived at Edessa in the Name of Christ our God, and, on our arrival, we straightway repaired to the church and memorial of saint Thomas. There, according to custom, prayers were made and the other things that were customary in the holy places were done; we read also some things concerning saint Thomas himself. The church there is very great, very beautiful and of new construction, well worthy to be the house of God, and as there was much that I desired to see, it was necessary for me to make a three days' stay there.\nAccording to Theodoret of Cyrrhus, the bones of Saint Thomas were transferred by Cyrus I, Bishop of Edessa, from the martyrium outside of Edessa, to a church in the south-west corner of the city on 22 August 394.\nIn 441, the \"Magister militum per Orientem\" Anatolius donated a silver coffin to hold the relics. In 1144, the city was conquered by the Zengids and the shrine destroyed.\nIn 522, Cosmas Indicopleustes (called the Alexandrian) visited the Malabar Coast. He is the first traveller who mentions Syrian Christians in Malabar, in his book \"Christian Topography.\" He mentions that in the town of \"Kalliana\" (Quilon or Kollam), there was a bishop who had been consecrated in Persia.\nChios and Ortona.\nThe reputed relics of Saint Thomas remained at Edessa until they were moved to Chios in 1258. Some portion of the relics were later transferred again, and now rest in the Cathedral of Saint Thomas the Apostle in Ortona, Italy. However, the skull of Thomas is said to be at Monastery of Saint John the Theologian on the Greek island of Patmos.\nOrtona's three galleys reached the island of Chios in 1258, led by General Leone Acciaiuoli. Chios was considered the island where Thomas, after his death in India, had been buried. A portion fought around the Peloponnese and the Aegean islands, the other in the sea lapping at the then Syrian coast. The three galleys of Ortona moved on the second front of the war and reached the island of Chios.\nThe tale is provided by Giambattista De Lectis, physician and writer of the 16th century of Ortona. After the looting, the navarca Ortona Leone went to pray in the main church of the island of Chios and was drawn to a chapel adorned and resplendent with lights. An elderly priest, through an interpreter, informed him that in that oratory was venerated the body of Saint Thomas the Apostle. Leone, filled with an unusual sweetness, gathered in deep prayer. At that moment, a light hand twice invited him to come closer. The navarca Leone reached out and took a bone from the largest hole of the tombstone, on which were carved the Greek letters and a halo depicted a bishop from the waist up. He was the confirmation of what he had said the old priest and that you are indeed in the presence of the Apostle's body. He went back on the galley and planned the theft for the next night, along with fellow Ruggiero Grogno. They lifted the heavy gravestone, watched the underlying relics, wrapped them in snow-white cloths, laid them in a wooden box (stored at Ortona to the looting of 1566) and brought them aboard the galley. Leone, then, along with other comrades, returned again to the church, took the tombstone and took her away. Just the Chinardo admiral was aware of the precious cargo, he moved all the Muslim sailors on other ships and ordered him to take the route to Ortona.\nHe landed at the port of Ortona 6 September 1258. According to the story of De Lectis, he was informed the abbot Jacopo was responsible for Ortona Church, which predisposed full provision for hospitality felt and shared by all the people. Since then, the body of the apostle and the gravestone are preserved in the crypt of the Basilica. In 1259, a parchment written in Bari by the court under John Peacock contracts, the presence of five witnesses, preserved in Ortona at the Diocesan Library, confirming the veracity of that event, reported, as mentioned, by Giambattista De Lectis, physician and writer Ortona of the 16th century.\nThe relics resisted both the Saracen looting of 1566, and the destruction of the Nazis in the battle of Ortona fought in late December 1943. The basilica was blown up because the belfry was considered a lookout point by the Allies, coming by sea from San Vito Chietino. The relics, together with the treasure of Saint Thomas, were intended by the Germans to be sold, but the monks entombed them inside the bell tower, the only surviving part of the semi-ruined church.\nThe tombstone of Thomas, brought to Ortona from Chios along with the relics of the Apostle, are preserved in the crypt of St Thomas Basilica, behind the altar. The urn containing the bones is placed under the altar. It is the cover of a fake coffin, a fairly widespread burial form in the early Christian world, as the top of a tomb of less expensive material. The plaque has an inscription and a bas-relief that refer, in many respects, to the Syro-Mesopotamian. Tombstone Thomas the Apostle on inclusion can be read, in Greek uncial, the expression 'osios thomas, that Saint Thomas. It can be dated from the point of view palaeographic and lexical to the 3rd\u20135th century, a time when the term osios is still used as a synonym of aghios in that holy is he that is in the grace of God and is inserted in the church: the two vocabulary, therefore, indicate the Christians. In the particular case of Saint Thomas' plaque, the word osios can be the translation of the word Syriac \"mar\" (Lord), attributed in the ancient world, but also to the present day, is a saint to be a bishop.\nIraq.\nThe purported finger bones of Saint Thomas were discovered during restoration work at the Church of Saint Thomas in Mosul, Iraq in 1964, and were housed there until the Fall of Mosul, after which the relics were transferred to the Monastery of Saint Matthew on 17 June 2014.\nSuccession.\nAs per the tradition of the Saint Thomas Christians, St. Thomas the Apostle established his throne in India and ordained Mar Keppa, a Chera prince, as his successor. India became his see (Kolla Hendo); therefore, the see of the metropolitan of Saint Thomas Christians was India and adopted the title of \"Metropolitan and Gate of all India\". In Syriac Manuscript Vatican Syriac Codex 22, the title given for the Metropolitan of the Saint Thomas Christians was \"the superintendent and ruler of the holy see of St. Thomas the Apostle\".\nHistorical references.\nA number of early Christian writings written during the centuries immediately following the first Ecumenical Council of 325 mention Thomas' mission.\nThe \"Transitus Mariae\" describes each of the apostles purportedly being temporarily transported to heaven during the Assumption of Mary.\nActs of Thomas.\nThe main source is the apocryphal Acts of Thomas, sometimes referred to by its full name \"The Acts of Judas Thomas\", written circa 180\u2013230 AD. These are generally regarded by various Christian religions as apocryphal, or even heretical. The two centuries that lapsed between the life of the apostle and the recording of this work cast doubt on their authenticity.\nThe king, Misdeus (or Mizdeos), was infuriated when Thomas converted the queen Tertia, the king's son Juzanes, sister-in-law princess Mygdonia and her friend Markia. Misdeus led Thomas outside the city and ordered four soldiers to take him to the nearby hill, where the soldiers speared Thomas, killing him. After Thomas' death, Syphorus was elected the first presbyter of Mazdai by the surviving converts, while Juzanes was the first deacon. (The names Misdeus, Tertia, Juzanes, Syphorus, Markia and Mygdonia (cf. Mygdonia, a province of Mesopotamia) may suggest Greek descent or cultural influences. Greek traders had long visited Muziris.\nDoctrine of the Apostles.\nThe Doctrine of the Apostles attests that Thomas had written Christian doctrine from India.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;India and all its own countries, and those bordering on it, even to the farther sea, received the Apostle's hand of Priesthood from Judas Thomas, who was Guide and Ruler in the Church which he built and ministered there\". In what follows \"the whole Persia of the Assyrians and Medes, and of the countries round about Babylon\u2026 even to the borders of the Indians and even to the country of Gog and Magog\" are said to have received the Apostles' Hand of Priesthood from Aggaeus the disciple of Addaeus\nOrigen.\nChristian philosopher Origen taught with great acclaim in Alexandria and then in Caesarea. Outside the account in the Acts of the Apostles , Origen is the earliest known writer to record the casting of lots by the Apostles. Origen's original work has been lost, but his statement about Parthia falling to Thomas has been preserved by Eusebius. \"Origen, in the third chapter of his Commentary on Genesis, says that, according to tradition, Thomas's allotted field of labour was Parthia\".\nEusebius.\nQuoting Origen, Eusebius of Caesarea wrote: \"When the holy Apostles and disciples of our Saviour were scattered over all the world, Thomas, so the tradition has it, obtained as his portion Parthia\u2026\" \"Judas, who is also called Thomas\" has a role in the legend of king Abgar of Edessa (Urfa), for having sent Thaddaeus to preach in Edessa after the Ascension. Ephrem the Syrian also recounts this legend.\nEphrem the Syrian.\nMany devotional hymns composed by Ephrem the Syrian bear witness to the Edessan Church's strong conviction concerning Thomas's Indian Apostolate. There, it is mentioned that \"the merchant brought the bones\" to Edessa, and the devil speaks of Thomas as \"the Apostle I slew in India\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Another hymn eulogizing Saint Thomas reads \"The bones the merchant hath brought\". \"In his several journeyings to India/ And thence on his return/ All riches/ which there he found/ Dirt in his eyes he did repute when to thy sacred bones compared\". In yet another hymn Ephrem speaks of the mission of Thomas: \"The earth darkened with sacrifices' fumes to illuminate\", \"a land of people dark fell to thy lot\", \"a tainted land Thomas has purified\"; \"India's dark night\" was \"flooded with light\" by Thomas.\nGregory of Nazianzus.\nGregory of Nazianzus was born in AD 330, consecrated a bishop by his friend Basil of Caesarea; in 372, his father, the Bishop of Nazianzus, induced him to share his charge. In 379, the people of Constantinople called him to be their bishop. By the Eastern Orthodox Church, he is emphatically called \"the Theologian\". \nIn mentioning the spreadation of the Apostles spreading across the world to evangelise, he wrote, \"What? Were not the Apostles strangers amidst the many nations and countries over which they spread themselves? \u2026 Peter indeed may have belonged to Judea, but what had Paul in common with the Gentiles, Luke with Achaia, Andrew with Epirus, John with Ephesus, Thomas with India, Mark with Italy?\"\nAmbrose of Milan.\nAmbrose of Milan was thoroughly acquainted with the Greek and Latin Classics and had a good deal of information on India and Indians. He speaks of the Gymnosophists of India, the Indian Ocean, the river Ganges etc., a number of times. \"This admitted of the Apostles being sent without delay according to the saying of our Lord Jesus\u2026 Even those Kingdoms which were shut out by rugged mountains became accessible to them, as India to Thomas, Persia to Matthew...\"\nGregory of Tours.\nThe testimony of Gregory of Tours: \"Thomas the Apostle, according to the narrative of his martyrdom is stated to have suffered in India. His holy remains (corpus), after a long interval of time, were removed to the city of Edessa in Syria and there interred. In that part of India where they first rested, stand a monastery and a church of striking dimensions, elaborately adorned and designed. This Theodore, who had been to the place, narrated to us.\"\nWritings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let none read the gospel according to Thomas, for it is the work, not of one of the twelve apostles, but of one of Mani's three wicked disciples.\u2014\u200a\nIn the first two centuries of the Christian era, a number of writings were circulated. It is unclear now why Thomas was seen as an authority for doctrine, although this belief is documented in Gnostic groups as early as the \"Pistis Sophia\". In that Gnostic work, Mary Magdalene (one of the disciples) says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now at this time, my Lord, hear, so that I speak openly, for thou hast said to us \"He who has ears to hear, let him hear:\" Concerning the word which thou didst say to Philip: \"Thou and Thomas and Matthew are the three to whom it has been given\u2026 to write every word of the Kingdom of the Light, and to bear witness to them\"; hear now that I give the interpretation of these words. It is this which thy light-power once prophesied through Moses: \"Through two and three witnesses everything will be established. The three witnesses are Philip and Thomas and Matthew\"\u2014\u200a\nAn early, non-Gnostic tradition may lie behind this statement, which also emphasizes the primacy of the Gospel of Matthew in its Aramaic form, over the other canonical three.\nBesides the \"Acts of Thomas\" there was a widely circulated \"Infancy Gospel of Thomas\" probably written in the later 2nd century, and probably also in Syria, which relates the miraculous events and prodigies of Jesus' boyhood. This is the document which tells for the first time the familiar legend of the twelve sparrows which Jesus, at the age of five, fashioned from clay on the Sabbath day, which took wing and flew away. The earliest manuscript of this work is a 6th-century one in Syriac. This gospel was first referred to by Irenaeus; Ron Cameron notes: \"In his citation, Irenaeus first quotes a non-canonical story that circulated about the childhood of Jesus and then goes directly on to quote a passage from the infancy narrative of the Gospel of Luke. Since the Infancy Gospel of Thomas records both of these stories, in relative close proximity to one another, it is possible that the apocryphal writing cited by Irenaeus is, in fact, what is now known as the Infancy Gospel of Thomas. Because of the complexities of the manuscript tradition, however, there is no certainty as to when the stories of the Infancy Gospel of Thomas began to be written down.\"\nThe best known in modern times of these documents is the \"sayings\" document that is being called the Gospel of Thomas, a noncanonical work whose date is disputed. The opening line claims it is the work of \"Didymos Judas Thomas\" \u2013 whose identity is unknown. This work was discovered in a Coptic translation in 1945 at the Egyptian village of Nag Hammadi, near the site of the monastery of Chenoboskion. Once the Coptic text was published, scholars recognized that an earlier Greek translation had been published from fragments of papyrus found at Oxyrhynchus in the 1890s. Because of its potentially very early date of composition, the Gospel of Thomas has played a substantial role in New Testament studies.\nSaint Thomas Cross.\nIn the 16th-century work \"Jornada\", Antonio Gouvea writes of ornate crosses known as \"Saint Thomas Crosses\". It is also known as Nasrani Menorah, Persian Cross, or Mar Thoma Sleeva. These crosses are believed to date from the 6th century as per the tradition and are found in a number of churches in Kerala, Mylapore and Goa. \"Jornada\" is the oldest known written document to refer to this type of cross as a Saint Thomas Cross. Gouvea also writes about the veneration of the Cross at Cranganore, referring to the cross as \"Cross of Christians\".\nThere are several interpretations of the Nasrani symbol. The interpretation based on Christian Jewish tradition assumes that its design was based on Jewish menorah, an ancient symbol of the Hebrews, which consists of a seven branched lamp stand (candelabra). The interpretation based on local culture states that the Cross without the figure of Jesus and with flowery arms symbolizing \"joyfulness\" points to the resurrection theology of Paul the Apostle; the Holy Spirit on the top represents the role of Holy Spirit in the resurrection of Jesus Christ. The lotus symbolizing Buddhism and the Cross over it shows that Christianity was established in the land of Buddha. The three steps indicate Calvary and the rivulets, channels of Grace flowing from the Cross.\nIn Islam.\nThe Qur'anic account of the disciples of Jesus does not include their names, numbers, or any detailed accounts of their lives. Muslim exegesis, however, more or less agrees with the New Testament list and says that the disciples included Peter, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, Andrew, James, Jude, John, James, son of Alphaeus, and Simon the Zealot.\nLegacy.\nSan Thome Church.\nSan Thome Church is said to be the tomb of Saint Thomas in Chennai, India. It was built in 1523 by Portuguese missionaries. It is a national shrine, basilica and cathedral. It is an important site for Christians and a major shrine of Saint Thomas.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31460", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31460", "title": "Tom Cruise", "text": "American actor and film producer (born 1962)\nThomas Cruise Mapother IV (born July 3, 1962) is an American actor and film producer. Regarded as a Hollywood icon, he has received various accolades, including an Honorary Palme d'Or, an Academy Honorary Award, and three Golden Globe Awards, in addition to nominations for four competitive Academy Awards. As of 2025, his films have grossed over $ worldwide, placing him among the highest-grossing actors of all time. One of Hollywood's most bankable stars, he is consistently one of the world's highest-paid actors.\nCruise began acting in the early 1980s and made his breakthrough with leading roles in \"Risky Business\" (1983) and \"Top Gun\" (1986), the latter earning him a reputation as a sex symbol. Critical acclaim came with his roles in the dramas \"The Color of Money\" (1986), \"Rain Man\" (1988), and \"Born on the Fourth of July\" (1989). For his portrayal of Ron Kovic in the latter, he won a Golden Globe Award and received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor. As a leading Hollywood star in the 1990s, he starred in commercially successful films, including the drama \"A Few Good Men\" (1992), the thriller \"The Firm\" (1993), the horror film \"Interview with the Vampire\" (1994), and the sports comedy-drama \"Jerry Maguire\" (1996); for the latter, he won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor and his second nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor. Cruise's performance in the drama \"Magnolia\" (1999) earned him another Golden Globe Award and a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.\nCruise subsequently established himself as a star of science fiction and action films, often performing his own risky stunts. He played fictional agent Ethan Hunt in eight , beginning with ' (1996) and ending with ' (2025). His other films in the genre include \"Vanilla Sky\" (2001), \"Minority Report\" (2002), \"The Last Samurai\" (2003), \"Collateral\" (2004), \"War of the Worlds\" (2005), \"Knight and Day\" (2010), \"Jack Reacher\" (2012), \"Oblivion\" (2013), \"Edge of Tomorrow\" (2014), and \"\" (2022).\nCruise holds the Guinness World Record for the most consecutive $-grossing movies, a feat achieved with seven films released between 2011 and 2018. In December 2024, he was awarded the U.S. Navy's highest civilian honor, the Distinguished Public Service Award, in recognition of his \"outstanding contributions\" to the military, with his screen roles. In March 2025, he was named the recipient of the British Film Institute Fellowship, the BFI's highest honor, for his contributions to cinema. \"Forbes\" ranked him as the world's most powerful celebrity in 2006. He was named \"People's\" Sexiest Man Alive in 1990, and received the top honor of \"Most Beautiful People\" in 1997. Outside his film career, Cruise has been an outspoken advocate for the Church of Scientology, which has resulted in controversy and scrutiny of his involvement in the organization. An aviation enthusiast, he has held a pilot certificate since 1994.\nEarly life.\nCruise was born on July 3, 1962, in Syracuse, New York, to electrical engineer Thomas Cruise Mapother III (1934\u20131984) and special education teacher Mary Lee (n\u00e9e Pfeiffer; 1936\u20132017). His parents were both from Louisville, Kentucky, and had English, German, and Irish ancestry. Cruise has three sisters named Lee Anne, Marian, and Cass. One of his cousins, William Mapother, is also an actor who has appeared alongside Cruise in five films.\nCruise grew up in near poverty and had a Catholic upbringing. He later described his father as \"a merchant of chaos\", a \"bully\", and a \"coward\" who beat his children. He elaborated, \"[My father] was the kind of person where, if something goes wrong, they kick you. It was a great lesson in my life\u2014how he'd lull you in, make you feel safe and then, bang! For me, it was like, 'There's something wrong with this guy. Don't trust him. Be careful around him.'\" Cruise's father died of cancer in 1984.\nIn total, Cruise attended fifteen schools in fourteen years. Cruise spent part of his childhood in Canada; when his father took a job as a defense consultant with the Canadian Armed Forces, his family moved in late 1971 to Beacon Hill, Ottawa. He attended the new Robert Hopkins Public School for his fourth and fifth grade education. He first became involved in drama in fourth grade, under drama teacher George Steinburg. He and six other boys put on an improvised play to music called \"IT\" at the Carleton Elementary School drama festival. Drama organizer Val Wright was in the audience and later said that \"the movement and improvisation were excellent ... a classic ensemble piece.\"\nIn sixth grade, Cruise went to Henry Munro Middle School in Ottawa. That year, his mother left his father, taking Cruise and his sisters back to the United States. In 1978 she married Jack South. Cruise briefly took a Catholic church scholarship and attended St. Francis Seminary in Cincinnati. He aspired to become a priest in the Franciscan order but left after a year. Priests at the seminary have said Cruise chose to leave the school when his family relocated again; however, a former classmate said that they were both asked to leave after getting caught taking liquor. In his senior year of high school, he played football for the varsity team as a linebacker, but was cut from the squad after getting caught drinking beer before a game. He went on to star in the school's production of \"Guys and Dolls\". In 1980, he graduated from Glen Ridge High School in Glen Ridge, New Jersey.\nActing career.\n1980s: Breakthrough and stardom.\nAt age 18, with the blessing of his mother and stepfather, Cruise moved to New York City to pursue an acting career. After working as a busboy in New York, he went to Los Angeles to try out for television roles. He signed with CAA and began acting in films. He made his film debut in a bit part in the 1981 film \"Endless Love\", followed by a major supporting role as a crazed military academy student in \"Taps\" later that year. Cruise was originally supposed to appear as a background actor but his role was expanded after impressing director Harold Becker. He next won the role of Steve Randle in Francis Ford Coppola's 1983 cinematic adaptation of S. E. Hinton's novel, \"The Outsiders\", and shared the screen with an ensemble cast that included Matt Dillon, Emilio Estevez, Leif Garrett, C. Thomas Howell, Diane Lane, Rob Lowe, Ralph Macchio, and Patrick Swayze. That same year he appeared in \"All the Right Moves\" and \"Risky Business\", which has been described as \"A Generation X classic, and a career maker for Tom Cruise.\" He also played the male lead in the Ridley Scott film \"Legend\", released in 1985. By 1986's \"Top Gun\", his status as a superstar had been cemented.\nCruise followed up \"Top Gun\" with Martin Scorsese's \"The Color of Money\" (1986), which came out the same year, and which paired him with Paul Newman. Their chemistry won praise among critics with \"The Washington Post\" writing, \"One of the subtle achievements of both Cruise's and Newman's performances is that you feel that both of them are genuinely top-notch pool hustlers\". In 1988, Cruise starred in \"Cocktail\", a film that was a box office success but failed with critics. His performance earned him a nomination for the Razzie Award for Worst Actor. Later that year he starred with Dustin Hoffman in Barry Levinson's \"Rain Man\", which won the Academy Award for Best Picture.\nIn 1989, Cruise portrayed real-life paralyzed Vietnam War veteran Ron Kovic in Oliver Stone's war epic \"Born on the Fourth of July\". Film critic Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" wrote, \"Nothing Cruise has done will prepare you for what he does in \"Born on the Fourth of July\"\u00a0... His performance is so good that the movie lives through it. Stone is able to make his statement with Cruise's face and voice and doesn't need to put everything into the dialogue.\" The performance earned him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Drama, the Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor, the People's Choice Award for Favorite Motion Picture Actor, a nomination for BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, and Cruise's first Best Actor Academy Award nomination.\n1990s: Dramatic roles.\nCruise's next films were \"Days of Thunder\" (1990) and \"Far and Away\" (1992), both of which co-starred then-wife Nicole Kidman as his love interest, followed by the legal thriller \"The Firm\", which was a critical and commercial success. In 1994, Cruise starred along with Brad Pitt, Antonio Banderas and Christian Slater in Neil Jordan's \"Interview with the Vampire\", a gothic drama/horror film that was based on Anne Rice's best-selling novel. The film was well-received, although Rice was initially quite outspoken in her criticism of Cruise having been cast in the film, as Julian Sands was her first choice. Upon seeing the film, however, she paid $ () for a two-page ad in \"Daily Variety\" praising his performance and apologizing for her previous doubts about him.\nIn 1996, Cruise starred as superspy Ethan Hunt in the reboot of \"\", which he also produced. The film was directed by Brian De Palma and was a box office success. Film critic Stephen Holden of \"The New York Times\" praised Cruise's performance, declaring \"Tom Cruise has found the perfect superhero character on which to graft his breathlessly gung-ho screen personality.\" In the same year, Cruise took on the title role in Cameron Crowe's sports drama \"Jerry Maguire\" playing a sports agent in search of love. The film was a massive financial success grossing more than $ worldwide against its $ budget.\nIn 1999, Cruise costarred with Kidman in Stanley Kubrick's erotic and psychological drama film \"Eyes Wide Shut\". Peter Bradshaw of \"The Guardian\" praised both Cruise and Kidman on their performances writing, \"Cruise in particular lays himself open in that fiercely committed way that he tries everything as an actor\". That same year he took a rare supporting role, as a motivational speaker, Frank T.J. Mackey, in Paul Thomas Anderson's \"Magnolia\" (1999). \"Rolling Stone\" film critic Peter Travers heaped praise on Cruise writing, \"Cruise is a revelation, fully deserving of the shower of superlatives coming his way\u00a0... Cruise seethes with the chaotic energy of a wounded animal\u2014he's devastating.\" For his performance he received another Golden Globe and nomination for an Academy Award.\n2000s: Established career.\nIn 2000, Cruise returned as Ethan Hunt in the second installment of the \"Mission: Impossible\" films, \"\". The film was helmed by Hong Kong director John Woo and branded with his gun fu style; it continued the series' success at the box office, taking in $ worldwide. Unlike its predecessor, it was the highest-grossing film of the year, but had a mixed critical reception. Cruise received an MTV Movie Award for Best Male Performance for the film. His next five films were major critical and commercial successes. The following year, Cruise starred in the romantic thriller \"Vanilla Sky\" (2001) with Cameron Diaz and Pen\u00e9lope Cruz. In 2002, Cruise starred in the dystopian science fiction action film \"Minority Report\", which was directed by Steven Spielberg and based on the short story by Philip K. Dick. It has since been included in lists of the greatest science fiction films of all time.\nIn 2003, he starred in Edward Zwick's period action drama \"The Last Samurai\", for which he received a Golden Globe nomination for best actor. In 2004, Cruise received critical acclaim for his performance as Vincent in \"Collateral\". The critical consensus states that \"Driven by director Michael Mann's trademark visuals and a lean, villainous performance from Tom Cruise, \"Collateral\" is a stylish and compelling noir thriller.\" In 2005, Cruise worked again with Steven Spielberg in \"War of the Worlds\", a loose adaptation of the H. G. Wells novel of the same name, which became the fourth highest-grossing film of the year with $ worldwide. Also in 2005, he was a nominee for the People's Choice Award for Favorite Male Movie Star and the winner of the MTV Generation Award. Cruise was nominated for seven Saturn Awards between 2002 and 2009, winning once. Nine of the ten films he starred in during the decade made over $ at the box office.\nIn 2006, he returned to his role as Ethan Hunt in the third installment of the \"Mission Impossible\" film series, \"\". The film was more positively received by critics than the previous films in the series and grossed nearly $ at the box office. In 2007, Cruise took a rare supporting role for the second time in \"Lions for Lambs\", which was a commercial disappointment. This was followed by an unrecognizable appearance as \"Les Grossman\" in the 2008 comedy \"Tropic Thunder\" with Ben Stiller, Jack Black, and Robert Downey Jr. This performance earned Cruise a Golden Globe nomination. Cruise played the central role in the historical thriller \"Valkyrie\" released on December 25, 2008, to box office success.\n2010s: Action star.\nIn March 2010, Cruise completed filming the action-comedy \"Knight and Day\", in which he re-teamed with former costar Cameron Diaz; the film was released on June 23, 2010. On February 9, 2010, Cruise confirmed that he would star in ', the fourth installment in the ' series. The film was released in December 2011 to high critical acclaim and box office success. Unadjusted for ticket price inflation, it was Cruise's biggest commercial success to that date.\nOn May 6, 2011, Cruise was awarded a humanitarian award from the Simon Wiesenthal Center and its Museum of Tolerance for his work as a dedicated philanthropist. In mid-2011, Cruise started shooting the movie \"Rock of Ages\" (2012), in which he played the fictional character Stacee Jaxx. The film was released in June 2012 and was a rare box-office misstep for Cruise. Cruise however received positive reviews for his performance with \"Variety\"'s film critic Justin Chang writing, \"Channeling the likes of Axl Rose and Keith Richards with his tattoos, heavy furs and even heavier eyeshadow, Cruise clearly relishes the opportunity to play against type even as he sends up his world's-biggest-movie-star identity, displaying a cock-of-the-rock strut that viewers haven't seen since his turn in \"Magnolia\".\"\nCruise starred as Jack Reacher in the film adaptation of British author Lee Child's 2005 novel \"One Shot\". The film was released on December 21, 2012. It met with positive reviews from critics and was a box office success grossing $ worldwide. In 2013, he starred in the science fiction film \"Oblivion\" based on director Joseph Kosinski's graphic novel of the same name. The film met with mixed reviews and grossed $ worldwide. It also starred Morgan Freeman and Olga Kurylenko. In 2014, Cruise starred in the science fiction-action film \"Edge of Tomorrow\", which received positive reviews and grossed over $.\nIn 2015, Cruise returned as Ethan Hunt in the fifth installment of the \"Mission: Impossible\" series, ', which he also produced. Returning cast members included Simon Pegg as Benji and Jeremy Renner as William Brandt, with Christopher McQuarrie as director. The film earned high critical acclaim and was a commercial success. Cruise starred in the 2017 reboot of Boris Karloff's 1932 horror movie \"The Mummy\". The new film, also titled \"The Mummy\", received negative reviews and disappointed at the box office, though still grossed over $. In 2018, Cruise again reprised Ethan Hunt, in the sixth film in his franchise, '. The film was more positively received by critics than the previous films in the series and grossed over $ at the box office. Unadjusted for ticket price inflation, it was Cruise's biggest commercial success to date.\n2020s: Franchise films.\nIn May 2020, it was reported that Cruise would be starring in and producing a movie shot in outer space. Doug Liman would be directing, writing, and co-producing. Both will fly to the International Space Station as part of a future Axiom Space mission in a SpaceX Dragon 2 spacecraft. In May 2021, Cruise protested against the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA) by returning all three of his Golden Globe Awards in light of controversy surrounding the HFPA, particularly its lack of diversity, specifically no black members, and ethical questions related to financial benefits to some of its members.\nIn 2022, Cruise reprised his role as Captain Pete \"Maverick\" Mitchell in \"\", a film which he also produced. The film premiered at the Cannes Film Festival where Cruise earned an Honorary Palme d'Or. The film was released to widespread critical praise, with many reviewers deeming it superior to its predecessor. The film broke several box office records upon its release; earning over $, becoming the highest-grossing film of his career. Cruise earned $ for the film, when combining ticket sales, his salary, and his cut of home entertainment rentals and streaming revenues.\nCruise reprised his role as Ethan Hunt in \"\" which was released in theaters on July 12, 2023. The film received critical acclaim, but was a box office disappointment due to the box-office and cultural phenomenon dubbed Barbenheimer, which was the same-day release of Christopher Nolan's historical epic film \"Oppenheimer\" and Greta Gerwig's fantasy comedy \"Barbie\". Peter Debruge of \"Variety\" praised \"Dead Reckoning\" for its performances, action sequences and a satisfying ending, writing, \"This outing may be one-half of a two-part finale, but it gives audiences enough closure to stand on its own\". In 2024, he appeared in the Paris 2024 Olympics closing ceremony to promote Los Angeles 2028 Summer Olympics, by jumping from the roof of the Stade de France stadium in Paris. He took the flag from Mayor Karen Bass and athlete Simone Biles.\nCruise reprised the role of Ethan Hunt in the second part, \"\", released in May 2025. Cruise also declared it would be the last film in which he would portray Ethan Hunt. He will also star in an untitled film directed by Alejandro Gonz\u00e1lez I\u00f1\u00e1rritu which will be his first film at Warner Bros. Pictures in twelve years.\nProduction.\nCruise partnered with his former talent agent Paula Wagner to form Cruise/Wagner Productions in 1993, and the company has since co-produced several of Cruise's films, the first being \"\" in 1996 which was also Cruise's first project as a producer. In addition, Cruise has produced films in which he does not appear, namely \"The Others\", \"Shattered Glass\", \"Elizabethtown\", \"Narc\", \"Ask the Dust\", and \"Without Limits\".\nCruise is noted as having negotiated some of the most lucrative film deals in Hollywood and was described in 2005 by Hollywood economist Edward Jay Epstein as \"one of the most powerful\u2014and richest\u2014forces in Hollywood.\" Epstein argues that Cruise is one of the few producers (the others being George Lucas, Steven Spielberg and Jerry Bruckheimer) who are regarded as able to guarantee the success of a billion-dollar film franchise. Epstein also contends that the public obsession with Cruise's tabloid controversies obscures full appreciation of Cruise's exceptional commercial prowess.\nBreak with Paramount.\nOn August 22, 2006, Paramount Pictures announced it was ending its 14-year relationship with Cruise. In \"The Wall Street Journal\", chairman of Viacom (Paramount's parent company) Sumner Redstone cited the economic damage to Cruise's value as an actor and producer from his controversial public behavior and views. Cruise/Wagner Productions responded that Paramount's announcement was a face-saving move after the production company had successfully sought alternative financing from private equity firms. Industry analysts such as Edward Jay Epstein commented that the real reason for the split was most likely Paramount's discontent over Cruise/Wagner's exceptionally large share of DVD sales from the \"Mission: Impossible\" franchise.\nManagement of United Artists.\nIn November 2006, Cruise and Paula Wagner announced that they had taken over the film studio United Artists (UA). Cruise acted as a producer and starred in films for UA, while Wagner served as UA's chief executive. Production began in 2007 of \"Valkyrie\", a thriller based on the July 20, 1944, assassination attempt against Adolf Hitler. The film was acquired in March 2007 by UA. On March 21, 2007, Cruise signed to play Claus von Stauffenberg, the protagonist. This project marked the second production to be greenlighted since Cruise and Wagner took control of UA. The first was its inaugural film, \"Lions for Lambs\", directed by Robert Redford and starring Redford, Meryl Streep and Cruise. In August 2008, Wagner stepped down from her position at UA; she retained her stake in UA, which combined with Cruise's share amounted to 30% of the studio.\nReturn to Paramount.\nCruise began working with Paramount again as a producer and star with \"\", without Wagner, which was a critical and commercial success. He and Wagner would collaborate for the final time on the modestly successful \"Jack Reacher\" series, also for Paramount.\nMove to Warner Bros. Discovery.\nIn January 2024, it was announced that his production company was forming a new strategic partnership with Warner Bros. Discovery to develop and produce original and franchise films.\nActing credits and accolades.\nIn 2006, \"Premiere\" ranked Cruise as Hollywood's most powerful actor, as Cruise came in at number 13 on the magazine's 2006 Power List, being the highest ranked actor. The same year, \"Forbes\" magazine ranked him as the world's most powerful celebrity. The founder of CinemaScore in 2016 cited Cruise and Leonardo DiCaprio as the \"two stars, it doesn't matter how bad the film is, they can pull [the box office] up.\" October 10, 2006, was declared \"Tom Cruise Day\" in Japan; the Japan Memorial Day Association said that he was awarded with a special day because of \"his love for and close association with Japan.\"\nWhile reviewing \"Days of Thunder\" (co-written Cruise), film critic Roger Ebert noted the similarities between several of Cruise's 1980s films and nicknamed the formula the \"Tom Cruise Picture\". Ebert listed nine key ingredients that make up the Tom Cruise Picture: the Cruise character, the mentor, the superior woman, the craft he must hone, the arena it takes place in, the arcana or knowledge he must learn, the trail or journey, the proto enemy, and the eventual enemy of the character. Some of Cruise's later films like \"A Few Good Men\" and \"The Last Samurai\" can also be considered to be part of this formula. \"Widescreenings\" compares two of these Cruise characters in an article on the film \"A Few Good Men:\"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[screenwriter] Aaron Sorkin interestingly takes the opposite approach of \"Top Gun\", where Cruise also starred as the protagonist. In \"Top Gun\", Cruise plays Mitchell who is a 'hot shot' military underachiever who makes mistakes because he is trying to outperform his late father. Where Maverick Mitchell needs to rein in the discipline, Daniel Kaffee needs to let it go, finally see what he can do.\nCruise is an aerobatic pilot and was inducted as part of the Living Legends of Aviation in 2010, receiving the Aviation Inspiration and Patriotism Award from the Kiddie Hawk Air Academy. In addition to other aircraft, Cruise owns a P-51 Mustang.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and relationships.\nCruise splits his time between homes in Beverly Hills, California; Clearwater, Florida; and the south of England, where he has lived in various places such as Central London, Dulwich, East Grinstead, and Biggin Hill. In the early-to-mid-1980s, Cruise had relationships with Melissa Gilbert, Rebecca De Mornay, Patti Scialfa, and Cher.\nCruise married actress Mimi Rogers on May 9, 1987. They divorced on February 4, 1990. Rogers had grown up in Scientology and was one of its \"auditors\"; they met when Cruise became one of her clients. In a 1993 \"Playboy\" interview, Rogers discussed her split from Cruise and said that he had been considering becoming a monk, which affected their intimacy. Rogers later retracted the comments and claimed she had been misinterpreted. According to a friend of Rogers, \"Tom, his agents and certain studios were furious about what Mimi said in \"Playboy\". She was told in no uncertain terms that her career would be over unless she put things right.\" Rogers received a $ divorce settlement.\nCruise met his second wife, actress Nicole Kidman, on the set of their film \"Days of Thunder\" (1990). The couple married on December 24, 1990. They adopted two children: Isabella Jane (born 1992) and Connor Antony (born 1995). On February 5, 2001, the couple's spokesperson announced their separation. Cruise filed for divorce two days later, and their marriage was dissolved later that year, with Cruise citing irreconcilable differences. Kidman stated that their marriage failed because at the time, she \"was a child\" who \"needed to grow up.\" According to former church spokesperson and board member Mike Rinder, the Church of Scientology used various means to push the couple to break up, including pressuring Cruise into more auditing and tapping Kidman's phone.\nIn a 2007 interview with \"Marie Claire\", Kidman noted the incorrect reporting of a miscarriage early in her marriage: \"It was wrongly reported as miscarriage by everyone who picked up the story. So it's huge news, and it didn't happen. I had a miscarriage at the end of my marriage, but I had an ectopic pregnancy at the beginning of my marriage.\"\nCruise was next romantically linked with Pen\u00e9lope Cruz, his co-star in \"Vanilla Sky\" (2001). Their three-year relationship ended in 2004. An article in the October 2012 issue of \"Vanity Fair\" stated that several sources have said that after the breakup with Cruz, Scientologist leaders launched a secret project to find Cruise a new girlfriend. According to those sources, a series of \"auditions\" of Scientologist actresses resulted in a short-lived relationship with Iranian-British actress Nazanin Boniadi, who subsequently left Scientology. Scientology and Cruise's lawyers issued strongly worded denials and threatened to sue, accusing \"Vanity Fair\" of \"shoddy journalism\" and \"religious bigotry\". Journalist Roger Friedman later reported that he received an email from director and ex-Scientologist Paul Haggis confirming the story.\nIn April 2005, Cruise began dating actress Katie Holmes. On April 27 that year, Cruise and Holmes\u2014dubbed \"TomKat\" by the media\u2014made their first public appearance together in Rome. A month later, Cruise publicly declared his love for Holmes on \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\"; he jumped on Winfrey's yellow couch and stood there to make the announcement. On October 6, 2005, Cruise and Holmes announced they were expecting a child. In April 2006, their daughter Suri was born.\nOn November 18, Holmes and Cruise were married at the 15th-century castle Castello Orsini-Odescalchi in Bracciano, in a Scientologist ceremony attended by many Hollywood stars. Their publicists said the couple had \"officialized\" their marriage in Los Angeles the day before the Italian ceremony. There has been widespread speculation that their marriage was arranged by Church of Scientology. David Miscavige, the head of Scientology, served as Cruise's best man. On June 29, 2012, Holmes filed for divorce from Cruise. On July 9, the couple signed a divorce settlement worked out by their lawyers. New York law requires all divorce documents remain sealed, so the exact terms of the settlement are not publicly available. Cruise stated that ex-wife Katie Holmes divorced him in part to protect the couple's daughter Suri from Scientology and that Suri is no longer a practicing member of the organization.\nLitigation.\nIn 1998, Cruise successfully sued the \"Daily Express\", a British tabloid which alleged that his marriage to Kidman was a sham designed to cover up his homosexuality. In May 2001, Cruise filed a lawsuit against gay porn actor Chad Slater. Slater had told the celebrity magazine \"Actustar\" that he had been involved in an affair with Cruise. This claim was strongly denied by Cruise, and Slater was ordered to pay $ to Cruise in damages after Slater declared he could not afford to defend himself against the suit and would therefore default. Cruise requested a default judgment, and in January 2003, a Los Angeles judge decided against Slater after he admitted that his claims were false.\nCruise also sued \"Bold Magazine\" publisher Michael Davis for $, because Davis had alleged that he had video that would prove Cruise was gay. The suit was dropped in exchange for a public statement by Davis that the video was not of Cruise, and that Cruise was heterosexual. In 2006, Cruise sued cybersquatter Jeff Burgar to obtain control of the TomCruise.com domain name. When owned by Burgar, the domain redirected to information about Cruise on Celebrity1000.com. The decision to turn TomCruise.com over to Cruise was handed down by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) on July 5, 2006.\nIn 2009, magazine editor Michael Davis Sapir filed a suit charging that his phone had been wiretapped at Cruise's behest. That suit was dismissed by a Central Civil West court judge in Los Angeles on the grounds that the statute of limitations had expired on Sapir's claim. In October 2012, Cruise filed a lawsuit against \"In Touch\" and \"Life &amp; Style\" magazines for defamation after they claimed Cruise had \"abandoned\" his six-year-old daughter. During deposition, Cruise admitted that \"he didn't see his daughter for 110 days\". The suit was settled the following year.\nScientology advocacy.\nCruise was converted to Scientology by his first wife, Mimi Rogers, in 1986 and became an outspoken advocate for Church of Scientology in the 2000s. His involvement in the organization was leaked by the tabloid \"Star\" in 1990, and he publicly announced he followed Scientology in a 1992 interview with Barbara Walters. Cruise has said that Scientology, through its teaching method Study Technology, helped him overcome his dyslexia. Cruise has been a close friend of Scientology leader David Miscavige since the 1980s.\nSeveral years after Cruise started studying Scientology, the organization's leaders promised to share some Scientology secrets with him, including information about the extraterrestrial ruler Xenu. According to Janet Reitman's book \"\" (2011), Cruise \"freaked out\" and took a step back from the Church to work on the film \"Eyes Wide Shut.\" In 1999, Marty Rathbun was sent by David Miscavige to convince Cruise to return to the Church and continue his studies. Cruise later sparked controversy in the 2000s with his efforts to promote Scientology.\nIn the aftermath of 9/11, Cruise co-founded and raised donations for Downtown Medical to offer New York City rescue workers \"detoxification therapy\", drawing criticism from medical professionals and firefighters. In late 2004, David Miscavige created the Scientology Freedom Medal of Valor and awarded it to Cruise for this work. Former Scientologist Paul Haggis has claimed that Cruise attempted to convert several celebrities to Scientology, including James Packer, Victoria and David Beckham, Jada Pinkett, Will Smith, and Steven Spielberg. Since 2008, Cruise has restricted interviewers from asking him about Scientology.\nPolitical lobbying.\nAs well as promoting various programs to introduce people to Scientology, Cruise campaigned for Scientology to be recognized as a religion in Europe. In 2005, the Council of Paris revealed that Cruise had lobbied French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy and Senate President Jean-Claude Gaudin; they described Cruise as a militant spokesman for Scientology and barred any further dealings with him.\nPolitics.\nIn 2025, Cruise was selected by President Donald Trump for the Kennedy Center Honors but he declined it.\nControversies.\nCriticism of psychiatry.\nIn January 2004, Cruise said, \"I think psychiatry should be outlawed.\" In 2005, he criticized actress Brooke Shields for using the drug Paxil (paroxetine), an antidepressant which she used to recover from postpartum depression after the birth of her first daughter in 2003. Cruise asserted that there is no such thing as a chemical imbalance and that psychiatry is a form of pseudoscience. In response, Shields argued that Cruise \"should stick to saving the world from aliens and let women who are experiencing postpartum depression decide what treatment options are best for them.\" This led to a heated argument between Cruise and Matt Lauer on NBC's \"Today\" on June 24, 2005.\nMedical authorities view Cruise's comments as furthering the social stigma of mental illness. From \"The Lancet\", \"He may be right that psychotropic drugs are overused, sometimes misused; and that lifestyle changes (and exercise for depression) can be helpful. But he is wrong, as a celebrity, to add to the burden of those with a mental illness, who often fear seeking or continuing treatment because of the stigma still attached to their condition.\" Shields called Cruise's comments \"a disservice to mothers everywhere\". In late August 2006, Cruise apologized in person to Shields for his comments.\nScientology is well known for its opposition to mainstream psychiatry and psychoactive drugs that are routinely prescribed for treatment. It was reported that Cruise's anti-psychiatry actions led to a rift with director Steven Spielberg. Spielberg had reportedly mentioned in Cruise's presence the name of a doctor friend who prescribed psychiatric medication. Shortly thereafter, the doctor's office was picketed by Scientologists, reportedly angering Spielberg.\nYouTube video removal.\nOn January 15, 2008, a video produced by Church of Scientology featuring an interview with Cruise was posted on YouTube by the Anonymous-linked group Project Chanology, showing Cruise discussing what being a Scientologist means to him. Church of Scientology said the video had been \"pirated and edited\", and was taken from a three-hour video produced for members of Scientology. YouTube removed the Cruise video from their site under threat of litigation. It was subsequently reinstated on the site, and as of June 2020, the video has achieved over 15 million views.\nPurported influence.\nIn March 2004, Cruise's publicist of 14 years, Pat Kingsley, resigned. Cruise's next publicist was Lee Anne DeVette, his sister, who was herself a Scientologist. She served in that role until November 2005. DeVette was replaced with Paul Bloch from the publicity firm Rogers and Cowan. Such restructuring was seen as a move to curtail publicity of his views on Scientology, as well as the controversy surrounding his relationship with Katie Holmes.\nLawrence Wright's 2013 book \"Going Clear: Scientology and the Prison of Belief\" and Alex Gibney's 2015 documentary adaptation of the book cast a spotlight on Cruise's role in Scientology. The book and the film both state that the Scientology organization groomed romantic partners for Cruise and that Cruise used Sea Org and Rehabilitation Project Force workers as a source of free labor. In the film, Cruise's former auditor Marty Rathbun says that Cruise's then-wife Nicole Kidman was wiretapped on Cruise's suggestion, which Cruise's lawyer denies. Cruise's ex-girlfriend Nazanin Boniadi later compared the Scientology organization's auditioning of women to date Cruise and experiences with him to \"white slavery\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31461", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31461", "title": "Labor union", "text": ""}
