{"id": "38791", "revid": "30211467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38791", "title": "Hunting", "text": "Searching, pursuing, and killing wild animals\nHunting is the human practice of seeking, pursuing, capturing, and killing wildlife or feral animals. The most common reasons for humans to hunt are to obtain the animal's body for meat and useful animal products (fur/hide, bone/tusks, horn/antler, etc.), for recreation/taxidermy (see trophy hunting), although it may also be done for resourceful reasons such as removing predators dangerous to humans or domestic animals (e.g. wolf hunting), to eliminate pests and nuisance animals that damage crops/livestock/poultry or spread diseases (see varminting), for trade/tourism (see safari), or for ecological conservation against overpopulation and invasive species (commonly called a cull).\nRecreationally hunted species are generally referred to as the \"game\", and are usually mammals and birds. A person participating in a hunt is a hunter or (less commonly) huntsman; a natural area used for hunting is called a game reserve; and an experienced hunter who helps organise a hunt and/or manage the game reserve is also known as a gamekeeper.\nHunting activities by humans arose in \"Homo erectus\" or earlier, in the order of millions of years ago. Hunting has become deeply embedded in various human cultures and was once an important part of rural economies\u2014classified by economists as part of primary production alongside forestry, agriculture, and fishery. Modern regulations (see game law) distinguish lawful hunting activities from illegal poaching, which involves the unauthorised and unregulated killing, trapping, or capture of animals.\nApart from food provision, hunting can be a means of population control. Hunting advocates state that regulated hunting can be a necessary component of modern wildlife management, for example to help maintain a healthy proportion of animal populations within an environment's ecological carrying capacity when natural checks such as natural predators are absent or insufficient, or to provide funding for breeding programs and maintenance of natural reserves and conservation parks. However, excessive hunting has also heavily contributed to the endangerment, extirpation and extinction of many animals. Some animal rights and anti-hunting activists regard hunting as a cruel, perverse and unnecessary blood sport. Certain hunting practices, such as canned hunts and ludicrously paid/bribed trophy tours (especially to poor countries), are considered unethical and exploitative even by some hunters.\nMarine mammals such as whales and pinnipeds are also targets of hunting, both recreationally and commercially, often with heated controversies regarding the morality, ethics and legality of such practices. The pursuit, harvesting or catch and release of fish and aquatic cephalopods and crustaceans is called fishing, which however is widely accepted and not commonly categorised as a form of hunting. It is also not considered hunting to pursue animals without intent to kill them, as in wildlife photography, birdwatching, or scientific-research activities which involve tranquilizing or tagging of animals, although green hunting is still called so. The practices of netting or trapping insects and other arthropods for trophy collection, or the foraging or gathering of plants and mushrooms, are also not regarded as hunting.\nSkillful tracking and acquisition of an elusive target has caused the word \"hunt\" to be used in the vernacular as a metaphor for searching and obtaining something, as in \"treasure hunting\", \"bargain hunting\", \"hunting for votes\" and even \"hunting down\" corruption and waste.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"hunt\" serves as both a noun (\"the act, the practice, or an instance of hunting\") and a verb (\"to pursue for food or in sport\"). The noun has been dated to the early 12th century, from the verb \"hunt\". Old English had \"huntung, hunto\u00fe\". The meaning of \"a body of persons associated for the purpose of hunting with a pack of hounds\" is first recorded in the 1570s. \"The act of searching for someone or something\" is from about 1600.\nThe verb, Old English \"huntian\" \"to chase game\" (transitive and intransitive), perhaps developed from \"hunta\" \"hunter,\" is related to \"hentan\" \"to seize,\" from Proto-Germanic \"huntojan\" (the source also of Gothic \"hin\u00fean\" \"to seize, capture,\" Old High German \"hunda\" \"booty\"), which is of uncertain origin. The general sense of \"search diligently\" (for anything) is first recorded c. 1200.\nHistory.\nLower to Middle Paleolithic.\nHunting has a long history. It predates the emergence of \"Homo sapiens\" (anatomically modern humans) and may even predate the genus \"Homo\".\nThe oldest undisputed evidence for hunting dates to the Early Pleistocene, consistent with the emergence and early dispersal of \"Homo erectus\" about 1.7 million years ago (Acheulean).\nWhile it is undisputed that \"Homo erectus\" were hunters, the importance of this for the emergence of \"Homo erectus\" from its australopithecine ancestors, including the production of stone tools and eventually the control of fire, is emphasised in the so-called \"hunting hypothesis\" and de-emphasised in scenarios that stress omnivory and social interaction.\nThere is no direct evidence for hunting predating \"Homo erectus\", in either \"Homo habilis\" or in \"Australopithecus\".\nThe early hominid ancestors of humans were probably frugivores or omnivores, with a partially carnivorous diet from scavenging rather than hunting.\nEvidence for australopithecine meat consumption was presented in the 1990s.\nIt has nevertheless often been assumed that at least occasional hunting behaviour may have been present well before the emergence of \"Homo\".This can be argued on the basis of comparison with chimpanzees, the closest extant relatives of humans, who also engage in hunting, indicating that the behavioural trait may have been present in the Chimpanzee\u2013human last common ancestor as early as 5 million years ago. The common chimpanzee (\"Pan troglodytes\") regularly engages in troop predation behaviour, where bands of beta males are led by an alpha male. Bonobos (\"Pan paniscus\") have also been observed to occasionally engage in group hunting, although more rarely than \"Pan troglodytes\", mainly subsisting on a frugivorous diet.\nIndirect evidence for Oldowan era hunting, by early \"Homo\" or late \"Australopithecus\", has been presented in a 2009 study based on\nan Oldowan site in southwestern Kenya.\nLouis Binford (1986) criticised the idea that early hominids and early humans were hunters. On the basis of the analysis of the skeletal remains of the consumed animals, he concluded that hominids and early humans were mostly scavengers, not hunters,\nBlumenschine (1986) proposed the idea of \"confrontational scavenging\", which involves challenging and scaring off other predators after they have made a kill, which he suggests could have been the leading method of obtaining protein-rich meat by early humans.\nStone spearheads dated as early as 500,000 years ago were found in South Africa. Wood does not preserve well, however, and Craig Stanford, a primatologist and professor of anthropology at the University of Southern California, has suggested that the discovery of spear use by chimpanzees probably means that early humans used wooden spears as well, perhaps, five million years ago.\nThe earliest dated find of surviving wooden hunting spears dates to the very end of the Lower Paleolithic, about 300,000 years ago. The Sch\u00f6ningen spears, found in 1976 in Germany, are associated with \"Homo heidelbergensis\".\nThe hunting hypothesis sees the emergence of behavioral modernity in the Middle Paleolithic as directly related to hunting, including mating behaviour, the establishment of language, culture, and religion, mythology and animal sacrifice. Sociologist David Nibert of Wittenberg University argues that the emergence of the organized hunting of animals undermined the communal, egalitarian nature of early human societies, with the status of women and less powerful males declining as the status of men quickly became associated with their success at hunting, which also increased human violence within these societies. However, 9000-year-old remains of a female hunter along with a toolkit of projectile points and animal processing implements were discovered at the Andean site of Wilamaya Patjxa, Puno District in Peru.\nEarly humans progressively invented tools and techniques for trapping animals. The earliest spears were crafted from wood, with tips toughened by burning. By 15,000 BC, hunters employed wooden and bone spear-launchers to enhance force and distance. These devices were frequently adorned with carvings of creatures.\nUpper Paleolithic to Mesolithic.\nEvidence exists that hunting may have been one of the multiple, or possibly main, environmental factors leading to the Holocene extinction of megafauna and their replacement by smaller herbivores.\nHumans are thought to have played a very significant role in the extinction of the Australian megafauna that was widespread prior to human occupation.\nHunting was a crucial component of hunter-gatherer societies before the domestication of livestock and the dawn of agriculture, beginning about 11,000 years ago in some parts of the world. In addition to the spear, hunting weapons developed during the Upper Paleolithic include the atlatl (a spear-thrower; before 30,000 years ago) and the bow (18,000 years ago). By the Mesolithic, hunting strategies had diversified with the development of these more far-reaching weapons and the domestication of the dog about 15,000 years ago. Evidence puts the earliest known mammoth hunting in Asia with spears to approximately 16,200 years ago.\nMany species of animals have been hunted throughout history. One theory is that in North America and Eurasia, caribou and wild reindeer \"may well be the species of single greatest importance in the entire anthropological literature on hunting\" (see also Reindeer Age), although the varying importance of different species depended on the geographic location.\nMesolithic hunter-gathering lifestyles remained prevalent in some parts of the Americas, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Siberia, as well as all of Australia, until the European Age of Discovery. They still persist in some tribal societies, albeit in rapid decline. Peoples that preserved Paleolithic hunting-gathering until the recent past include some indigenous peoples of the Amazonas (Ach\u00e9), some Central and Southern African (San people), some peoples of New Guinea (Fayu), the Mlabri of Thailand and Laos, the Vedda people of Sri Lanka, and a handful of uncontacted peoples. In Africa, one of the last remaining hunter-gatherer tribes are the Hadza of Tanzania.\nNeolithic and Antiquity.\nEven as animal domestication became relatively widespread and after the development of agriculture, hunting usually remained a significant contributor to the human food-supply. \nThe supplementary meat and materials from hunting included protein, bone for implements, sinew for cordage, fur, feathers, rawhide and leather used in clothing.\nHunting is still vital in marginal climates, especially those unsuited for pastoral uses or for agriculture. For example, Inuit in the Arctic trap and hunt animals for clothing and use the skins of sea mammals to make kayaks, clothing, and footwear.\nOn ancient reliefs, especially from Mesopotamia, kings are often depicted by sculptors as hunters of big game such as lions and are often portrayed hunting from a war chariot - early examples of royalty symbolically and militaristically engaging in hunting\nas \"the sport of kings\".\nThe cultural and psychological importance of hunting in ancient societies is represented by deities such as the horned god Cernunnos and lunar goddesses of classical antiquity, the Greek Artemis or Roman Diana. Taboos are often related to hunting, and mythological association of prey species with a divinity could be reflected in hunting restrictions such as a reserve surrounding a temple. Euripides' tale of Artemis and Actaeon, for example, may be seen as a caution against disrespect of prey or against impudent boasting.\nWith the domestication of the dog, birds of prey, and the ferret, various forms of animal-aided hunting developed, including venery (scent-hound hunting, such as fox hunting), coursing (sight-hound hunting), falconry, and ferreting. While these are all associated with medieval hunting, over time, various dog breeds were selected by humans for very precise tasks during the hunt, reflected in such names as \"pointer\" and \"setter\".\nPastoral and agricultural societies.\nEven as agriculture and animal husbandry became more prevalent, hunting often remained as a part of human culture where the environment and social conditions allowed. Hunter-gatherer societies persisted, even when increasingly confined to marginal areas. And within agricultural systems, hunting served to kill animals that prey upon domestic and wild animals or to attempt to extirpate animals seen by humans as competition for resources such as water or forage.\nWhen hunting moved from a subsistence activity to a selective one, two trends emerged:\nThe meaning of the word \"game\" in Middle English evolved to include an animal which is hunted. As the domestication of animals for meat grew, subsistence hunting remained among the lowest classes; however, the stylised pursuit of game in European societies became a luxury. Dangerous hunting, such as for lions or wild boars, often done on horseback or from a chariot, had a function similar to tournaments and manly sports. Hunting ranked as an honourable, somewhat competitive pastime to help the aristocracy practice skills of war in times of peace.\nIn most parts of medieval Europe, the upper class obtained the sole rights to hunt in certain areas of a feudal territory. Game in these areas was used as a source of food and furs, often provided via professional huntsmen, but it was also expected to provide a form of recreation for the aristocracy. The importance of this proprietary view of game can be seen in the Robin Hood legends, in which one of the primary charges against the outlaws is that they \"hunt the King's deer\". In contrast, settlers in Anglophone colonies gloried democratically in hunting for all.\nIn medieval Europe, hunting was considered by Johannes Scotus Eriugena to be part of the set of \"seven mechanical arts\".\nUse of dog.\nAlthough various other animals have been used to aid the hunter, such as ferrets, the dog has assumed many very important uses to the hunter. \nThe domestication of the dog has led to a symbiotic relationship in which the dog's independence from humans is deferred. Though dogs can survive independently of humans, and in many cases do ferally, when raised or adopted by humans the species tends to defer to its control in exchange for habitation, food and support.\nDogs today are used to find, chase, retrieve, and sometimes kill game. Dogs allow humans to pursue and kill prey that would otherwise be very difficult or dangerous to hunt. Different breeds of specifically bred hunting dog are used for different types of hunting. Waterfowl are commonly hunted using retrieving dogs such as the Labrador Retriever, the Golden Retriever, the Chesapeake Bay Retriever, the Brittany Spaniel, and other similar breeds. Game birds are flushed out using flushing spaniels such as the English Springer Spaniel, the various Cocker Spaniels and similar breeds.\nThe hunting of wild mammals in England and Wales with dogs was banned under the Hunting Act 2004. The wild mammals include fox, hare, deer and mink. There are, however, exceptions in the Act. Nevertheless, there have been numerous attempts on behalf of activists, pressure groups, etc. to revoke the act over the last two decades.\nReligion.\nMany prehistoric deities are depicted as predators or prey of humans, often in a zoomorphic form, perhaps alluding to the importance of hunting for most Palaeolithic cultures.\nIn many pagan religions, specific rituals are conducted before or after a hunt; the rituals done may vary according to the species hunted or the season the hunt is taking place. Often a hunting ground, or the hunt for one or more species, was reserved or prohibited in the context of a temple cult. In Roman religion, Diana is the goddess of the hunt.\nIndian and Eastern religions.\nHindu scriptures describe hunting as an occupation, as well as a sport of the kingly. Even figures considered divine are described to have engaged in hunting. One of the names of the god Shiva is Mrigavyadha (deer-slayer). The word \"Mriga\", in many Indian languages including Malayalam, not only stands for deer, but for all animals and animal instincts (Mriga Thrishna). Shiva, as Mrigavyadha, is the one who destroys the animal instincts in human beings. In the epic Ramayana, Dasharatha, the father of Rama, is said to have the ability to hunt in the dark. During one of his hunting expeditions, he accidentally killed Shravana, mistaking him for game. During Rama's exile in the forest, Ravana kidnapped his wife, Sita, from their hut, while Rama was asked by Sita to capture a golden deer, and his brother Lakshman went after him. According to the Mahabharat, Pandu, the father of the Pandavas, accidentally killed the sage Kindama and his wife with an arrow, mistaking them for a deer.\nJainism teaches followers to have tremendous respect for all of life. Prohibitions for hunting and meat eating are the fundamental conditions for being a Jain.\nBuddhism's first precept is the respect for all sentient life. The general approach by all Buddhists is to avoid killing any living animals. Buddha explained the issue by saying \"all fear death; comparing others with oneself, one should neither kill nor cause to kill.\"\nIn Sikhism, only meat obtained from hunting, or slaughtered with the Jhatka is permitted. The Sikh gurus, especially Guru Hargobind and Guru Gobind Singh were ardent hunters. Many old Sikh Rehatnamas like Prem Sumarag, recommend hunting wild boar and deer. However, among modern Sikhs, the practice of hunting has died down; some even saying that all meat is forbidden.\nChristianity, Judaism, and Islam.\nFrom early Christian times, hunting has been forbidden to Roman Catholic Church clerics. Thus the \"Corpus Juris Canonici\" (C. ii, X, De cleric. venat.) says, \"We forbid to all servants of God hunting and expeditions through the woods with hounds; and we also forbid them to keep hawks or falcons.\" The Fourth Council of the Lateran, held under Pope Innocent III, decreed (canon xv): \"We interdict hunting or hawking to all clerics.\" The decree of the Council of Trent is worded more mildly: \"Let clerics abstain from illicit hunting and hawking\" (Sess. XXIV, De reform., c. xii), which seems to imply that not all hunting is illicit, and canonists generally make a distinction declaring noisy (\"clamorosa\") hunting unlawful, but not quiet (\"quieta\") hunting.\nFerraris gives it as the general sense of canonists that hunting is allowed to clerics if it be indulged in rarely and for sufficient cause, as necessity, utility or \"honest\" recreation, and with that moderation which is becoming to the ecclesiastical state. Ziegler, however, thinks that the interpretation of the canonists is not in accordance with the letter or spirit of the laws of the church.\nNevertheless, although a distinction between lawful and unlawful hunting is undoubtedly permissible, it is certain that a bishop can absolutely prohibit all hunting to the clerics of his diocese, as was done by synods at Milan, Avignon, Li\u00e8ge, Cologne, and elsewhere. Benedict XIV declared that such synodal decrees are not too severe, as an absolute prohibition of hunting is more conformable to the ecclesiastical law. In practice, therefore, the synodal statutes of various localities must be consulted to discover whether they allow quiet hunting or prohibit it altogether. Small-scale hunting as a family or subsistence farming activity is recognised by Pope Francis in his encyclical letter, Laudato si', as a legitimate and valuable aspect of employment within the food production system.\nHunting is not forbidden in Jewish law, although there is an aversion to it. The great 18th-century authority Rabbi Yechezkel Landau after a study concluded although \"hunting would not be considered cruelty to animals insofar as the animal is generally killed quickly and not tortured... There is an unseemly element in it, namely cruelty.\" The other issue is that hunting can be dangerous and Judaism places an extreme emphasis on the value of human life.\nIslamic Sharia Law permits hunting of lawful animals and birds if they cannot be easily caught and slaughtered. However, this is only for the purpose of food and not for trophy hunting.\nNational traditions.\nEast Africa.\nA safari, from a Swahili word meaning \"journey, expedition,\" especially in Africa, is defined as a journey to see or kill animals in their natural environment, most commonly in East Africa. Safari as a distinctive way of hunting was popularized by the US author Ernest Hemingway and President Theodore Roosevelt. A safari may consist of a several-days\u2014or even weeks-long journey, with camping in the bush or jungle, while pursuing big game. Nowadays, it is often used to describe hunting tours through African wildlife.\nHunters are usually tourists, accompanied by licensed and highly regulated professional hunters, local guides, skinners, and porters in more difficult terrains. A special safari type is the solo-safari, where all the license acquiring, stalking, preparation, and outfitting is done by the hunter himself.\nIndian subcontinent.\nDuring the feudal and colonial times in British India, hunting or \"shikar\" was regarded as a regal sport in the numerous princely states, as many maharajas and nawabs, as well as British officers, maintained a whole corps of \"shikari\"s (big-game hunters), who were native professional hunters. They would be headed by a master of the hunt, who might be styled \"mir-shikar\". Often, they recruited the normally low-ranking local tribes because of their traditional knowledge of the environment and hunting techniques. Big game, such as Bengal tigers, might be hunted from the back of an Indian elephant.\nRegional social norms are generally antagonistic to hunting, while a few sects, such as the Bishnoi, lay special emphasis on the conservation of particular species, such as the antelope. India's Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 bans the killing of all wild animals. However, the Chief Wildlife Warden may, if satisfied that any wild animal from a specified list has become dangerous to human life or is so disabled or diseased as to be beyond recovery, permit any person to hunt such an animal. In this case, the body of any wild animal killed or wounded becomes government property.\nThe practice among the soldiers in British India during the 1770s of going out to hunt snipes, a shorebird considered extremely challenging for hunters due to its alertness, camouflaging colour and erratic flight behavior, is believed to be the origin of the modern word for sniper, as snipe-hunters needed to be stealthy in addition to having tracking skills and marksmanship. The term was used in the nineteenth century, and had become common usage by the First World War.\nUnited Kingdom.\nUnarmed fox hunting on horseback with hounds is the type of hunting most closely associated with the United Kingdom; in fact, \"hunting\" without qualification implies fox hunting. What in other countries is called \"hunting\" is called \"shooting\" (birds) or \"stalking\" (deer) in Britain. Fox hunting is a social activity for the upper classes, with roles strictly defined by wealth and status. Similar to fox hunting in many ways is the chasing of hares with hounds. Pairs of sighthounds (or long-dogs), such as greyhounds, may be used to pursue a hare in coursing, where the greyhounds are marked as to their skill in coursing the hare (but are not intended to actually catch it), or the hare may be pursued with scent hounds such as beagles or harriers. Other sorts of foxhounds may also be used for hunting stags (deer) or mink. Deer stalking with rifles is carried out on foot without hounds, using stealth.\nThese forms of hunting have been controversial in the UK. Animal welfare supporters believe that hunting causes unnecessary suffering to foxes, horses, and hounds. Proponents argue that the activity is a historical tradition. Using dogs to chase wild mammals was made illegal in February 2005 by the Hunting Act 2004; there were a number of exemptions (under which the activity may not be illegal) in the act for hunting with hounds, but no exemptions at all for hare-coursing.\nShooting traditions.\nGame birds, especially pheasants and red grouse, are shot with shotguns for sport in the UK; the British Association for Shooting and Conservation says that over a million people per year participate in shooting, including game shooting, clay pigeon shooting, and target shooting.\nShooting as practiced in Britain, as opposed to traditional hunting, requires little questing for game\u2014around thirty-five million birds are released onto shooting estates every year, some having been factory farmed. Shoots can be elaborate affairs with guns placed in assigned positions and assistants to help load shotguns. When in position, \"beaters\" move through the areas of cover, swinging sticks or flags to drive the game out. Such events are often called \"drives\" / driven hunting / driven hunt (e.g., driven grouse shooting). The open season for grouse in the UK begins on 12 August, the so-called Glorious Twelfth. The definition of game in the United Kingdom is governed by the Game Act 1831 (1 &amp; 2 Will. 4. c. 32).\nA similar tradition, \"ojeo\", exists in Spain.\nUnited States.\nNorth American hunting pre-dates the United States by thousands of years and was an important part of many pre-Columbian Native American cultures. Native Americans retain some hunting rights and are exempt from some laws as part of Indian treaties and otherwise under federal law\u2014examples include eagle feather laws and exemptions in the Marine Mammal Protection Act. This is considered particularly important in Alaskan native communities.\nGun usage in hunting is typically regulated by game category, area within the state, and time period. Regulations for big-game hunting often specify a minimum caliber or muzzle energy for firearms. The use of rifles is often banned for safety reasons in areas with high population densities or limited topographic relief. Regulations may also limit or ban the use of lead in ammunition because of environmental concerns. Specific seasons for bow hunting or muzzle-loading black-powder guns are often established to limit competition with hunters using more effective weapons.\nHunting in the United States is not associated with any particular class or culture; a 2006 poll showed seventy-eight per cent of Americans supported legal hunting, although relatively few Americans actually hunt. At the beginning of the 21st century, just six per cent of Americans hunted. Southerners in states along the eastern seaboard hunted at a rate of five per cent, slightly below the national average, and while hunting was more common in other parts of the South at nine per cent, these rates did not surpass those of the Plains states, where twelve per cent of Midwesterners hunted. Hunting in other areas of the country fell below the national average. Overall, in the 1996\u20132006 period, the number of hunters over the age of sixteen declined by ten per cent, a drop attributable to a number of factors including habitat loss and changes in recreation habits.\nThe principles of the fair chase have been a part of the American hunting tradition for over one hundred years. The role of the hunter-conservationist, popularised by Theodore Roosevelt, and perpetuated by Roosevelt's formation of the Boone and Crockett Club, has been central to the development of the modern fair chase tradition. \"Beyond Fair Chase: The Ethic and Tradition of Hunting\", a book by Jim Posewitz, describes fair chase:\n\"Fundamental to ethical hunting is the idea of fair chase. This concept addresses the balance between the hunter and the hunted. It is a balance that allows hunters to occasionally succeed while animals generally avoid being taken.\"\nWhen Internet hunting was introduced in 2005, allowing people to hunt over the Internet using remotely controlled guns, the practice was widely criticised by hunters as violating the principles of fair chase. As a representative of the National Rifle Association of America (NRA) explained, \"The NRA has always maintained that fair chase, being in the field with your firearm or bow, is an important element of hunting tradition. Sitting at your desk in front of your computer, clicking at a mouse, has nothing to do with hunting.\"\nAnimals such as blackbuck, nilgai, axis deer, fallow deer, zebras, barasingha, gazelle and many other exotic game species can now be found on game farms and ranches in Texas, where they were introduced for sport hunting. These hunters can be found paying in excess of $10,000 to take trophy animals on these controlled ranches.\nRussia.\nThe Russian imperial hunts evolved from hunting traditions of early Russian rulers\u2014Grand Princes and Tsars\u2014under the influence of hunting customs of European royal courts. The imperial hunts were organised mainly in Peterhof, Tsarskoye Selo, and Gatchina.\nAustralia.\nHunting in Australia has evolved around the hunting and eradication of various animals considered to be pests or invasive species . All native animals are protected by law, and certain species such as kangaroos and ducks can be hunted by licensed shooters but only under a special permit on public lands during open seasons. The introduced species that are targeted include European rabbits, red foxes, deer (sambar, hog, red, fallow, chital and rusa), feral cats, pigs, goats, brumbies, donkeys and occasionally camels, as well as introduced upland birds such as quails, pheasants and partridges.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand has a strong hunting culture. When humans arrived, the only mammals present on the islands making up New Zealand were bats, although seals and other marine mammals were present along the coasts. However, when humans arrived they brought other species with them. Polynesian voyagers introduced kuri (dogs), kiore (Polynesian rats), as well as a range of plant species. European explorers further added to New Zealand's biota, particularly pigs which were introduced by either Captain Cook or the French explorer De Surville in the 1700s. During the nineteenth century, as European colonisation took place, acclimatisation societies were established. The societies introduced a large number of species with no use other than as prey for hunting. Species that adapted well to the New Zealand terrain include deer, pigs, goats, hare, tahr and chamois. With wilderness areas, suitable forage, and no natural predators, their populations exploded. Government agencies view the animals as pests due to their effects on the natural environment and on agricultural production, but hunters view them as a resource.\nIran.\nIranian tradition regarded hunting as an essential part of a prince's education, and hunting was well recorded for the education of the upper-class youths during pre-Islamic Persia. As of October 2020, a hunting licensee costs $20,000. The Department of Environment although do not report the number of permits issued.\nJapan.\nThe numbers of licensed hunters in Japan, including those using snares and guns, is generally decreasing, while their average age is increasing. As of 2010[ [update]], there were approximately 190,000 registered hunters, approximately 65% of whom were sixty years old or older.\nTrinidad and Tobago.\nThere is a very active tradition of hunting small to medium-sized wild game in Trinidad and Tobago. Hunting is carried out with firearms, slingshots and cage traps, and sometimes aided by the use of hounds. The illegal use of trap guns and snare nets also occurs. With approximately 12,000 to 13,000 hunters applying for and being granted hunting permits in recent years, there is some concern that the practice might not be sustainable. In addition, there are at present no bag limits and the open season is comparatively very long (5 months \u2013 October to February inclusive). As such hunting pressure from legal hunters is very high. Added to that, there is a thriving and very lucrative black market for poached wild game (sold and enthusiastically purchased as expensive luxury delicacies) and the numbers of commercial poachers in operation is unknown but presumed to be fairly high. As a result, the populations of the five major mammalian game species (red-rumped agouti, lowland paca, nine-banded armadillo, collared peccary and red brocket deer) are thought to be relatively low when compared to less-hunted regions in nearby mainland South America (although scientifically conducted population studies are only just recently being conducted as of 2013[ [update]]). It appears that the red brocket deer population has been extirpated in Tobago as a result of over-hunting. By some time in the mid 20th century another extirpation due to over-hunting occurred in Trinidad with its population of horned screamer (a large game bird). Various herons, ducks, doves, the green iguana, the cryptic golden tegu, the spectacled caiman, the common opossum and the capybara are also commonly hunted and poached. There is also some poaching of 'fully protected species', including red howler monkey and capuchin monkeys, southern tamandua, Brazilian porcupine, yellow-footed tortoise, the critically endangered island endemic Trinidad piping guan and even one of the national birds, the scarlet ibis. Legal hunters pay relatively small fees to obtain hunting licenses and undergo no official basic conservation biology or hunting-ethics/fair chase training and are not assessed regarding their knowledge and comprehension of the local wildlife conservation laws. There is presumed to be relatively little subsistence hunting in the country (with most hunting for either sport or commercial profit). The local wildlife management authorities are under-staffed and under-funded, and as such little in the way of enforcement is done to uphold existing wildlife management laws, with hunting/poaching occurring both in and out of season and even in wildlife sanctuaries. There is some indication that the government is beginning to take the issue of wildlife management more seriously, with well drafted legislation being brought before Parliament in 2015. It remains to be seen if the drafted legislation will be fully adopted and financially supported by the current and future governments, and if the general populace will move towards a greater awareness of the importance of wildlife conservation and change the culture of wanton consumption to one of sustainable management.\nWildlife management.\nHunting is claimed to give resource managers an important tool in managing populations that might exceed the carrying capacity of their habitat and threaten the well-being of other species, or, in some instances, damage human health or safety.\nIn some cases, hunting actually can increase the population of predators such as coyotes by removing territorial bounds that would otherwise be established, resulting in excess neighbouring migrations into an area, thus artificially increasing the population. Hunting advocates assert that hunting reduces intraspecific competition for food and shelter, reducing mortality among the remaining animals. Some environmentalists assert that (re)introducing predators would achieve the same end with greater efficiency and less negative effect, such as introducing significant amounts of free lead into the environment and food chain.\nIn the United States, wildlife managers are frequently part of hunting regulatory and licensing bodies, where they help to set rules on the number, manner and conditions in which game may be hunted.\nManagement agencies sometimes rely on hunting to control specific animal populations, as has been the case with deer in North America. These hunts may sometimes be carried out by professional shooters, although others may include amateur hunters. Many US city and local governments hire professional and amateur hunters each year to reduce populations of animals such as deer that are becoming hazardous in a restricted area, such as neighbourhood parks and metropolitan open spaces.\nA large part of managing populations involves managing the number and, sometimes, the size or age of animals harvested so as to ensure the sustainability of the population. Tools that are frequently used to control harvest are bag limits and season closures, although gear restrictions such as archery-only seasons are becoming increasingly popular in an effort to reduce hunter success rates in countries that rely on bag limits per hunter instead of per area.\nLaws.\nIllegal hunting and harvesting of wild species contrary to local and international conservation and wildlife management laws is called poaching. Game preservation is one of the tactics used to prevent poaching. Violations of hunting laws and regulations involving poaching are normally punishable by law. Punishment can include confiscation of equipment, fines or a prison sentence.\nRight to hunt.\nThe right to hunt\u2014sometimes in combination with the right to fish\u2014is protected implicitly, as a consequence of the right of ownership, or explicitly, as a right on its own, in a number of jurisdictions. For instance, as of 2019, a total of 22 U.S. states explicitly recognize a subjective right to hunt in their constitutions.\nBag limits.\nBag limits are provisions under the law that control how many animals of a given species or group of species can be killed, although there are often species for which bag limits do not apply. There are also jurisdictions where bag limits are not applied at all or are not applied under certain circumstances. The phrase \"bag limits\" come from the custom among hunters of small game to carry successful kills in a small basket, similar to a fishing creel.\nWhere bag limits are used, there can be daily or seasonal bag limits; for example, ducks can often be harvested at a rate of six per hunter per day. Big game, like moose, most often have a seasonal bag limit of one animal per hunter. Bag limits may also regulate the size, sex, or age of animal that a hunter can kill. In many cases, bag limits are designed to allocate harvest among the hunting population more equitably rather than to protect animal populations, as protecting the population would necessitate regional density-dependent maximum bags.\nClosed and open season.\nA closed season is a time during which hunting an animal of a given species is contrary to law. Typically, closed seasons are designed to protect a species when they are most vulnerable or to protect them during their breeding season. By extension, the period that is not the closed season is known as the open season.\nMethods.\nHistorical, subsistence, and sport hunting techniques can differ radically, with modern hunting regulations often addressing issues of where, when, and how hunts are conducted. Techniques may vary depending on government regulations, a hunter's personal ethics, local custom, hunting equipment, and the animal being hunted. Often a hunter will use a combination of more than one technique. Laws may forbid sport hunters from using some methods used primarily in poaching and wildlife management.\nTrophy hunting.\nTrophy hunting is the selective seeking and killing of wild game animals to take trophies for personal collection, bragging rights or as a status symbol. It may also include the controversial hunting of captive or semi-captive animals expressly bred and raised under controlled or semi-controlled conditions so as to attain trophy characteristics; this is sometimes known as canned hunts.\nHistory.\nIn the 19th century, southern and central European sport hunters often pursued game only for a trophy, usually the head or pelt of an animal, which was then displayed as a sign of prowess. The rest of the animal was typically discarded. Some cultures, however, disapprove of such waste. In Nordic countries, hunting for trophies was\u2014and still is\u2014frowned upon. Hunting in North America in the 19th century was done primarily as a way to supplement food supplies, although it is now undertaken mainly for sport. The safari method of hunting was a development of sport hunting that saw elaborate travel in Africa, India and other places in pursuit of trophies. In modern times, trophy hunting persists and is a significant industry in some areas.\nConservation tool.\nAccording to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, hunting \"provides an economic incentive\" for ranchers to continue to breed those species, and that hunting \"reduces the threat of the species' extinction.\"\nA scientific study in the journal, \"Biological Conservation\", states that trophy hunting is of \"major importance to conservation in Africa by creating economic incentives for conservation over vast areas, including areas which may be unsuitable for alternative wildlife-based land uses such as photographic ecotourism.\" However, another study states that less than 3% of a trophy hunters' expenditures reach the local level, meaning that the economic incentive and benefit is \"minimal, particularly when we consider the vast areas of land that hunting concessions occupy.\"\nFinancial incentives from trophy hunting effectively more than double the land area that is used for wildlife conservation, relative to what would be conserved relying on national parks alone according to \"Biological Conservation\", although local communities usually derive no more than 18 cents per hectare from trophy hunting.\nTrophy hunting has been considered essential for providing economic incentives to conserve large carnivores according to research studies in \"Conservation Biology\", \"Journal of Sustainable Tourism\", \"Wildlife Conservation by Sustainable Use\", and \"Animal Conservation\". Studies by the Centre for Responsible Tourism and the IUCN state that ecotourism, which includes more than hunting, is a superior economic incentive, generating twice the revenue per acre and 39 times more permanent employment. At the cross-section of trophy hunting, ecotourism and conservation is green hunting, a trophy hunting alternative where hunters pay to dart animals that need to be tranquilized for conservation projects.\nThe U.S. House Committee on Natural Resources in 2016 concluded that trophy hunting may be contributing to the extinction of certain animals. Animal welfare organizations, including the International Fund for Animal Welfare, claim that trophy hunting is a key factor in the \"silent extinction\" of giraffes.\nAccording to a national survey that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service conducts every five years, fewer people are hunting, even as population rises. National Public Radio reported, a graph shows 2016 statistics, that only about 5 per cent of Americans, 16 years old and older, actually hunt, which is half of what it was 50 years ago. The decline in popularity of hunting is expected to accelerate over the next decade, which threatens how US will pay for conservation.\nControversy.\nTrophy hunting is most often criticised when it involves rare or endangered animals. Opponents may also see trophy hunting as an issue of morality or animal cruelty, criticising the killing of living creatures for recreation. Victorian era dramatist W. S. Gilbert remarked, \"Deer-stalking would be a very fine sport if only the deer had guns.\"\nThere is also debate about the extent to which trophy hunting benefits the local economy. Hunters pay substantial fees to the game outfitters and hunting guides which contributes to the local economy and provides value to animals that would otherwise be seen as competition for grazing, livestock, and crops. However, the argument is disputed by animal welfare organizations and other opponents of trophy hunting. It is argued that the animals are worth more to the community for ecotourism than hunting.\nEconomics.\nA variety of industries benefit from hunting and support hunting on economic grounds. In Tanzania, it is estimated that a safari hunter spends fifty to one hundred times that of the average ecotourist. While the average photo tourist may seek luxury accommodation, the average safari hunter generally stays in tented camps. Safari hunters are also more likely to use remote areas, uninviting to the typical ecotourist. Advocates argue that these hunters allow for anti-poaching activities and revenue for local communities.\nIn the United Kingdom, the game hunting of birds as an industry is said to be extremely important to the rural economy. The Cobham Report of 1997 suggested it to be worth around \u00a3700\u00a0million, and hunting and shooting lobby groups claimed it to be worth over a billion pounds less than ten years later.\nHunting also has a significant financial impact in the United States, with many companies specialising in hunting equipment or speciality tourism. Many different technologies have been created to assist hunters. Today's hunters come from a broad range of economic, social, and cultural backgrounds. In 2001, over thirteen million hunters averaged eighteen days hunting, and spent over $20.5\u00a0billion on their sport. In the US, proceeds from hunting licenses contribute to state game management programs, including preservation of wildlife habitat.\nHunting contributes to a portion of caloric intake of people and may have positive impacts on greenhouse gas emissions by avoidance of utilization of meat raised under industrial methods.\nEnvironmental problems.\nLead bullets that miss their target or remain in an unretrieved carcass could become a toxicant in the environment but lead in ammunition because of its metallic form has a lower solubility and higher resistance to corrosion than other forms of lead making it hardly available to biological systems. Waterfowl or other birds may ingest the lead and poison themselves with the neurotoxicant, but studies have demonstrated that effects of lead in ammunition are negligible on animal population size and growth. Since 1991, US federal law forbids lead shot in waterfowl hunts, and 30 states have some type of restriction.\nIn December 2014, a federal appeals court denied a lawsuit by environmental groups that the EPA must use the Toxic Substances Control Act to regulate lead in shells and cartridges. The groups sought EPA to regulate \"spent lead\", yet the court found EPA could not regulate spent lead without also regulating cartridges and shells.\nConservation.\nHunters have been driving forces throughout history in the movement to ensure the preservation of wildlife habitats and wildlife for further hunting. However, excessive hunting and poachers have also contributed heavily to the endangerment, extirpation and extinction of many animals, such as the quagga, the great auk, Steller's sea cow, the thylacine, the bluebuck, the Arabian oryx, the Caspian and Javan tigers, the markhor, the Sumatran rhinoceros, the bison, the North American cougar, the Altai argali sheep, the Asian elephant and many more, primarily for commercial sale or sport. All these animals have been hunted to endangerment or extinction. Poaching currently threatens bird and mammalian populations around the world. The 2019 \"Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services\" lists the direct exploitation of organisms, including hunting, as the second leading cause of biodiversity loss, after land use for agriculture. In 2022, IPBES released another report which stated that unsustainable hunting, along with unsustainable logging and fishing, are primary drivers of the global extinction crisis. A 2023 study published in \"BioScience\" posited that the prioritizing of hunting by state agencies in the United States over the rewinding of key species is \"reinforcing\" the loss of biodiversity.\nLegislation.\nPittman\u2013Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act of 1937.\nIn 1937, American hunters successfully lobbied the US Congress to pass the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act, which placed an eleven per cent tax on all hunting equipment. This self-imposed tax now generates over $700\u00a0million each year and is used exclusively to establish, restore and protect wildlife habitats. The act is named for Nevada Senator Key Pittman and Virginia Congressman Absalom Willis Robertson.\nFederal Duck Stamp program.\nOn 16 March 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the Migratory Bird Hunting Stamp Act, which requires an annual stamp purchase by all hunters over the age of sixteen. The stamps are created on behalf of the program by the US Postal Service and depict wildlife artwork chosen through an annual contest. They play an important role in habitat conservation because ninety-eight per cent of all funds generated by their sale go directly toward the purchase or lease of wetland habitat for protection in the National Wildlife Refuge System. In addition to waterfowl, it is estimated that one third of the nation's endangered species seek food and shelter in areas protected using Duck Stamp funds.\nSince 1934, the sale of Federal Duck Stamps has generated $670\u00a0million, and helped to purchase or lease of habitat. The stamps serve as a license to hunt migratory birds, an entrance pass for all National Wildlife Refuge areas, and are also considered collector's items often purchased for aesthetic reasons outside of the hunting and birding communities. Although non-hunters buy a significant number of Duck Stamps, eighty-seven per cent of their sales are contributed by hunters. Distribution of funds is managed by the Migratory Bird Conservation Commission (MBCC).\nSpecies.\nArabian oryx.\nThe Arabian oryx, a species of large antelope, once inhabited much of the desert areas of the Middle East. Native Bedouin tribes had long hunted the oryx using camels and arrows. Oil exploration made the habitat increasingly accessible, and the species' striking appearance made it (along with the closely related scimitar-horned oryx and addax) a popular quarry for sport hunters, including foreign executives of oil companies. The use of automobiles and high-powered rifles destroyed their only advantage: speed, and they became extinct in the wild exclusively due to sport hunting in 1972. The scimitar-horned oryx followed suit, while the addax became critically endangered. However, the Arabian oryx has now made a comeback and been upgraded from \"extinct in the wild\" to \"vulnerable\" due to conservation efforts like captive breeding.\nMarkhor.\nThe markhor is an endangered species of wild goat which inhabits the mountains of Central Asia and Pakistan. The colonization of these regions by Britain gave British sport hunters access to the species, and they were hunted heavily, almost to the point of extinction. Only their willingness to breed in captivity and the inhospitability of their mountainous habitat prevented this. Despite these factors, the markhor is still endangered.\nAmerican bison.\nThe American bison is a large bovid which inhabited much of western North America prior to the 1800s, living on the prairies in large herds. However, the vast herds of bison attracted market hunters, who killed dozens of bison for their hides only, leaving the rest to rot. Thousands of these hunters quickly eliminated the bison herds, bringing the population from several million in the early 1800s to a few hundred by the 1880s. Conservation efforts have allowed the population to increase, but the bison remains near-threatened due to lack of habitat.\nWhite rhino.\nThe \"Journal of International Wildlife Law and Policy\" cites that the legalization of white rhinoceros hunting in South Africa motivated private landowners to reintroduce the species onto their lands. As a result, the country saw an increase in white rhinos from fewer than one hundred individuals to more than 11,000, even while a limited number were killed as trophies.\nHowever, the illegal hunting of rhinoceros for their horns is highly damaging to the population and is currently growing globally, with 1004 being killed in South Africa alone according to the most recent estimate. The White Rhino (along with the other 4 rhino species) are poached due to beliefs that the Rhinos horns can be used to cure Cancer, Arthritis and other diseases and illnesses, even though they are scientifically proven wrong.\nOther species.\nAccording to Richard Conniff, Namibia is home to 1,750 of the roughly 5,000 black rhinos surviving in the wild because it allows trophy hunting of various species. Namibia's mountain zebra population has increased to 27,000 from 1,000 in 1982. Elephants, which \"are gunned down elsewhere for their ivory\", have gone to 20,000 from 15,000 in 1995. Lions, which were on the brink of extinction \"from Senegal to Kenya\", are increasing in Namibia.\nIn contrast, Botswana in 2012 banned trophy hunting following a precipitous wildlife decline. The numbers of antelope plummeted across Botswana, with a resultant decline in predator numbers, while elephant numbers remained stable and hippopotamus numbers rose. According to the government of Botswana, trophy hunting is at least partly to blame for this, but many other factors, such as poaching, drought and habitat loss are also to blame. Uganda recently did the same, arguing that \"the share of benefits of sport hunting were lopsided and unlikely to deter poaching or improve [Uganda's] capacity to manage the wildlife reserves.\" In 2020, Botswana reopened trophy hunting on public lands.\nStudies.\nA study published by the Wildlife Society concluded that hunting and trapping are cost effective tools that reduce wildlife damage by reducing a population below the capacity of the environment to carry it and changing the behaviors of animals to stop them from causing damage. The study furthermore states that the cessation of hunting could cause wildlife to be severely harmed, rural property values to fall, and the incentive of landowners to maintain natural habitats to diminish.\nAlthough deforestation and forest degradation have long been considered the most significant threats to tropical biodiversity, across Southeast Asia (Northeast India, Indochina, Sundaland, Philippines) substantial areas of natural habitat have few wild animals (&gt;1\u00a0kg), bar a few hunting\u2010tolerant species.\nOpposition.\nAnimal rights activists argue that killing animals for sport is unethical, cruel, and unnecessary. They note the suffering and cruelty inflicted on animals hunted for sport: \"Many animals endure prolonged, painful deaths when they are injured but not killed by hunters. Hunting disrupts migration and hibernation patterns and destroys families.\" Animal rights activists also comment that hunting is not needed to maintain an ecological balance, and that \"nature takes care of its own\". They say that hunting can be combated on public lands by \"spread[ing] deer repellent or human hair (from barber shops) near hunting areas\". Animal rights activists also argue that hunting is speciesist:\nWhether hunters try to justify their killing by citing human deaths caused by wild animals, by making conservationist claims, by claiming that it's acceptable to hunt as long as the animals' bodies are eaten, or simply because of the pleasure it brings them, the fact remains that hunting is morally unacceptable if we consider the interests of nonhuman animals. Hunted animals endure fear and pain, and then are deprived of their lives. Understanding the injustices of speciesism and the interests of nonhuman animals makes it clear that human pleasure cannot justify nonhuman animals' pain.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38796", "revid": "38498248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38796", "title": "Sausthorpe", "text": "Village in Lincolnshire\nSausthorpe is a small village and civil parish in the East Lindsey district of Lincolnshire, England, east of Horncastle and north-west of Spilsby. It lies on the southern edge of the Lincolnshire Wolds \u2013 a designated Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty \u2013 in the valley of the River Lymn. Farming remains the dominant economic activity in the area. The population was 305 in the 2011 census and estimated at 306 in 2019.\nHeritage.\nDerivation.\nThe name is believed to derive from \"Sauthr's thorpe\", a farming settlement here in Viking times.\nChurch.\nThe parish church, dedicated to St Andrew, is a Grade II listed building, designed by Charles Kirk and built in 1842 on the site of an earlier medieval church. Its construction was sponsored by Rev. Francis A. Swan, Lord of the Manor and parish rector from 1819 until his death in 1878. The spire is a prominent landmark resembling on a smaller scale that of St. James Church, Louth, to the north.\nPelham Dale SSC \u2013 prosecuted and imprisoned for ritualist practices in 1876 and 1880, and so regarded as a martyr by Anglo-Catholics \u2013 was the parish priest from 1881 to 1892. His grave lies under the trees on the eastern side of the churchyard. Inside the church, several Dymoke family gravestones date from the 18th century, having been transferred from the earlier church.\nIn 1885 \"Kelly's Directory\" recorded Rev. Charles Trollope Swan LLB as living at Sausthorpe Hall, a \"modern mansion in a park of 30 acres\". He had inherited the roles of Lord of the Manor and Rector from his father, Francis Swan, in 1878. He granted the rectorate, including the rectory living, residence (the Old Hall, see below) and of glebe land, to T. Pelham Dale in 1882.\nFacilities.\nRev. Francis A. Swan built a National School for 50 children in 1860. It survived until 1983.\nThe parish of Sausthorpe had a population of 206 in 30 inhabited houses in 1831.\n\"Kelly's Directory\" recorded that in 1885 the area of the parish was , in which were grown wheat, barley and turnips, that Sausthorpe's population at the time of the 1881 census was 141, and that within the parish were a grocer, wheelwright, carrier, two farmers, a farmer-cum-beer retailer, and a farmer-surveyor.\nSausthorpe Hall is a late 18th-century Grade II listed country house, extended and remodelled in 1822.\nThe Old Hall is a Grade II* listed 15th-century house, with 16th and 18th-century alterations. It has rendering over red brick and the remains of a timber frame.\nHistorically there were three principal farms in the village: East Farm (the farmhouse is set back from the main road about one mile east of the village); Grange Farm (the farmhouse is on the main road at the eastern entry to the village); and Church Farm (the farmhouse, now known as Linden House, is on the corner of the crossroads at the centre of the village).\nTransport.\nSausthorpe lies on the main A158 road between Horncastle and Skegness. It is served by the Spilsby CallConnect weekday bus service, which must be ordered by phone in advance. The nearest railway station is Skegness ().\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38797", "revid": "20156010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38797", "title": "Arthur Andersen", "text": "1913\u20132002 American accounting firm\nArthur Andersen LLP was an American accounting firm based in Chicago that provided auditing, tax advising, consulting and other professional services to large corporations. By 2001, it had become one of the world's largest multinational corporations and was one of the \"Big Five\" accounting firms (along with Deloitte, Ernst &amp; Young, KPMG and PricewaterhouseCoopers). The firm collapsed by mid-2002, as details of its questionable accounting practices for energy company Enron and telecommunications company WorldCom were revealed amid the two high-profile bankruptcies. The scandals were a factor in the enactment of the Sarbanes\u2013Oxley Act of 2002.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nBorn on May 30, 1885, in Plano, Illinois, and orphaned at the age of 16, Arthur E. Andersen began working as a mail boy by day and attended school at night, eventually being hired as the assistant to the comptroller of Allis-Chalmers in Chicago. In 1908, after attending courses at night while working full-time, he graduated from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University with a bachelor's degree in business. That same year, at age 23, he became the youngest Certified Public Accountant in Illinois.\nIn 1913, Andersen and Clarence DeLany founded an accounting firm as Andersen, DeLany &amp; Co. The firm changed its name to Arthur Andersen &amp; Co. in 1918, as DeLany resigned from the firm. Arthur Andersen's first client was the Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company of Milwaukee, a company where Andersen had worked as a controller. In 1915, due to his many contacts there, the Milwaukee office was opened as the firm's second office. \nAndersen believed education was the basis upon which the new profession of accounting should be developed. He created the profession's first centralized training program and believed in training during normal working hours. In 1927, he was elected to the board of trustees of Northwestern University and served as its president from 1930 to 1932. He was also chairman of the board of CPA examiners of Illinois.\nReputation.\nAndersen, who headed the firm until his death in 1947, was a zealous supporter of high standards in the accounting industry. A stickler for honesty, he argued that accountants' responsibility was to investors, not their clients' management. This gave rise to the uniform look of all the so-called \"Arthur Androids\", as employees referred to themselves, the intent being to provide the same service the same way to all customers in all locations. For many years, Andersen's motto was \"Think straight, talk straight\"\u2014an axiom passed on from his mother. During the early years, it is reputed that Andersen was approached by an executive from a local rail utility to sign off on accounts containing flawed accounting, or else face the loss of a major client. Andersen refused in no uncertain terms, replying that there was \"not enough money in the city of Chicago\" to make him do it. The railroad fired Andersen, only to go bankrupt a few months later.\nArthur Andersen &amp; Co. also led the way in a number of areas of accounting standards. Being among the first to identify a possible sub-prime bust, Arthur Andersen dissociated itself from a number of clients in the 1970s.\nArthur Andersen &amp; Co. struggled to balance the need to maintain its faithfulness to accounting standards with its clients' desire to maximize profits, particularly in the era of quarterly earnings reports. The firm has been alleged to have been involved in the fraudulent accounting and auditing of Sunbeam Products, Waste Management, Asia Pulp &amp; Paper, the Baptist Foundation of Arizona, WorldCom, as well as Enron, among others.\nAndersen Consulting and Accenture.\nThe consulting wing of the firm became increasingly important during the 1970s and 1980s, growing at a much faster rate than the more established accounting, auditing, and tax practice. In a further effort to take advantage of economies of scale, Price Waterhouse and Arthur Andersen discussed a merger in 1989 but the negotiations failed, mainly because of conflicts of interest such as Andersen's strong commercial links with IBM and PW's audit of IBM, as well as the two firms' radically different cultures. It was said by those involved with the failed merger that at the end of the discussion, the partners at the table realized they had different views of business, and the potential merger was scrapped.\nIn 1989, Arthur Andersen and Andersen Consulting became separate units of Andersen Worldwide Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Coop\u00e9rative. The two businesses spent most of the 1990s in a bitter dispute. Andersen Consulting saw a huge surge in profits during the decade. The consultants, however, continued to resent transfer payments they were required to make to Arthur Andersen. In August 2000, at the conclusion of International Chamber of Commerce arbitration of the dispute, the arbitrators granted Andersen Consulting its independence from Arthur Andersen, but awarded $1.2 billion in past payments (held in escrow pending the ruling) to Arthur Andersen, and declared that Andersen Consulting could no longer use the Andersen name. As a result, Andersen Consulting changed its name to Accenture on January 1, 2001, and Arthur Andersen, having the right to the Andersen Consulting name, rebranded itself to \"Andersen\".\nFour hours after the arbitrator made his ruling, Arthur Andersen CEO Jim Wadia resigned. Industry analysts and business school professors alike viewed the event as a complete victory for Andersen Consulting. Wadia would provide insight on his resignation years later at a Harvard Business school case activity about the split. It turned out that the Arthur Andersen board passed a resolution saying he had to resign if he did not get at least an incremental $4 billion (either through negotiation or via the arbitrator decision) for the consulting practice to split off, hence his quick resignation once the decision was announced.\nAccounts vary on why the split occurred\u2014executives on both sides of the split cite greed and arrogance on the part of the other side. The executives on the Andersen Consulting side maintained it was a breach of contract when Arthur Andersen created a second consulting group, AABC (Arthur Andersen Business Consulting) which competed directly with Andersen Consulting in the marketplace.\nEnron scandal.\nFollowing the 2001 scandal in which energy giant Enron was found to have fraudulently reported $100 billion in revenue through institutional and systematic accounting fraud, leading to its bankruptcy \u2013 the largest corporate bankruptcy in American history at the time \u2013 Andersen's performance and alleged complicity as an auditor came under intense scrutiny. Sherron Watkins, the Enron whistleblower who had previously been an Andersen auditor before becoming Enron's Vice President of Corporate Development, also implicated Andersen while testifying to Congress. \nThe Powers Committee (appointed by Enron's board to look into the firm's accounting in October 2001) came to the following assessment: \"The evidence available to us suggests that Andersen did not fulfill its professional responsibilities in connection with its audits of Enron's financial statements, or its obligation to bring to the attention of Enron's Board (or the Audit and Compliance Committee) concerns about Enron's internal contracts over the related-party transactions\".\nOn June 15, 2002, Andersen was convicted of obstruction of justice for shredding documents related to its audit of Enron. Although the Supreme Court reversed the firm's conviction, the impact of the scandal combined with the findings of criminal complicity ultimately destroyed the firm. Nancy Temple (in the firm's legal department) and David Duncan (lead partner for the Enron account) were cited as the responsible managers in the scandal because they ordered subordinates to shred relevant documents.\nBecause the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission does not accept audits from convicted felons, the firm agreed to surrender its CPA licenses and its right to practice before the SEC on August 31, 2002\u2014effectively putting the firm out of business. It had already started winding down its American operations after the indictment, and many of its accountants joined other firms. The firm sold the majority of its American operations to other accounting firms such as KPMG, Ernst &amp; Young, Deloitte &amp; Touche and Grant Thornton International. At this time, Arthur Andersen had lost most of its business and two-thirds of its 28,000 employees.\nThe indictment also put a spotlight on the firm's faulty audits of other companies, most notably Waste Management, Sunbeam Products, the Baptist Foundation of Arizona and WorldCom.\nOn May 31, 2005, in \"Arthur Andersen LLP v. United States\", the Supreme Court unanimously reversed Andersen's conviction because of errors in the trial judge's jury instructions. The Supreme Court held that the instructions were too vague to allow a jury to find that obstruction of justice had occurred. The court found that the instructions were worded in such a way that Andersen could have been convicted without any proof that the firm knew it had broken the law or that there had been a link to any official proceeding that prohibited the destruction of documents. The opinion, written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, also expressed skepticism of the government's concept of \"corrupt persuasion\"\u2014persuading someone to engage in an act with an improper purpose without knowing that the act is unlawful.\nCollapse.\nThe firm collapsed by mid-2002, as details of its questionable accounting practices for energy company Enron and telecommunications company Worldcom were revealed amid the two high-profile bankruptcies. The scandals were a factor in the enactment of the Sarbanes\u2013Oxley Act of 2002 to increase oversight and protect whistleblowers. After the collapse, some parts of the company continue to exist: the company's consulting services were split out before the collapse and continue today as Accenture and Protiviti, while some of the former partners formed a new firm in 2002 focused on tax services, now called Andersen Tax.\nDemise.\nThe 2005 Supreme Court ruling theoretically left Andersen free to resume operations. However, CNN reported that by then, Andersen was \"nearly defunct,\" with about 200 employees remaining from a high of 28,000 in 2002. Following the ruling, William Mateja, a former counsel to the US Attorney General who had supervised the Andersen appeal, told NPR that he did not believe the government would seek a retrial because, \"there's nothing left of Arthur Andersen, and to spend the taxpayers' money on another prosecution would be just\u2014defy common sense.\" Echoing this, United States Chamber of Commerce vice president Stephen Bokat pronounced Andersen \"dead,\" and said that \"there is no putting the company back together.\" In his post-mortem of the Enron scandal, \"Conspiracy of Fools,\" journalist Kurt Eichenwald argued that even if Andersen had escaped the Enron scandal, it would have likely been brought down by the massive accounting fraud at WorldCom. The WorldCom fraud came to light just days after Andersen was convicted of wrongdoing at Enron.\nAs a result, Andersen has never returned as a viable business on even a limited scale. Ownership of the partnership has been ceded to four limited liability companies named Omega Management I through IV.\nArthur Andersen LLP operated the Q Center conference center in St. Charles, Illinois, until day-to-day management was turned over to Dolce Hotels and Resorts in 2014, but Andersen retains ownership. In 2018, that relationship ended, and day-to-day management returned to the Q Center. The Q Center is currently used for training, primarily for internal Accenture personnel, and other large-scale companies.\nIn 2014, Wealth Tax and Advisory Services (WTAS), a tax and consulting firm started by several former Andersen partners, changed its name to Andersen Tax after acquiring the rights to the Andersen name. It rebranded its year-old international arm, WTAS Global, as Andersen Global.\nMigration of partners and local offices to new firms.\nMany offices were acquired by other consulting firms as described above. Some partners formed new companies such as:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38798", "revid": "9548411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38798", "title": "Big Four accounting firms", "text": "Largest global accounting networks\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nThe Big Four are the four largest professional services networks in the world: Deloitte, EY, KPMG, and PwC. They are the four largest global accounting networks as measured by revenue. The four are often grouped because they are comparable in size relative to the rest of the market, both in terms of revenue and workforce; they are considered equal in their ability to provide a wide scope of professional services to their clients; and, among those looking to start a career in professional services, particularly accounting, they are considered equally attractive networks to work in, because of the frequency with which these firms engage with \"Fortune\" 500 companies.\nThe Big Four all offer audit, assurance, taxation, management consulting, valuation, market research, actuarial, corporate finance, and legal services to their clients. A significant majority of the audits of public companies, as well as many audits of private companies, are conducted by these four networks. Until the late 20th century, the market for professional services was dominated by eight networks which were nicknamed the \"Big Eight\". The Big Eight consisted of Arthur Andersen, Arthur Young, Coopers &amp; Lybrand, Deloitte Haskins and Sells, Ernst &amp; Whinney, Peat Marwick Mitchell, Price Waterhouse, and Touche Ross.\nThe Big Eight gradually reduced due to mergers between these firms, as well as the 2002 collapse of Arthur Andersen, leaving four networks dominating the market at the turn of the 21st century. In the United Kingdom in 2011, it was reported that the Big Four account for the audits of 99% of the companies in the FTSE 100 Index, and 96% of the companies in the FTSE 250 Index, an index of the leading mid-cap listing companies. Such a high level of industry concentration has caused concern, and a desire among some in the investment community for the UK's Competition &amp; Markets Authority (CMA) to consider breaking up the Big Four.&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nLegal structure.\nNone of the \"firms\" within the Big Four is actually a single firm; rather, they are professional services networks. Each is a network of firms, owned and managed independently, which have entered into agreements with the other member firms in the network to share a common name, brand, intellectual property, and quality standards. Each network has established a global entity to co-ordinate the activities of the network.\nUntil 2020, KPMG was the only Big Four firm not registered as a UK private company, but rather the co-ordinating entity was a Swiss association (verein). However, KPMG International changed its legal structure from a verein to a co-operative under Swiss law in 2003, then to a UK limited company in 2020. For Deloitte, PwC and Ernst &amp; Young, the co-ordinating entity is a UK limited company. Those entities \"do not\" themselves perform external professional services, nor do they own or control the member firms. Nevertheless, these networks colloquially are referred to as \"firms\" for the sake of simplicity and to reduce confusion with lay-people. These accounting and professional services networks are similar in nature to how law firm networks in the legal profession work.\nIn many cases, each member firm practises in a single country, and is structured to comply with the regulatory environment in that country.\nErnst &amp; Young also includes separate legal entities which manage its three geographic areas: the Americas, Asia-Pacific, and EMEIA (Europe, the Middle East, India and Africa) groups. These entities coordinate services performed by local firms within their respective areas, but \"do\" \"not perform\" services or hold ownership in the local entities. There are rare exceptions to this convention; in 2007, KPMG announced a merger of four internationally distinct member firms (in the United Kingdom, Germany, Switzerland and Liechtenstein) to form a single firm, KPMG Europe LLP.\nHistory of mergers.\nSince the 1980s, numerous mergers and one major scandal involving Arthur Andersen, have reduced the number of major professional-services firms from eight to four.\nBig Eight.\nThe firms which came to be known as the \"Big Eight\" originated in various UK and US audit firms established in the 19th or early 20th centuries and later merged. The firms' initial international expansion was driven by the needs of British and American based multinationals for worldwide service. They expanded by forming local partnerships, or by forming alliances with local firms. Arthur Andersen was the exception: the firm originated in the United States, and then expanded internationally by establishing its own offices in other markets, including the United Kingdom.\nIn 1932, \"Fortune\" published an article listing the 15 largest American CPA firms by number of public corporation clients. At this point in time, Price, Waterhouse and Co. was far and away the most successful of the firms with more than double the clients compared to the firms in the second and third spots.\nFrom the 1930s through the 1950s, audit firms expanded their national sizes and their service offerings. After the Wall Street crash of 1929, numerous regulations were put into place by the federal government to ensure that investors were able to view accurate and detailed financial information. As a result of the fierce competition between themselves, many of the firms merged to further expand their practices and geographic reach. These mergers led to a few name changes as the firms embraced a larger identity. In 1947, Touche, Niven and Co. merged with George Bailey and Co. and Allen R. Smart and Co. to become Touche, Niven, Bailey and Smart (TNBS). In 1950, Barrow, Wade, Guthrie and Co. merged into Peat, Marwick, Mitchell and Co., which kept the more notable PMM name. In 1955, the Audit Co. of New York merged into Price, Waterhouse and Co., again keeping PW as the firm name. In 1958, two of the firms listed on \"Fortune\" list merged into larger firms: Loomis, Suffern and Fernald was assumed by Lybrand, Ross Bros. and Montgomery while Miller, Donaldson and Co. was assumed by Haskins and Sells. Finally, in 1960, TNBS merged with the Canadian accounting firm Ross to form Touche, Ross, Bailey and Smart (later simplified in 1969 to Touche Ross).\nBy 1960, business among the CPA firms had consolidated such that the top eight firms audited about 80% of all firms listed with the SEC. Around this time the term \"Big Eight\" came to be used to describe these CPA firms' dominance of the market. \"Fortune\" published an article in the same year listing these firms along with their number of partners, offices, and estimated gross revenues.\nIn the following 20 years, the consolidation pattern continued. The two remaining firms from the top 15 in 1932 outside of the Big Eight in 1960 were merged in 1963 and 1967, respectively: F. W. Lafrentz and Co. with Main and Co. to form Main Lafrentz and Co. (later merging with Thomson, McLintock and Co., a British firm, to form McLintock Main Lafrentz International or MMLI in 1969) and Leslie, Banks and Co. into Lybrand, Ross Bros. and Montgomery. Six years later, in 1973, LRBM merged with the British Cooper Bros. and Co. to form Coopers and Lybrand. In 1978, Deloitte, Plender, Griffiths and Co. merged with Haskins and Sells to become Deloitte, Haskins and Sells and one year later Ernst and Ernst merged its practice with Whinney, Murray and Co. to become Ernst and Whinney. As 1980 arrived, the Big Eight were known as the following:\nIn the 1980s the Big Eight, each with global branding, adopted modern marketing and grew rapidly. They merged with many smaller firms. KPMG was the result of one of the largest of these mergers. In 1987, Peat Marwick merged with the Klynveld Main Goerdeler group (which included the aforementioned MMLI) to become KPMG Peat Marwick, rebranding in 1995 to simply KPMG.\nBig Six.\nCompetition among these firms intensified, and the Big\u00a0Eight became the Big\u00a0Six in 1989. In that year, Ernst &amp; Whinney merged with Arthur Young to form Ernst &amp; Young in June, and Deloitte, Haskins &amp; Sells merged with Touche Ross to form Deloitte &amp; Touche in August.\nThe Big Six after both mergers occurred were:\nThere has been some merging of ancestor firms, in some localities, which would aggregate brands belonging to the Big Four today, but in different combinations than the present-day names would otherwise suggest. For example, the United Kingdom local firm of Deloitte, Haskins &amp; Sells merged instead with the United Kingdom firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand. The resulting firm was called Coopers &amp; Lybrand Deloitte, and the local firm of Touche Ross kept its original name. It was not until the mid-1990s that both UK firms changed their names to match those of their respective international organizations. Meanwhile, in Australia, the local firm of Touche Ross merged instead with KPMG. It is for these reasons that the Deloitte &amp; Touche international organization was known as DRT International (later DTT International), to avoid use of names which would have been ambiguous, as well as contested, in certain markets.\nBig Five.\nIn July 1998, the Big Six became the Big\u00a0Five when Price Waterhouse merged with Coopers &amp; Lybrand to form PricewaterhouseCoopers.\nThe Big Five at this point in time were:\nBig Four.\nFinally, the insolvency of Arthur Andersen stemming from their involvement in the 2001 Enron Scandal produced the Big Four:\nThe Enron collapse and ensuing investigation prompted scrutiny of the company's financial reporting and its long time auditor, Arthur Andersen. The company was indicted for obstruction of justice for shredding documents related to the audit of Enron. The resulting conviction, although later overturned, doomed Arthur Andersen, because most clients dropped the firm, and the company was not allowed to take on new clients while they were under investigation. Most of Arthur Andersen's international practices were sold to members of what is now the Big Four \u2013 notably EY globally; Deloitte in the United Kingdom, Canada, Spain, and Brazil; and PwC in China and Hong Kong.\nBig Four merger history.\nThe Big Four were all derived from a series of global mergers. The charts below show year of formation through merger, or adoption of single brand name.\nRevenue comparison.\nIn 2010, Deloitte, with its 1.8% growth, was able to outpace PricewaterhouseCoopers' 1.5% growth, gaining \"first place\" in revenue size, and became the largest firm in the professional services industry. In 2011, PwC re-gained first place with 10% revenue growth. In 2013, these two firms claimed the top two spots with only a $200 million revenue difference, that is, within half a percent. However, Deloitte saw faster growth than PwC over the next few years (largely due to acquisitions) and reclaimed the title of largest of the Big Four in Fiscal Year 2016.\nIt was estimated that the Big Four had about a 67% share of the global accountancy market in 2012, while most of the rest was divided among so called mid-tier players, such as BDO, Crowe Global and Grant Thornton.\nNote: Consulting &amp; Advisory includes the following service lines reported by each firm. Further, columns may not cross-add due to rounding in numbers reported by each firm.\nRevenue comparison charts.\nBig Four Accounting Firm Revenues (US$ bn)\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nRevenue gap to largest firm (%)\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nRevenue gap to largest firm (US$ bn)\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nTotal Employees\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nRevenue Per Employee\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nAudit &amp; Assurance Revenue (US$ bn)\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nTax Revenue (US$ bn)\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nConsulting &amp; Advisory Revenue (US$ bn)\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nConsulting % of Total Revenue\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nCriticism.\nAudit quality and ethics.\nA 2019 analysis by Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) in the United States observed that the big four accounting firms bungled almost 31% of their audits since 2009. In another project study on government oversight, it was seen that while the auditors colluded to present audit reports that pleased their clients, the times they did not resulted in a loss of business. Despite this large-scale collusion in audits, the PCAOB in its 16-year history has only made 18 enforcement cases against the \"big four\". Although these auditors have failed audits in 31% of cases (808 cases in total), they have only faced action by PCAOB in 6.6% of the cases. KPMG at that point had never been fined despite having the worst audit failure rate of 36.6%.\nAs per the Financial Reporting Council (FRC) none of the Big Four \u2013 Deloitte, EY, KPMG, and PwC managed to surpass the 90% target of its audits. The inefficiency in audit was resulting in a loss of investors' money, people's pension plans, stakeholders' livelihoods and was putting a question mark on the credibility of audited financial statements. \"At a time when the future of the audit sector is under the microscope, the latest audit quality results are not acceptable,\" said Stephen Haddrill, the FRC's Chief executive. Multiple ethics scandals and questionable practices across the globe led to multi-million dollar fines and subsequent settlements by all the Big Four firms.\nDespite repeated sanctions from regulators, the Big Four have seen continued challenges to audit quality and ethics as the 2020 decade comes to a close.\nTax avoidance.\nAccording to Australian taxation expert George Rozvany, the Big Four are \"the masterminds of multinational tax avoidance and the architects of tax schemes which cost governments and their taxpayers an estimated US$ a year\". At the same time they are advising governments on tax reforms, they are advising their multinational clients on how to avoid taxes.\nThe PwC tax scandal is one example where PwC sold advice to clients on tax avoidance, and did so using information obtained from PwC tax experts consulting for the Australian Tax Office and Department of Treasury.\nMarket concentration and alleged collusion amongst the Big Four.\nIn the wake of industry concentration and the occasional firm failure, the issue of a credible alternative industry structure has been raised. The limiting factor on the expansion of the Big Four to include additional firms, is that although some of the firms in the next tier have become quite substantially large, or have formed international networks, effectively all large public companies insist on having an audit performed by a Big Four network. This creates the complication that smaller firms have no way to compete well enough to make it into the top end of the market.\nDocuments published in June 2010 show that some UK companies' banking covenants required them to use one of the Big Four. This approach from the lender prevents firms in the next tier from competing for audit work for such companies. The British Bankers' Association said that such clauses are rare. Current discussions in the UK consider outlawing such clauses.\nIn February 2011, the Irish Director of Corporate Enforcement Paul Appleby said that auditors \"report surprisingly few types of company law offences to us\", with the so-called \"big four\" auditing firms reporting the least often to his office, at just 5% of all reports.\nIn 2011, the House of Lords of United Kingdom completed an inquiry into the financial crisis, and called for an Office of Fair Trading investigation into the dominance of the Big Four. In September 2019, Bloomberg News reported that The Big Four controlled 95% of the FTSE 250 audit market by client numbers and 96% by market capitalization in August 2019, according to Adviser Rankings.\nIn 2018, an Australian parliamentary committee was told that the heads of the Big Four firms have met regularly for dinner. The revelation was among issues which led to an inquiry by the Australian Competition &amp; Consumer Commission into possible collusion in the selling of audit and other services. However, Ernst &amp; Young told the inquiry that the dinners, which were held once or twice a year, were to discuss industry trends and issues of corporate culture such as inclusion and diversity.\nThe January 2018 collapse of the UK construction and services company Carillion raised further questions about the Big Four, all of which had advised the company before its liquidation. On 13 February 2018, the Big Four were described by Member of Parliament (MP) and chair of the Work and Pensions Select Committee Frank Field as \"feasting on what was soon to become a carcass\" after collecting fees of \u00a372m for Carillion work during the years leading up to its collapse. The final report of a Parliamentary inquiry into the collapse of Carillion, published on 16 May 2018, accused the Big Four accounting firms of being a \"cosy club\", with KPMG singled out for its \"complicity\" in signing off on Carillion's \"increasingly fantastical figures\" and internal auditor Deloitte accused of failing to identify, or ignoring, \"terminal failings\". The report recommended the Government refer the statutory audit market to the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), urging consideration of breaking up the Big Four. In September 2018, Business Secretary Greg Clark announced he had asked the CMA to conduct an inquiry into competition in the audit sector, and on 9 October 2018, the CMA announced it had launched a detailed study. In July 2020, the UK Financial Reporting Council told the Big Four that they must submit plans by October 2020 to separate their audit and consultancy operations by 2024.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38799", "revid": "50956306", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38799", "title": "Galanthus", "text": "Genus of flowering plants in the family Amaryllidacee\nGalanthus (from Ancient Greek , (, \"milk\") + (, \"flower\")), or snowdrop, is a small genus of approximately 20 species of bulbous perennial herbaceous plants in the family Amaryllidaceae. The plants have two linear leaves and a single small white drooping bell-shaped flower with six petal-like (petaloid) tepals in two circles (whorls). The smaller inner petals have green markings.\nSnowdrops have been known since the earliest times under various names, but were named \"Galanthus\" in 1753. As the number of recognised species increased, various attempts were made to divide the species into subgroups, usually on the basis of the pattern of the emerging leaves (vernation). In the era of molecular phylogenetics this characteristic has been shown to be unreliable and now seven molecularly defined clades are recognised that correspond to the biogeographical distribution of species. New species continue to be discovered.\nMost species flower in winter, before the vernal equinox (20 or 21 March in the Northern Hemisphere), but some flower in early spring and late autumn. Sometimes snowdrops are confused with the two related genera within the tribe Galantheae, snowflakes \"Leucojum\" and \"Acis\".\nDescription.\nGeneral.\nAll species of \"Galanthus\" are perennial petaloid herbaceous bulbous (growing from bulbs) monocot plants. The genus is characterised by the presence of two leaves, pendulous white flowers with six free perianth segments in two whorls. The inner whorl is smaller than the outer whorl and has green markings.\nVegetative.\nThese are basal, emerging from the bulb initially enclosed in a tubular membranous sheath of cataphylls. Generally, these are two (sometimes three) in number and linear, strap-shaped, or oblanceolate. Vernation, the arrangement of the emerging leaves relative to each other, varies among species. These may be applanate (flat), supervolute (conduplicate), or explicative (pleated). In applanate vernation, the two leaf blades are pressed flat to each other within the bud and as they emerge; explicative leaves are also pressed flat against each other, but the edges of the leaves are folded back (externally recurved) or sometimes rolled; in supervolute plants, one leaf is tightly clasped around the other within the bud and generally remains at the point where the leaves emerge from the soil (for illustration, see Stearn and Davis). In the past, this feature has been used to distinguish between species and to determine the parentage of hybrids, but now has been shown to be homoplasious, and not useful in this regard.\nThe scape (flowering stalk) is erect, leafless, terete, or compressed.\nReproductive.\nAt the top of the scape is a pair of bract-like spathes (valves) usually fused down one side and joined by a papery membrane, appearing monophyllous (single). From between the spathes emerges a solitary (rarely two), pendulous, nodding, bell-shaped white flower, held on a slender pedicel. The flower bears six free perianth segments (tepals) rather than true petals, arranged in two whorls of three, the outer whorl being larger and more convex than the inner whorl. The outer tepals are acute to more or less obtuse, spathulate or oblanceolate to narrowly obovate or linear, shortly clawed, and erect spreading. The inner tepals are much shorter (half to two thirds as long), oblong, spathulate or oblanceolate, somewhat unguiculate (claw like); tapering to the base and erect. These tepals also bear green markings at the base, the apex, or both, that when at the apex, are bridge-shaped over the small sinus (notch) at the tip of each tepal, which are emarginate. Occasionally, the markings are either green-yellow, yellow, or absent, and the shape and size varies by species.\nThe six stamens are inserted at the base of the perianth, and are very short (shorter than the inner perianth segments), the anthers basifixed (attached at their bases) with filaments much shorter than the anthers; they dehisce (open) by terminal pores or short slits.\nThe inferior ovary is three-celled. The style is slender and longer than the anthers; the stigma is minutely capitate. The ovary ripens into a three-celled capsule fruit. This fruit is fleshy, ellipsoid or almost spherical, opening by three flaps, with seeds that are light brown to white and oblong with a small appendage or tail (elaiosome) containing substances attractive to ants, which distribute the seeds.\nThe chromosome number is 2n=24.\nFloral formula: formula_1\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe genus \"Galanthus\" is native to Europe and the Middle East, from the Spanish and French Pyrenees in the west through to the Caucasus and Iran in the east, and south to Sicily, the Peloponnese, the Aegean, Turkey, Lebanon, and Syria. The northern limit is uncertain because \"G. nivalis\" has been widely introduced and cultivated throughout Europe. \"G. nivalis\" and some other species valued as ornamentals have become widely naturalised in Europe, North America, and other regions. In the Udmurt republic of Russia, \"Galanthus\" are found even above the 56th parallel.\n\"Galanthus nivalis\" is the best-known and most widespread representative of the genus \"Galanthus\". It is native to a large area of Europe, stretching from the Pyrenees in the west, through France and Germany to Poland in the north, Italy, northern Greece, Bulgaria, Romania, Ukraine, and European Turkey. It has been introduced and is widely naturalised elsewhere. Although it is often thought of as a British native wild flower, or to have been brought to the British Isles by the Romans, it most likely was introduced around the early sixteenth century, and is currently not a protected species in the UK. It was first recorded as naturalised in the UK in Worcestershire and Gloucestershire in 1770. Most other \"Galanthus\" species are from the eastern Mediterranean, while several are found in the Caucasus, in southern Russia, Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan. \"Galanthus fosteri\" is found in Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Turkey, and, perhaps, Palestine.\nMost \"Galanthus\" species grow best in woodland, in acid or alkaline soil, although some are grassland or mountain species.\nTaxonomy.\nHistory.\nEarly.\nSnowdrops have been known since early times, being described by the classical Greek author Theophrastus, in the fourth century BCE, in his \"\u03a0\u03b5\u03c1\u1f76 \u03c6\u03c5\u03c4\u1ff6\u03bd \u1f31\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c1\u03af\u03b1\" (Latin: \"Historia plantarum\", \"Enquiry into plants\"). He gave it, and similar plants, the name \u03bb\u03b5\u03c5\u03ba\u03cc\u1f32\u03bf\u03bd (\u03bb\u03b5\u03c5\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2, leukos \"white\" and \u1f30\u03cc\u03bd, ion \"violet\") from which the later name \"Leucojum\" was derived. He described the plant as \"\u1f11\u03c0\u03b5\u1f30 \u03c4\u03bf\u1fd6\u03c2 \u03b3\u03b5 \u03c7\u03c1\u03ce\u03bc\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9 \u03bb\u03b5\u03c5\u03ba\u1f02 \u03ba\u03b1\u1f31 \u03bf\u1f50 \u03bb\u03b5\u03c0\u03c5\u03c1\u03b9\u03ce\u03b4\u03b7\" (in colour white and bulbs without scales) and of their habits \"\u1f38\u1ff6\u03bd \u03b4' \u1f01\u03bd\u03b8\u1ff6\u03bd \u03c4\u1f40 \u03bc\u1f11\u03bd \u03c0\u03c1\u1ff6\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd \u1f11\u03ba\u03c6\u03b1\u1f31\u03bd\u03b5\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c4\u1f41 \u03bb\u03b5\u03c5\u03ba\u03cc\u1f32\u03bf\u03bd, \u1f45\u03c0\u03bf\u03c5 \u03bc\u1f11\u03bd \u03cc \u1f00\u1f20\u03c1 \u03bc\u03b1\u03bb\u03b1\u03ba\u03ce\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 \u03b5\u1f50\u03b8\u1f51\u03c2 \u03c4\u03bf\u1fe6 \u03c7\u03b5\u03b9\u03bc\u1ff6\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2, \u1f45\u03c0\u03bf\u03c5 \u03b4\u1f10 \u03c3\u03ba\u03bb\u03b7\u03c1\u03cc\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 \u1f55\u03c3\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd, \u1f11\u03bd\u03b9\u03b1\u03c7\u03bf\u1fe1 \u03c4\u03bf\u1fe1 \u1f23\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2\" (Of the flowers, the first to appear is the white violet. Where the climate is mild, it appears with the first sign of winter, but in more severe climates, later in spring)\nRembert Dodoens, a Flemish botanist, described and illustrated this plant in 1583 as did Gerard in England in 1597 (probably using much of Dodoens' material), calling it \"Leucojum bulbosum praecox\" (Early bulbous violet). Gerard refers to Theophrastus's description as \"Viola alba\" or \"Viola bulbosa\", using Pliny's translation, and comments that the plant had originated in Italy and had \"taken possession\" in England \"many years past\". The genus was formally named \"Galanthus\" and described by Carl Linnaeus in 1753, with the single species, \"Galanthus nivalis\", which is the type species. Consequently, Linnaeus is granted the botanical authority. In doing so, he distinguished this genus and species from \"Leucojum\" (\"Leucojum bulbosum trifolium minus\"), a name by which it previously had been known.\nModern.\nIn 1763 Michel Adanson began a system of arranging genera in families. Using the synonym \"Acrocorion\" (also spelt \"Akrokorion\"), he placed \"Galanthus\" in the family Liliaceae, section Narcissi. Lamarck provided a description of the genus in his encyclopedia (1786), and later, \"Illustrations des genres\" (1793). In 1789 de Jussieu, who is credited with the modern concept of genera organised in families, placed \"Galanthus\" and related genera within a division of Monocotyledons, using a modified form of Linnaeus' sexual classification, but with the respective topography of stamens to carpels rather than just their numbers. In doing so, he restored the name \"Galanthus\" and retained their placement under Narcissi, this time as a family (known as \"Ordo\", at that time) and referred to the French vernacular name, \"\" (Snow-pierce), based on the plants tendency to push through early spring snow (see Ecology for illustration). The modern family of Amaryllidaceae, in which \"Galanthus\" is placed, dates to Jaume Saint-Hilaire (1805) who replaced Jussieu's Narcissi with \"Amaryllid\u00e9es\". In 1810, Brown proposed that a subgroup of Liliaceae be distinguished on the basis of the position of the ovaries and be referred to as Amaryllideae, and in 1813, de Candolle separated them by describing Liliac\u00e9es and Amaryllid\u00e9es as two quite separate families. However, in his comprehensive survey of the Flora of France (Flore fran\u00e7aise, 1805\u20131815) he divided Liliaceae into a series of \"Ordres\", and placed Galanthus into the Narcissi \"Ordre\". This relationship of Galanthus to either liliaceous or amaryllidaceaous taxa (see Taxonomy of Liliaceae) was to last for another two centuries until the two were formally divided at the end of the twentieth century. Lindley (1830) followed this general pattern, placing \"Galanthus\" and related genera such as \"Amaryllis\" and \"Narcissus\" in his Amaryllideae (which he called The Narcissus Tribe in English). By 1853, the number of known plants was increasing considerably and he revised his schema in his last work, placing \"Galanthus\" together, and the other two genera in the modern Galantheae in tribe Amarylleae, order Amaryllidaceae, alliance Narcissales. These three genera have been treated together taxonomically by most authors, on the basis of an inferior ovary. As the number of plant species increased, so did the taxonomic complexity. By the time Bentham and Hooker published their \"Genera plantarum\" (1862\u20131883) ordo Amaryllideae contained five tribes, and tribe Amarylleae three subtribes (see Bentham &amp; Hooker system). They placed \"Galanthus\" in subtribe Genuinae and included three species.\nPhylogeny.\n\"Galanthus\" is one of three closely related genera making up the tribe Galantheae within subfamily Amaryllidoideae (family Amaryllidaceae). Sometimes snowdrops are confused with the other two genera, \"Leucojum\" and \"Acis\" (both called snowflakes). \"Leucojum\" species are much larger and flower in spring (or early summer, depending on the species), with all six tepals in the flower being the same size, although some \"poculiform\" (goblet- or cup-shaped) \"Galanthus\" species may have inner segments similar in shape and length to the outer ones. Galantheae are likely to have arisen in the Caucusus.\nSubdivision.\n\"Galanthus\" has approximately 20 species, but new species continue to be described. \"G. trojanus\" was identified in Turkey in 2001. \"G. panjutinii\" (Panjutin's snowdrop) was discovered in 2012 in five locations in a small area (estimated at ) of the northern Colchis area (western Transcaucasus) of Georgia and Russia. \"G. samothracicus\" was identified in Greece in 2014. Since it has not been subjected to genetic sequencing, it remains unplaced. It resembles \"G. nivalis\", but is outside the distribution of that species.\nMany species are difficult to identify, however, and traditional infrageneric classification based on plant morphology alone, such as those of Stern (1956), Traub (1963) and Davis (1999, 2001), has not reflected what is known about its evolutionary history, due to the morphological similarities among the species and relative lack of easily discernible distinguishing characteristics. Stern divided the genus into three series according to leaf vernation (the way the leaves are folded in the bud, when viewed in transverse section, see Description);\nStern further utilised characteristics such as the markings of the inner segments, length of the pedicels in relation to the spathe, and the colour and shape of the leaves in identifying and classifying species\nTraub considered them as subgenera;\nBy contrast Davis, with much more information and specimens, included biogeography in addition to vernation, forming two series. He used somewhat different terminology for vernation, namely applanate (flat), explicative (plicate), and supervolute (convolute). He merged \"Nivalis\" and \"Plicati\" into series \"Galanthus\", and divided \"Latifolii\" into two subseries, \"Glaucaefolii\" and \"Viridifolii\" .\nEarly molecular phylogenetic studies confirmed the genus was monophyletic and suggested four clades, which were labelled as series, and showed that Davis' subseries were not monophyletic. An expanded study in 2013 demonstrated seven major clades, corresponding to biogeographical distribution. This study used nuclear encoded nrITS (Nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer), and plastid encoded genes \"matK\" (Maturase K), \"trnL-F\", \"ndhF\", and \"psbK\u2013psbI\", and examined all species recognised at the time, as well as two naturally occurring putative hybrids. The morphological characteristic of vernation that earlier authors had mainly relied on was shown to be highly homoplasious. A number of species, such as \"G. nivalis\" and \"G. elwesii\" demonstrated intraspecific biogeographical clades, indicating problems with speciation and there may be a need for recircumscription. These clades were assigned names, partly according to Davis' previous groupings. In this model clade, the group containing \"G. platyphyllus\" is sister to the rest of the genus.\nBy contrast, another study performed at the same time, using both nuclear and chloroplast DNA, but limited to the 14 species found in Turkey, largely confirmed Davis' series and subseries, and with biogeographical correlation. Series \"Galanthus\" in this study corresponded to clade nivalis, subseries \"Glaucaefolii\" with clade Elwesii and subseries \"Viridifolii\" with clades Woronowii and Alpinus. However, the model did not provide complete resolution.\nClades.\n\"sensu\" Ronsted et al. 2013\nEtymology.\n\"Galanthus\" is derived from the Greek \u03b3\u03ac\u03bb\u03b1 (\"gala\"), meaning \"milk\" and \u1f04\u03bd\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2 (\"anthos\") meaning \"flower\", alluding to the colour of the flowers. The epithet \"nivalis\" is derived from the Latin, meaning \"of the snow\". The word \"Snowdrop\" may be derived from the German \"Schneetropfen\" (snow-drop), the tear drop shaped pearl earrings popular in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Other, earlier, common names include Candlemas bells, Fair maids of February, and White ladies (see Symbols).\nEcology.\nSnowdrops are hardy herbaceous plants that perennate by underground bulbs. They are among the earliest spring bulbs to bloom, although a few forms of \"G. nivalis\" are autumn flowering. In colder climates, they will emerge through snow (see illustration). To help aganst the cold and possible damage caused by ice crystals forming on the plant, they are coated in an enzyme that inhibits the creation of these crystals. They naturalise relatively easily forming large drifts. These are often sterile, found near human habitation, and also former monastic sites. The leaves die back a few weeks after the flowers have faded. \"Galanthus\" plants are relatively vigorous and may spread rapidly by forming bulb offsets. They also spread by dispersal of seed, animals disturbing bulbs, and water if disturbed by floods.\nConservation.\nSome snowdrop species are threatened in their wild habitats, due to habitat destruction, illegal collecting, and climate change. In most countries collecting bulbs from the wild is now illegal. Under CITES regulations, international trade in any quantity of \"Galanthus\", whether bulbs, live plants, or even dead ones, is illegal without a CITES permit. This applies to hybrids and named cultivars, as well as species. CITES lists all species, but allows a limited trade in wild-collected bulbs of just three species (\"G. nivalis\", \"G. elwesii\", and \"G. woronowii\") from Turkey and Georgia. A number of species are on the IUCN Red List of threatened species, with the conservation status being \"G. trojanus\" as critically endangered, four species vulnerable, \"G. nivalis\" is near threatened and several species show decreasing populations. \"G. panjutinii\" is considered endangered. One of its five known sites, at Sochi, was destroyed by preparations for the 2014 Winter Olympics.\nCultivation.\n\"Galanthus\" species and cultivars are extremely popular as symbols of spring and are traded more than any other wild-source ornamental bulb genus. Millions of bulbs are exported annually from Turkey and Georgia. For instance export quotas for 2016 for \"G. elwesii\" were 7 million for Turkey. Quotas for \"G. worononowii\" were 5 million for Turkey and 15 million for Georgia. These figures include both wild-taken and artificially propagated bulbs.\nSnowdrop gardens.\nCelebrated as a sign of spring, snowdrops may form impressive carpets of white in areas where they are native or have been naturalised. These displays may attract large numbers of sightseers. There are a number of snowdrop gardens in England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. Several gardens open specially in February for visitors to admire the flowers. Sixty gardens took part in Scotland's first Snowdrop Festival (1 Feb\u201311 March 2007). Several gardens in England open during snowdrop season for the National Gardens Scheme (NGS) and in Scotland for Scotland's Gardens. Colesbourne Park in Gloucestershire is one of the best known of the English snowdrop gardens, being the home of Henry John Elwes, a collector of Galanthus specimens, and after whom \"Galanthus elwesii\" is named.\nCultivars.\nNumerous single- and double-flowered cultivars of \"Galanthus nivalis\" are known, and also of several other \"Galanthus\" species, particularly \"G. plicatus\" and \"G. elwesii\". Also, many hybrids between these and other species exist (more than 500 cultivars are described in Bishop, Davis, and Grimshaw's book, plus lists of many cultivars that have now been lost, and others not seen by the authors). They differ particularly in the size, shape, and markings of the flower, the period of flowering, and other characteristics, mainly of interest to the keen (even fanatical) snowdrop collectors, known as \"galanthophiles\", who hold meetings where the scarcer cultivars change hands. \u00a0Double-flowered cultivars and forms, such as the extremely common \"Galanthus nivalis\" f. \"pleniflorus\" 'Flore Pleno', may be less attractive to some people, but they can have greater visual impact in a garden setting. Cultivars with yellow markings and ovaries rather than the usual green are also grown, such as 'Wendy's Gold'. Many hybrids have also occurred in cultivation.\nAwards.\nAs of July\u00a02017[ [update]], the following have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPropagation.\nPropagation is by offset bulbs, either by careful division of clumps in full growth (\"in the green\"), or removed when the plants are dormant, immediately after the leaves have withered; or by seeds sown either when ripe, or in spring. Professional growers and keen amateurs also use such methods as \"twin-scaling\" to increase the stock of choice cultivars quickly.\nToxicity.\nSnowdrops contain an active lectin or agglutinin named GNA for \"Galanthus nivalis\" agglutinin.\nMedicinal use.\nIn 1983, Andreas Plaitakis and Roger Duvoisin suggested that the mysterious magical herb, moly, that appears in Homer's \"Odyssey\" is the snowdrop. One of the active principles present in the snowdrop is the alkaloid galantamine, which, as an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, could have acted as an antidote to Circe's poisons. Further supporting this notion are notes made during the fourth century BC by the Greek scholar Theophrastus who wrote in \"Historia plantarum\" that moly was \"used as an antidote against poisons\" although which specific poisons it was effective against remains unclear. Galantamine (or galanthamine) may be helpful in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, although it is not a cure; the substance also occurs naturally in daffodils and other narcissi.\nIn popular culture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Blow, Northern Wind\"\n&lt;poem&gt; low, northern wind; fall snow;\nAnd thou\u2014my loved and dear,\nSee, in this waste of burthened cloud\nHow Spring is near!\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\"Walter de la Mare (1950)\"\nSnowdrops figure prominently in art and literature, often as a symbol in poetry of spring, purity, and religion (see Symbols), such as Walter de la Mare's poem \"The Snowdrop\" (1929). In this poem, he likened the triple tepals in each whorl (\"A triplet of green-pencilled snow\") to the Holy Trinity. He used snowdrop imagery several times in his poetry, such as \"Blow, Northern Wind\" (1950) \u2013 see Box. Another instance is the poem . by Letitia Elizabeth Landon in which she asks \"Thou fairy gift from summer, Why art thou blooming now?\"\nSymbolism.\nEarly names refer to the association with the religious feast of Candlemas (February 2) \u2013 the optimum flowering time of the plant \u2013 at which young women, robed in white, would walk in solemn procession in commemoration of the Purification of the Virgin, an alternative name for the feast day. The French name of refers to Candlemas, while an Italian name, , refers to purification. The German name of (little snow bells) invokes the symbol of bells.\nIn the language of flowers, the \"snowdrop\" is synonymous with 'hope' (and the goddess Persephone's/Proserpina's return from Hades), as it blooms in early springtime, just before the vernal equinox, and so, is seen as 'heralding' the new spring and new year.\nIn more recent times, the snowdrop was adopted as a symbol of sorrow and of hope following the Dunblane massacre in Scotland, and lent its name to the subsequent campaign to restrict the legal ownership of handguns in the UK.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38800", "revid": "1280903748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38800", "title": "Louis II, Elector of Brandenburg", "text": "Prince-Elector of Brandenburg from 1356 to 1365\nLouis the Roman () (7 May 1328 \u2013 17 May 1365) was the eldest son of Holy Roman Emperor Louis IV by his second wife, Margaret II, Countess of Hainaut, and a member of the House of Wittelsbach. Louis was Duke of Upper Bavaria as Louis VI (1347\u20131365) and Margrave of Brandenburg (1351\u20131365) as Louis II. As of 1356, he also served as Prince-Elector of Brandenburg.\nBiography.\nLouis was born in Rome when his parents travelled there for his father's coronation as Holy Roman Emperor, hence his nickname \"the Roman\". When his father died in 1347, Louis succeeded him as Duke of Bavaria (as Louis VI) and Count of Holland and Hainaut together with his five brothers. Louis released Holland and Hainaut for his brothers William I and Albert I in 1349, since he expected to acquire the Polish crown by his in 1345 marriage with Cunigunde of Poland, a daughter of Casimir III and Aldona Ona of Lithuania. Later claims against William and Albert were not successful. Hence Louis supported his mother during her war with William.\nIn December 1351 Louis VI received Brandenburg from his older half-brother Louis V of Bavaria in exchange for the sole rule of Upper Bavaria. Less experienced than Louis V, he was also challenged by the \"False Waldemar\", an impostor who claimed Brandenburg and got support from several cities and Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV until the Wittelsbachs came to terms with Charles. Louis also had to abandon claims on fiefdoms in Mecklenburg and Pomerania. With the Golden Bull of 1356, Louis secured the electoral dignity. In 1358 Louis was absolved from the papal excommunication.\nAfter Cunigunde's death in 1357, Louis married Ingeborg of Mecklenburg-Schwerin. She was a daughter of Albert II, Duke of Mecklenburg, and Euphemia of Sweden. Louis had no children with her, either, thus his younger brother Otto V succeeded him in Brandenburg. The childless dukes Louis and Otto had already promised Charles IV the succession in Brandenburg in 1364 as revenge for a conflict with their brother Stephen II over the Bavarian succession after the death of their nephew Meinhard, the son of Louis V. Louis the Roman died in Berlin in 1365.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38801", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38801", "title": "Algebraic topology", "text": "Branch of mathematics\nAlgebraic topology is a branch of mathematics that uses tools from abstract algebra to study topological spaces. The basic goal is to find algebraic invariants that classify topological spaces up to homeomorphism, though usually most classify up to homotopy equivalence.\nAlthough algebraic topology primarily uses algebra to study topological problems, using topology to solve algebraic problems is sometimes also possible. Algebraic topology, for example, allows for a convenient proof that any subgroup of a free group is again a free group.\nMain branches.\nBelow are some of the main areas studied in algebraic topology:\nHomotopy groups.\nIn mathematics, homotopy groups are used in algebraic topology to classify topological spaces. The first and simplest homotopy group is the fundamental group, which records information about loops in a space. Intuitively, homotopy groups record information about the basic shape, or holes, of a topological space.\nHomology.\nIn algebraic topology and abstract algebra, homology (in part from Greek \u1f41\u03bc\u03cc\u03c2 \"homos\" \"identical\") is a certain general procedure to associate a sequence of abelian groups or modules with a given mathematical object such as a topological space or a group.\nCohomology.\nIn homology theory and algebraic topology, cohomology is a general term for a sequence of abelian groups defined from a cochain complex. That is, cohomology is defined as the abstract study of cochains, cocycles, and coboundaries. Cohomology can be viewed as a method of assigning algebraic invariants to a topological space that has a more refined algebraic structure than does homology. Cohomology arises from the algebraic dualization of the construction of homology. In less abstract language, cochains in the fundamental sense should assign \"quantities\" to the \"chains\" of homology theory.\nManifolds.\nA manifold is a topological space that near each point resembles Euclidean space. Examples include the plane, the sphere, and the torus, which can all be realized in three dimensions, but also the Klein bottle and real projective plane which cannot be embedded in three dimensions, but can be embedded in four dimensions. Typically, results in algebraic topology focus on global, non-differentiable aspects of manifolds; for example Poincar\u00e9 duality.\nKnot theory.\nKnot theory is the study of mathematical knots. While inspired by knots that appear in daily life in shoelaces and rope, a mathematician's knot differs in that the ends are joined so that it cannot be undone. In precise mathematical language, a knot is an embedding of a circle in three-dimensional Euclidean space, formula_1. Two mathematical knots are equivalent if one can be transformed into the other via a deformation of formula_1 upon itself (known as an ambient isotopy); these transformations correspond to manipulations of a knotted string that do not involve cutting the string or passing the string through itself.\nComplexes.\nA simplicial complex is a topological space of a certain kind, constructed by \"gluing together\" points, line segments, triangles, and their \"n\"-dimensional counterparts (see illustration). Simplicial complexes should not be confused with the more abstract notion of a simplicial set appearing in modern simplicial homotopy theory. The purely combinatorial counterpart to a simplicial complex is an abstract simplicial complex.\nA CW complex is a type of topological space introduced by J. H. C. Whitehead to meet the needs of homotopy theory. This class of spaces is broader and has some better categorical properties than simplicial complexes, but still retains a combinatorial nature that allows for computation (often with a much smaller complex).\nMethod of algebraic invariants.\nAn older name for the subject was combinatorial topology, implying an emphasis on how a space X was constructed from simpler ones (the modern standard tool for such construction is the CW complex). In the 1920s and 1930s, there was growing emphasis on investigating topological spaces by finding correspondences from them to algebraic groups, which led to the change of name to algebraic topology. The combinatorial topology name is still sometimes used to emphasize an algorithmic approach based on decomposition of spaces.\nIn the algebraic approach, one finds a correspondence between spaces and groups that respects the relation of homeomorphism (or more general homotopy) of spaces. This allows one to recast statements about topological spaces into statements about groups, which have a great deal of manageable structure, often making these statements easier to prove. Two major ways in which this can be done are through fundamental groups, or more generally homotopy theory, and through homology and cohomology groups. The fundamental groups give us basic information about the structure of a topological space, but they are often nonabelian and can be difficult to work with. The fundamental group of a (finite) simplicial complex does have a finite presentation.\nHomology and cohomology groups, on the other hand, are abelian and in many important cases finitely generated. Finitely generated abelian groups are completely classified and are particularly easy to work with.\nSetting in category theory.\nIn general, all constructions of algebraic topology are functorial; the notions of category, functor and natural transformation originated here. Fundamental groups and homology and cohomology groups are not only \"invariants\" of the underlying topological space, in the sense that two topological spaces which are homeomorphic have the same associated groups, but their associated morphisms also correspond\u2014a continuous mapping of spaces induces a group homomorphism on the associated groups, and these homomorphisms can be used to show non-existence (or, much more deeply, existence) of mappings.\nOne of the first mathematicians to work with different types of cohomology was Georges de Rham. One can use the differential structure of smooth manifolds via de Rham cohomology, or \u010cech or sheaf cohomology to investigate the solvability of differential equations defined on the manifold in question. De Rham showed that all of these approaches were interrelated and that, for a closed, oriented manifold, the Betti numbers derived through simplicial homology were the same Betti numbers as those derived through de Rham cohomology. This was extended in the 1950s, when Samuel Eilenberg and Norman Steenrod generalized this approach. They defined homology and cohomology as functors equipped with natural transformations subject to certain axioms (e.g., a weak equivalence of spaces passes to an isomorphism of homology groups), verified that all existing (co)homology theories satisfied these axioms, and then proved that such an axiomatization uniquely characterized the theory.\nApplications.\nClassic applications of algebraic topology include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38802", "revid": "47120006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38802", "title": "Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 1328 to 1347\nLouis IV (; 1 April 1282 \u2013 11 October 1347), called the Bavarian (, ), was King of the Romans from 1314, King of Italy from 1327, and Holy Roman Emperor from 1328 until his death in 1347.\nLouis' election as king of Germany in 1314 was controversial, as his Habsburg cousin Frederick the Fair was simultaneously elected king by a separate set of electors. Louis defeated Frederick in the Battle of M\u00fchldorf in 1322, and the two eventually reconciled. Louis was opposed and excommunicated by the French Pope John XXII; Louis in turn attempted to depose the pope and install an anti-pope.\nLouis IV was Duke of Upper Bavaria from 1294 to 1301 together with his elder brother Rudolf I, was Margrave of Brandenburg until 1323, and Count Palatine of the Rhine until 1329, and became Duke of Lower Bavaria in 1340. He was the last Bavarian to be a king of Germany until 1742. He became Count of Hainaut, Holland, Zeeland, and Friesland in 1345 when his wife Margaret inherited those domains.\nEarly reign as Duke of Upper Bavaria.\nLouis was born in Munich, the son of Louis II, Duke of Upper Bavaria and Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Matilda, a daughter of King Rudolph I.\nThough Louis was partly educated in Vienna and became co-regent of his brother Rudolf I in Upper Bavaria in 1301 with the support of his Habsburg mother and her brother, King Albert I, he quarreled with the Habsburgs from 1307 over possessions in Lower Bavaria. A civil war against his brother Rudolf due to new disputes on the partition of their lands was ended in 1313, when peace was made at Munich.\nIn the same year, on November 9, Louis defeated his Habsburg cousin Frederick the Fair who was further aided by duke Leopold I. Originally, he was a friend of Frederick, with whom he had been raised. However, armed conflict arose when the guardianship over the young Dukes of Lower Bavaria (Henry XIV, Otto IV, and Henry XV) was entrusted to Frederick, even though the late Duke Otto III, the former King of Hungary, had chosen Louis. On 9 November 1313, Frederick was defeated by Louis in the Battle of Gammelsdorf and had to renounce the tutelage. This victory caused a stir within the Holy Roman Empire and increased the reputation of the Bavarian Duke.\nElection as German King and conflict with Frederick the Fair.\nThe death of Holy Roman Emperor Henry VII in August 1313 necessitated the election of a successor. Henry's son John, King of Bohemia since 1310, was considered by many prince-electors to be too young, and by others to be already too powerful. One alternative was Frederick the Fair, the son of Henry's predecessor, Albert I, of the House of Habsburg. In reaction, the pro-Luxembourg party among the prince electors settled on Louis as its candidate to prevent Frederick's election.\nOn 19 October 1314, Archbishop Henry II of Cologne chaired an assembly of four electors at Sachsenhausen, south of Frankfurt. Participants were Louis' brother, Rudolph I of the Palatinate, who objected to the election of his younger brother, Duke Rudolph I of Saxe-Wittenberg, and Henry of Carinthia, whom the Luxembourgs had deposed as King of Bohemia. These four electors chose Frederick as King.\nThe Luxembourg party did not accept this election and the next day a second election was held. Upon the instigation of Peter of Aspelt, Archbishop of Mainz, five different electors convened at Frankfurt and elected Louis as King. These electors were Archbishop Peter himself, Archbishop Baldwin of Trier and King John of Bohemia \u2013 both of the House of Luxembourg \u2013 Margrave Waldemar of Brandenburg and Duke John II of Saxe-Lauenburg, who contested Rudolph of Wittenberg's claim to the electoral vote.\nThis double election was quickly followed by two coronations: Louis was crowned at Aachen\u00a0\u2013 the customary site of coronations\u00a0\u2013 by Archbishop Peter of Mainz, while the Archbishop of Cologne, who by custom had the right to crown the new king, crowned Frederick at Bonn. In the following conflict between the kings, Louis recognized in 1316 the independence of Switzerland from the Habsburg dynasty.\nAfter several years of bloody war, victory finally seemed within the grasp of Frederick, who was strongly supported by his brother Leopold. However, Frederick's army was decisively defeated in the Battle of M\u00fchldorf on 28 September 1322 on the Ampfing Heath, where Frederick and 1300 nobles from Austria and Salzburg were captured.\nLouis held Frederick captive in Trausnitz Castle (Schwandorf) for three years, but the determined resistance by Frederick's brother Leopold, the retreat of John of Bohemia from his alliance, and a ban by Pope John XXII, who excommunicated Louis in 1324, induced Louis to release Frederick in the Treaty of Trausnitz of 13 March 1325. In this agreement, Frederick recognized Louis as legitimate ruler and undertook to return to captivity should he not succeed in convincing his brothers to submit to Louis.\nAs he did not manage to overcome Leopold's obstinacy, Frederick returned to Munich as a prisoner, even though the Pope had released him from his oath. Louis, who was impressed by such nobility, renewed the old friendship with Frederick, and they agreed to rule the Empire jointly. Since the Pope and the electors strongly objected to this agreement, another treaty was signed at Ulm on 7 January 1326, according to which Frederick would administer Germany as King of the Romans, while Louis would be crowned as Holy Roman Emperor in Italy. However, after Leopold's death in 1326, Frederick withdrew from the regency of the Empire and returned to rule only Austria. He died on 13 January 1330.\nCoronation as Holy Roman Emperor and conflict with the Pope.\nAfter the reconciliation with the Habsburgs in 1326, Louis marched to Italy and was crowned King of Italy in Milan in 1327. Already in 1323, Louis had sent an army to Italy to protect Milan against the Kingdom of Naples, which was together with France the strongest ally of the papacy. But now the Lord of Milan Galeazzo I Visconti was deposed since he was suspected of conspiring with the pope.\nIn January 1328, Louis entered Rome and had himself crowned emperor by the aged senator Sciarra Colonna, called \"captain of the Roman people\". Three months later, Louis published a decree declaring Pope John XXII (\"Jacques Du\u00e8ze\"), who resided in Avignon, deposed on grounds of heresy. He then installed a Spiritual Franciscan, Pietro Rainalducci as antipope Nicholas V, who soon left Rome and a few years later submitted to Pope John XXII. In the meantime, Robert, King of Naples had sent both a fleet and an army against Louis and his ally Frederick II of Sicily. Louis spent the winter 1328/29 in Pisa and stayed then in Northern Italy. When his co-ruler Frederick of Habsburg died in 1330, Louis returned from Italy. In fulfillment of an oath, Louis founded Ettal Abbey on 28 April 1330.\nFranciscan theologians Michael of Cesena and William of Ockham, and the philosopher Marsilius of Padua, who were all on bad terms with the Pope as well, joined Emperor Louis in Italy and accompanied him to his court at Alter Hof in Munich which became the first imperial residence of the Holy Roman Empire.\nIn 1333, Emperor Louis sought to counter French influence in the southwest of the empire so he offered Humbert II of Viennois the Kingdom of Arles which was an opportunity to gain full authority over Savoy, Provence, and its surrounding territories. Humbert was reluctant to take the crown due to the conflict that would follow with all around him, so he declined, telling the emperor that he should make peace with the church first.\nEmperor Louis also allied with King Edward III of England in 1337 against King Philip VI of France, the protector of the new Pope Benedict XII in Avignon. King Philip VI had prevented any agreement between the Emperor and the Pope. Thus, the failure of negotiations with the papacy led to the declaration at Rhense in 1338 by six electors to the effect that election by all or the majority of the electors automatically conferred the royal title and rule over the empire, without papal confirmation. King Edward III was the Emperor's guest at the Imperial Diet in the Kastorkirche at Coblence in 1338 and was named Vicar-General of the Holy Roman Empire. However in 1341, the Emperor deserted Edward III but came to terms with Philip VI only temporarily. For the expected English payments were missing and Louis intended to reach an agreement with the Pope one more time.\nImperial privileges.\nLouis IV was a protector of the Teutonic Knights. In 1337 he allegedly bestowed upon the Teutonic Order a privilege to conquer Lithuania and Russia, although the Order had only petitioned for three small territories. Later he forbade the Order to stand trial before foreign courts in their territorial conflicts with foreign rulers.\nLouis concentrated his energies also on the economic development of the cities of the empire, so his name can be found in many city chronicles for the privileges he granted. In 1330 the emperor for example permitted the Frankfurt Trade Fair, and in 1340 L\u00fcbeck, as the leading member of the Hanseatic League, received the coinage prerogative for golden gulden.\nDynastic policy.\nIn 1323 Louis gave Brandenburg as a fiefdom to his eldest son Louis V after the Brandenburg branch of the House of Ascania had died out. With the Treaty of Pavia in 1329 the emperor reconciled the sons of his late brother Rudolph and returned the Palatinate to his nephews Rudolf and Rupert. After the death of Henry of Bohemia, the duchy of Carinthia was released as an imperial fief on 2 May 1335 in Linz to his Habsburg cousins Albert II, Duke of Austria, and Otto, Duke of Austria, while Tyrol was first placed into Luxemburg hands.\nWith the death of duke John I in 1340 Louis inherited Lower Bavaria and then reunited the duchy of Bavaria. John's mother, a member of the Luxemburg dynasty, had to return to Bohemia. In 1342 Louis also acquired Tyrol for the Wittelsbach by voiding the first marriage of Margarete Maultasch with John Henry of Bohemia and marrying her to his own son Louis V, thus alienating the House of Luxemburg even more.\nIn 1345 the emperor further antagonized the lay princes by conferring Hainaut, Holland, Zeeland, and Friesland upon his wife, Margaret II of Hainaut. The hereditary titles of Margaret's sisters, one of whom was the queen of England, were ignored. Because of the dangerous hostility of the Luxemburgs, Louis had increased his power base ruthlessly.\nConflict with Luxembourg.\nThe acquisition of these territories and his restless foreign policy had earned Louis many enemies among the German princes. In the summer of 1346 the Luxembourg Charles IV was elected rival king, with the support of Pope Clement VI. Louis himself obtained much support from the Imperial Free Cities and the knights and successfully resisted Charles, who was widely regarded as a papal puppet (\"rex clericorum\" as William of Ockham called him). Also the Habsburg dukes stayed loyal to Louis. In the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy Charles' father John of Luxembourg was killed; Charles himself also took part in the battle but escaped.\nBut then Louis' sudden death avoided a longer civil war. Louis died in October 1347 from a stroke suffered during a bear-hunt in Puch near F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck. He is buried in the Frauenkirche in Munich. The sons of Louis supported G\u00fcnther von Schwarzburg as new rival king to Charles but finally joined the Luxembourg party after G\u00fcnther's early death in 1349 and divided the Wittelsbach possessions amongst themselves again. In continuance of the conflict of the House of Wittelsbach with the House of Luxembourg, the Wittelsbach family returned to power in the Holy Roman Empire in 1400 with King Rupert of Germany, a great-grandnephew of Louis.\nFamily and children.\nIn 1308 Louis married his first wife, Beatrice of Silesia (1290\u20131322). Their children were:\nIn 1324, Louis married his second wife, Margaret II, Countess of Hainaut and Holland (1310\u20131356).\nTheir children were:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38803", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38803", "title": "Louis VI, Duke of Bavaria", "text": ""}
{"id": "38805", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38805", "title": "Oscar I submarine", "text": ""}
{"id": "38806", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38806", "title": "Wenceslas IV the Drunkard", "text": ""}
{"id": "38807", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38807", "title": "Homeomorphic", "text": ""}
{"id": "38808", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38808", "title": "Compression", "text": "Compression may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38809", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38809", "title": "GNU Privacy Guard", "text": "Data encryption and authentication program\nGNU Privacy Guard (GnuPG or GPG) is a free-software replacement for Symantec's cryptographic software suite PGP. The software is compliant with the now obsoleted , the IETF standards-track specification of OpenPGP. Modern versions of PGP are interoperable with GnuPG and other OpenPGP v4-compliant systems. \nNovember 2023 saw two drafts aiming to update the 2007 OpenPGP v4 specification (RFC4880), ultimately resulting in the RFC 9580 standard in July 2024. The proposal from the GnuPG developers, which is called LibrePGP, was not taken up by the OpenPGP Working Group and future versions of GnuPG will not support the current version of OpenPGP.\nGnuPG is part of the GNU Project and received major funding from the German government in 1999.\nOverview.\nGnuPG is a hybrid-encryption software program because it uses a combination of conventional symmetric-key cryptography for speed, and public-key cryptography for ease of secure key exchange, typically by using the recipient's public key to encrypt a session key which is used only once. This mode of operation is part of the OpenPGP standard and has been part of PGP from its first version.\nThe GnuPG\u00a01.x series uses an integrated cryptographic library, while the GnuPG\u00a02.x series replaces this with Libgcrypt.\nGnuPG encrypts messages using asymmetric key pairs individually generated by GnuPG users. The resulting public keys may be exchanged with other users in a variety of ways, such as Internet key servers. They must always be exchanged carefully to prevent identity spoofing by corrupting public key \u2194 \"owner\" identity correspondences. It is also possible to add a cryptographic digital signature to a message, so the message integrity and sender can be verified, if a particular correspondence relied upon has not been corrupted.\nGnuPG also supports symmetric encryption algorithms. By default, GnuPG uses the AES symmetrical algorithm since version 2.1, CAST5 was used in earlier versions. GnuPG does not use patented or otherwise restricted software or algorithms. Instead, GnuPG uses a variety of other, non-patented algorithms.\nFor a long time, it did not support the IDEA encryption algorithm used in PGP. It was in fact possible to use IDEA in GnuPG by downloading a plugin for it, however, this might require a license for some uses in countries in which IDEA was patented. Starting with versions 1.4.13 and 2.0.20, GnuPG supports IDEA because the last patent of IDEA expired in 2012. Support of IDEA is intended \"to get rid of all the questions from folks either trying to decrypt old data or migrating keys from PGP to GnuPG\", and hence is not recommended for regular use.\nMore recent releases of GnuPG\u00a02.x (\"modern\" and the now deprecated \"stable\" series) expose most cryptographic functions and algorithms Libgcrypt (its cryptography library) provides, including support for elliptic-curve cryptography (ECDH, ECDSA and EdDSA) in the \"modern\" series (i.e. since GnuPG\u00a02.1).\nAlgorithms.\nAs of 2.3 or 2.2 versions, GnuPG supports the following algorithms:\nHistory.\nGnuPG was initially developed by Werner Koch. The first production version, version 1.0.0, was released on September 7, 1999, almost two years after the first GnuPG release (version 0.0.0). The German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology funded the documentation and the port to Microsoft Windows in 2000.\nGnuPG is a system compliant to the OpenPGP standard, thus the history of OpenPGP is of importance; it was designed to interoperate with PGP, an email encryption program initially designed and developed by Phil Zimmermann.\nOn February 7, 2014, a GnuPG crowdfunding effort closed, raising \u20ac36,732 for a new website and infrastructure improvements.\nBranches.\nSince the release of a stable GnuPG 2.3, starting with version 2.3.3 in October 2021, three stable branches of GnuPG are actively maintained:\nBefore GnuPG 2.3, two stable branches of GnuPG were actively maintained:\nDifferent GnuPG 2.x versions (e.g. from the 2.2 and 2.0 branches) cannot be installed at the same time. However, it is possible to install a \"classic\" GnuPG version (i.e. from the 1.4 branch) along with any GnuPG 2.x version.\nBefore the release of GnuPG 2.2 (\"modern\"), the now deprecated \"stable\" branch (2.0) was recommended for general use, initially released on November 13, 2006. This branch reached its end-of-life on December 31, 2017; Its last version is 2.0.31, released on December 29, 2017.\nBefore the release of GnuPG 2.0, all stable releases originated from a single branch; i.e., before November 13, 2006, no multiple release branches were maintained in parallel. These former, sequentially succeeding (up to 1.4) release branches were:\n(Note that before the release of GnuPG 2.3.0, branches with an odd minor release number (e.g. 2.1, 1.9, 1.3) were development branches leading to a stable release branch with a \"+ 0.1\" higher version number (e.g. 2.2, 2.0, 1.4); hence branches 2.2 and 2.1 both belong to the \"modern\" series, 2.0 and 1.9 both to the \"stable\" series, while the branches 1.4 and 1.3 both belong to the \"classic\" series.\nWith the release of GnuPG 2.3.0, this nomenclature was altered to be composed of a \"stable\" and \"LTS\" branch from the \"modern\" series, plus 1.4 as the last maintained \"classic\" branch. Also note that even or odd minor release numbers do not indicate a stable or development release branch, anymore.)\nPlatforms.\nAlthough the basic GnuPG program has a command-line interface, there exists various front-ends that provide it with a graphical user interface. For example, GnuPG encryption support has been integrated into KMail and Evolution, the graphical email clients found in KDE and GNOME, the most popular Linux desktops. There are also graphical GnuPG front-ends, for example Seahorse for GNOME and KGPG and Kleopatra for KDE.\nGPGTools provides a number of front-ends for OS integration of encryption and key management as well as GnuPG installations via Installer packages for macOS. GPG Suite installs all related OpenPGP applications (GPG Keychain), plugins (GPG Mail) and dependencies (MacGPG), along with GPG Services (integration into macOS Services menu) to use GnuPG based encryption.\nInstant messaging applications such as Psi and Fire can automatically secure messages when GnuPG is installed and configured. Web-based software such as Horde also makes use of it. The cross-platform extension Enigmail provides GnuPG support for Mozilla Thunderbird and SeaMonkey. Similarly, Enigform provides GnuPG support for Mozilla Firefox. FireGPG was discontinued June 7, 2010.\nIn 2005, g10 Code GmbH and Intevation GmbH released Gpg4win, a software suite that includes GnuPG for Windows, GNU Privacy Assistant, and GnuPG plug-ins for Windows Explorer and Outlook. These tools are wrapped in a standard Windows installer, making it easier for GnuPG to be installed and used on Windows systems.\nVulnerabilities.\nThe OpenPGP standard specifies several methods of digitally signing messages. In 2003, due to an error in a change to GnuPG intended to make one of those methods more efficient, a security vulnerability was introduced. It affected only one method of digitally signing messages, only for some releases of GnuPG (1.0.2 through 1.2.3), and there were fewer than 1000 such keys listed on the key servers. Most people did not use this method, and were in any case discouraged from doing so, so the damage caused (if any, since none has been publicly reported) would appear to have been minimal. Support for this method has been removed from GnuPG versions released after this discovery (1.2.4 and later).\nTwo further vulnerabilities were discovered in early 2006; the first being that scripted uses of GnuPG for signature verification may result in false positives, the second that non-MIME messages were vulnerable to the injection of data which while not covered by the digital signature, would be reported as being part of the signed message. In both cases updated versions of GnuPG were made available at the time of the announcement.\nIn June 2017, a vulnerability (CVE-2017-7526) was discovered within Libgcrypt by Bernstein, Breitner and others: a library used by GnuPG, which enabled a full key recovery for RSA-1024 and about more than 1/8 of RSA-2048 keys. This side-channel attack exploits the fact that Libgcrypt used a sliding windows method for exponentiation which leads to the leakage of exponent bits and to full key recovery. Again, an updated version of GnuPG was made available at the time of the announcement.\nAround June 2018, the SigSpoof attacks were announced. These allowed an attacker to convincingly spoof digital signatures.\nIn January 2021, Libgcrypt 1.9.0 was released, which was found to contain a severe bug that was simple to exploit. A fix was released 10 days later in Libgcrypt 1.9.1.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38811", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38811", "title": "Proline", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nProline (symbol Pro or P) is an organic acid classed as a proteinogenic amino acid (used in the biosynthesis of proteins), although it does not contain the amino group -NH2 but is rather a secondary amine. The secondary amine nitrogen is in the protonated form (NH2+) under biological conditions, while the carboxyl group is in the deprotonated \u2212COO\u2212 form. The \"side chain\" from the \u03b1 carbon connects to the nitrogen forming a pyrrolidine loop, classifying it as a aliphatic amino acid. It is non-essential in humans, meaning the body can synthesize it from the non-essential amino acid -glutamate. It is encoded by all the codons starting with CC (CCU, CCC, CCA, and CCG).\nProline is the only proteinogenic amino acid which is a secondary amine, as the nitrogen atom is attached both to the \u03b1-carbon and to a chain of three carbons that together form a five-membered ring.\nHistory and etymology.\nProline was first isolated in 1900 by Richard Willst\u00e4tter who obtained the amino acid while studying \"N\"-methylproline, and synthesized proline by the reaction of sodium salt of diethyl malonate with 1,3-dibromopropane. The next year, Emil Fischer isolated proline from casein and the decomposition products of \u03b3-phthalimido-propylmalonic ester, and published the synthesis of proline from phthalimide propylmalonic ester.\nThe name proline comes from pyrrolidine, one of its constituents.\nBiosynthesis.\nProline is biosynthetically derived from the amino acid -glutamate. Glutamate-5-semialdehyde is first formed by glutamate 5-kinase (ATP-dependent) and glutamate-5-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (which requires NADH or NADPH). This can then either spontaneously cyclize to form 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylic acid, which is reduced to proline by pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase (using NADH or NADPH), or turned into ornithine by ornithine aminotransferase, followed by cyclisation by ornithine cyclodeaminase to form proline.\nBiological activity.\n-Proline has been found to act as a weak agonist of the glycine receptor and of both NMDA and non-NMDA (AMPA/kainate) ionotropic glutamate receptors. It has been proposed to be a potential endogenous excitotoxin. In plants, proline accumulation is a common physiological response to various stresses but is also part of the developmental program in generative tissues (e.g. pollen).\nA diet rich in proline was linked to an increased risk of depression in humans in a study from 2022 that was tested on a limited pre-clinical trial on humans and primarily in other organisms. Results were significant in the other organisms.\nProperties in protein structure.\nThe distinctive cyclic structure of proline's side chain gives proline an exceptional conformational rigidity compared to other amino acids. It also affects the rate of peptide bond formation between proline and other amino acids. When proline is bound as an amide in a peptide bond, its nitrogen is not bound to any hydrogen, meaning it cannot act as a hydrogen bond donor, but can be a hydrogen bond acceptor.\nPeptide bond formation with incoming Pro-tRNAPro in the ribosome is considerably slower than with any other tRNAs, which is a general feature of \"N\"-alkylamino acids. Peptide bond formation is also slow between an incoming tRNA and a chain ending in proline; with the creation of proline-proline bonds slowest of all.\nThe exceptional conformational rigidity of proline affects the secondary structure of proteins near a proline residue and may account for proline's higher prevalence in the proteins of thermophilic organisms. Protein secondary structure can be described in terms of the dihedral angles \u03c6, \u03c8 and \u03c9 of the protein backbone. The cyclic structure of proline's side chain locks the angle \u03c6 at approximately \u221265\u00b0.\nProline acts as a structural disruptor in the middle of regular secondary structure elements such as alpha helices and beta sheets; however, proline is commonly found as the first residue of an alpha helix and also in the edge strands of beta sheets. Proline is also commonly found in turns (another kind of secondary structure), and aids in the formation of beta turns. This may account for the curious fact that proline is usually solvent-exposed, despite having a completely aliphatic side chain.\nMultiple prolines and/or hydroxyprolines in a row can create a polyproline helix, the predominant secondary structure in collagen. The hydroxylation of proline by prolyl hydroxylase (or other additions of electron-withdrawing substituents such as fluorine) increases the conformational stability of collagen significantly. Hence, the hydroxylation of proline is a critical biochemical process for maintaining the connective tissue of higher organisms. Severe diseases such as scurvy can result from defects in this hydroxylation, e.g., mutations in the enzyme prolyl hydroxylase or lack of the necessary ascorbate (vitamin C) cofactor.\n\"Cis\"\u2013\"trans\" isomerization.\nPeptide bonds to proline, and to other \"N\"-substituted amino acids (such as sarcosine), are able to populate both the \"cis\" and \"trans\" isomers. Most peptide bonds overwhelmingly adopt the \"trans\" isomer (typically 99.9% under unstrained conditions), chiefly because the amide hydrogen (\"trans\" isomer) offers less steric repulsion to the preceding C\u03b1 atom than does the following C\u03b1 atom (\"cis\" isomer). By contrast, the \"cis\" and \"trans\" isomers of the X-Pro peptide bond (where X represents any amino acid) both experience steric clashes with the neighboring substitution and have a much lower energy difference. Hence, the fraction of X-Pro peptide bonds in the \"cis\" isomer under unstrained conditions is significantly elevated, with \"cis\" fractions typically in the range of 3-10%. However, these values depend on the preceding amino acid, with Gly and aromatic residues yielding increased fractions of the \"cis\" isomer. \"Cis\" fractions up to 40% have been identified for aromatic\u2013proline peptide bonds.\nFrom a kinetic standpoint, \"cis\"\u2013\"trans\" proline isomerization is a very slow process that can impede the progress of protein folding by trapping one or more proline residues crucial for folding in the non-native isomer, especially when the native protein requires the \"cis\" isomer. This is because proline residues are exclusively synthesized in the ribosome as the \"trans\" isomer form. All organisms possess prolyl isomerase enzymes to catalyze this isomerization, and some bacteria have specialized prolyl isomerases associated with the ribosome. However, not all prolines are essential for folding, and protein folding may proceed at a normal rate despite having non-native conformers of many X\u2013Pro peptide bonds.\nUses.\nProline and its derivatives are often used as asymmetric catalysts in proline organocatalysis reactions. The CBS reduction and proline catalysed aldol condensation are prominent examples.\nIn brewing, proteins rich in proline combine with polyphenols to produce haze (turbidity).\n-Proline is an osmoprotectant and therefore is used in many pharmaceutical and biotechnological applications.\nThe growth medium used in plant tissue culture may be supplemented with proline. This can increase growth, perhaps because it helps the plant tolerate the stresses of tissue culture. For proline's role in the stress response of plants, see .\nSpecialties.\nProline is one of the two amino acids that do not follow along with the typical Ramachandran plot, along with glycine. Due to the ring formation connected to the beta carbon, the \"\u03c8\" and \"\u03c6\" angles about the peptide bond have fewer allowable degrees of rotation. As a result, it is often found in \"turns\" of proteins as its free entropy (\u0394\"S\") is not as comparatively large to other amino acids and thus in a folded form vs. unfolded form, the change in entropy is smaller. Furthermore, proline is rarely found in \u03b1 and \u03b2 structures as it would reduce the stability of such structures, because its side chain \u03b1-nitrogen can only form one nitrogen bond.\nAdditionally, proline is the only amino acid that does not form a red-purple colour when developed by spraying with ninhydrin for uses in chromatography. Proline, instead, produces an orange-yellow colour.\nSynthesis.\nRacemic proline can be synthesized from diethyl malonate and acrylonitrile:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38812", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38812", "title": "Cross country skiing", "text": ""}
{"id": "38813", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38813", "title": "Coven", "text": "Group or gathering of witches \nA coven () is a group or gathering of witches. The word \"coven\" (from Anglo-Norman \"covent, cuvent\", from Old French \"covent\", from Latin \"conventum\" = convention) remained largely unused in English until 1921 when Margaret Murray promoted the idea that all witches across Europe met in groups of thirteen which they called \"covens\".\nModern paganism.\nIn Wicca and other similar forms of modern pagan witchcraft, such as Stregheria and Feri, a coven is a gathering or community of witches, like an affinity group, engagement group, or small covenant group. It is composed of a group of practitioners who gather together for rituals such as Drawing Down the Moon, or celebrating the Sabbats. The place at which they generally meet is called a covenstead.\nThe number of people involved may vary. Although some consider thirteen to be ideal (probably in deference to Murray's theories), any group of at least three can be a coven. A group of two is usually called a \"working couple\" (regardless of their gender). It can also unofficially be called an \"Obaven\" by some members of the community, derived from the Scottish Gaelic word \"obair\" meaning work, a tribute to the more official term \"working couple\", a portmanteau with the word \"coven\". Thus creating the word, \"Obaven\". Within the community, many believe that a coven larger than thirteen is unwieldy, citing unwieldy group dynamics and an unfair burden on the leadership. When a coven has grown too large to be manageable, it may split, or \"hive\". In Wicca, this may also occur when a newly made High Priest or High Priestess, also called 3rd Degree initiation, leaves to start their own coven.\nWiccan covens are usually jointly led by a High Priestess and a High Priest, although some are led by only one or the other, and some by a same-sex couple. In more recent forms of modern pagan witchcraft, covens are sometimes run as democracies with a rotating leadership.\nOnline covens.\nWith the rise of the Internet as a platform for collaborative discussion and media dissemination, it became popular for adherents and practitioners of Wicca to establish \"online covens\" which remotely teach tradition-specific crafts to students in a similar method of education as non-religious virtual online schools. One of the first online covens to take this route is the Coven of the Far Flung Net (CFFN), which was established in 1997 as the online arm of the Church of Universal Eclectic Wicca.\nHowever, because of potentially-unwieldy membership sizes, many online covens limit their memberships to anywhere between 10 and 100 students. The CFFN, in particular, tried to devolve its structure into a system of sub-coven clans (which governed their own application processes), a system which ended in 2003 due to fears by the CFFN leadership that the clans were becoming communities in their own right.\nOther contemporary forms.\nThe Urban Coven is a group founded on Facebook by Becca Gordon for women in Los Angeles to gather, hike, and howl at the Moon. It meets monthly and is estimated to have almost 3,500 members. A January 2016 gathering at Griffith Park drew nearly 1,000 women, and was described as follows:\nA lot of the women ... were there in groups \u2014 mothers and daughters, friends, colleagues. Some arrived solo and struck up conversations with other women or hiked in solitude.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38814", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38814", "title": "Wenceslas IV Holy Roman Emperor", "text": ""}
{"id": "38817", "revid": "150280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38817", "title": "Amstrad", "text": "British electronics company\nAmstrad plc was a British consumer electronics company, founded in 1968 by Alan Sugar. During the 1980s, the company was known for its home computers beginning with the Amstrad CPC and later also the ZX Spectrum range after the Sinclair deal, which led it to have a substantial share of the home computer market in Britain. In the following decade it shifted focus towards communication technologies, and its main business during the 2000s was the manufacture of satellite television set-top boxes for Sky, which Amstrad had started in 1989 as the then sole supplier of the emerging Sky TV service.\nHeadquartered in Brentwood, the company was listed on the London Stock Exchange from 1980 to 2008, the year when Sugar stepped down after 40 years. After acquiring Betacom and Viglen, Amstrad was broken up in 1997 but the name was soon revived when successor Betacom plc renamed itself to Amstrad plc. Amstrad was a FTSE 100 Index constituent up until the company was acquired by BSkyB in 2007 for \u00a3125 million. In 2010, Sky integrated Amstrad's satellite division as part of Sky so they could make their own set-top boxes in-house.\nHistory.\nEarly beginnings.\nAmstrad (also known as AMSTrad) was founded in 1968 by Alan Sugar at the age of 21, the name of the original company being AMS Trading (Amstrad) Limited, derived from its founder's initials (Alan Michael Sugar). Amstrad entered the market in the field of consumer electronics. During the 1970s they were at the forefront of low-priced hi-fi, TV and car stereo cassette technologies. Lower prices were achieved by injection moulding plastic hi-fi turntable covers, undercutting competitors who used the vacuum forming process.\nAmstrad expanded to the marketing of low cost amplifiers and tuners, imported from East Asia and badged with the Amstrad name for the UK market. Their first electrical product was the Amstrad 8000 amplifier.\nHome computers.\nIn 1980, Amstrad went public trading on the London Stock Exchange, and doubled in size each year during the early '80s. Amstrad began marketing its own home computers in an attempt to capture the market from Commodore and Sinclair, with the Amstrad CPC range in 1984. The CPC 464 was launched in the UK, Ireland, France, Australia, New Zealand, Germany, Spain and Italy. It was followed by the CPC 664 and CPC 6128 models. Later \"Plus\" variants of the 464 and 6128, launched in 1990, increased their functionality slightly.\nIn 1985, the popular Amstrad PCW range was introduced, which were principally word processors, complete with printer, running the LocoScript word processing program. They were also capable of running the CP/M operating system. The Amsoft division of Amstrad was set up to provide in-house software and consumables.\nOn 7 April 1986 Amstrad announced it had bought from Sinclair Research \"the worldwide rights to sell and manufacture all existing and future Sinclair computers and computer products, together with the Sinclair brand name and those intellectual property rights where they relate to computers and computer related products\", which included the ZX Spectrum, for \u00a35 million. This included Sinclair's unsold stock of Sinclair QLs and Spectrums. Amstrad made more than \u00a35 million on selling these surplus machines alone. Amstrad launched two new variants of the Spectrum: the ZX Spectrum +2, based on the ZX Spectrum 128, with a built-in cassette tape drive (like the CPC 464) and, the following year, the ZX Spectrum +3, with a built-in floppy disk drive (similar to the CPC 664 and 6128), taking the 3\" disks that many Amstrad machines used.\nIn 1986 Amstrad entered the IBM PC-compatible arena with the PC1512 system. In standard Amstrad livery and priced at \u00a3399 it was a success, capturing more than 25% of the European computer market. It was MS-DOS-based, but with the GEM graphics interface, and later Windows. In 1988 Amstrad attempted to make the first affordable portable personal computer with the PPC512 and 640 models, introduced a year before the Macintosh Portable. They ran MS-DOS on an 8\u00a0MHz processor, and the built-in screen could emulate the Monochrome Display Adapter or Color Graphics Adapter. Amstrad's final (and ill-fated) attempts to exploit the Sinclair brand were based on the company's own PCs; a compact desktop PC derived from the PPC 512, branded as the Sinclair PC200, and the PC1512 rebadged as the Sinclair PC500.\nAmstrad's second generation of PCs, the PC2000 series, were launched in 1989. However,\ndue to a problem with the Seagate ST277R hard disk shipped with the PC2386 model, these had to be recalled and fitted with Western Digital controllers. Amstrad later successfully sued Seagate, but following bad press over the hard disk problems, Amstrad lost its lead in the European PC market.\nLaunch of Sky and Astra Satellite.\nAmstrad had been a major supplier of set top boxes to UK satellite television pay-TV provider Sky since its launch in 1989 following the launch of the SES Astra 1A TV satellite. Amstrad was key to the introduction of Sky, as the company was responsible for finding methods to produce the requisite equipment at an attractive price for the consumer - Alan Sugar famously approached \"someone who bashes out dustbin lids\", to manufacture mesh satellite dishes cheaply. Ultimately, it was the only manufacturer producing receiver boxes and dishes at the system's launch, and continued to manufacture set top boxes for Sky, from analogue to digital including Sky's Sky+ digital video recorder.\nWith the addition of the Astra 1B TV satellite in May 1991 even more TV programs were available in Central Europe. In former East Germany as well as in the parts of former West Germany that had no access to cable TV, the affordable Amstrad receiver with the typical black mesh minidish were sold in large numbers. \nRestructuring in the 1990s.\nIn the early 1990s, Amstrad began to focus on portable computers rather than desktop computers. In 1990, Amstrad tried to enter the video game console market with the Amstrad GX4000, similar to what Commodore did at the same time with the C64 GS. The console, based on the Amstrad 464 Plus hardware, was a commercial failure, because it used outdated technology, and most games available for it were straight ports of CPC games that could be purchased for much less in their original format.\nIn 1993, Amstrad was licensed by Sega to produce a system which was similar to the Sega TeraDrive, going by the name of the Amstrad Mega PC, to try to regain their image in the gaming market. The system didn't succeed as well as expected, mostly due to its high initial retail price of \u00a3999. In that same year, Amstrad released the PenPad, a PDA similar to the Apple Newton, and released only weeks before it. It was a commercial failure, and had several technical and usability problems. It lacked most features that the Apple Newton included, but had a lower price at $450.\nAs Amstrad began to concentrate less on computers and more in communication, they purchased several telecommunications businesses including Betacom, Dancall Telecom, Viglen Computers, and modem manufacturer Dataflex Design Communications, bought out of liquidation, during the early 1990s. The company also established a direct marketing channel, Amstrad Direct, in late 1994 and announced 486- and Pentium-based products including an \"All-in-One Multimedia PC\" with built-in television tuner, infra-red remote control, amplifier and speakers. A pen-based personal digital assistant with support for a PCMCIA-based modem, the InfoPad, was also unveiled with a September 1995 launch scheduled.\nBy 1996, Alan Sugar was reported as having been looking for a buyer for Amstrad \"for some time\". Amongst the group's assets, cumulatively valued at \u00a3200 million, the Dancall subsidiary was of particular interest to potential acquirer Psion, producer of handheld computer products, for its expertise in \"GSM digital mobile phone functionality\" and the potential to integrate such functionality into Psion's own product range. Despite \"long drawn out negotiations\", the parties failed to agree a price and a strategy to dispose of the group's other assets. In 1997, Amstrad PLC was wound up, its shares being split into Viglen and Betacom instead. Betacom PLC was then renamed Amstrad PLC.\nThe same year, Amstrad supplied set top boxes to Australian broadcaster Foxtel, and in 2004 to Italian broadcaster Sky Italia.\nE-m@iler, Sky boxes, and final years.\nIn 2000, Amstrad released the first of its combined telephony and email devices, called the \"E-m@iler\". This was followed by the \"E-m@iler Plus\" in 2002, and the \"E3 Videophone\" in 2004. Amstrad's UK E-m@iler business is operated through a separate company, Amserve Ltd which is 89.8% owned by Amstrad and 10.2% owned by DSG International plc (formerly Dixons plc).\nAmstrad has also produced a variety of home entertainment products over their history, including hi-fi, televisions, VCRs, and DVD players.\nBSkyB takeover.\nIn July 2007, British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB) announced a takeover of Amstrad for \u00a3125m, a 23.7% premium on its market capitalisation. BSkyB had been a major client of Amstrad, accounting for 75% of sales for its 'set top box' business. Having supplied BSkyB with hardware since its inception in 1988, market analysts had noted the two companies becoming increasingly close.\nSky bought Amstrad so they could have their own hardware development division to develop new satellite boxes (Sky Q) made in-house. Under Sky, Amstrad only produced satellite receivers for Sky, as doing so allows them to reduce costs by cutting out the middleman. Its main competitor in this space was Pace plc.\nSugar commented that he wished to play a part in the business, saying: \"I turn 60 this year and I have had 40 years of hustling in the business, but now I have to start thinking about my team of loyal staff, many of whom have been with me for many years.\"\nIt was announced on 2 July 2008 that Sugar had stepped down as Chairman of Amstrad, which had been planned since BSkyB took over in 2007.\nAmstrad was taken off the Stock Exchange on 9 October 2008. Amstrad has ceased operations as a trading company, and now exists in name only. Amstrad's former offices are now a Premier Inn Hotel.\nRevival of Amstrad name.\nIn 2024 Sugar announced he had bought back the rights to the Amstrad name from Sky UK. Amstrad now belongs to a digital marketing firm named Amstrad Digital headed by Sugar's grandson Joe Baron.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38822", "revid": "24496035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38822", "title": "Power transmission", "text": "Movement of energy from its source to where it can be applied\nPower transmission is the movement of energy from its place of generation to a location where it is applied to perform useful work.\nPower is defined formally as units of energy per unit time. In SI units:\nformula_1\nSince the development of technology, transmission and storage systems have been of immense interest to technologists and technology users.\nElectrical power.\nWith the widespread establishment of electrical grids, power transmission is usually associated most with electric power transmission. Alternating current is normally preferred as its voltage may be easily stepped up by a transformer in order to minimize resistive loss in the conductors used to transmit power over great distances; another set of transformers is required to step it back down to safer or more usable voltage levels at destination.\nPower transmission is usually performed with overhead lines as this is the most economical way to do so. Underground transmission by high-voltage cables is chosen in crowded urban areas and in high-voltage direct-current (HVDC) submarine connections.\nPower might also be transmitted by changing electromagnetic fields or by radio waves; microwave energy may be carried efficiently over short distances by a waveguide or in free space via wireless power transfer.\nMechanical power.\nElectrical power transmission has replaced mechanical power transmission in all but the very shortest distances.\nFrom the 16th century through the Industrial Revolution to the end of the 19th century, mechanical power transmission was the norm. The oldest long-distance power transmission technology involved systems of push-rods or jerker lines (\"st\u00e4ngenkunst\" or \"feldst\u00e4ngen\") connecting waterwheels to distant mine-drainage and brine-well pumps. A surviving example from 1780 exists at Bad K\u00f6sen that transmits power approximately 200 meters from a waterwheel to a salt well, and from there, an additional 150 meters to a brine evaporator. This technology survived into the 21st century in a handful of oilfields in the US, transmitting power from a central pumping engine to the numerous pump-jacks in the oil field.\nMechanical power may be transmitted directly using a solid structure such as a driveshaft; transmission gears can adjust the amount of torque or force vs. speed in much the same way an electrical transformer adjusts voltage vs current. Factories were fitted with overhead line shafts providing rotary power. Short line-shaft systems were described by Agricola, connecting a waterwheel to numerous ore-processing machines. While the machines described by Agricola used geared connections from the shafts to the machinery, by the 19th century, drivebelts would become the norm for linking individual machines to the line shafts. One mid 19th century factory had 1,948 feet of line shafting with 541 pulleys.\nHydraulic systems use liquid under pressure to transmit power; canals and hydroelectric power generation facilities harness natural water power to lift ships or generate electricity. Pumping water or pushing mass uphill with (windmill pumps) is one possible means of energy storage. London had a hydraulic network powered by five pumping stations operated by the London Hydraulic Power Company, with a total effect of 5 MW.\nPneumatic systems use gasses under pressure to transmit power; compressed air is commonly used to operate pneumatic tools in factories and repair garages. A pneumatic wrench (for instance) is used to remove and install automotive tires far more quickly than could be done with standard manual hand tools. A pneumatic system was proposed by proponents of Edison's direct current as the basis of the power grid. Compressed air generated at Niagara Falls would drive far away generators of DC power. The war of the currents ended with alternating current (AC) as the only means of long distance power transmission.\nThermal power.\nThermal power can be transported in pipelines containing a high heat capacity fluid such as oil or water as used in district heating systems, or by physically transporting material items, such as bottle cars, or in the ice trade.\nChemicals and fuels.\nWhile not technically power transmission, energy is commonly transported by shipping chemical or nuclear fuels. Possible artificial fuels include radioactive isotopes, wood alcohol, grain alcohol, methane, synthetic gas, hydrogen gas (H2), cryogenic gas, and liquefied natural gas (LNG).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38823", "revid": "7646666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38823", "title": "Fulda", "text": "City in Hesse, Germany\nFulda (; historically in English called Fuld) is a city in Hesse, Germany, on the river Fulda and is the administrative seat of the Fulda district (\"Kreis\"). In 1990 the city hosted the 30th Hessentag state festival.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn 744 Saint Sturm, a disciple of Saint Boniface, founded the Benedictine monastery of Fulda as one of Boniface's outposts in the reorganization of the church in Germany. The initial grant for the abbey was signed by Carloman, Mayor of the Palace in Austrasia (in office 741\u201347), the son of Charles Martel. The support of the Mayors of the Palace, and later of the early Pippinid and Carolingian rulers, was important to Boniface's success. Fulda also received support from many of the leading families of the Carolingian world. Sturm, abbot from 747 until 779, was most likely related to the Agilolfing dukes of Bavaria.\nFulda also received large and constant donations from the Etichonids, a leading family in Alsace, and from the Conradines, predecessors of the Salian Holy Roman Emperors. Under Sturm, the donations Fulda received from these and other important families helped in the establishment of daughter-houses near Fulda. In 751, Boniface and his disciple and successor Lullus obtained an exemption for Fulda, having it placed directly under the Papal See and making it independent of interference by bishops or worldly princes. The monastery school became a renowned center of learning.\nAfter his martyrdom by the Frisians in 754, the relics of Saint Boniface were brought back to Fulda. Because of the stature this afforded the monastery, the donations increased, and Fulda could establish daughter-houses further away, for example in Hamelin. Meanwhile, Saint Lullus, successor of Boniface as archbishop of Mainz, tried to absorb the abbey into his archbishopric, but failed.\nBetween 790 and 819 the community rebuilt the main abbey church to more fittingly house the relics. They based their new basilica on the original 4th-century (since demolished) Old St. Peter's Basilica in Rome, using the transept and crypt plan of that great pilgrimage church to frame their own saint as the \"Apostle of the Germans\".\nThe crypt of the original abbey church still holds those relics, but the church itself has been subsumed into a Baroque renovation. A small, 9th-century chapel remains standing within walking distance of the church, as do the foundations of a later women's abbey. Rabanus Maurus served as abbot at Fulda from 822 to 842. Fulda Abbey owned such works as the \"Res Gestae\" by the fourth-century Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus and the Codex Fuldensis, as well as works by Cicero, Servius, Bede and Sulpicius Severus.\nCounter-Reformation.\nPrince-abbot Balthasar von Dernbach adopted a policy of Counter-Reformation. In 1571 he called in the Jesuits to found a school and college. He insisted the members of the chapter should return to a monastic form of life. Whereas his predecessors had tolerated Protestantism, resulting in most of the citizenry of Fulda and a large portion of the principality's countryside professing Lutheranism, Balthasar ordered his subjects either to return to the Catholic faith or leave his territories. He also ordered the Fulda witch trials, in which hundreds of people, including a number of crypto-Protestants were arrested on charges of witchcraft alongside others.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nThe foundation of the abbey of Fulda and its territory originated with an Imperial grant and the sovereign principality therefore was subject only to the German emperor. Fulda became a bishopric in 1752 and the prince-abbots were given the additional title of prince-bishop. The prince-abbots (and later prince-bishops) ruled Fulda and the surrounding region until the bishopric was forcibly dissolved by Napoleon I in 1802.\nThe city went through a baroque building campaign in the 18th century, resulting in the current \"Baroque City\" status. This included a remodeling of Fulda Cathedral (1704\u201312) and of the \"Stadtschloss\" (Fulda Castle-Palace, 1707\u201312) by Johann Dientzenhofer. The city parish church, St Blasius, was built between 1771 and 1785. In 1764 a porcelain factory was started in Fulda under Prince-Bishop, Prince-Abbot Heinrich von Bibra, but in 1789, shortly after his death, it was closed down by his successor, Prince-Bishop, Prince-Abbot Adalbert von Harstall.\nThe city was given to Prince William Frederick of Orange-Nassau (the later King William I of the Netherlands) in 1803 (as part of the short-lived Principality of Nassau-Orange-Fulda) and was annexed to the Grand Duchy of Berg in 1806 and in 1809 to the Principality of Frankfurt. After the Congress of Vienna of 1814\u201315, most of the territory went to the Electorate of Hesse, which the Prussia annexed in 1866.\n20th century.\nFrom 1938 to 1943 Fulda was the location of a Nazi forced labour camp for Romani people.\nFulda lends its name to the Fulda Gap, a traditional east\u2013west invasion route used by Napoleon I and others. During the Cold War it was presumed to be an invasion route for any conventional war between NATO and Soviet forces. Downs Barracks in Fulda was the headquarters of the American 14th Armored Cavalry Regiment, later replaced by the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment. The cavalry had as many as 3,000 soldiers from the end of World War II until 1993. Not all those soldiers were in Fulda proper but scattered over observation posts and in the cities of Bad Kissingen and Bad Hersfeld. The strategic importance of this region, along the border between East and West Germany, led to a large United States and Soviet military presence.\nPolitics.\nFulda has traditionally been a conservative Catholic city, with the Roman Catholic Diocese of Fulda being based in the city cathedral. During the time of the German Empire and Weimar Republic, the city was a stronghold for the Centre Party. After the end of World War II, in addition to all mayors, Fulda's constituency seats have been safe seats for CDU in both the Landtag of Hesse (District X 1946\u20131950, District 14 1950\u20131983, Fulda I since 1983) and Bundestag (Fulda electoral district). The CDU has never received less than 42.4 percent of the vote in communal elections since 1946.\nOberb\u00fcrgermeister (Lord mayor) Department I (head and personnel administration, finance, committee work, culture, business development, city marketing, investments)\nDepartment II (public security and order, family, youth, schools, sports, social affairs, seniors)\nLandtag (state parliament)\nBundestag (federal parliament)\nBetween 1927 and 1974, Fulda was a district-free city (Kreisfreie Stadt). Since 1974, it has been included in the eponymous district as a city with special status (Stadt mit Sonderstatus), a distinction it shares with six other Hessian cities, meaning that it takes on tasks more usually performed by the district.\nTransport.\nFulda station is a transport hub and interchange point between local and long-distance traffic of the German railway network, and is classified by Deutsche Bahn as a category2 station. It is on the Hanover\u2013W\u00fcrzburg high-speed railway; the North\u2013South line (\"Nord-S\u00fcd-Strecke\"), comprising the Bebra\u2013Fulda line north of Fulda, and the Kinzig Valley Railway and Fulda\u2013Main Railway to the south; the Vogelsberg Railway, which connects to the hills of the Vogelsberg in the west; and the Fulda\u2013Gersfeld Railway (Rh\u00f6n Railway) to Gersfeld in the Rh\u00f6n Mountains to the east.\nFulda is on the Bundesautobahn 7 (BAB 7). Bundesautobahn 66 starts at the interchange with the BAB 7, heading south towards Frankfurt. Fulda is also on the Bundesstra\u00dfe 27.\nThe city doesn't have its own airport. The nearest airport is served by Frankfurt Airport, it is located south west of Fulda.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nFulda is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38824", "revid": "21112944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38824", "title": "Electric power transmission", "text": "Bulk movement of electrical energy\nElectric power transmission is the bulk movement of electrical energy from a generating site, such as a power plant, to an electrical substation. The interconnected lines that facilitate this movement form a \"transmission network\". This is distinct from the local wiring between high-voltage substations and customers, which is typically referred to as electric power distribution. The combined transmission and distribution network is part of electricity delivery, known as the electrical grid.\nEfficient long-distance transmission of electric power requires high voltages. This reduces the losses produced by strong currents. Transmission lines use either alternating current (AC) or direct current (DC). The voltage level is changed with transformers. The voltage is stepped up for transmission, then reduced for local distribution.\nA wide area synchronous grid, known as an \"interconnection\" in North America, directly connects generators delivering AC power with the same relative \"frequency\" to many consumers. North America has four major interconnections: Western, Eastern, Quebec and Texas. One grid connects most of continental Europe.\nHistorically, transmission and distribution lines were often owned by the same company, but starting in the 1990s, many countries liberalized the regulation of the electricity market in ways that led to separate companies handling transmission and distribution.\nSystem.\nMost North American transmission lines are high-voltage three-phase AC, although single phase AC is sometimes used in railway electrification systems. DC technology is used for greater efficiency over longer distances, typically hundreds of miles. High-voltage direct current (HVDC) technology is also used in submarine power cables (typically longer than 30 miles (50\u00a0km)), and in the interchange of power between grids that are not mutually synchronized. HVDC links stabilize power distribution networks where sudden new loads, or blackouts, in one part of a network might otherwise result in synchronization problems and cascading failures.\nElectricity is transmitted at high voltages to reduce the energy loss due to resistance that occurs over long distances. Power is usually transmitted through overhead power lines. Underground power transmission has a significantly higher installation cost and greater operational limitations, but lowers maintenance costs. Underground transmission is more common in urban areas or environmentally sensitive locations.\nElectrical energy must typically be generated at the same rate at which it is consumed. A sophisticated control system is required to ensure that power generation closely matches demand. If demand exceeds supply, the imbalance can cause generation plant(s) and transmission equipment to automatically disconnect or shut down to prevent damage. In the worst case, this may lead to a cascading series of shutdowns and a major regional blackout.\nThe US Northeast faced blackouts in 1965, 1977, 2003, and major blackouts in other US regions in 1996 and 2011. Electric transmission networks are interconnected into regional, national, and even continent-wide networks to reduce the risk of such a failure by providing multiple redundant, alternative routes for power to flow should such shutdowns occur. Transmission companies determine the maximum reliable capacity of each line (ordinarily less than its physical or thermal limit) to ensure that spare capacity is available in the event of a failure in another part of the network.\nOverhead.\nHigh-voltage overhead conductors are not covered by insulation. The conductor material is nearly always an aluminium alloy, formed of several strands and possibly reinforced with steel strands. Copper was sometimes used for overhead transmission, but aluminum is lighter, reduces yields only marginally and costs much less. Overhead conductors are supplied by several companies. Conductor material and shapes are regularly improved to increase capacity.\nConductor sizes range from 12\u00a0mm2 (#6 American wire gauge) to 1,092\u00a0mm2 (2,156,000\u00a0circular mils area), with varying resistance and current-carrying capacity. For large conductors (more than a few centimetres in diameter), much of the current flow is concentrated near the surface due to the skin effect. The center of the conductor carries little current but contributes weight and cost. Thus, multiple parallel cables (called bundle conductors) are used for higher capacity. Bundle conductors are used at high voltages to reduce energy loss caused by corona discharge.\nToday, transmission-level voltages are usually considered to be 110\u00a0kV and above. Lower voltages, such as 66\u00a0kV and 33\u00a0kV, are usually considered subtransmission voltages, but are occasionally used on long lines with light loads. Voltages less than 33\u00a0kV are usually used for distribution. Voltages above 765\u00a0kV are considered extra high voltage and require different designs.\nOverhead transmission wires depend on air for insulation, requiring that lines maintain minimum clearances. Adverse weather conditions, such as high winds and low temperatures, interrupt transmission. Wind speeds as low as can permit conductors to encroach operating clearances, resulting in a flashover and loss of supply. Oscillatory motion of the physical line is termed conductor gallop or flutter depending on the frequency and amplitude of oscillation.\nUnderground.\nElectric power can be transmitted by underground power cables. Underground cables take up no right-of-way, have lower visibility, and are less affected by weather. However, cables must be insulated. Cable and excavation costs are much higher than overhead construction. Faults in buried transmission lines take longer to locate and repair.\nIn some metropolitan areas, cables are enclosed by metal pipe and insulated with dielectric fluid (usually an oil) that is either static or circulated via pumps. If an electric fault damages the pipe and leaks dielectric, liquid nitrogen is used to freeze portions of the pipe to enable draining and repair. This extends the repair period and increases costs. The temperature of the pipe and surroundings are monitored throughout the repair period.\nUnderground lines are limited by their thermal capacity, which permits less overload or re-rating lines. Long underground AC cables have significant capacitance, which reduces their ability to provide useful power beyond . DC cables are not limited in length by their capacitance.\nHistory.\nCommercial electric power was initially transmitted at the same voltage used by lighting and mechanical loads. This restricted the distance between generating plant and loads. In 1882, DC voltage could not easily be increased for long-distance transmission. Different classes of loads (for example, lighting, fixed motors, and traction/railway systems) required different voltages, and so used different generators and circuits.\nThus, generators were sited near their loads, a practice that later became known as distributed generation using large numbers of small generators.\nTransmission of alternating current (AC) became possible after Lucien Gaulard and John Dixon Gibbs built what they called the secondary generator, an early transformer provided with 1:1 turn ratio and open magnetic circuit, in 1881.\nThe first long distance AC line was long, built for the 1884 International Exhibition of Electricity in Turin, Italy. It was powered by a 2\u00a0kV, 130\u00a0Hz Siemens &amp; Halske alternator and featured several Gaulard transformers with primary windings connected in series, which fed incandescent lamps. The system proved the feasibility of AC electric power transmission over long distances.\nThe first commercial AC distribution system entered service in 1885 in via dei Cerchi, Rome, Italy, for public lighting. It was powered by two Siemens &amp; Halske alternators rated 30\u00a0hp (22\u00a0kW), 2 kV at 120\u00a0Hz and used 19\u00a0km of cables and 200\u00a0parallel-connected 2\u00a0kV to 20\u00a0V step-down transformers provided with a closed magnetic circuit, one for each lamp. A few months later it was followed by the first British AC system, serving Grosvenor Gallery. It also featured Siemens alternators and 2.4\u00a0kV to 100\u00a0V step-down transformers \u2013 one per user \u2013 with shunt-connected primaries.\nWorking to improve what he considered an impractical Gaulard-Gibbs design, electrical engineer William Stanley, Jr. developed the first practical series AC transformer in 1885. Working with the support of George Westinghouse, in 1886 he demonstrated a transformer-based AC lighting system in Great Barrington, Massachusetts. It was powered by a steam engine-driven 500\u00a0V Siemens generator. Voltage was stepped down to 100\u00a0volts using the Stanley transformer to power incandescent lamps at 23\u00a0businesses over . This practical demonstration of a transformer and alternating current lighting system led Westinghouse to begin installing AC systems later that year.\nIn 1888 the first designs for an AC motor appeared. These were induction motors running on polyphase current, independently invented by Galileo Ferraris and Nikola Tesla. Westinghouse licensed Tesla's design. Practical three-phase motors were designed by Mikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky and Charles Eugene Lancelot Brown. Widespread use of such motors were delayed many years by development problems and the scarcity of polyphase power systems needed to power them.\nIn the late 1880s and early 1890s smaller electric companies merged into larger corporations such as Ganz and AEG in Europe and General Electric and Westinghouse Electric in the US. These companies developed AC systems, but the technical difference between direct and alternating current systems required a much longer technical merger. Alternating current's economies of scale with large generating plants and long-distance transmission slowly added the ability to link all the loads. These included single phase AC systems, poly-phase AC systems, low voltage incandescent lighting, high-voltage arc lighting, and existing DC motors in factories and street cars. In what became a universal system, these technological differences were temporarily bridged via the rotary converters and motor-generators that allowed the legacy systems to connect to the AC grid. These stopgaps were slowly replaced as older systems were retired or upgraded.\nThe first transmission of single-phase alternating current using high voltage came in Oregon in 1890 when power was delivered from a hydroelectric plant at Willamette Falls to the city of Portland down river. The first three-phase alternating current using high voltage took place in 1891 during the international electricity exhibition in Frankfurt. A 15 kV transmission line, approximately 175\u00a0km long, connected Lauffen on the Neckar and Frankfurt.\nTransmission voltages increased throughout the 20th\u00a0century. By 1914, fifty-five transmission systems operating at more than 70 kV were in service. The highest voltage then used was 150\u00a0kV. Interconnecting multiple generating plants over a wide area reduced costs. The most efficient plants could be used to supply varying loads during the day. Reliability was improved and capital costs were reduced, because stand-by generating capacity could be shared over many more customers and a wider area. Remote and low-cost sources of energy, such as hydroelectric power or mine-mouth coal, could be exploited to further lower costs.\nThe 20th\u00a0century's rapid industrialization made electrical transmission lines and grids critical infrastructure. Interconnection of local generation plants and small distribution networks was spurred by World War I, when large electrical generating plants were built by governments to power munitions factories.\nBulk transmission.\nThese networks use components such as power lines, cables, circuit breakers, switches and transformers. The transmission network is usually administered on a regional basis by an entity such as a regional transmission organization or transmission system operator.\nTransmission efficiency is improved at higher voltage and lower current. The reduced current reduces heating losses. Joule's first law states that energy losses are proportional to the square of the current. Thus, reducing the current by a factor of two lowers the energy lost to conductor resistance by a factor of four for any given size of conductor.\nThe optimum size of a conductor for a given voltage and current can be estimated by Kelvin's law for conductor size, which states that size is optimal when the annual cost of energy wasted in resistance is equal to the annual capital charges of providing the conductor. At times of lower interest rates and low commodity costs, Kelvin's law indicates that thicker wires are optimal. Otherwise, thinner conductors are indicated. Since power lines are designed for long-term use, Kelvin's law is used in conjunction with long-term estimates of the price of copper and aluminum as well as interest rates.\nHigher voltage is achieved in AC circuits by using a \"step-up transformer\". High-voltage direct current (HVDC) systems require relatively costly conversion equipment that may be economically justified for particular projects such as submarine cables and longer distance high capacity point-to-point transmission. HVDC is necessary for sending energy between unsynchronized grids.\nA transmission grid is a network of power stations, transmission lines, and substations. Energy is usually transmitted within a grid with three-phase AC. Single-phase AC is used only for distribution to end users since it is not usable for large polyphase induction motors. In the 19th\u00a0century, two-phase transmission was used but required either four wires or three wires with unequal currents. Higher order phase systems require more than three wires, but deliver little or no benefit.\nWhile the price of generating capacity is high, energy demand is variable, making it often cheaper to import needed power than to generate it locally. Because loads often rise and fall together across large areas, power often comes from distant sources. Because of the economic benefits of load sharing, wide area transmission grids may span countries and even continents. Interconnections between producers and consumers enables power to flow even if some links are inoperative.\nThe slowly varying portion of demand is known as the \"base load\" and is generally served by large facilities with constant operating costs, termed firm power. Such facilities are nuclear, coal or hydroelectric, while other energy sources such as concentrated solar thermal and geothermal power have the potential to provide firm power. Renewable energy sources, such as solar photovoltaics, wind, wave, and tidal, are, due to their intermittency, not considered to be firm. The remaining or \"peak\" power demand, is supplied by peaking power plants, which are typically smaller, faster-responding, and higher cost sources, such as combined cycle or combustion turbine plants typically fueled by natural gas.\nLong-distance transmission (hundreds of kilometers) is cheap and efficient, with costs of US$0.005\u20130.02 per kWh, compared to annual averaged large producer costs of US$0.01\u20130.025 per kWh, retail rates upwards of US$0.10 per kWh, and multiples of retail for instantaneous suppliers at unpredicted high demand moments. New York often buys over 1000\u00a0MW of low-cost hydropower from Canada. Local sources (even if more expensive and infrequently used) can protect the power supply from weather and other disasters that can disconnect distant suppliers.\nHydro and wind sources cannot be moved closer to big cities, and solar costs are lowest in remote areas where local power needs are nominal. Connection costs can determine whether any particular renewable alternative is economically realistic. Costs can be prohibitive for transmission lines, but high capacity, long distance super grid transmission network costs could be recovered with modest usage fees.\nGrid input.\nAt power stations, power is produced at a relatively low voltage between about 2.3\u00a0kV and 30\u00a0kV, depending on the size of the unit. The voltage is then stepped up by the power station transformer to a higher voltage (115\u00a0kV to 765\u00a0kV AC) for transmission.\nIn the United States, power transmission is, variously, 230\u00a0kV to 500\u00a0kV, with less than 230\u00a0kV or more than 500\u00a0kV as exceptions.\nThe Western Interconnection has two primary interchange voltages: 500\u00a0kV AC at 60\u00a0Hz, and \u00b1500\u00a0kV (1,000\u00a0kV net) DC from North to South (Columbia River to Southern California) and Northeast to Southwest (Utah to Southern California). The 287.5\u00a0kV (Hoover Dam to Los Angeles line, via Victorville) and 345\u00a0kV (Arizona Public Service (APS) line) are local standards, both of which were implemented before 500\u00a0kV became practical.\nLosses.\nTransmitting electricity at high voltage reduces the fraction of energy lost to Joule heating, which varies by conductor type, the current, and the transmission distance. For example, a span at 765\u00a0kV carrying 1000\u00a0MW of power can have losses of 0.5% to 1.1%. A 345\u00a0kV line carrying the same load across the same distance has losses of 4.2%. For a given amount of power, a higher voltage reduces the current and thus the resistive losses. For example, raising the voltage by a factor of 10 reduces the current by a corresponding factor of 10 and therefore the formula_1 losses by a factor of 100, provided the same sized conductors are used in both cases. Even if the conductor size (cross-sectional area) is decreased ten-fold to match the lower current, the formula_1 losses are still reduced ten-fold using the higher voltage.\nWhile power loss can also be reduced by increasing the wire's conductance (by increasing its cross-sectional area), larger conductors are heavier and more expensive. And since conductance is proportional to cross-sectional area, resistive power loss is only reduced proportionally with increasing cross-sectional area, providing a much smaller benefit than the squared reduction provided by multiplying the voltage.\nLong-distance transmission is typically done with overhead lines at voltages of 115 to 1,200\u00a0kV. At higher voltages, where more than 2,000\u00a0kV exists between conductor and ground, corona discharge losses are so large that they can offset the lower resistive losses in the line conductors. Measures to reduce corona losses include larger conductor diameter, hollow cores or conductor bundles.\nFactors that affect resistance and thus loss include temperature, spiraling, and the skin effect. Resistance increases with temperature. Spiraling, which refers to the way stranded conductors spiral about the center, also contributes to increases in conductor resistance. The skin effect causes the effective resistance to increase at higher AC frequencies. Corona and resistive losses can be estimated using a mathematical model.\nUS transmission and distribution losses were estimated at 6.6% in 1997, 6.5% in 2007 and 5% from 2013 to 2019. In general, losses are estimated from the discrepancy between power produced (as reported by power plants) and power sold; the difference constitutes transmission and distribution losses, assuming no utility theft occurs.\nAs of 1980, the longest cost-effective distance for DC transmission was . For AC it was , though US transmission lines are substantially shorter.\nIn any AC line, conductor inductance and capacitance can be significant. Currents that flow solely in reaction to these properties, (which together with the resistance define the impedance) constitute reactive power flow, which transmits no power to the load. These reactive currents, however, cause extra heating losses. The ratio of real power transmitted to the load to apparent power (the product of a circuit's voltage and current, without reference to phase angle) is the power factor. As reactive current increases, reactive power increases and power factor decreases.\nFor transmission systems with low power factor, losses are higher than for systems with high power factor. Utilities add capacitor banks, reactors and other components (such as phase-shifters; static VAR compensators; and flexible AC transmission systems, FACTS) throughout the system help to compensate for the reactive power flow, reduce the losses in power transmission and stabilize system voltages. These measures are collectively called 'reactive support'.\nTransposition.\nCurrent flowing through transmission lines induces a magnetic field that surrounds the lines of each phase and affects the inductance of the surrounding conductors of other phases. The conductors' mutual inductance is partially dependent on the physical orientation of the lines with respect to each other. Three-phase lines are conventionally strung with phases separated vertically. The mutual inductance seen by a conductor of the phase in the middle of the other two phases is different from the inductance seen on the top/bottom.\nUnbalanced inductance among the three conductors is problematic because it may force the middle line to carry a disproportionate amount of the total power transmitted. Similarly, an unbalanced load may occur if one line is consistently closest to the ground and operates at a lower impedance. Because of this phenomenon, conductors must be periodically transposed along the line so that each phase sees equal time in each relative position to balance out the mutual inductance seen by all three phases. To accomplish this, line position is swapped at specially designed transposition towers at regular intervals along the line using various transposition schemes.\nSubtransmission.\nSubtransmission runs at relatively lower voltages. It is uneconomical to connect all distribution substations to the high main transmission voltage, because that equipment is larger and more expensive. Typically, only larger substations connect with this high voltage. Voltage is stepped down before the current is sent to smaller substations. Subtransmission circuits are usually arranged in loops so that a single line failure does not stop service to many customers for more than a short time.\nLoops can be \"normally closed\", where loss of one circuit should result in no interruption, or \"normally open\" where substations can switch to a backup supply. While subtransmission circuits are usually carried on overhead lines, in urban areas buried cable may be used. The lower-voltage subtransmission lines use less right-of-way and simpler structures; undergrounding is less difficult.\nNo fixed cutoff separates subtransmission and transmission, or subtransmission and distribution. Their voltage ranges overlap. Voltages of 69\u00a0kV, 115\u00a0kV, and 138\u00a0kV are often used for subtransmission in North America. As power systems evolved, voltages formerly used for transmission were used for subtransmission, and subtransmission voltages became distribution voltages. Like transmission, subtransmission moves relatively large amounts of power, and like distribution, subtransmission covers an area instead of just point-to-point.\nTransmission grid exit.\nSubstation transformers reduce the voltage to a lower level for distribution to customers. This distribution is accomplished with a combination of sub-transmission (33 to 138\u00a0kV) and distribution (3.3 to 25\u00a0kV). Finally, at the point of use, the energy is transformed to end-user voltage (100 to 4160 volts).\nAdvantage of high-voltage transmission.\nHigh-voltage power transmission allows for lesser resistive losses over long distances. This efficiency delivers a larger proportion of the generated power to the loads.\nIn a simplified model, the grid delivers electricity from an ideal voltage source with voltage formula_3, delivering a power formula_4) to a single point of consumption, modelled by a resistance formula_5, when the wires are long enough to have a significant resistance formula_6.\nIf the resistances are in series with no intervening transformer, the circuit acts as a voltage divider, because the same current formula_7 runs through the wire resistance and the powered device. As a consequence, the useful power (at the point of consumption) is:\nformula_8\nShould an ideal transformer convert high-voltage, low-current electricity into low-voltage, high-current electricity with a voltage ratio of formula_9 (i.e., the voltage is divided by formula_9 and the current is multiplied by formula_9 in the secondary branch, compared to the primary branch), then the circuit is again equivalent to a voltage divider, but the wires now have apparent resistance of only formula_12. The useful power is then:\nformula_13\nFor formula_14 (i.e. conversion of high voltage to low voltage near the consumption point), a larger fraction of the generator's power is transmitted to the consumption point and a lesser fraction is lost to Joule heating.\nModeling.\nThe terminal characteristics of the transmission line are the voltage and current at the sending (S) and receiving (R) ends. The transmission line can be modeled as a black box and a 2\u00a0by\u00a02 transmission matrix is used to model its behavior, as follows:\nformula_15\nThe line is assumed to be a reciprocal, symmetrical network, meaning that the receiving and sending labels can be switched with no consequence. The transmission matrix T has the properties:\nThe parameters \"A\", \"B\", \"C\", and \"D\" differ depending on how the desired model handles the line's resistance (\"R\"), inductance (\"L\"), capacitance (\"C\"), and shunt (parallel, leak) conductance \"G\".\nThe four main models are the short line approximation, the medium line approximation, the long line approximation (with distributed parameters), and the lossless line. In such models, a capital letter such as \"R\" refers to the total quantity summed over the line and a lowercase letter such as \"c\" refers to the per-unit-length quantity.\nLossless line.\nThe lossless line approximation is the least accurate; it is typically used on short lines where the inductance is much greater than the resistance. For this approximation, the voltage and current are identical at the sending and receiving ends.\nThe characteristic impedance is pure real, which means resistive for that impedance, and it is often called surge impedance. When a lossless line is terminated by surge impedance, the voltage does not drop. Though the phase angles of voltage and current are rotated, the magnitudes of voltage and current remain constant along the line. For load\u00a0&gt;\u00a0SIL, the voltage drops from sending end and the line \"consumes\" VARs. For load\u00a0&lt;\u00a0SIL, the voltage increases from the sending end, and the line \"generates\" VARs.\nShort line.\nThe short line approximation is normally used for lines shorter than . There, only a series impedance \"Z\" is considered, while \"C\" and \"G\" are ignored. The final result is that A\u00a0=\u00a0D\u00a0=\u00a01 per unit, B\u00a0=\u00a0Z\u00a0Ohms, and C\u00a0=\u00a00. The associated transition matrix for this approximation is therefore:\nformula_18\nMedium line.\nThe medium line approximation is used for lines running between . The series impedance and the shunt (current leak) conductance are considered, placing half of the shunt conductance at each end of the line. This circuit is often referred to as a \"nominal \"\u03c0\" (pi)\" circuit because of the shape (\"\u03c0\") that is taken on when leak conductance is placed on both sides of the circuit diagram. The analysis of the medium line produces:\nformula_19\nCounterintuitive behaviors of medium-length transmission lines:\nLong line.\nThe long line model is used when a higher degree of accuracy is needed or when the line under consideration is more than long. Series resistance and shunt conductance are considered to be distributed parameters, such that each differential length of the line has a corresponding differential series impedance and shunt admittance. The following result can be applied at any point along the transmission line, where formula_20 is the propagation constant.\nformula_21\nTo find the voltage and current at the end of the long line, formula_22 should be replaced with formula_23 (the line length) in all parameters of the transmission matrix. This model applies the Telegrapher's equations.\nHigh-voltage direct current.\nHigh-voltage direct current (HVDC) is used to transmit large amounts of power over long distances or for interconnections between asynchronous grids. When electrical energy is transmitted over very long distances, the power lost in AC transmission becomes appreciable and it is less expensive to use direct current instead. For a long transmission line, these lower losses (and reduced construction cost of a DC line) can offset the cost of the required converter stations at each end.\nHVDC is used for long submarine cables where AC cannot be used because of cable capacitance. In these cases special high-voltage cables are used. Submarine HVDC systems are often used to interconnect the electricity grids of islands, for example, between Great Britain and continental Europe, between Great Britain and Ireland, between Tasmania and the Australian mainland, between the North and South Islands of New Zealand, between New Jersey and New York City, and between New Jersey and Long Island. Submarine connections up to in length have been deployed.\nHVDC links can be used to control grid problems. The power transmitted by an AC line increases as the phase angle between source end voltage and destination ends increases, but too large a phase angle allows the systems at either end to fall out of step. Since the power flow in a DC link is controlled independently of the phases of the AC networks that it connects, this phase angle limit does not exist, and a DC link is always able to transfer its full rated power. A DC link therefore stabilizes the AC grid at either end, since power flow and phase angle can then be controlled independently.\nAs an example, to adjust the flow of AC power on a hypothetical line between Seattle and Boston would require adjustment of the relative phase of the two regional electrical grids. This is an everyday occurrence in AC systems, but one that can become disrupted when AC system components fail and place unexpected loads on the grid. With an HVDC line instead, such an interconnection would:\n(and possibly in other cooperating cities along the transmission route). Such a system could be less prone to failure if parts of it were suddenly shut down. One example of a long DC transmission line is the Pacific DC Intertie located in the Western United States.\nCapacity.\nThe amount of power that can be sent over a transmission line varies with the length of the line. The heating of short line conductors due to line losses sets a thermal limit. If too much current is drawn, conductors may sag too close to the ground, or conductors and equipment may overheat. For intermediate-length lines on the order of , the limit is set by the voltage drop in the line. For longer AC lines, system stability becomes the limiting factor. Approximately, the power flowing over an AC line is proportional to the cosine of the phase angle of the voltage and current at the ends.\nThis angle varies depending on system loading. It is undesirable for the angle to approach 90 degrees, as the power flowing decreases while resistive losses remain. The product of line length and maximum load is approximately proportional to the square of the system voltage. Series capacitors or phase-shifting transformers are used on long lines to improve stability. HVDC lines are restricted only by thermal and voltage drop limits, since the phase angle is not material.\nUnderstanding the temperature distribution along the cable route became possible with the introduction of distributed temperature sensing (DTS) systems that measure temperatures all along the cable. Without them maximum current was typically set as a compromise between understanding of operation conditions and risk minimization. This monitoring solution uses passive optical fibers as temperature sensors, either inside a high-voltage cable or externally mounted on the cable insulation.\nFor overhead cables the fiber is integrated into the core of a phase wire. The integrated Dynamic Cable Rating (DCR)/Real Time Thermal Rating (RTTR) solution makes it possible to run the network to its maximum. It allows the operator to predict the behavior of the transmission system to reflect major changes to its initial operating conditions.\nReconductoring.\nSome utilities have embraced reconductoring to handle the increase in electricity production. Reconductoring is the replacement-in-place of existing transmission lines with higher-capacity lines. Adding transmission lines is difficult due to cost, permit intervals, and local opposition. Reconductoring has the potential to double the amount of electricity that can travel across a transmission line. A 2024 report found the United States behind countries like Belgium and the Netherlands in adoption of this technique to accommodate electrification and renewable energy. In April 2022, the Biden Administration streamlined environmental reviews for such projects, and in May 2022 announced competitive grants for them funded by the 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and 2022 Inflation Reduction Act.\nThe rate of transmission expansion needs to double to support ongoing electrification and reach emission reduction targets. As of 2022, more than 10,000 power plant and energy storage projects were awaiting permission to connect to the US grid \u2014 95% were zero-carbon resources. New power lines can take 10 years to plan, permit, and build.\nTraditional power lines use a steel core surrounded by aluminum strands (Aluminium-conductor steel-reinforced cable). Replacing the steel with a lighter, stronger composite material such as carbon fiber (ACCC conductor) allows lines to operate at higher temperatures, with less sag, and doubled transmission capacity. Lowering line sag at high temperatures can prevent wildfires from starting when power lines touch dry vegetation. Although advanced lines can cost 2-4x more than steel, total reconductoring costs are less than half of a new line, given savings in time, land acquisition, permitting, and construction.\nA reconductoring project in southeastern Texas upgraded 240 miles of transmission lines at a cost of $900,000 per mile, versus a 3,600-mile greenfield project that averaged $1.9 million per mile.\nControl.\nTo ensure safe and predictable operation, system components are controlled with generators, switches, circuit breakers and loads. The voltage, power, frequency, load factor, and reliability capabilities of the transmission system are designed to provide cost effective performance.\nLoad balancing.\nThe transmission system provides for base load and peak load capability, with margins for safety and fault tolerance. Peak load times vary by region largely due to the industry mix. In hot and cold climates home air conditioning and heating loads affect the overall load. They are typically highest in the late afternoon in the hottest part of the year and in mid-mornings and mid-evenings in the coldest part of the year. Power requirements vary by season and time of day. Distribution system designs always take the base load and the peak load into consideration.\nThe transmission system usually does not have a large buffering capability to match loads with generation. Thus generation has to be kept matched to the load, to prevent overloading generation equipment.\nMultiple sources and loads can be connected to the transmission system and they must be controlled to provide orderly transfer of power. In centralized power generation, only local control of generation is necessary. This involves synchronization of the generation units.\nIn distributed power generation the generators are geographically distributed and the process to bring them online and offline must be carefully controlled. The load control signals can either be sent on separate lines or on the power lines themselves. Voltage and frequency can be used as signaling mechanisms to balance the loads.\nIn voltage signaling, voltage is varied to increase generation. The power added by any system increases as the line voltage decreases. This arrangement is stable in principle. Voltage-based regulation is complex to use in mesh networks, since the individual components and setpoints would need to be reconfigured every time a new generator is added to the mesh.\nIn frequency signaling, the generating units match the frequency of the power transmission system. In droop speed control, if the frequency decreases, the power is increased. (The drop in line frequency is an indication that the increased load is causing the generators to slow down.)\nWind turbines, vehicle-to-grid, virtual power plants, and other locally distributed storage and generation systems can interact with the grid to improve system operation. Internationally, a slow move from a centralized to decentralized power systems have taken place. The main draw of locally distributed generation systems is that they reduce transmission losses by leading to consumption of electricity closer to where it was produced.\nFailure protection.\nUnder excess load conditions, the system can be designed to fail incrementally rather than all at once. Brownouts occur when power supplied drops below the demand. Blackouts occur when the grid fails completely.\nRolling blackouts (also called load shedding) are intentionally engineered electrical power outages, used to distribute insufficient power to various loads in turn.\nCommunications.\nGrid operators require reliable communications to manage the grid and associated generation and distribution facilities. Fault-sensing protective relays at each end of the line must communicate to monitor the flow of power so that faulted conductors or equipment can be quickly de-energized and the balance of the system restored. Protection of the transmission line from short circuits and other faults is usually so critical that common carrier telecommunications are insufficiently reliable, while in some remote areas no common carrier is available. Communication systems associated with a transmission project may use:\nRarely, and for short distances, pilot-wires are strung along the transmission line path. Leased circuits from common carriers are not preferred since availability is not under control of the operator.\nTransmission lines can be used to carry data: this is called power-line carrier, or power-line communication (PLC). PLC signals can be easily received with a radio in the long wave range.\nOptical fibers can be included in the stranded conductors of a transmission line, in the overhead shield wires. These cables are known as optical ground wire (\"OPGW\"). Sometimes a standalone cable is used, all-dielectric self-supporting (\"ADSS\") cable, attached to the transmission line cross arms.\nSome jurisdictions, such as Minnesota, prohibit energy transmission companies from selling surplus communication bandwidth or acting as a telecommunications common carrier. Where the regulatory structure permits, the utility can sell capacity in extra dark fibers to a common carrier.\nMarket structure.\nElectricity transmission is generally considered to be a natural monopoly, but one that is not inherently linked to generation. Many countries regulate transmission separately from generation.\nSpain was the first country to establish a regional transmission organization. In that country, transmission operations and electricity markets are separate. The transmission system operator is Red El\u00e9ctrica de Espa\u00f1a (REE) and the wholesale electricity market operator is Operador del Mercado Ib\u00e9rico de Energ\u00eda \u2013 Polo Espa\u00f1ol, S.A. (OMEL) https://. Spain's transmission system is interconnected with those of France, Portugal, and Morocco.\nThe establishment of RTOs in the United States was spurred by the FERC's Order 888, \"Promoting Wholesale Competition Through Open Access Non-discriminatory Transmission Services by Public Utilities; Recovery of Stranded Costs by Public Utilities and Transmitting Utilities\", issued in 1996. In the United States and parts of Canada, electric transmission companies operate independently of generation companies, but in the Southern United States vertical integration is intact. In regions of separation, transmission owners and generation owners continue to interact with each other as market participants with voting rights within their RTO. RTOs in the United States are regulated by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.\nMerchant transmission projects in the United States include the Cross Sound Cable from Shoreham, New York to New Haven, Connecticut, Neptune RTS Transmission Line from Sayreville, New Jersey, to New Bridge, New York, and Path 15 in California. Additional projects are in development or have been proposed throughout the United States, including the Lake Erie Connector, an underwater transmission line proposed by ITC Holdings Corp., connecting Ontario to load serving entities in the PJM Interconnection region.\nAustralia has one unregulated or market interconnector \u2013 Basslink \u2013 between Tasmania and Victoria. Two DC links originally implemented as market interconnectors, Directlink and Murraylink, were converted to regulated interconnectors.\nA major barrier to wider adoption of merchant transmission is the difficulty in identifying who benefits from the facility so that the beneficiaries pay the toll. Also, it is difficult for a merchant transmission line to compete when the alternative transmission lines are subsidized by utilities with a monopolized and regulated rate base. In the United States, the FERC's Order 1000, issued in 2010, attempted to reduce barriers to third party investment and creation of merchant transmission lines where a public policy need is found.\nTransmission costs.\nThe cost of high voltage transmission is comparatively low, compared to all other costs constituting consumer electricity bills. In the UK, transmission costs are about 0.2\u00a0p per kWh compared to a delivered domestic price of around 10\u00a0p per kWh.\nThe level of capital expenditure in the electric power T&amp;D equipment market was estimated to be $128.9\u00a0bn in 2011.\nHealth concerns.\nMainstream scientific evidence suggests that low-power, low-frequency, electromagnetic radiation associated with household currents and high transmission power lines does not constitute a short- or long-term health hazard.\nSome studies failed to find any link between living near power lines and developing any sickness or diseases, such as cancer. A 1997 study reported no increased risk of cancer or illness from living near a transmission line. Other studies, however, reported statistical correlations between various diseases and living or working near power lines. No adverse health effects have been substantiated for people not living close to power lines.\nThe New York State Public Service Commission conducted a study to evaluate potential health effects of electric fields. The study measured the electric field strength at the edge of an existing right-of-way on a 765 kV transmission line. The field strength was 1.6\u00a0kV/m, and became the interim maximum strength standard for new transmission lines in New York State. The opinion also limited the voltage of new transmission lines built in New York to 345\u00a0kV. On September 11, 1990, after a similar study of magnetic field strengths, the NYSPSC issued their \"Interim Policy Statement on Magnetic Fields\". This policy established a magnetic field standard of 200 mG at the edge of the right-of-way using the winter-normal conductor rating. As a comparison with everyday items, a hair dryer or electric blanket produces a 100 mG \u2013 500\u00a0mG magnetic field.\nApplications for a new transmission line typically include an analysis of electric and magnetic field levels at the edge of rights-of-way. Public utility commissions typically do not comment on health impacts.\nBiological effects have been established for acute high level exposure to magnetic fields above 100\u00a0\u03bcT (1\u00a0G) (1,000\u00a0mG). In a residential setting, one study reported \"limited evidence of carcinogenicity in humans and less than sufficient evidence for carcinogenicity in experimental animals\", in particular, childhood leukemia, associated with average exposure to residential power-frequency magnetic field above 0.3\u00a0\u03bcT (3\u00a0mG) to 0.4\u00a0\u03bcT (4\u00a0mG). These levels exceed average residential power-frequency magnetic fields in homes, which are about 0.07\u00a0\u03bcT (0.7\u00a0mG) in Europe and 0.11\u00a0\u03bcT (1.1\u00a0mG) in North America.\nThe Earth's natural geomagnetic field strength varies over the surface of the planet between 0.035\u00a0mT and 0.07\u00a0mT (35\u00a0\u03bcT \u2013 70\u00a0\u03bcT or 350 mG \u2013 700 mG) while the international standard for continuous exposure is set at 40\u00a0mT (400,000 mG or 400\u00a0G) for the general public.\nTree growth regulators and herbicides may be used in transmission line right of ways, which may have health effects.\nSpecialized transmission.\nGrids for railways.\nIn some countries where electric locomotives or electric multiple units run on low frequency AC power, separate single phase traction power networks are operated by the railways. Prime examples are countries such as Austria, Germany and Switzerland that utilize AC technology based on 16\u00a02\"/\"3\u00a0Hz. Norway and Sweden also use this frequency but use conversion from the 50\u00a0Hz public supply; Sweden has a 16\u00a02\"/\"3\u00a0Hz traction grid but only for part of the system.\nSuperconducting cables.\nHigh-temperature superconductors (HTS) promise to revolutionize power distribution by providing lossless transmission. The development of superconductors with transition temperatures higher than the boiling point of liquid nitrogen has made the concept of superconducting power lines commercially feasible, at least for high-load applications. It has been estimated that waste would be halved using this method, since the necessary refrigeration equipment would consume about half the power saved by the elimination of resistive losses. Companies such as Consolidated Edison and American Superconductor began commercial production of such systems in 2007.\nSuperconducting cables are particularly suited to high load density areas such as the business district of large cities, where purchase of an easement for cables is costly.\nSingle-wire earth return.\nSingle-wire earth return (SWER) or single-wire ground return is a single-wire transmission line for supplying single-phase electrical power to remote areas at low cost. It is principally used for rural electrification, but also finds use for larger isolated loads such as water pumps. Single-wire earth return is also used for HVDC over submarine power cables.\nWireless power transmission.\nBoth Nikola Tesla and Hidetsugu Yagi attempted to devise systems for large scale wireless power transmission in the late 1800s and early 1900s, without commercial success.\nIn November 2009, LaserMotive won the NASA 2009 Power Beaming Challenge by powering a cable climber 1\u00a0km vertically using a ground-based laser transmitter. The system produced up to 1\u00a0kW of power at the receiver end. In August 2010, NASA contracted with private companies to pursue the design of laser power beaming systems to power low earth orbit satellites and to launch rockets using laser power beams.\nWireless power transmission has been studied for transmission of power from solar power satellites to the earth. A high power array of microwave or laser transmitters would beam power to a rectenna. Major engineering and economic challenges face any solar power satellite project.\nSecurity.\nThe federal government of the United States stated that the American power grid was susceptible to cyber-warfare. The United States Department of Homeland Security works with industry to identify vulnerabilities and to help industry enhance the security of control system networks.\nIn June 2019, Russia conceded that it was \"possible\" its electrical grid is under cyber-attack by the United States. \"The New York Times\" reported that American hackers from the United States Cyber Command planted malware potentially capable of disrupting the Russian electrical grid.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38826", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38826", "title": "Wenceslaus IV of Bohemia", "text": "King of Bohemia (1378\u20131419) and Germany (1376\u20131400)\nWenceslaus IV (also \"Wenceslas\"; ; , nicknamed \"the Idle\"; 26 February 1361\u00a0\u2013 16 August 1419), also known as Wenceslaus of Luxembourg, was King of Bohemia from 1378 until his death and King of Germany from 1376 until he was deposed in 1400. As he belonged to the House of Luxembourg, he was also Duke of Luxembourg from 1383 to 1388.\nBiography.\nWenceslaus was born in the Imperial city of Nuremberg, the son of Emperor Charles\u00a0IV by his third wife Anna Sv\u00eddnick\u00e1, a scion of the Silesian Piasts, and baptized at St.\u00a0Sebaldus Church. He was raised by the Prague Archbishops Arno\u0161t of Pardubice and Jan O\u010dko of Vla\u0161im. His father had the two-year-old crowned King of Bohemia in June 1363 and in 1373 also obtained for him the Electoral Margraviate of Brandenburg. When on 10 June 1376 Charles\u00a0IV asserted Wenceslaus' election as King of the Romans by the prince-electors, two of seven votes, those of Brandenburg and Bohemia, were held by the emperor and his son themselves. Wenceslaus was crowned at Aix-la-Chapelle on 6 July.\nIn order to secure the election of his son, Charles\u00a0IV revoked the privileges of many Imperial Cities that he had earlier granted and mortgaged them to various nobles. The cities, however, were not powerless, and as executors of the public peace, they had developed into a potent military force. Moreover, as Charles\u00a0IV had organized the cities into leagues, he had made it possible for them to cooperate in large-scale endeavors. Indeed, on 4 July 1376, fourteen Swabian cities bound together into the independent Swabian League of Cities to defend their rights against the newly elected King, attacking the lands of Eberhard\u00a0II, Count of W\u00fcrttemberg. The city league soon attracted other members and until 1389 acted as an autonomous state within the Empire.\nRule.\nWenceslaus took some part in government during his father's lifetime, and on Charles' death in 1378, he inherited the Crown of Bohemia and as king assumed the government of the Holy Roman Empire. In the cathedral of Monza there is preserved a series of reliefs depicting the coronations of the kings of Italy with the Iron Crown of Lombardy. The seventh of these depicts Wenceslaus being crowned in the presence of six electors, he himself being the seventh. The depiction is probably not accurate and was likely made solely to reinforce the claims of the cathedral on the custody of the Iron Crown.\nIn 1387 a quarrel between Frederick, Duke of Bavaria, and the cities of the Swabian League allied with the Archbishop of Salzburg gave the signal for a general war in Swabia, in which the cities, weakened by their isolation, mutual jealousies, and internal conflicts, were defeated by the forces of Eberhard\u00a0II, Count of W\u00fcrttemberg, at D\u00f6ffingen, near Grafenau, on 24 August 1388. The cities were taken severally and devastated. Most of them quietly acquiesced when King Wenceslaus proclaimed an ambivalent arrangement at Cheb (\"Eger\") in 1389 that prohibited all leagues between cities while confirming their political autonomy. This settlement provided a modicum of stability for the next several decades, however, the cities dropped out as a basis of the central Imperial authority.\nKing of Bohemia.\nDuring his long reign, Wenceslaus held a tenuous grip on power at best, as he came into repeated conflicts with the Bohemian nobility led by the House of Rosenberg. On two occasions he was even imprisoned for lengthy spells by rebellious nobles during the Moravian Margrave Wars.\nBut the greatest liability for Wenceslaus proved to be his own family. Charles\u00a0IV had divided his holdings among his sons and other relatives. Although Wenceslaus upon his father's death retained Bohemia, his younger half brother Sigismund inherited Brandenburg, while John received the newly established Duchy of G\u00f6rlitz in Upper Lusatia. The March of Moravia was divided between his cousins Jobst and Procopius, and his uncle Wenceslaus\u00a0I had already been made Duke of Luxembourg. Hence the young king was left without the resources his father had enjoyed, although he inherited the duchy of Luxembourg from his uncle in 1383. In 1386, Sigismund became king of Hungary and became involved in affairs further east.\nWenceslaus also faced serious opposition from the Bohemian nobles and even from his chancellor, the Prague archbishop Jan of Jen\u0161tejn. In a conflict surrounding the investiture of the abbot of Kladruby, the torture and murder of the archbishop's vicar-general John of Nepomuk by royal officials in 1393 sparked a noble rebellion. In 1394 Wenceslaus' cousin Jobst of Moravia was named regent, while Wenceslaus was arrested at Kr\u00e1l\u016fv Dv\u016fr. King Sigismund of Hungary arranged a truce in 1396, and for his efforts, he was recognized as heir to Wenceslaus.\nIn the Papal Schism, Wenceslaus supported the Roman Pope Urban\u00a0VI. As Bohemian king he sought to protect the religious reformer Jan Hus and his followers against the demands of the Catholic Church for their suppression as heretics. Hus and his followers drove German academics from the University of Prague, who then set up their own university at Leipzig.\nHe then met Charles VI of France at Reims, where the two monarchs decided to persuade the rival popes, now Benedict XIII and Boniface IX, to resign, and to end the papal schisms by the election of a new pontiff. Many of the princes were angry at this abandonment of Boniface by Wenceslaus, who had also aroused much indignation by his long absence from Germany and by selling the title of duke of Milan to Gian Galeazzo Visconti.\nHus was eventually executed in Konstanz in 1415, and the rest of Wenceslaus' reign in Bohemia featured precursors of the Hussite Wars that would follow his death.\nDethronement.\nIn view of his troubles in Bohemia, Wenceslaus did not seek a coronation ceremony as Holy Roman Emperor. Consequently, he faced anger at the \"Reichstag\" diets of Nuremberg (1397) and Frankfurt (1398). The four Rhenish electors, Count Palatine Rupert III and the archbishops of Mainz, Cologne and Trier, accused him of failing to maintain the public peace or to resolve the Schism. They demanded that Wenceslaus appear before them to answer to the charges in June 1400. Wenceslaus demurred, in large part because of renewed hostilities in Bohemia. When he failed to appear, the electors meeting at Lahneck Castle declared him deposed on 20 August 1400 on account of \"futility, idleness, negligence and ignobility\". The next day they chose Rupert as their king at Rhens. Although Wenceslaus refused to acknowledge this successor's decade-long reign, he made no move against Rupert.\nOn 29 June 1402, Wenceslaus was captured by Sigismund, who at first intended to escort him to Rome to have him crowned emperor, but Rupert heard of this plan and tried to prevent the passage to Italy, so Sigismund had Wenceslaus imprisoned, at first in Schaumberg and from 16 August in Vienna, in the charge of William, Duke of Austria.\nOn 20 November, Wenceslaus was forced to sign his renunciation of all his powers to Sigismund and the Dukes of Austria. In exchange, the conditions of his imprisonment were relaxed.\nIn early 1403, Rupert made diplomatic overtures to Sigismund, attempting to get him to forgo his attempt to secure the imperial crown, but Sigismund invaded Bohemia with Hungarian forces, looting, imposing heavy taxes, and persecuting the supporters of Wenceslaus. He also plundered the royal treasury to pay for his military campaigns against the supporters of Rupert and of Jobst of Moravia. An armistice between Sigismund and Jobst was agreed to be in effect from 14 April until 20 May. This gave Sigismund's opponents time to prepare, and after the end of the armistice, Sigismund could make no further gains and retreated from Bohemia, reaching Bratislava on 24 July.\nOn 1 October 1403, Pope Boniface IX finally acknowledged the deposition of Wenceslaus and the election of Rupert as King of the Romans. As a coronation of Wenceslaus was now no longer a possibility, and while he was nominally still prisoner in Vienna, he was no longer under strict guard, and he managed to escape on 11 November.\nHe crossed the Danube and was escorted by John II of Liechtenstein via Mikulov back to Bohemia, meeting his supporters in Kutn\u00e1 Hora before moving on Prague, which he entered on Christmas.\nAmong the charges raised by Rupert as the basis for his predecessor's deposition was the Papal Schism. King Rupert called the Council of Pisa in 1409, attended by defectors from both papal parties. They elected Antipope Alexander V, worsening the situation because he was not acknowledged by his two rivals, and from 1409 to 1417 there were three popes.\nAfter the death of Rupert in 1410, his succession at first proved difficult since both Wenceslaus's cousin Jobst of Moravia and Wenceslaus's brother Sigismund of Hungary were elected King of the Romans. Wenceslaus himself had never recognized his deposition and hence still claimed the kingship. Jobst died in\u00a01411, and Wenceslaus agreed to give up the crown, so long as he could keep Bohemia. This settled the issue, and after\u00a01411, Sigismund reigned as king and later also became Holy Roman Emperor.\nThe bishops and secular leaders, tired of the Great Schism, supported Sigismund when he called the Council of Constance in\u00a01414. The goal of the council was to reform the church in head and members. In\u00a01417, the council deposed all three popes and elected a new one. By resolving the schism, Sigismund restored the honour of the imperial title and made himself the most influential monarch in the West.\nPersonal life.\nWenceslaus was married twice, first to Joanna of Bavaria, a scion of the Wittelsbach dynasty, on 29 September 1370. Joanna died on 31 December 1386 from chronic lung disease, most likely tuberculosis. Wenceslaus married her first cousin once removed, Sofia of Bavaria, on 2 May\u00a01389. He had no children by either wife.\nWenceslaus was described as a man of great knowledge and is known for the Wenceslas Bible, a richly illuminated manuscript he had drawn up between 1390 and\u00a01400. However, his rule remained uncertain, varying between idleness and cruel measures as in the case of John of Nepomuk. Unlike his father, Wenceslaus relied on favouritism, which made him abhorrent to many nobles and led to increasing isolation. Moreover, he probably suffered from alcoholism, which was brought to light in 1398 when he was unable to accept an invitation by King Charles\u00a0VI of France for a reception at Reims due to his drunkenness.\nWenceslaus died in 1419 of a heart attack during a hunt in the woods surrounding his castle Nov\u00fd Hrad at Kunratice (today a part of Prague), leaving the country in a deep political crisis. His death was followed by almost two decades of conflict called the Hussite Wars, which were centred on greater calls for religious reform by Jan Hus and spurred by popular outrage provoked by his execution.\nIn popular culture.\nThe 2018 video game ', along with its 2025 sequel, ', are set in Bohemia during the reign of King Wenceslaus IV in the year 1403. The main character becomes involved in a plot to restore Wenceslaus to the Bohemian throne.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38828", "revid": "49166656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38828", "title": "Michael Bloomberg", "text": "American businessman and politician (born 1942)\nMichael Rubens Bloomberg (born February 14, 1942) is an American businessman and politician. He is the majority owner and co-founder of Bloomberg L.P., and was its CEO from 1981 to 2001, and again from 2014 to 2023. A member of the Democratic Party, he served as the 108th mayor of New York City for three terms, from 2002 to 2013, and was a candidate for the 2020 Democratic nomination for president of the United States.\nBloomberg grew up in Medford, Massachusetts, and graduated from Johns Hopkins University, in Baltimore, Maryland, and Harvard Business School in Boston, Massachusetts. He began his career at the securities brokerage firm Salomon Brothers, before forming his own company in 1981. That company, Bloomberg L.P., is a financial information, software, and media firm that is known for its Bloomberg Terminal. Bloomberg spent the next twenty years as its chairman and CEO. According to \"Forbes\", as of May 2025, Bloomberg's estimated net worth stood at US$104.7 billion, making him the 18th richest individual in the world. Bloomberg, who has signed the Giving Pledge, has given away $17.4 billion to philanthropic causes in his lifetime. After a brief stint as a full-time philanthropist, he re-assumed the position of CEO at Bloomberg L.P. by the end of 2014.\nBloomberg was elected the 108th mayor of New York City in 2001. He held office for three consecutive terms, winning re-election in 2005 and 2009. Pursuing socially liberal and fiscally moderate policies, Bloomberg developed a technocratic managerial style.\nAs the mayor of New York, Bloomberg established public charter schools, rebuilt urban infrastructure, and supported gun control, public health initiatives, and environmental protections. He also led a re-zoning of large areas of the city, which facilitated massive and widespread new commercial and residential construction after the September 11 attacks. Bloomberg is considered to have had far-reaching influence on the politics, business sector, and culture of New York City during his three terms as mayor. He has also faced significant criticism for the city's stop and frisk program, support for which he reversed with an apology before his 2020 presidential run.\nIn November 2019, four months before Super Tuesday, Bloomberg officially launched his campaign for the Democratic nomination for president of the United States in the 2020 election. He ended his campaign in March 2020, after having won only 61 delegates. Bloomberg self-funded $935 million for his candidacy, which set the record for the most expensive presidential primary campaign and highest spending in any political capacity by a single individual in U.S. history. In 2024, Bloomberg received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Joe Biden.\nEarly education.\nBloomberg was born on February 14, 1942, at St. Elizabeth's Hospital, in the Brighton neighborhood of Boston, to William Henry Bloomberg, a bookkeeper for a dairy company, and Charlotte (n\u00e9e Rubens) Bloomberg. His father never earned more than $6,000 a year. William Henry Bloomberg died suddenly when his son was in college. The Bloomberg Center at the Harvard Business School was named in William Henry's honor. Bloomberg's family is Jewish, and he is a member of the Temple Emanu-El in Manhattan. Bloomberg's paternal grandfather, Rabbi Alexander \"Elick\" Bloomberg, was a Polish Jew. Bloomberg's maternal grandfather, Max Rubens, was a Lithuanian Jewish immigrant from present-day Belarus, and his maternal grandmother was born in New York to Lithuanian Jewish parents.\nThe family lived in Allston until Bloomberg was two years old, followed by Brookline, Massachusetts, for two years, finally settling in the Boston suburb of Medford, Massachusetts, where he lived until after he graduated from college.\nBloomberg became an Eagle Scout when he was twelve years old. He graduated from Medford High School in 1960. He went on to attend Johns Hopkins University, where he joined the fraternity Phi Kappa Psi. While there, he constructed the blue jay costume for the university's mascot. He graduated in 1964 with a Bachelor of Science in Engineering degree in electrical engineering. In 1966, he graduated from Harvard Business School with a Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree.\nBloomberg is a member of Kappa Beta Phi and Tau Beta Pi. He wrote an autobiography, \"Bloomberg by Bloomberg\", with help from Bloomberg News editor-in-chief Matthew Winkler.\nBusiness career.\nIn 1966, Bloomberg was hired for a job earning $9,000 per year at Salomon Brothers, a large Wall Street investment bank. Salomon Brothers later promoted him to the equities desk. Bloomberg became a general partner at Salomon Brothers in 1972; he headed equity trading and, later, systems development. Phibro Corporation bought Salomon Brothers in 1981, and the new management fired Bloomberg, paying him $10\u00a0million for his equity in the firm.\nUsing the money he received from Phibro, Bloomberg\u2014having designed in-house computerized financial systems for Salomon\u2014set up a data services company named Innovative Market Systems (IMS) based on his belief that Wall Street would pay a premium for high-quality business information, delivered instantaneously on computer terminals in a variety of usable formats. The company sold customized computer terminals that delivered real-time market data, financial calculations and other analytics to Wall Street firms. The terminal, first called the Market Master terminal, was released to market in December 1982.\nIn 1986, IMS renamed itself Bloomberg L.P. Over the years, ancillary products including Bloomberg News, Bloomberg Radio, Bloomberg Message, and Bloomberg Tradebook were launched. Bloomberg, L.P. had revenues of approximately $10\u00a0billion in 2018. As of 2019, the company has more than 325,000 terminal subscribers worldwide and employs 20,000 people in dozens of locations.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, Bloomberg L.P. has been compared to a fraternity, with employees bragging in the company's office about their sexual exploits. The company was sued four times by female employees for sexual harassment, including one incident in which a victim claimed to have been raped. To celebrate Bloomberg's 48th birthday, colleagues published a pamphlet entitled \"\". Among various sayings that were attributed to him, several have subsequently been criticized as sexist or misogynistic. Among the contents of the 1990 publication are a suggestion that if women wanted to be known for their intelligence, they would spend less time at Bloomingdale's and more at the library; as well as a joke that if Bloomberg terminals could provide oral sex, it would put female employees out of work. Bloomberg's staff told the \"New York Times\" that he now regrets having made such \"disrespectful\" remarks.\nWhen he left the position of CEO to pursue a political career as the mayor of New York City, Bloomberg was replaced by Lex Fenwick and later by Daniel L. Doctoroff, after his initial service as deputy mayor under Bloomberg. After completing his final term as the mayor of New York City, Bloomberg spent his first eight months out of office as a full-time philanthropist. In fall 2014, he announced that he would return to Bloomberg L.P. as CEO at the end of 2014, succeeding Doctoroff, who had led the company since February 2008. Bloomberg resigned as CEO of Bloomberg L.P. to run for president in 2019.\nIn January 2024, John P. Angelos reached a $1.725 billion deal to sell the Baltimore Orioles to a group led by David Rubenstein. The group included Bloomberg, former Baltimore Mayor Kurt Schmoke, Cal Ripken, New York investment manager Michael Arougheti and NBA legend Grant Hill.\nWealth.\nIn March 2009, \"Forbes\" reported Bloomberg's wealth at $16\u00a0billion, a gain of $4.5\u00a0billion over the previous year, the world's biggest increase in wealth from 2008 to 2009. Bloomberg moved from 142nd to 17th in the \"Forbes\" list of the world's billionaires in only two years. In the 2019 \"Forbes\" list of the world's billionaires, he was the ninth-richest person; his net worth was estimated at $55.5\u00a0billion. In 2021, Bloomberg's net worth was estimated at $106\u00a0billion, ranking him 12th on \"Forbes\"' list of billionaires.\nPolitical career.\nMayor of New York City.\nBloomberg assumed office as the 108th mayor of New York City on January 1, 2002. He won re-election in 2005, and again in 2009. As mayor, he initially struggled with approval ratings as low as 24 percent, but he subsequently developed, and maintained, high approval ratings. Bloomberg joined Rudy Giuliani, John Lindsay, and Fiorello La Guardia as re-elected Republican mayors in the mostly Democratic city.\nBloomberg stated that he wanted public education reform to be the legacy of his first term, and addressing poverty to be the legacy of his second.\nBloomberg chose to apply a statistical, metrics-based management approach to city government, and granted departmental commissioners' broad autonomy in their decision-making. Breaking with 190 years of tradition, he implemented what \"New York Times\" political reporter Adam Nagourney called a \"bullpen\" open office plan, similar to a Wall Street trading floor, in which dozens of aides and managerial staff are seated together in a large chamber. The design is intended to promote accountability and accessibility.\nBloomberg accepted a remuneration of $1 annually, in lieu of the mayoral salary.\nAs mayor, Bloomberg turned the city's $6\u00a0billion budget deficit into a $3\u00a0billion surplus, largely by raising property taxes. Bloomberg increased city funding for the new development of affordable housing through a plan that created and preserved an estimated 160,000 affordable homes in the city. In 2003, he implemented a successful smoking ban in all indoor workplaces, including bars and restaurants, and many other cities and states followed suit. On December 5, 2006, New York City became the first city in the United States to ban trans-fat from all restaurants. This went into effect in July 2008, and has since been adopted in many other cities and countries. Bloomberg created bicycle lanes, required chain restaurants to post calorie counts, and pedestrianized much of Times Square. In 2011, Bloomberg launched the NYC Young Men's Initiative, a $127\u00a0million initiative to support programs and policies designed to address disparities between young Black and Latino men and their peers, and personally donated $30\u00a0million to the project. In 2010, Bloomberg supported the then-controversial Islamic complex near Ground Zero.\nUnder the Bloomberg Administration, the New York City Police Department greatly expanded its stop and frisk program, with a six-fold increase in documented stops. The policy was challenged in U.S. Federal Court, which ruled that the city's implementation of the policy violated citizens' rights under the Fourth Amendment of the Constitution and encouraged racial profiling. Bloomberg's administration appealed the ruling; however, his successor, Mayor Bill de Blasio, dropped the appeal and allowed the ruling to take effect. After the September 11 attacks, with assistance from the Central Intelligence Agency, Bloomberg's administration oversaw a controversial program that surveilled Muslim communities on the basis of their religion, ethnicity, and language. The program was discontinued in 2014.\nIn a January 2014 Quinnipiac poll, 64 percent of voters called Bloomberg's 12 years as mayor \"mainly a success\".\nMayoral elections.\n2001 election.\nIn 2001, New York's Republican mayor Rudy Giuliani, was ineligible for re-election due to the city's limit of two consecutive terms. Bloomberg, who had been a lifelong member of the Democratic Party, decided to run for mayor on the Republican ticket. Voting in the primary began on the morning of September 11, 2001. The primary was postponed later that day, due to the September 11 attacks. In the rescheduled primary, Bloomberg defeated Herman Badillo, a former Democratic congressman, to become the Republican nominee. After a runoff, the Democratic nomination went to New York City Public Advocate Mark Green.\nBloomberg received Giuliani's endorsement to succeed him in the 2001 election. He also had a huge campaign spending advantage. Although New York City's campaign finance law restricts the total amount of contributions that a candidate can accept, Bloomberg chose not to use public funds and therefore his campaign was not subject to these restrictions. He spent $73\u00a0million of his own money on his campaign, outspending Green by a ratio of five to one.\nIn the wake of the September 11 attacks, Bloomberg's administration made a successful bid to host the 2004 Republican National Convention. The convention drew thousands of protesters, among them New Yorkers against George W. Bush and the Bush administration's pursuit of the Iraq War.\n2005 election.\nBloomberg was re-elected mayor in November 2005 by a margin of 20 percent, the widest margin ever for a Republican mayor of New York City. He spent almost $78\u00a0million on his campaign, exceeding the record of $74\u00a0million he spent on the previous election. In late 2004 or early 2005, Bloomberg gave the Independence Party of New York $250,000 to fund a phone bank seeking to recruit volunteers for his re-election campaign.\nFormer Bronx Borough President Fernando Ferrer won the Democratic nomination to oppose Bloomberg in the general election. Thomas Ognibene sought to run against Bloomberg in the Republican Party's primary election. The Bloomberg campaign successfully challenged the signatures Ognibene submitted to the Board of Elections to prevent Ognibene from appearing on ballots for the Republican primary. Instead, Ognibene ran on only the Conservative Party ticket. Ognibene accused Bloomberg of betraying Republican Party ideals, a feeling echoed by others.\nBloomberg opposed the confirmation of John Roberts as Chief Justice of the United States. Bloomberg is a staunch supporter of abortion rights, and did not believe that Roberts was committed to maintaining \"Roe v. Wade\". In addition to Republican support, Bloomberg obtained the endorsements of several prominent Democrats: former Democratic mayor Ed Koch; former Democratic governor Hugh Carey; former Democratic City Council Speaker Peter Vallone, and his son, Councilman Peter Vallone Jr.; former Democratic Congressman Floyd Flake (who had previously endorsed Bloomberg in 2001), and Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz.\n2009 election.\nOn October 2, 2008, Bloomberg announced he would seek to extend the city's term limits law, and run for a third mayoral term in 2009. Bloomberg said, \"Handling this financial crisis while strengthening essential services\u00a0... is a challenge I want to take on\", Bloomberg said at a news conference. \"So, should the City Council vote to amend term limits, I plan to ask New Yorkers to look at my record of independent leadership and then decide if I have earned another term.\"\nRonald Lauder, who campaigned for New York City's term limits in 1993 and spent over 4\u00a0million dollars of his own money to limit the maximum years a mayor could serve to eight years, sided with Bloomberg and agreed to stay out of future legality issues. In exchange, he was promised a seat on an influential city board by Bloomberg.\nSome people and organizations objected, and NYPIRG filed a complaint with the City Conflict of Interest Board. On October 23, 2008, the city council voted 29\u201322 in favor of extending the term limit to three consecutive four-year terms. After two days of public hearings, Bloomberg signed the bill into law on November 3.\nBloomberg's bid for a third term generated some controversy. Civil libertarians such as former New York Civil Liberties Union Director Norman Siegel and New York Civil Rights Coalition Executive Director Michael Meyers joined with local politicians to protest the process as undermining the democratic process.\nBloomberg's opponent was Democratic and Working Families Party nominee Bill Thompson, who had been New York City Comptroller for the past eight years and before that, president of the New York City Board of Education. Bloomberg defeated Thompson by a vote of 51 percent to 46 percent. Bloomberg spent $109.2\u00a0million on his 2009 campaign, outspending Thompson by a margin of more than 11 to one.\nAfter the release of Independence Party campaign filings in January 2010, it was reported that Bloomberg had made two $600,000 contributions from his personal account to the Independence Party on October 30 and November 2, 2009. The Independence Party then paid $750,000 of that money to Republican Party political operative John Haggerty, Jr. This prompted an investigation beginning in February 2010 by the office of New York County District Attorney Cyrus Vance, Jr., into possible improprieties. The Independence Party later questioned how Haggerty spent the money, which was to go to poll-watchers. Former New York State Senator Martin Connor contended that because the Bloomberg donations were made to an Independence Party housekeeping account, rather than to an account meant for current campaigns, this was a violation of campaign finance laws. Haggerty also spent money from a separate $200,000 donation from Bloomberg on office space.\n2013 election.\nOn September 13, 2013, Bloomberg announced that he would not endorse any of the candidates to succeed him. On his radio show, he stated, \"I don't want to do anything that complicates it for the next mayor. And that's one of the reasons I've decided I'm just not going to make an endorsement in the race.\" He added, \"I want to make sure that person is ready to succeed, to take what we've done and build on that.\"\nBloomberg praised \"The New York Times\" for its endorsement of Christine Quinn and Joe Lhota as their favorite candidates in the Democratic and Republican primaries, respectively. Quinn came in third in the Democratic primary, and Lhota won the Republican primary. Bloomberg criticized Democratic mayoral candidate Bill de Blasio's campaign methods, which he initially called \"racist\"; Bloomberg later downplayed, and partially retracted, those remarks.\nOn January 1, 2014, de Blasio became New York City's new mayor, succeeding Bloomberg.\nPost-mayoral political involvement.\nBloomberg was frequently mentioned as a possible centrist candidate for the presidential elections in 2008 and 2012, as well as for governor of New York in 2010 or vice-president in 2008. He eventually declined to seek all of these offices.\nIn the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Sandy in November 2012, Bloomberg penned an op-ed officially endorsing Barack Obama for president, citing Obama's policies on climate change.\n2016 elections.\nOn January 23, 2016, it was reported that Bloomberg was again considering a presidential run, as an independent candidate in the 2016 election, if Bernie Sanders got the Democratic party nomination. This was the first time he had officially confirmed he was considering a run. Bloomberg supporters believed that Bloomberg could run as a centrist and capture many voters who were dissatisfied with the likely Democratic and Republican nominees. However, on March 7, Bloomberg announced he would not be running for president.\nIn July 2016, Bloomberg delivered a speech at the 2016 Democratic National Convention in which he called Hillary Clinton \"the right choice\". Bloomberg warned of the dangers a Donald Trump presidency would pose. He said Trump \"wants you to believe that we can solve our biggest problems by deporting Mexicans and shutting out Muslims. He wants you to believe that erecting trade barriers will bring back good jobs. He's wrong on both counts.\" Bloomberg also said Trump's economic plans \"would make it harder for small businesses to compete\", and would \"erode our influence in the world\". Trump responded to the speech by condemning Bloomberg in a series of tweets.\n2018 elections.\nIn June 2018, Bloomberg pledged $80\u00a0million to support Democratic congressional candidates in the 2018 election, with the goal of flipping control of the Republican-controlled House to Democrats. In a statement, Bloomberg said that Republican House leadership were \"absolutely feckless\" and had failed to govern responsibly. Bloomberg advisor Howard Wolfson was chosen to lead the effort, which was to target mainly suburban districts. By early October, Bloomberg had committed more than $100\u00a0million to returning the House and Senate to Democratic power, fueling speculation about a presidential run in 2020. On October 10, 2018, Bloomberg announced that he had returned to the Democratic Party.\n2020 presidential campaign.\nOn March 5, 2019, Bloomberg announced that he would not run for president in 2020. Instead, he encouraged the Democratic Party to \"nominate a Democrat who will be in the strongest position to defeat Donald Trump.\" However, due to his dissatisfaction with the Democratic field, Bloomberg reconsidered. He officially launched his campaign for the 2020 Democratic nomination on November 24, 2019.\nBloomberg self-funded his campaign from his personal fortune and did not accept campaign contributions.\nBloomberg's campaign suffered from his lackluster performance in two televised debates. When Bloomberg participated in his first presidential debate, Senator Elizabeth Warren challenged him to release women from non-disclosure agreements relating to their allegations of sexual harassment at Bloomberg L.P. Two days later, Bloomberg announced that there were three women who had made complaints concerning him, and added that he would release any of the three if they requested. Warren continued her attack in the second debate the next week. Others criticized Bloomberg for his wealth and campaign spending, as well as his former affiliation with the Republican Party.\nAs a late entrant to the race, Bloomberg skipped the first four state primaries and caucuses. He spent over $1\u00a0billion of his personal fortune on the primary campaign, more than all other Democratic candidates combined at that stage. Bloomberg said he wanted to spent so much money as an \"investment\" into removing or at least trying to unseat President Trump from the White House. His campaign blanketed the country with campaign advertisements on broadcast and cable television, the Internet, and radio, as well as direct mail. Bloomberg also spent heavily on campaign operations that grew to 200 field offices and more than 2,400 paid campaign staffers. His support in nationwide opinion polls never exceeded 15 percent, but stagnated or dropped before Super Tuesday, while former vice president Joe Biden became the frontrunner after receiving the support of major candidates Pete Buttigieg and Amy Klobuchar. Bloomberg suspended his campaign on March 4, 2020, after a disappointing Super Tuesday in which he won only American Samoa. Multiple former campaign staffers sued Bloomberg alleging that he promised his employees to be paid through the election but they were fired instead after the candidate dropped out. Five years later, a Massachusetts man working for his campaign won $90,000 in back pay plus interest.\nAfter dropping out from the presidential race, Bloomberg endorsed Biden. Bloomberg donated $18 million to the Democratic National Committee and publicly planned a \"massive spending blitz\" to support Biden's campaign. Speaking on the final night of the 2020 Democratic National Convention, Bloomberg took aim at Trump's handling of the COVID-19 pandemic and the American economy: \"Would you rehire or work for someone who ran your business into the ground? Who always does what's best for him or her, even when it hurts the company, and whose reckless decisions put you in danger, and who spends more time tweeting than working? If the answer is no, why the hell would we ever rehire Donald Trump for another four years?\"\nDefense Innovation Board.\nIn February 2022, Bloomberg was nominated to chair the Defense Innovation Board, being sworn in on June 22, 2022.\nPolitical positions.\nBloomberg was a Democrat until 2001, when he switched to the Republican Party to run for mayor. He switched to an independent in 2007, and registered again as a Democrat in October 2018. In 2004, he endorsed the re-election of George W. Bush, and spoke at the 2004 Republican National Convention. He endorsed Barack Obama's re-election in 2012, endorsed Hillary Clinton in the 2016 election, and spoke at the 2016 Democratic National Convention. In 2008, he did not make a presidential election endorsement, but he voted for Obama, according to a 2020 statement by \"Stu Loeser, a Bloomberg [2020] campaign spokesman\".\nAs Mayor of New York, Bloomberg supported government initiatives in public health and welfare. This included tobacco control efforts (including an increase in the legal age to purchase tobacco products, a ban on smoking in indoor workplaces, and an increase in the cigarette tax); the elimination of the use of artificial trans fats in restaurants; and bans on all flavored tobacco and e-cigarette products including menthol flavors. Bloomberg also launched an unsuccessful effort to ban on certain large (more than 16 fluid ounce) sugary sodas at restaurants and food service establishments in the city. These initiatives were supported by public health advocates, but were criticized by some as \"nanny state\" policies.\nOver his career, Bloomberg has \"mingled support for progressive causes with more conservative positions on law enforcement, business regulation, and school choice\". Bloomberg supports gun-control measures, abortion rights, same-sex marriage, and a pathway to citizenship for illegal immigrants. He advocates for a public health insurance option that he has called \"Medicare for all for people that are uncovered\", rather than a universal single-payer healthcare system. He is concerned about climate change, and has touted his mayoral efforts to reduce greenhouse gases. Bloomberg supported the Iraq War, and opposed creating a timeline for withdrawing troops. Bloomberg has sometimes embraced the use of surveillance in efforts to deter crime and protect the public against terrorism.\nDuring, and after, his tenure, he was a staunch supporter of stop-and-frisk. In November 2019, Bloomberg apologized for supporting it. He advocates reversing many of the Trump tax cuts. His own tax plan includes implementing a 5 percent surtax on incomes above $5\u00a0million a year, and would raise federal revenue by $5\u00a0trillion over a decade. He opposes a wealth tax, saying that it would likely be found unconstitutional. He has also proposed more stringent financial regulations that include tougher oversight for big banks, a financial transactions tax, and stronger consumer protections. He supported decreasing estate-tax threshold to collect more estate taxes and close tax avoidance schemes. According to ProPublica investigation, he set up multiple GRATs, thus shielding parts of his fortune for his heirs.\nBloomberg stated that running as a Democrat\u00a0\u2013 not an independent\u00a0\u2013 was the only path he saw to defeating Donald Trump, saying: \"In 2020, the great likelihood is that an independent would just split the anti-Trump vote and end up re-electing the President. That's a risk I refused to run in 2016, and we can't afford to run it now.\"\nIn the 2020 general election, Bloomberg invested $115 million in Joe Biden's campaign in key states like Florida, Ohio, and Texas, contributed millions to various Democrats in local races, and raised over $16 million to clear court fines for nearly 32,000 Black and Hispanic Florida voters with felony convictions. Bloomberg contributed $19\u00a0million to a pro-Biden super PAC in support of Biden's reelection in 2024. In October 2024, Bloomberg contributed $50 million to support Kamala Harris's 2024 election campaign.\nPhilanthropy.\nIn August 2010, Bloomberg signed The Giving Pledge, whereby the wealthy pledge to give away at least half of their wealth. In his lifetime, he has given away $17.4 billion overall including $3 billion in 2023, when he was America's highest giving philanthropist, according to Chronicle of Philanthropy. He has been in the top ten on the publication's list of America's biggest donors since 2004.\nHis Bloomberg Philanthropies foundation focuses on public health, the arts, government innovation, the environment, and education. Through the foundation, he donated or pledged $767\u00a0million in 2018, and more than $1 billion in 2019.\nIn 2011, recipients included the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health; World Lung Foundation and the World Health Organization. According to \"The New York Times\", Bloomberg was an \"anonymous donor\" to the Carnegie Corporation from 2001 to 2010, with gifts ranging from $5\u00a0million to $20\u00a0million each year. The Carnegie Corporation distributed these contributions to hundreds of New York City organizations ranging from the Dance Theatre of Harlem to Gilda's Club, a non-profit organization that provides support to people and families living with cancer. He continues to support the arts through his foundation.\nBloomberg gave $254\u00a0million in 2009 to almost 1,400 nonprofit organizations, saying, \"I am a big believer in giving it all away and have always said that the best financial planning ends with bouncing the check to the undertaker.\"\nCOVID-19 response.\nDuring the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath, Bloomberg through his foundation committed to a wide range of urgent causes including researching treatments and vaccines, leading contact tracing to root out the virus, supporting the World Health Organization, and funding global efforts to fight the spread of the disease and protect vulnerable populations. Action included:\nEnvironmental advocacy.\nBloomberg is an environmentalist and has advocated policy to fight climate change at least since he became the mayor of New York City. In September 2023, the New York Times called Bloomberg \"perhaps the world's single largest funder of climate activism.\" At the national level, Bloomberg has consistently pushed for transitioning the United States' energy mix from fossil fuels to clean energy. In July 2011, Bloomberg Philanthropies donated $50 million to Sierra Club's Beyond Coal campaign, allowing the campaign to expand its efforts to shut down coal-fired power plants from 15 states to 45 states. In 2015, Bloomberg announced an additional $30 million contribution to the Beyond Coal initiative, matched with another $30\u00a0million by other donors, to help secure the retirement of half of America's fleet of coal plants by 2017. In July 2017, Europe Beyond Coal was established to phase out use of coal on the continent by 2030. Austria closed its final coal-fired plant in April 2020. In early June 2019, Bloomberg pledged $500 million to reduce climate impacts and shut remaining coal-fired power plants by 2030 via the new Beyond Carbon initiative. In September 2023, Bloomberg committed another $500 million to Beyond Carbon to \"finish the job on coal.\"\nBloomberg Philanthropies awarded a $6 million grant to the Environmental Defense Fund in support of strict regulations on fracking in the 14 states with the heaviest natural gas production.\nIn 2013, Bloomberg and Bloomberg Philanthropies launched the Risky Business initiative with former Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson and hedge-fund billionaire Tom Steyer. The joint effort worked to convince the business community of the need for more sustainable energy and development policies, by quantifying and publicizing the economic risks the United States faces from the impact of climate change. In January 2015, Bloomberg led Bloomberg Philanthropies in a $48-million partnership with the Heising-Simons family to launch the Clean Energy Initiative. The initiative supports state-based solutions aimed at ensuring America has a clean, reliable, and affordable energy system.\nSince 2010, Bloomberg has taken an increasingly global role on environmental issues. From 2010 to 2013, he served as the chairman of the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, a network of the world's biggest cities working together to reduce carbon emissions. During his tenure, Bloomberg worked with President Bill Clinton to merge C40 with the Clinton Climate Initiative, with the goal of amplifying their efforts in the global fight against climate change worldwide. He serves as the president of the board of C40 Cities. In January 2014, Bloomberg began a five-year commitment totaling $53\u00a0million through Bloomberg Philanthropies to the Vibrant Oceans Initiative. The initiative partners Bloomberg Philanthropies with Oceana, Rare, and Encourage Capital to help reform fisheries and increase sustainable populations worldwide. In 2018, Bloomberg joined Ray Dalio in announcing a commitment of $185\u00a0million towards protecting the oceans.\nIn 2014, United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon appointed Bloomberg as his first Special Envoy for Cities and Climate Change to help the United Nations work with cities to prevent climate change. In September 2014, Bloomberg convened with Ban and global leaders at the UN Climate Summit to announce definite action to fight climate change in 2015. In 2018, Ban's successor Ant\u00f3nio Guterres appointed Bloomberg as UN envoy for climate action. He resigned in November 2019, in the run-up to his presidential campaign. On 5 February 2021, however, he was re-appointed by Guterres as his Special Envoy on Climate Ambition and Solutions in the lead-up to the climate conference in Scotland scheduled for November 2021.\nIn late 2014, Bloomberg, Ban Ki-moon, and global city networks ICLEI-Local Governments for Sustainability (ICLEI), C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group (C40) and United Cities and Local Governments (UCLG), with support from UN-Habitat, launched the Compact of Mayors, a global coalition of mayors and city officials pledging to reduce local greenhouse gas emissions, enhance climate resilience, and track their progress transparently. To date, over 250 cities representing more than 300\u00a0million people worldwide and 4.1 percent of the total global population, have committed to the Compact of Mayors, which was merged with the Covenant of Mayors in June 2016.\nIn 2015, Bloomberg and Paris mayor Anne Hidalgo created the Climate Summit for Local Leaders. which convened assembled hundreds of city leaders from around the world at Paris City Hall to discuss fighting climate change. The Summit concluded with the presentation of the Paris Declaration, a pledge by leaders from assembled global cities to cut carbon emissions by 3.7 gigatons annually by 2030.\nDuring the 2015 UN Climate Change Conference in Paris, Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and chair of the Financial Stability Board, announced that Bloomberg would lead a new global task force designed to help industry and financial markets understand the growing risks of climate change.\nFollowing President Donald Trump's announcement that the U.S. government would withdraw from the Paris climate accord, Bloomberg outlined a coalition of cities, states, universities and businesses that had come together to honor America's commitment under the agreement through 'America's Pledge'. Bloomberg offered up to $15\u00a0million to the UNFCCC, the UN body that assists countries with climate change efforts. About a month later, Bloomberg and California Governor Jerry Brown announced that the America's Pledge coalition would work to \"quantify the actions taken by U.S. states, cities and business to drive down greenhouse gas emissions consistent with the goals of the Paris Agreement.\" In announcing the initiative, Bloomberg said \"the American government may have pulled out of the Paris agreement, but American society remains committed to it.\" Two think tanks, World Resource Institute and the Rocky Mountain Institute, will work with America's Pledge to analyze the work cities, states and businesses do to meet the U.S. commitment to the Paris agreement.\nIn May 2019, Bloomberg announced a 2020 Midwestern Collegiate Climate Summit in Washington University in St. Louis with the aim to bring together leaders from Midwestern universities, local government and the private sector to reduce climate impacts in the region.\nExpanding on the work of Beyond Coal and Beyond Carbon, Bloomberg launched Beyond Petrochemicals in September 2022. The campaign takes aim at the rapid expansion of U.S. petrochemicals and plastic pollution. The $85 million campaign aims to block the construction of 120 proposed petrochemical projects in Louisiana, Texas and the Ohio River Valley.\nBloomberg serves as global adviser to the winners of the Earthshot Prize. His foundation Bloomberg Philanthropies is a founding partner of the Prize which awards \u00a31,000,000 to each of five winners each year whose work will achieve ambitious climate and sustainability goals by 2030. The 2023 finalists were announced at the Earthshot Prize Innovation Summit in September 2023 in New York, and the five winners were announced in November 2023 in Singapore.\nJohns Hopkins University philanthropy.\nAs of 2024, Bloomberg has given more than $4.55\u00a0billion to Johns Hopkins University, his alma mater, making him \"the most generous living donor to any education institution in the United States.\" His first contribution, in 1965, had been $5. He made his first $1\u00a0million commitment to JHU in 1984, and subsequently became the first individual to exceed $1\u00a0billion in lifetime donations to a single U.S. institution of higher education.\nBloomberg's contributions to Johns Hopkins \"fueled major improvements in the university's reputation and rankings, its competitiveness for faculty and students, and the appearance of its campus,\" and included construction of a children's hospital (the Charlotte R. Bloomberg Children's Center Building, named after Bloomberg's mother); a physics building, a school of public health (the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health), libraries, and biomedical research facilities, including the Institute for Cell Engineering, a stem-cell research institute within the School of Medicine, and the Malaria Research Institute within the School of Public Health. In 2013, Bloomberg committed $350\u00a0million to Johns Hopkins, five-sevenths of which were allocated to the Bloomberg Distinguished Professorships. In 2016, Bloomberg Philanthropies contributed $300\u00a0million to establish the Bloomberg American Health Initiative. Bloomberg also funded the launch of the Bloomberg\u2013Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy within the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in East Baltimore, with a $50\u00a0million gift; an additional $50\u00a0million was given by philanthropist Sidney Kimmel, and $25\u00a0million by other donors. It will support cancer therapy research, technology and infrastructure development, and private sector partnerships. In 2016, Bloomberg joined Vice President Joe Biden for the institute's formal launch, embracing Biden's \"Cancer Moonshot\" initiative, which seeks to find a cure for cancer through national coordination of government and private sector resources. In 2018, Bloomberg contributed a further gift of $1.8\u00a0billion to Johns Hopkins, allowing the university to practice need-blind admission and meet the full financial need of admitted students.\nIn 2024, Bloomberg announced a $1 billion gift to Johns Hopkins University to make tuition free for all medical school students whose families make under $300,000 a year, beginning in the fall of 2024. The donation also increased financial aid for students enrolled in nursing, public health and other graduate programs.\nOther educational and research philanthropy.\nIn 1996, Bloomberg endowed the William Henry Bloomberg Professorship at Harvard University with a $3\u00a0million gift in honor of his father, who died in 1963, saying: \"Throughout his life, he recognized the importance of reaching out to the non-profit sector to help better the welfare of the entire community.\"\nIn 2015, Bloomberg donated $100\u00a0million to Cornell Tech, the applied sciences graduate school of Cornell University on the school's Roosevelt Island campus. Through Bloomberg Philanthropies, Bloomberg established the American Talent Initiative in 2016 which is committed to increasing the number of lower-income high-achieving students attending elite colleges. Bloomberg Philanthropies also supports CollegePoint which has provided advising to lower- and moderate-income high school students since 2014. In 2016, the Museum of Science, Boston, announced a $50\u00a0million gift from Bloomberg. Bloomberg credited the museum with sparking his intellectual curiosity as a patron and student during his youth in Medford, Massachusetts. It is the largest donation in the museum's 186-year history.\nBloomberg donated $100 million to America's four Historically Black Medical Schools in 2020 as part of Bloomberg Philanthropies' Greenwood Initiative, which tackles the racial wealth gap and addresses decades of under-investment in Black communities. The gift to Meharry Medical College, Howard University College of Medicine, Morehouse School of Medicine and Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science provided grants to reduce debt for students, meaning many medical students enrolled at the time and for the four years to follow would graduate free of debt.\nIn April 2022, Bloomberg announced two separate $100 million donations, one to Harlem Children\u2019s Zone\u2019s Promise Academy and another to Success Academy Charter Schools.\nIn 2024, Bloomberg again made a donation to the nation's Historically Black Medical Schools \u2014 this time gifting $600 million to the four schools to support their endowments. The New York Times reported the endowments were \"significantly underfunded\" due to entrenched discrimination, but Bloomberg's gift was expected to increase three of the schools' endowment sizes by more than 100%. The donation also included $5 million to help Xavier University to establish a new medical school.\nUrban innovation philanthropy.\nIn July 2011, Bloomberg launched a $24\u00a0million initiative to fund \"Innovation Delivery Teams\" in five cities. The teams are one of Bloomberg Philanthropies' key goals: advancing government innovation. In December 2011, Bloomberg Philanthropies launched a partnership with online ticket search engine SeatGeek to connect artists with new audiences. Called the Discover New York Arts Project, the project includes organizations HERE, New York Theatre Workshop, and the Kaufman Center.\nIn 2013, Bloomberg announced the Mayors Challenge competition to drive innovation in American cities. The program was later expanded to competitions in Latin America and Europe.\nIn 2016, Bloomberg gave Harvard $32\u00a0million to create the Bloomberg Harvard City Leadership Initiative within Harvard Kennedy School's Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation; the initiative provides training to mayors and their aides on innovative municipal leadership and challenges facing cities. Since its founding, 275 mayors and more than 400 top city aides have gone through the program, prompting Time Magazine to call Bloomberg \"the nation's mayoral tutor\".\nIn March 2021, Bloomberg gave Harvard $150\u00a0million to create the \"Bloomberg Center for Cities\" to support mayors.\nTobacco, gun control, and public health.\nBloomberg has been a long-time donor to global tobacco control efforts. Bloomberg has donated close to $1\u00a0billion to the World Health Organization (WHO) to promote anti-smoking efforts, including $125\u00a0million in 2006, $250\u00a0million in 2008, and $360\u00a0million, making Bloomberg Philanthropies the developing world's biggest funder of tobacco-control initiatives. In 2013, it was reported that Bloomberg had donated $109.24\u00a0million in 556 grants and 61 countries to campaigns against tobacco. Bloomberg's contributions are aimed at \"getting countries to monitor tobacco use, introduce strong tobacco-control laws, and create mass media campaigns to educate the public about the dangers of tobacco use\". Bloomberg Philanthropies and the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids jointly launched a $160 million, three-year campaign against youth use of electronic cigarettes (vaping).\nBloomberg is the co-founder of Everytown for Gun Safety (formerly Mayors Against Illegal Guns), a gun control advocacy group.\nIn 2016, the World Health Organization appointed Bloomberg as its Global Ambassador for Noncommunicable Diseases.\nNational September 11 Memorial and Museum.\nIn October 2006, Bloomberg became chairman of the board and chief fundraiser of the National September 11 Memorial &amp; Museum; CBS News and Politico credited him with having resolved financial and design obstacles that delayed its completion. He was mayor during the initial planning stages of the memorial &amp; museum. Once he assumed the Chairmanship, he sought to reduce cost increases, finalize fundraising efforts, and resume the mapping and design processes. Bloomberg has raised $450 million for the National September 11 Memorial &amp; Museum, including a $50 million personal contribution, making him its largest single donor. Bloomberg secured donations from major corporations by saying they held some responsibility as members of the global community. One of his first acts as chairman was securing a $10 million donation from American Express. Bloomberg recruited members to the board and donations across the political spectrum, including David Koch and Jon Stewart. Bloomberg is also chairman of the Perelman Performing Arts Center in the World Trade Center complex, to which he has donated $130 million.\nAt the ceremony opening for the National September 11 Memorial Museum, Bloomberg said the museum was \"a reminder to us and all future generations that freedom carries heavy responsibilities\". He continued to lead the annual 9/11 ceremony after leaving office. In 2010 he replanted the Callery Pear tree that had been originally planted in the World Trade Center complex and was discovered in the rubble and saved after the attacks. In September 2021, marking the 20th anniversary of the attacks, Bloomberg and the museum launched The Never Forget Fund, focused on educational programming about 9/11.\nOther philanthropy.\nThrough Bloomberg Philanthropies, Bloomberg supported the Fresh Air Fund's creation of 'Open Spaces in the City' in summer 2020 to provide socially-distant areas for kids to play during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as jobs for local teens. He donated $3 million to the construction of a new public library in his hometown of Medford and $75\u00a0million for The Shed, a new arts and cultural center in Hudson Yards, Manhattan.\nIn September 2023, the Perelman Performing Arts Center opened with $130 million of support from Bloomberg, who serves as its chair. The $500 million art center is the final major piece of the redevelopment of the site where the World Trade Center once stood.\nFollowing the Hamas attack on Israel in October 2023, Bloomberg committed to matching donations to the Israeli Red Cross, known as Magen David Adom. By October 19, 2023, Bloomberg had matched $25 million in donations to the ambulance and Medivac services.\nBloomberg also endowed his hometown synagogue, Temple Shalom, which was renamed for his parents as the William and Charlotte Bloomberg Jewish Community Center of Medford.\nBloomberg hosted the Global Business Forum in 2017, during the annual meeting of the United Nations General Assembly; the gathering featured international CEOs, heads of state, and other prominent speakers.\nIn 2009, Bloomberg met with fellow billionaires, including Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, Ted Turner and Oprah Winfrey, to address issues ranging from the environment, health care and concerns over population growth. Although no formal organization was established, the effort was understood to be designed to help bring various philanthropic projects of the mega-donors into a more unified effort.\nCampaign finance controversies.\nIn March 2020, during Bloomberg\u2019s presidential bid, he was sued by multiple former campaign staffers alleging fraud, and claiming that as many as 2,000 campaign staffers who were promised to be paid through the election were fired instead.\nPersonal life.\nFamily and relationships.\nIn 1975, Bloomberg married Susan Elizabeth Barbara Brown, a British national from Yorkshire, United Kingdom. They have two daughters: Emma Beth (born c. 1979), and Georgina Leigh (born 1983), who were featured on \"Born Rich\", a 2003 documentary film about the children of the extremely wealthy. Bloomberg divorced Brown in 1993, but he has said she remains his \"best friend\". Since 2000, Bloomberg has lived with former New York state banking superintendent Diana Taylor. Emma Bloomberg was married to Chris Frissora, son of Mark Frissora, and they had a daughter with a hybrid surname, Frissberg.\nBloomberg's younger sister, Marjorie Tiven, has been commissioner of the New York City Commission for the United Nations, Consular Corps, and Protocol, since February 2002.\nRelations with the Sackler family.\nDuring the opioid epidemic in the United States, Mortimer Sackler \u2014 son of a co-founder of the company, Purdue Pharma, and a member of its board, met with Bloomberg to \"seek his help and guidance on the current issues we are facing\". Purdue's head of communications, Josephine Martin, added \"Any positive news or ability to get our side out is through Bloomberg. We have given them exclusives and they have treated us very well.\" Bloomberg also advised Mortimer Sackler to consult Stu Loeser to help manage communications.\nReligion.\nAlthough he attended Hebrew school, had a bar mitzvah, and his family kept a kosher kitchen, Bloomberg today lives a mostly secular religious life, attending synagogue mainly during the High Holidays and a Passover Seder with his sister, Marjorie Tiven. Neither of his daughters had bat mitzvahs, nor does either daughter follow a religiously Jewish lifestyle, such as abiding kosher dietary restrictions or keeping the Jewish sabbath.\nPublic image and lifestyle.\nThroughout his business career, Bloomberg has made numerous statements which have been considered by some to be insulting, derogatory, sexist or misogynistic. When working on Wall Street in the 1960s and 1970s, Bloomberg claimed in his 1997 autobiography, he had \"a girlfriend in every city\". On various occasions, Bloomberg allegedly commented, \"I'd do her\", regarding certain women, some of whom were co-workers or employees. Bloomberg later said that by \"do\", he meant that he would have a personal relationship with the woman.\nDuring his term as mayor, he lived at his own home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, instead of Gracie Mansion, the official mayoral residence. In 2013, he owned 13 properties in various countries around the world, including a $20\u00a0million Georgian mansion in Southampton, New York. In 2015, he acquired 4 Cheyne Walk, a historical property in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London, which once belonged to writer George Eliot. Bloomberg and his daughters own houses in Bermuda, and stay there frequently.\nBloomberg stated that during his mayoralty, he rode the New York City Subway on a daily basis, particularly in the commute from his 79th Street home to his office at City Hall. An August 2007 story in \"The New York Times\" stated that he was often seen chauffeured by two New York Police Department-owned SUVs to an express train station to avoid having to change from the local to the express trains on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line. He supported the construction of the 7 Subway Extension and the Second Avenue Subway; in December 2013, Bloomberg took a ceremonial ride on a train to the new 34th Street station to celebrate a part of his legacy as mayor.\nDuring his tenure as mayor, Bloomberg made cameos, playing himself in the films \"The Adjustment Bureau\" and \"New Year's Eve\", as well as in episodes of \"30 Rock\", \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\", \"The Good Wife\", and two episodes of \"Law &amp; Order\".\nBloomberg is a private pilot. He owns six airplanes: three Dassault Falcon 900s, a Beechcraft B300, a Pilatus PC-24, and a Cessna 182 Skylane. Bloomberg also owns two helicopters: an AW109, and an Airbus helicopter; and, as of 2012, was near the top of the waiting list for an AW609 tiltrotor aircraft. In his youth, he was a licensed amateur radio operator, was proficient in Morse code, and built ham radios.\nBloomberg's fortune is managed by Willett Advisors, an investment firm that serves as his family office.\nAwards and honors.\nBloomberg has received honorary degrees from Tufts University (2007), Bard College (2007), Rockefeller University (2007), the University of Pennsylvania (2008), Fordham University (2009), Williams College (2014), Harvard University (2014), the University of Michigan (2016), Villanova University (2017), and Washington University in St. Louis (2019).\nBloomberg was the speaker for Princeton University's 2011 baccalaureate service.\nOn May 27, 2010, Bloomberg delivered the commencement speech at his alma mater, Johns Hopkins University. In addition, he was invited to and delivered guest remarks for the Johns Hopkins Class of 2020. Other notable guest speakers during the virtual ceremony included Reddit co-founder and Commencement speaker Alexis Ohanian; Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and a leading member of the White House Coronavirus Task Force; and senior class president Pavan Patel\nIn 2022, Bloomberg was awarded the Asia Game Changer Award.\nBloomberg has received the Yale School of Management's Award for Distinguished Leadership in Global Capital Markets (2003); Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement presented by Ehud Barak (2004); Barnard College's Barnard Medal of Distinction (2008); the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Leadership for Healthy Communities' Healthy Communities Leadership Award (2009); and the Jefferson Awards Foundation's U.S. Senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service by an Elected or Appointed Official (2010). He was the inaugural laureate of the annual Genesis Prize for Jewish values in 2013, and donated the $1\u00a0million prize money to a global competition, the Genesis Generation Challenge, to identify young adults' big ideas to better the world.\nBloomberg was named the 39th most influential person in the world in the 2007 and 2008 Time 100. In 2009, Bloomberg was awarded the Lasker Award. In 2010, \"Vanity Fair\" ranked him #7 in its \"Vanity Fair 100\" list of influential figures.\nBloomberg received a Lifetime Achievement award from the Webby Awards in 2012. In 2013, the Tony Awards gave Bloomberg the Excellence in Theatre Award.\nIn 2014, Queen Elizabeth II appointed Bloomberg an Honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his \"prodigious entrepreneurial and philanthropic endeavors, and the many ways in which they have benefited the United Kingdom and the U.K.-U.S. special relationship.\" The League of Conservation Voters awarded Bloomberg the Lifetime Achievement Award in 2018. He was the recipient of the Heyman Service to America Medal in 2019.\nIn 2024, President Joe Biden awarded Bloomberg the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the Nation's highest civilian honor.\nIn January 2025 Bloomberg was awarded the Department of the Navy Distinguished Public Service Award.\nIn March 2025, Time Magazine awarded Bloomberg the Earth Award for his ongoing environmental work including the closure of 300 coal-fired power plants across America, a 20% reduction in N.Y.'s emissions, and donating over $1 billion to climate causes.\nBooks and other works.\nBloomberg, with Matthew Winkler, wrote an autobiography, \"Bloomberg by Bloomberg\", published in 1997 by Wiley. A second edition was released in 2019, ahead of Bloomberg's presidential run. Bloomberg and former Sierra Club Executive Director Carl Pope co-authored \"Climate of Hope: How Cities, Businesses, and Citizens Can Save the Planet\" (2017), published by St. Martin's Press; the book appeared on the \"New York Times\" hardcover nonfiction best-seller list. Bloomberg has written a number of op-eds in \"The New York Times\" about various issues, including an op-ed supporting state and local efforts to fight climate change (2017), an op-ed about his donation of $1.8\u00a0billion in financial aid for college students and support for need-blind admission policies (2018); an op-ed supporting a ban on flavored e-cigarettes (2019); and an op-ed supporting policies to reduce economic inequality (2020).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38829", "revid": "39348845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38829", "title": "Three-phase electric power", "text": "Form of alternating current\nThree-phase electric power (abbreviated 3\u03d5) is the most widely used form of alternating current (AC) for electricity generation, transmission, and distribution. It is a type of polyphase system that uses three wires (or four, if a neutral return is included) and is the standard method by which electrical grids deliver power around the world. \nIn a three-phase system, each of the three voltages is offset by 120 degrees of phase shift relative to the others. This arrangement produces a more constant flow of power compared with single-phase systems, making it especially efficient for transmitting electricity over long distances and for powering heavy loads such as industrial machinery. Because it is an AC system, voltages can be easily increased or decreased with transformers, allowing high-voltage transmission and low-voltage distribution with minimal loss. \nThree-phase circuits are also more economical: a three-wire system can transmit more power than a two-wire single-phase system of the same phase-to-phase voltage while using less conductor material. Beyond transmission, three-phase power is commonly used to run large induction motors, other electric motors, and heavy industrial loads, while smaller devices and household equipment often rely on single-phase circuits derived from the same network. \nThree-phase electrical power was first developed in the 1880s by several inventors and has remained the backbone of modern electrical systems ever since.\nTerminology.\nThe conductors between a voltage source and a load are called lines, and the voltage between any two lines is called line voltage. The voltage measured between any line and neutral is called phase voltage. For example, in countries with nominal 230 V power, the line voltage is 400 V and the phase voltage is 230 V. For a 208/120 V service, the line voltage is 208 V and the phase voltage is 120 V.\nHistory.\nPolyphase power systems were independently invented by Galileo Ferraris, Mikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky, Jonas Wenstr\u00f6m, John Hopkinson, William Stanley Jr., and Nikola Tesla in the late 1880s.\nThree phase power evolved out of electric motor development. In 1885, Galileo Ferraris was doing research on rotating magnetic fields. Ferraris experimented with different types of asynchronous electric motors. The research and his studies resulted in the development of an alternator, which may be thought of as an alternating-current motor operating in reverse, so as to convert mechanical (rotating) power into electric power (as alternating current). On 11 March 1888, Ferraris published his research in a paper to the Royal Academy of Sciences in Turin.\nTwo months later Nikola Tesla gained https:// for a three-phase electric motor design, application filed October 12, 1887. Figure 13 of this patent shows that Tesla envisaged his three-phase motor being powered from the generator via six wires.\nThese alternators operated by creating systems of alternating currents displaced from one another in phase by definite amounts, and depended on rotating magnetic fields for their operation. The resulting source of polyphase power soon found widespread acceptance. The invention of the polyphase alternator is key in the history of electrification, as is the power transformer. These inventions enabled power to be transmitted by wires economically over considerable distances. Polyphase power enabled the use of water-power (via hydroelectric generating plants in large dams) in remote places, thereby allowing the mechanical energy of the falling water to be converted to electricity, which then could be fed to an electric motor at any location where mechanical work needed to be done. This versatility sparked the growth of power-transmission network grids on continents around the globe.\nMikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky developed a three-phase electrical generator and a three-phase electric motor in 1888 and studied star and delta connections. His three-phase three-wire transmission system was displayed in 1891 in Germany at the International Electrotechnical Exhibition, where Dolivo-Dobrovolsky used the system to transmit electric power at the distance of 176\u00a0km (110 miles) with 75% efficiency. In 1891 he also created a three-phase transformer and short-circuited (squirrel-cage) induction motor. He designed the world's first three-phase hydroelectric power plant in 1891. Inventor Jonas Wenstr\u00f6m received in 1890 a Swedish patent on the same three-phase system. The possibility of transferring electrical power from a waterfall at a distance was explored at the Gr\u00e4ngesberg mine. A fall at H\u00e4llsj\u00f6n, Smedjebackens kommun, where a small iron work had been located, was selected. In 1893, a three-phase system was used to transfer a distance of 15\u00a0km (10 miles), becoming the first commercial application.\nPrinciple.\nIn a symmetric three-phase power supply system, three conductors each carry an alternating current of the same frequency and voltage amplitude relative to a common reference, but with a phase difference of one third of a cycle (i.e., 120 degrees out of phase) between each. The common reference is usually connected to ground and often to a current-carrying conductor called the neutral. Due to the phase difference, the voltage on any conductor reaches its peak at one third of a cycle after one of the other conductors and one third of a cycle before the remaining conductor. This phase delay gives constant power transfer to a balanced linear load. It also makes it possible to produce a rotating magnetic field in an electric motor and generate other phase arrangements using transformers (for instance, a two-phase system using a Scott-T transformer). The amplitude of the voltage difference between two phases is formula_1 times the amplitude of the voltage of the individual phases.\nThe symmetric three-phase systems described here are simply referred to as \"three-phase systems\" because, although it is possible to design and implement asymmetric three-phase power systems (i.e., with unequal voltages or phase shifts), they are not used in practice because they lack the most important advantages of symmetric systems.\nIn a three-phase system feeding a balanced and linear load, the sum of the instantaneous currents of the three conductors is zero. In other words, the current in each conductor is equal in magnitude to the sum of the currents in the other two, but with the opposite sign. The return path for the current in any phase conductor is the other two phase conductors.\nConstant power transfer is possible with any number of phases greater than one. However, two-phase systems do not have neutral-current cancellation and thus use conductors less efficiently, and more than three phases complicates infrastructure unnecessarily.\nAdditionally, in some practical generators and motors, \ntwo phases can result in a less smooth (pulsating) torque. \nThree-phase systems may have a fourth wire, common in low-voltage distribution. This is the neutral wire. The neutral allows three separate single-phase supplies to be provided at a constant voltage and is commonly used for supplying multiple single-phase loads. The connections are arranged so that, as far as possible in each group, equal power is drawn from each phase. Further up the distribution system, the currents are usually well balanced. Transformers may be wired to have a four-wire secondary and a three-wire primary, while allowing unbalanced loads and the associated secondary-side neutral currents.\nPhase sequence.\nWiring for three phases is typically identified by colors that vary by country and voltage. The phases must be connected in the correct order to achieve the intended direction of rotation of three-phase motors. For example, pumps and fans do not work as intended in reverse. Maintaining the identity of phases is required if two sources could be connected at the same time. A direct connection between two different phases is a short circuit and leads to flow of unbalanced current.\nAdvantages and disadvantages.\nAs compared to a single-phase AC power supply that uses two current-carrying conductors with no neutral, a three-phase supply with no neutral and the same phase-to-phase voltage can transmit the same power by using just 0.75 times as much conductor material.\nThree-phase supplies have properties that make them desirable in electric power distribution systems:\nHowever, most loads are single-phase. In North America, single-family houses and individual apartments are supplied one phase from the power grid and use a split-phase system to the panelboard from which most branch circuits will carry 120\u00a0V. Circuits designed for higher powered devices such as stoves, dryers, or outlets for electric vehicles carry 240\u00a0V.\nIn Europe, three-phase power is normally delivered to the panelboard and further to higher powered devices.\nGeneration and distribution.\nAt the power station, an electrical generator converts mechanical power into a set of three AC electric currents, one from each coil (or winding) of the generator. The windings are arranged such that the currents are at the same frequency but with the peaks and troughs of their wave forms offset to provide three complementary currents with a phase separation of one-third cycle (120\u00b0 or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u03c0\u20443 radians). The generator frequency is typically 50 or 60 Hz, depending on the country.\nAt the power station, transformers change the voltage from generators to a level suitable for transmission in order to minimize losses.\nAfter further voltage conversions in the transmission network, the voltage is finally transformed to the standard utilization before power is supplied to customers.\nMost automotive alternators generate three-phase AC and rectify it to DC with a diode bridge.\nTransformer connections.\nA \"delta\" (\u0394) connected transformer winding is connected between phases of a three-phase system. A \"wye\" (Y) transformer connects each winding from a phase wire to a common neutral point.\nA single three-phase transformer can be used, or three single-phase transformers.\nIn an \"open delta\" or \"V\" system, only two transformers are used. A closed delta made of three single-phase transformers can operate as an open delta if one of the transformers has failed or needs to be removed. In open delta, each transformer must carry current for its respective phases as well as current for the third phase, therefore capacity is reduced to 87%. With one of three transformers missing and the remaining two at 87% efficiency, the capacity is 58% (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 of 87%).\nWhere a delta-fed system must be grounded for detection of stray current to ground or protection from surge voltages, a grounding transformer (usually a zigzag transformer) may be connected to allow ground fault currents to return from any phase to ground. Another variation is a \"corner grounded\" delta system, which is a closed delta that is grounded at one of the junctions of transformers.\nThree-wire and four-wire circuits.\nThere are two basic three-phase configurations: wye\u00a0(Y) and delta\u00a0(\u0394). As shown in the diagram, a delta configuration requires only three wires for transmission, but a wye (star) configuration may have a fourth wire. The fourth wire, if present, is provided as a neutral and is normally grounded. The three-wire and four-wire designations do not count the ground wire present above many transmission lines, which is solely for fault protection and does not carry current under normal use.\nA four-wire system with symmetrical voltages between phase and neutral is obtained when the neutral is connected to the \"common star point\" of all supply windings. In such a system, all three phases will have the same magnitude of voltage relative to the neutral. Other non-symmetrical systems have been used.\nThe four-wire wye system is used when a mixture of single-phase and three-phase loads is to be served, such as mixed lighting and motor loads. An example of application is local distribution in Europe (and elsewhere), where each customer may be only fed from one phase and the neutral (which is common to the three phases). When a group of customers sharing the neutral draw unequal phase currents, the common neutral wire carries the currents resulting from these imbalances. Electrical engineers try to design the three-phase power system for any one location so that the power drawn from each of three phases is the same, as far as possible at that site. Electrical engineers also try to arrange the distribution network so the loads are balanced as much as possible, since the same principles that apply to individual premises also apply to the wide-scale distribution system power. Hence, every effort is made by supply authorities to distribute the power drawn on each of the three phases over a large number of premises so that, on average, as nearly as possible a balanced load is seen at the point of supply.\nFor domestic use, some countries such as the UK may supply one phase and neutral at a high current (up to 100\u00a0A) to one property, while others such as Germany may supply 3\u00a0phases and neutral to each customer, but at a lower fuse rating, typically 40\u201363\u00a0A per phase, and \"rotated\" to avoid the effect that more load tends to be put on the first phase.\nBased on wye (Y) and delta (\u0394) connection. Generally, there are four different types of three-phase transformer winding connections for transmission and distribution purposes:\nIn North America, a high-leg delta supply is sometimes used where one winding of a delta-connected transformer feeding the load is center-tapped and that center tap is grounded and connected as a neutral as shown in the second diagram. This setup produces three different voltages: If the voltage between the center tap (neutral) and each of the top and bottom taps (phase and anti-phase) is 120\u00a0V (100%), the voltage across the phase and anti-phase lines is 240\u00a0V (200%), and the neutral to \"high leg\" voltage is \u2248\u00a0208\u00a0V (173%).\nThe reason for providing the delta connected supply is usually to power large motors requiring a rotating field. However, the premises concerned will also require the \"normal\" North American 120\u00a0V supplies, two of which are derived (180\u00a0degrees \"out of phase\") between the \"neutral\" and either of the center-tapped phase points.\nBalanced circuits.\nIn the perfectly balanced case all three lines share equivalent loads. Examining the circuits, we can derive relationships between line voltage and current, and load voltage and current for wye- and delta-connected loads.\nIn a balanced system each line will produce equal voltage magnitudes at phase angles equally spaced from each other. With V1 as our reference and V3 lagging V2 lagging V1, using angle notation, and VLN the voltage between the line and the neutral we have:\nformula_2\nThese voltages feed into either a wye- or delta-connected load.\nWye (or, star; Y).\nThe voltage seen by the load will depend on the load connection; for the wye case, connecting each load to a phase (line-to-neutral) voltages gives\nformula_3\nwhere \"Z\"total is the sum of line and load impedances (\"Z\"total = \"Z\"LN + \"Z\"Y), and \"\u03b8\" is the phase of the total impedance (\"Z\"total).\nThe phase angle difference between voltage and current of each phase is not necessarily 0 and depends on the type of load impedance, \"Z\"y. Inductive and capacitive loads will cause current to either lag or lead the voltage. However, the relative phase angle between each pair of lines (1 to 2, 2 to 3, and 3 to 1) will still be \u2212120\u00b0.\nBy applying Kirchhoff's current law (KCL) to the neutral node, the three phase currents sum to the total current in the neutral line. In the balanced case:\n formula_4\nDelta (\u0394).\nIn the delta circuit, loads are connected across the lines, and so loads see line-to-line voltages:\n formula_5\nFurther:\nformula_6\nwhere \"\u03b8\" is the phase of delta impedance (\"Z\"\u0394).\nRelative angles are preserved, so \"I\"31 lags \"I\"23 lags \"I\"12 by 120\u00b0. Calculating line currents by using KCL at each delta node gives\nformula_7\nand similarly for each other line:\n formula_8\nwhere, again, \"\u03b8\" is the phase of delta impedance (\"Z\"\u0394).\nInspection of a phasor diagram, or conversion from phasor notation to complex notation, illuminates how the difference between two line-to-neutral voltages yields a line-to-line voltage that is greater by a factor of \u221a3. As a delta configuration connects a load across phases of a transformer, it delivers the line-to-line voltage difference, which is \u221a3 times greater than the line-to-neutral voltage delivered to a load in the wye configuration. As the power transferred is \"V\"2/\"Z\", the impedance in the delta configuration must be 3 times what it would be in a wye configuration for the same power to be transferred.\nSingle-phase loads.\nExcept in a high-leg delta system and a corner-grounded delta system, single-phase loads may be connected across any two phases, or a load can be connected from phase to neutral. Distributing single-phase loads among the phases of a three-phase system balances the load and makes most economical use of conductors and transformers.\nIn a symmetrical three-phase four-wire wye system, the three phase conductors have the same voltage to the system neutral. The voltage between line conductors is \u221a3 times the phase conductor to neutral voltage:\nformula_9\nThe currents returning from the customers' premises to the supply transformer all share the neutral wire. If the loads are evenly distributed on all three phases, the sum of the returning currents in the neutral wire is approximately zero. Any unbalanced phase loading on the secondary side of the transformer will use the transformer capacity inefficiently.\nIf the supply neutral is broken, phase-to-neutral voltage is no longer maintained. Phases with higher relative loading will experience reduced voltage, and phases with lower relative loading will experience elevated voltage, up to the phase-to-phase voltage.\nA high-leg delta provides phase-to-neutral relationship of \"V\"LL = 2\u2009\"V\"LN, however, LN load is imposed on one phase. A transformer manufacturer's page suggests that LN loading not exceed 5% of transformer capacity.\nSince \u221a3 \u2248 1.73, defining \"V\"LN as 100% gives \"V\"LL \u2248 100% \u00d7 1.73 = 173%. If \"V\"LL was set as 100%, then \"V\"LN \u2248 57.7%.\nUnbalanced loads.\nWhen the currents on the three live wires of a three-phase system are not equal or are not at an exact 120\u00b0 phase angle, the power loss is greater than for a perfectly balanced system. The method of symmetrical components is used to analyze unbalanced systems.\nNon-linear loads.\nWith linear loads, the neutral only carries the current due to imbalance between the phases. Gas-discharge lamps and devices that utilize rectifier-capacitor front-end such as switch-mode power supplies, computers, office equipment and such produce third-order harmonics that are in-phase on all the supply phases. Consequently, such harmonic currents add in the neutral in a wye system (or in the grounded (zigzag) transformer in a delta system), which can cause the neutral current to exceed the phase current.\nThree-phase loads.\nAn important class of three-phase load is the electric motor. A three-phase induction motor has a simple design, inherently high starting torque and high efficiency. Such motors are applied in industry for many applications. A three-phase motor is more compact and less costly than a single-phase motor of the same voltage class and rating, and single-phase AC motors above are uncommon. Three-phase motors also vibrate less and hence last longer than single-phase motors of the same power used under the same conditions.\nResistive heating loads such as electric boilers or space heating may be connected to three-phase systems. Electric lighting may also be similarly connected.\nLine frequency flicker in light is detrimental to high-speed cameras used in sports event broadcasting for slow-motion replays. It can be reduced by evenly spreading line frequency operated light sources across the three phases so that the illuminated area is lit from all three phases. This technique was applied successfully at the 2008 Beijing Olympics.\nRectifiers may use a three-phase source to produce a six-pulse DC output. The output of such rectifiers is much smoother than rectified single phase and, unlike single-phase, does not drop to zero between pulses. Such rectifiers may be used for battery charging, electrolysis processes such as aluminium production and the electric arc furnace used in steelmaking, and for operation of DC motors. Zigzag transformers may make the equivalent of six-phase full-wave rectification, twelve pulses per cycle, and this method is occasionally employed to reduce the cost of the filtering components, while improving the quality of the resulting DC.\nIn many European countries electric stoves are usually designed for a three-phase feed with permanent connection. Individual heating units are often connected between phase and neutral to allow for connection to a single-phase circuit if three-phase is not available. Other usual three-phase loads in the domestic field are tankless water heating systems and storage heaters. Homes in Europe have standardized on a nominal 230\u00a0V\u00a0\u00b110% between any phase and ground. Most groups of houses are fed from a three-phase street transformer so that individual premises with above-average demand can be fed with a second or third phase connection.\nPhase converters.\nPhase converters are used when three-phase equipment needs to be operated on a single-phase power source. They are used when three-phase power is not available or cost is not justifiable. Such converters may also allow the frequency to be varied, allowing speed control. Some railway locomotives use a single-phase source to drive three-phase motors fed through an electronic drive.\nA rotary phase converter is a three-phase motor with special starting arrangements and power factor correction that produces balanced three-phase voltages. When properly designed, these rotary converters can allow satisfactory operation of a three-phase motor on a single-phase source. In such a device, the energy storage is performed by the inertia (flywheel effect) of the rotating components. An external flywheel is sometimes found on one or both ends of the shaft.\nA three-phase generator can be driven by a single-phase motor. This motor-generator combination can provide a frequency changer function as well as phase conversion, but requires two machines with all their expenses and losses. The motor-generator method can also form an uninterruptible power supply when used in conjunction with a large flywheel and a battery-powered DC motor; such a combination will deliver nearly constant power compared to the temporary frequency drop experienced with a standby generator set gives until the standby generator kicks in.\nCapacitors and autotransformers can be used to approximate a three-phase system in a static phase converter, but the voltage and phase angle of the additional phase may only be useful for certain loads.\nVariable-frequency drives and digital phase converters use power electronic devices to synthesize a balanced three-phase supply from single-phase input power.\nTesting.\nVerification of the phase sequence in a circuit is of considerable practical importance. Two sources of three-phase power must not be connected in parallel unless they have the same phase sequence, for example, when connecting a generator to an energized distribution network or when connecting two transformers in parallel. Otherwise, the interconnection will behave like a short circuit, and excess current will flow. The direction of rotation of three-phase motors can be reversed by interchanging any two phases; it may be impractical or harmful to test a machine by momentarily energizing the motor to observe its rotation. Phase sequence of two sources can be verified by measuring voltage between pairs of terminals and observing that terminals with very low voltage between them will have the same phase, whereas pairs that show a higher voltage are on different phases.\nWhere the absolute phase identity is not required, phase rotation test instruments can be used to identify the rotation sequence with one observation. The phase rotation test instrument may contain a miniature three-phase motor, whose direction of rotation can be directly observed through the instrument case. Another pattern uses a pair of lamps and an internal phase-shifting network to display the phase rotation. Another type of instrument can be connected to a de-energized three-phase motor and can detect the small voltages induced by residual magnetism, when the motor shaft is rotated by hand. A lamp or other indicator lights to show the sequence of voltages at the terminals for the given direction of shaft rotation.\nColor codes.\nConductors of a three-phase system are usually identified by a color code, to facilitate balanced loading and to assure the correct phase rotation for motors. Colors used may adhere to International Standard IEC 60446 (later IEC 60445), older standards or to no standard at all and may vary even within a single installation. For example, in the U.S. and Canada, different color codes are used for grounded (earthed) and ungrounded systems.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38830", "revid": "50196153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38830", "title": "Rupert, King of the Romans", "text": "King of Germany from 1400 to 1410\nRupert of the Palatinate (; 5 May 1352 \u2013 18 May 1410), a member of the House of Wittelsbach, was Elector Palatine from 1398 (as Rupert III) and King of Germany from 1400 until his death.\nEarly life.\nRupert was born at Amberg in the Upper Palatinate, the son of Elector Palatine Rupert II and Beatrice of Aragon, daughter of King Peter II of Sicily. Rupert's great-granduncle was the Wittelsbach emperor Louis IV. He was raised at the Dominican Liebenau monastery near Worms, where his widowed grandmother Irmengard of Oettingen lived as a nun.\nReign.\nFrom his early years Rupert took part in the government of the Electoral Palatinate to which he succeeded on his father's death in 1398. He and the three ecclesiastical prince-electors (of Mainz, Cologne and Trier) met at Lahneck Castle in Oberlahnstein on 20 August 1400 and declared their king, Wenceslaus, deposed. On the next day the same four electors met at Rhens to ballot for Rupert as next German king, thus the majority of the college including the Elector Palatine's own vote. As the Imperial City of Aachen refused to let him enter through its gates, Rupert was crowned by Archbishop Frederick III in Cologne on 6 January 1401.\nLacking a solid power base in the Empire, his rule remained contested by Wenceslaus' family, the mighty House of Luxembourg, though Wenceslaus himself did not take any action to regain his royal title. In the Western Schism, Rupert backed Pope Boniface IX who, however, was reluctant to acknowledge his rule in view of the Luxembourg claims. After the king had won some recognition in Southern Germany, he started a campaign to Italy, where he hoped to crush the rule of Gian Galeazzo Visconti over the thriving Duchy of Milan and to be crowned Holy Roman Emperor by the Pope. In the autumn of 1401 he crossed the Alps, but was defeated at Brescia and in April 1402 Rupert returned to Germany.\nThe news of this failure increased the disorder in Germany, but the king met with some success in his efforts to restore peace. The Luxembourg resistance waned after Wenceslaus was arrested at Prague Castle by his brother Sigismund in March 1402 and the next year his lordship was finally recognized by the Pope. Rupert also gained the support of England by the marriage of his son Louis with Blanche of Lancaster, daughter of King Henry IV on 6 July 1402. In his Palatinate hereditary lands, Rupert turned out to be a capable ruler.\nIt was nevertheless only the indolence of Wenceslaus that prevented his overthrow. After attempts to enlarge the king's allodium caused conflicts with his former ally, the Archbishop of Mainz forging an alliance with Count Eberhard III of W\u00fcrttemberg, the Z\u00e4hringen margrave Bernard I of Baden and several Swabian cities in 1405, Rupert was compelled to make certain concessions. The quarrel was complicated by the Papal Schism, but the king was just beginning to make some headway when he died at his castle of Landskrone near Oppenheim on 18 May 1410 and was buried at the Church of the Holy Spirit in Heidelberg.\nOn his deathbed Rupert had decreed the division of his heritage among his four surviving sons. He was succeeded as elector by the eldest surviving son, Louis III. The second surviving son, John, received the County Palatine of Neumarkt, the third surviving son, Stephen, Count Palatine of Simmern-Zweibr\u00fccken, and the youngest son, Otto, the County Palatine of Mosbach. In the following imperial election on September 20, Louis III voted for Sigismund of Luxembourg, who however lost to his cousin Margrave Jobst of Moravia.\nFamily and children.\nHe was married in Amberg on 27 June 1374 to Elisabeth, daughter of Burgrave Frederick V of Nuremberg and Elisabeth of Meissen.\nThey had the following children:\nLegacy.\nRupert's strenuous efforts earned him the surname \"Clemens\" (\"the Gentle\"). He also commissioned the Ruprecht building in Heidelberg Castle.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38832", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38832", "title": "CRC", "text": "CRC may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38833", "revid": "855858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38833", "title": "Sheepshank", "text": "Type of knot\nA shank is a type of knot that is used to shorten a rope or take up slack, such as the sheepshank. The sheepshank knot is not stable. It will fall apart under too much load or too little load.\nThe knot has several features which allow a rope to be shortened:\nConstruction methods.\nA sheepshank knot may be constructed as follows: ...\n Many people draw the small loop over facing the wrong way at least half of the time. Instead, make with the U a half-hitch around the other part, by tucking through, then pull the U straight.\nAn alternative method for quickly constructing a sheepshank is as follows:\nThe result is a flattened loop which is held at each end by a half hitch. If the sides of the flattened loop are pulled away from each other, the flattened loop ends pull out of the half hitches and the knot falls apart, but if the free ends\nare pulled taut then the knot remains secure.\nModern usage.\nSheepshank knots are typically used for securing loads to trucks or trailers, and in sailing applications.\nDisadvantages.\nThe sheepshank was developed before the use of modern \"slippery\" synthetic ropes. Constructed from such ropes, under load, it can fail. It is strongly advised that an alternative knot be used.\nVariants.\nMan-o'war sheepshank.\nThe man-o'war sheepshank is a sheepshank knot with a Handcuff knot in the middle. This configuration with the half-hitches formed close to the central knot is used in rope rescue and is called a Fireman's chair knot.\nSheepshank with Marlinespike hitches.\nThis version of the sheepshank is tied by using slipknots instead of half-hitches. It is one of the safest sheepshank variations.\nKamikaze knot.\nThe kamikaze knot is a slight variant of the sheepshank. To perform a kamikaze knot, a sheepshank is first constructed. While holding sufficient tension on the sheepshank so it will not slip out, the middle rope is sliced. This allows climbers rappelling down cliff faces to keep most of the rope used for the rappel, by tying the knot at the top, and shaking the rope when they reach the bottom. The shaking disconnects the knot at the top, allowing the longer section of rope to fall, meaning only a small amount of rope is retained by the anchor at the top of the cliff. Thin or slippery rope is unsuitable for such a knot, as it can easily slip, and the knot should not be performed unless desperately needed.\nUse.\nThis variant of the sheepshank knot appeared in an episode of the TV show \"Man vs. Wild\". Although certainly not invented by him, Bear Grylls uses by cutting one of the lengths of rope in the knot, while rappelling down an edge during the Ireland episode of \"Man Vs Wild\" in order to retrieve his rope at the bottom by severing the middle leg of the sheepshank knot before his descent. He refers to it as a \"Kamikaze\" knot.\nBell-ringer's knot.\nA simpler variant of the sheepshank wherein a half-hitch is only tied around only one end produces a bell-ringer's knot (ABoK #1147). It will immediately spill under tension, and is used to keep a long rope from the belfry deck when not in use.\nCatshank.\nThe catshank is a variant of the sheepshank, clinched by two overhand knots with the bights passed through the twists (one end of the rope must be available to tie the overhands).\nDogshank.\nThe dogshank, or sheepshank pouch knot, is a variant of the sheepshank where the eyes formed at each end have the ends of the rope passed through them to prevents the knot from spilling. At least one end of the rope must be available to tie or untie this knot. It is mostly useful for the hammock-like space it creates.\nThe dogshank can be thought of as two opposite bowlines where\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38835", "revid": "855858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38835", "title": "Clove hitch", "text": "Type of knot\nThe clove hitch is an ancient type of knot, made of two successive single hitches tied around an object. It is most effectively used to secure a middle section of rope to an object it crosses over, such as a line on a fencepost. It can also be used as an ordinary hitch, or as a binding knot, but it is not particularly secure in either application. It is considered one of the most important knots, alongside the bowline and the sheet bend.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although the name clove hitch is given by Falconer in his Dictionary of 1769, the knot is much older, having been tied in ratlines at least as early as the first quarter of the sixteenth century. This is shown in early sculpture and paintings. A round turn is taken with the ratline and then a hitch is added below. The forward end is always the first to be made fast.\u2014\u200a\nUsage.\nThis knot is particularly useful where the length of the running end needs to be adjustable, since feeding in rope from either direction will loosen the knot to be tightened at a new position. With certain types of cord, the clove hitch can slip when loaded. In modern climbing rope, the clove hitch will slip to a point, and then stop slipping. When tied around a carabiner, the load should pull on the end closest to its spine. With smaller diameter cords, after being heavily weighted it may become difficult to untie. It is also unreliable when used on a square or rectangular post, rather than round.\nThe clove hitch is also commonly used in pioneering to start and finish a lashing such as the traditional square lashing, tripod lashing, round lashing and shear lashing.\nTying.\nThe clove hitch is tied by first passing the running end of the rope around the spar and back over itself to form an X. The running end then passes around the spar again, under the intersection of the last two turns, and both ends are pulled tight. There are several methods of tying it using both hands or one hand.\nRelated knots.\nWhen a turn around an object is made and a clove hitch is tied to the rope's own standing part, it produces either a buntline hitch or two half-hitches, depending on whether the turns of the clove hitch progress toward or away from the hitched object. Two-half hitches is also the capsized form of a granny knot.18 The buntline hitch itself is used as a necktie knot called the four-in-hand knot.\nThe clove hitch is also a part of a family of binding knots called millers' knots, which all start with a single hitch tied around an object."}
{"id": "38836", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38836", "title": "SHA1", "text": ""}
{"id": "38837", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38837", "title": "LFSR", "text": ""}
{"id": "38838", "revid": "50855950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38838", "title": "Cyclic redundancy check", "text": "Error-detecting code for detecting data changes\nA cyclic redundancy check (CRC) is an error-detecting code commonly used in digital networks and storage devices to detect accidental changes to digital data. Blocks of data entering these systems get a short \"check value\" attached, based on the remainder of a polynomial division of their contents. On retrieval, the calculation is repeated and, in the event the check values do not match, corrective action can be taken against data corruption. CRCs can be used for error correction (see bitfilters).\nCRCs are so called because the \"check\" (data verification) value is a \"redundancy\" (it expands the message without adding information) and the algorithm is based on \"cyclic\" codes. CRCs are popular because they are simple to implement in binary hardware, easy to analyze mathematically, and particularly good at detecting common errors caused by noise in transmission channels. Because the check value has a fixed length, the function that generates it is occasionally used as a hash function.\nIntroduction.\nCRCs are based on the theory of cyclic error-correcting codes. The use of systematic cyclic codes, which encode messages by adding a fixed-length check value, for the purpose of error detection in communication networks, was first proposed by W. Wesley Peterson in 1961.\nCyclic codes are not only simple to implement but have the benefit of being particularly well suited for the detection of burst errors: contiguous sequences of erroneous data symbols in messages. This is important because burst errors are common transmission errors in many communication channels, including magnetic and optical storage devices. Typically an \"n\"-bit CRC applied to a data block of arbitrary length will detect any single error burst not longer than \"n\" bits, and the fraction of all longer error bursts that it will detect is approximately (1 \u2212 2\u2212\"n\").\nSpecification of a CRC code requires definition of a so-called generator polynomial. This polynomial becomes the divisor in a polynomial long division, which takes the message as the dividend and in which the quotient is discarded and the remainder becomes the result. The important caveat is that the polynomial coefficients are calculated according to the arithmetic of a finite field, so the addition operation can always be performed bitwise-parallel (there is no carry between digits).\nIn practice, all commonly used CRCs employ the finite field of two elements, GF(2). The two elements are usually called 0 and 1, comfortably matching computer architecture.\nA CRC is called an \"n\"-bit CRC when its check value is \"n\" bits long. For a given \"n\", multiple CRCs are possible, each with a different polynomial. Such a polynomial has highest degree \"n\", which means it has \"n\" + 1 terms. In other words, the polynomial has a length of \"n\" + 1; its encoding requires \"n\" + 1 bits. Note that most polynomial specifications either drop the MSb or LSb, since they are always 1. The CRC and associated polynomial typically have a name of the form CRC-\"n\"-XXX as in the table below.\nThe simplest error-detection system, the parity bit, is in fact a 1-bit CRC: it uses the generator polynomial\u00a0\"x\" + 1 (two terms), and has the name CRC-1.\nApplication.\nA CRC-enabled device calculates a short, fixed-length binary sequence, known as the \"check value\" or \"CRC\", for each block of data to be sent or stored and appends it to the data, forming a \"codeword\".\nWhen a codeword is received or read, the device either compares its check value with one freshly calculated from the data block, or equivalently, performs a CRC on the whole codeword and compares the resulting check value with an expected \"residue\" constant.\nIf the CRC values do not match, then the block contains a data error.\nThe device may take corrective action, such as rereading the block or requesting that it be sent again. Otherwise, the data is assumed to be error-free (though, with some small probability, it may contain undetected errors; this is inherent in the nature of error-checking).\nData integrity.\nCRCs are specifically designed to protect against common types of errors on communication channels, where they can provide quick and reasonable assurance of the integrity of messages delivered. However, they are not suitable for protecting against intentional alteration of data.\nFirstly, as there is no authentication, an attacker can edit a message and recompute the CRC without the substitution being detected. When stored alongside the data, CRCs and cryptographic hash functions by themselves do not protect against \"intentional\" modification of data. Any application that requires protection against such attacks must use cryptographic authentication mechanisms, such as message authentication codes or digital signatures (which are commonly based on cryptographic hash functions).\nSecondly, unlike cryptographic hash functions, CRC is an easily reversible function, which makes it unsuitable for use in digital signatures.\nThirdly, CRC satisfies a relation similar to that of a linear function (or more accurately, an affine function):\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 depends on the length of formula_3 and formula_4. This can be also stated as follows, where formula_3, formula_4 and formula_7 have the same length\nformula_8\nas a result, even if the CRC is encrypted with a stream cipher that uses XOR as its combining operation (or mode of block cipher which effectively turns it into a stream cipher, such as OFB or CFB), both the message and the associated CRC can be manipulated without knowledge of the encryption key; this was one of the well-known design flaws of the Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) protocol.\nComputation.\nTo compute an \"n\"-bit binary CRC, line the bits representing the input in a row, and position the (\"n\" + 1)-bit pattern representing the CRC's divisor (called a \"polynomial\") underneath the left end of the row.\nIn this example, we shall encode 14 bits of message with a 3-bit CRC, with a polynomial \"x\"3 + \"x\" + 1. The polynomial is written in binary as the coefficients; a 3rd-degree polynomial has 4 coefficients (1\"x\"3 + 0\"x\"2 + 1\"x\" + 1). In this case, the coefficients are 1, 0, 1 and 1. The result of the calculation is 3 bits long, which is why it is called a 3-bit CRC. However, 4 bits are needed to explicitly state the polynomial.\nStart with the message to be encoded:\nThis is first padded with zeros corresponding to the bit length \"n\" of the CRC. This is done so that the resulting code word is in systematic form. Here is the first calculation for computing a 3-bit CRC:\nThe algorithm acts on the bits directly above the divisor in each step. The result for that iteration is the bitwise XOR of the polynomial divisor with the bits above it. The bits not above the divisor are simply copied directly below for that step. The divisor is then shifted right to align with the highest remaining 1 bit in the input, and the process is repeated until the divisor reaches the right-hand end of the input row. Here is the entire calculation:\nSince the leftmost divisor bit zeroed every input bit it touched, when this process ends the only bits in the input row that can be nonzero are the n bits at the right-hand end of the row. These \"n\" bits are the remainder of the division step, and will also be the value of the CRC function (unless the chosen CRC specification calls for some postprocessing).\nThe validity of a received message can easily be verified by performing the above calculation again, this time with the check value added instead of zeroes. The remainder should equal zero if there are no detectable errors.\nThe following Python code outlines a function which will return the initial CRC remainder for a chosen input and polynomial, with either 1 or 0 as the initial padding. This code works with string inputs rather than raw numbers:\ndef crc_remainder(input_bitstring, polynomial_bitstring, initial_filler):\n \"\"\"Calculate the CRC remainder of a string of bits using a chosen polynomial.\n initial_filler should be '1' or '0'.\n polynomial_bitstring = polynomial_bitstring.lstrip(\"0\")\n len_input = len(input_bitstring)\n initial_padding = (len(polynomial_bitstring) - 1) * initial_filler\n input_padded_array = list(input_bitstring + initial_padding)\n while \"1\" in input_padded_array[:len_input]:\n cur_shift = input_padded_array.index(\"1\")\n for i in range(len(polynomial_bitstring)):\n input_padded_array[cur_shift + i] \\\n = str(int(polynomial_bitstring[i] != input_padded_array[cur_shift + i]))\n return \"\".join(input_padded_array)[len_input:]\ndef crc_check(input_bitstring, polynomial_bitstring, check_value):\n \"\"\"Calculate the CRC check of a string of bits using a chosen polynomial.\"\"\"\n polynomial_bitstring = polynomial_bitstring.lstrip(\"0\")\n len_input = len(input_bitstring)\n initial_padding = check_value\n input_padded_array = list(input_bitstring + initial_padding)\n while \"1\" in input_padded_array[:len_input]:\n cur_shift = input_padded_array.index(\"1\")\n for i in range(len(polynomial_bitstring)):\n input_padded_array[cur_shift + i] \\\n = str(int(polynomial_bitstring[i] != input_padded_array[cur_shift + i]))\n return (\"1\" not in \"\".join(input_padded_array)[len_input:])\n\u00bb&gt; crc_remainder('11010011101100', '1011', '0')\n'100'\n\u00bb&gt; crc_check('11010011101100', '1011', '100')\nTrue\nMathematics.\nMathematical analysis of this division-like process reveals how to select a divisor that guarantees good error-detection properties. In this analysis, the digits of the bit strings are taken as the coefficients of a polynomial in some variable \"x\"\u2014coefficients that are elements of the finite field GF(2) (the integers modulo 2, i.e. either a zero or a one), instead of more familiar numbers. The set of binary polynomials is a mathematical ring.\nDesigning polynomials.\nThe selection of the generator polynomial is the most important part of implementing the CRC algorithm. The polynomial must be chosen to maximize the error-detecting capabilities while minimizing overall collision probabilities.\nThe most important attribute of the polynomial is its length (largest degree(exponent) +1 of any one term in the polynomial), because of its direct influence on the length of the computed check value.\nThe most commonly used polynomial lengths are 9 bits (CRC-8), 17 bits (CRC-16), 33 bits (CRC-32), and 65 bits (CRC-64).\nA CRC is called an \"n\"-bit CRC when its check value is \"n\"-bits. For a given \"n\", multiple CRCs are possible, each with a different polynomial. Such a polynomial has highest degree \"n\", and hence \"n\" + 1 terms (the polynomial has a length of \"n\" + 1). The remainder has length \"n\". The CRC has a name of the form CRC-\"n\"-XXX.\nThe design of the CRC polynomial depends on the maximum total length of the block to be protected (data + CRC bits), the desired error protection features, and the type of resources for implementing the CRC, as well as the desired performance. A common misconception is that the \"best\" CRC polynomials are derived from either irreducible polynomials or irreducible polynomials times the factor\u00a01 + \"x\", which adds to the code the ability to detect all errors affecting an odd number of bits. In reality, all the factors described above should enter into the selection of the polynomial and may lead to a reducible polynomial. However, choosing a reducible polynomial will result in a certain proportion of missed errors, due to the quotient ring having zero divisors.\nThe advantage of choosing a primitive polynomial as the generator for a CRC code is that the resulting code has maximal total block length in the sense that all 1-bit errors within that block length have different remainders (also called syndromes) and therefore, since the remainder is a linear function of the block, the code can detect all 2-bit errors within that block length. If formula_9 is the degree of the primitive generator polynomial, then the maximal total block length is formula_10, and the associated code is able to detect any single-bit or double-bit errors. However, if we use the generator polynomial formula_11, where formula_12 is a primitive polynomial of degree formula_13, then the maximal total block length is formula_14, and the code is able to detect single, double, triple and any odd number of errors.\nA polynomial formula_15 that admits other factorizations may be chosen then so as to balance the maximal total blocklength with a desired error detection power. The BCH codes are a powerful class of such polynomials. They subsume the two examples above. Regardless of the reducibility properties of a generator polynomial of degree\u00a0\"r\", if it includes the \"+1\" term, the code will be able to detect error patterns that are confined to a window of \"r\" contiguous bits. These patterns are called \"error bursts\".\nSpecification.\nThe concept of the CRC as an error-detecting code gets complicated when an implementer or standards committee uses it to design a practical system. Here are some of the complications:\nThese complications mean that there are three common ways to express a polynomial as an integer: the first two, which are mirror images in binary, are the constants found in code; the third is the number found in Koopman's papers. \"In each case, one term is omitted.\" So the polynomial formula_17 may be transcribed as:\nIn the table below they are shown as:\nObfuscation.\nCRCs in proprietary protocols might be obfuscated by using a non-trivial initial value and a final XOR, but these techniques do not introduce cryptographic strength into the algorithm and can be reverse engineered using straightforward methods.\nStandards and common use.\nNumerous varieties of cyclic redundancy checks have been incorporated into technical standards. By no means does one algorithm, or one of each degree, suit every purpose; Koopman and Chakravarty recommend selecting a polynomial according to the application requirements and the expected distribution of message lengths. The number of distinct CRCs in use has confused developers, a situation which authors have sought to address. There are three polynomials reported for CRC-12, twenty-two conflicting definitions of CRC-16, and seven of CRC-32.\nThe polynomials commonly applied are not the most efficient ones possible. Since 1993, Koopman, Castagnoli and others have surveyed the space of polynomials between 3 and 64 bits in size, finding examples that have much better performance (in terms of Hamming distance for a given message size) than the polynomials of earlier protocols, and publishing the best of these with the aim of improving the error detection capacity of future standards. In particular, iSCSI and SCTP have adopted one of the findings of this research, the CRC-32C (Castagnoli) polynomial.\nThe design of the 32-bit polynomial most commonly used by standards bodies, CRC-32-IEEE, was the result of a joint effort for the Rome Laboratory and the Air Force Electronic Systems Division by Joseph Hammond, James Brown and Shyan-Shiang Liu of the Georgia Institute of Technology and Kenneth Brayer of the Mitre Corporation. The earliest known appearances of the 32-bit polynomial were in their 1975 publications: Technical Report 2956 by Brayer for Mitre, published in January and released for public dissemination through DTIC in August, and Hammond, Brown and Liu's report for the Rome Laboratory, published in May. Both reports contained contributions from the other team. During December 1975, Brayer and Hammond presented their work in a paper at the IEEE National Telecommunications Conference: the IEEE CRC-32 polynomial is the generating polynomial of a Hamming code and was selected for its error detection performance. Even so, the Castagnoli CRC-32C polynomial used in iSCSI or SCTP matches its performance on messages from 58 bits to 131 kbits, and outperforms it in several size ranges including the two most common sizes of Internet packet. The ITU-T G.hn standard also uses CRC-32C to detect errors in the payload (although it uses CRC-16-CCITT for PHY headers).\nCRC-32C computation is implemented in hardware as an operation () of SSE4.2 instruction set, first introduced in Intel processors' Nehalem microarchitecture. ARM AArch64 architecture also provides hardware acceleration for both CRC-32 and CRC-32C operations.\nPolynomial representations.\nThe table below lists only the polynomials of the various algorithms in use. Variations of a particular protocol can impose pre-inversion, post-inversion and reversed bit ordering as described above. For example, the CRC-32 used in Gzip and Bzip2 use the same polynomial, but Gzip employs reversed bit ordering, while Bzip2 does not.\nNote that even parity polynomials in GF(2) with degree greater than 1 are never primitive. Even parity polynomial marked as primitive in this table represent a primitive polynomial multiplied by formula_21. The most significant bit of a polynomial is always 1, and is not shown in the hex representations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38842", "revid": "50833690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38842", "title": "Jochem Uytdehaage", "text": "Dutch speed skater\nJochem Simon Uytdehaage (born 9 July 1976) is a Dutch former long track speed skater who won two Olympic gold medals in Salt Lake City and was the 2002 World Allround champion. He retired in 2007 at the age of 30, following two consecutive seasons of poor results.\nBiography.\nUytdehaage was born on 9 July 1976 in Oog in Al, Utrecht, Netherlands. He was the 2002 European Allround champion. During the 2002 Winter Olympics, he won the gold medal in the 5,000 and 10,000 meter events and the silver in the 1500 meter event. His winning time on the 10,000 meter was 12:58.92, the first time a skater broke the 13-minute barrier on this distance, and this world record stood for three years, until it was broken by Carl Verheijen and Chad Hedrick. His 5,000 meter time of 6:14.66 was also a world record. Uytdehaage led the long track speed skating Adelskalender from 2001 until 13 November 2005, when Chad Hedrick (US) overtook him.\nIn December 2005, at the Dutch Olympic trials in Heerenveen, Uytdehaage failed to qualify for the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin.\nAfter retirement he was also a reporter in the AVROTROS program \"De IJzersterkste\" in 2019-2020."}
{"id": "38843", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38843", "title": "Renate Groenewold", "text": "Dutch speed skater and cyclist\nRenate Titzia Groenewold (born 8 October 1976) is a Dutch former long track speed skater and road bicycle racer.\nGroenewold has won several Dutch Championships. In 1999, 2002 and 2003 she won the Dutch allround championship. At the European Allround Championships she has won various medals. Five times she came in third in the overall ranking. In 2005, she won the silver medal which was her best result at the European Championships. In 2001, she also came in third in the overall ranking on the World Allround Championships, which she won in 2004.\nBesides participating in the all-round championships Groenewold has participated in the championships for individual distances. Her best results there were winning the team pursuit in 2008 and the 3000 meters in 2009.\nIn 2002 Groenewold participated at the 2002 Winter Olympics. She won the silver medal in the 3000 m. However, on the 1500 m she fell in the second turn. At the 2006 Winter Olympics, rookie compatriot Ireen W\u00fcst beat her to the gold on the 3000 m, leaving Groenewold with silver once more.\nIn 2007, Groenewold joined Team DSB Bank, which was a women's professional cycling team that competed in international and UCI Women's Road World Cup events. In 2010, Groenewold competed again at the 2010 Winter Olympics, in Vancouver. She falsely listed as one of lesbian athletes at the Games.\nAfter her active skating career she was a coach from 2011 until 2014. In October 2018 she was appointed in the speed skating Technical Committee of the International Skating Union (ISU)."}
{"id": "38846", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38846", "title": "Electoral Palatinate", "text": "State of the Holy Roman Empire (1085\u20131803)\nThe Electoral Palatinate was a constituent state of the Holy Roman Empire until it was annexed by the Electorate of Baden in 1803. From the end of the 13th century, its ruler was one of the Prince-electors who elected the Holy Roman Emperor, ranking them among the most significant secular Princes of the Holy Roman Empire.\nThe Palatinate consisted of a number of widely dispersed territories, ranging from the left bank of the Upper Rhine in the modern state of Rhineland-Palatinate, adjacent parts of the French regions of Alsace and Lorraine to the opposite territory on the east bank of the Rhine in present-day Hesse and Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg up to the Odenwald range and the southern Kraichgau region, containing the capital cities of Heidelberg and Mannheim.\nIn 1541, Otto Henry, Elector Palatine converted to Lutheranism, while his Calvinist descendant, Frederick V, sparked the Thirty Years' War in 1618 by accepting the Crown of Bohemia. Occupied until the 1648 Peace of Westphalia, the Palatinate suffered extensive damage during the 1688 to 1697 Nine Years' War. Ruled in personal union with the Electorate of Bavaria from 1777, the Palatinate was annexed by Baden in 1803, before being absorbed by Bavaria in 1805.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nA position of Count Palatine at the Frankish court of King Childebert I was mentioned about 535. The Counts Palatine were the permanent representatives of the king in particular geographic areas, in contrast to the semi-independent authority of the dukes (and their successors). Under the Merovingian dynasty, the position had been a purely appointed one, but by the Middle Ages had evolved into an hereditary one.\nUp to the tenth century, the Frankish empire was centered at the royal palace () in Aachen, in what had become the Carolingian kingdom of Lotharingia. Consequently, the Count Palatine of Lotharingia became the most important of the Counts Palatine. Marital alliances meant that, by the Middle Ages, most Count Palatine positions had been inherited by the duke of the associated province, but the importance of the Count Palatine of Lotharingia enabled it to remain as an independent position.\nIn 985, Herman I, a scion of the Ezzonids, is mentioned as count palatine of Lotharingia (which by then had been divided into Upper and Lower Lotharingia). While his Palatine authority operated over the whole of Upper Lorraine, the feudal territories of his family were instead scattered around south-western Franconia, including parts of the Rhineland around Cologne and Bonn, and areas around the rivers Moselle and Nahe.\nIn continual conflicts with the rivalling Archbishops of Cologne, he changed the emphasis of his rule to the southern Eifel region and further to the Upper Rhine, where the Ezzonid dynasty governed several counties on both banks of the river. The southernmost point was near Alzey.\nFrom about 1085/86, after the death of the last Ezzonian count palatine Herman II, Palatinate authority ceased to have any military significance in Lotharingia. In practice, the Count Palatinate's Palatine authority had collapsed, reducing his successor (Henry of Laach) to a mere feudal magnate over his own territories \u2013 along the Upper Rhine in south-western Franconia. From this time on, his territory became known as the County Palatine of the Rhine (not because Palatine authority existed there, but as an acknowledgement that the Count still held the title, if not the authority, of Count Palatine).\nVarious noble dynasties competed to be enfeoffed with the Palatinate by the Holy Roman Emperor \u2013 among them the House of Ascania, the House of Salm (Count Otto I of Salm in 1040) and the House of Babenberg (Henry Jasomirgott in 1140/41).\nThe first hereditary Count Palatine of the Rhine was Conrad, a member of the House of Hohenstaufen and younger half-brother of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. The territories attached to this hereditary office in 1156 started from those held by the Hohenstaufens in the Donnersberg, Nahegau, Haardt, Bergstra\u00dfe and Kraichgau regions (other branches of the Hohenstaufens received lands in the Duchy of Swabia, Franche-Comt\u00e9, and so forth). Much of this was from their imperial ancestors, the Salian emperors, and apart from Conrad's maternal ancestry, the Counts of Saarbr\u00fccken. These backgrounds explain the composition of Upper and Rhenish Palatinate in the inheritance centuries onwards. About 1182, Conrad moved his residence from Stahleck Castle near Bacharach up the Rhine river to Heidelberg.\nUpon Conrad's death in 1195, the Palatinate passed to the House of Welf through the (secret) marriage of his daughter Agnes of Hohenstaufen with Henry of Brunswick. When Henry's son Henry the Younger died without heirs in 1214, the Hohenstaufen king Frederick II enfeoffed the Wittelsbach Duke Louis I of Bavaria, whose son, Otto II of Bavaria, married Agnes of the Palatinate, daughter of Henry of Brunswick and Agnes of Hohenstaufen, in 1222. The Bavarian House of Wittelsbach eventually held the Palatinate territories until 1918.\nDuring a later division of territory among the heirs of Duke Louis II, Duke of Upper Bavaria, in 1294, the elder branch of the Wittelsbachs came into possession of both the Rhenish Palatinate and the territories in the Bavarian Nordgau (Bavaria north of the Danube river) with the centre around the town of Amberg. As this region was politically connected to the Rhenish Palatinate, the name Upper Palatinate () became common from the early 16th century in contrast to the Lower Palatinate along the Rhine.\nWith the Treaty of Pavia in 1329, the Wittelsbach Emperor Louis IV, a son of Louis II, returned the Palatinate to his nephews Rudolf and Rupert I.\nIn the Golden Bull of 1356, the Palatinate was recognized as one of the secular electorates, and given the hereditary offices of archsteward (, ) of the Empire and imperial vicar (\"Reichsverweser\") of Franconia, Swabia, the Rhine, and southern Germany. From that time forth, the Count Palatine of the Rhine was usually known as the Elector Palatine (, ). In 1386, Rupert I helped establish the University of Heidelberg, the oldest University in Germany.\nIn 1400, the Elector Palatine, Rupert III, was elected as King of the Romans, but he was never crowned as Holy Roman Emperor because he was defeated in Italy while attempting to travel to Rome for a coronation.\nDue to the practice of dividing territories among different branches of the family, by the early 16th century junior lines of the Palatine Wittelsbachs came to rule in Simmern, Kaiserslautern, and Zweibr\u00fccken in the Lower Palatinate, and in Neuburg and Sulzbach in the Upper Palatinate. The Elector Palatine, now based in Heidelberg, adopted Lutheranism in the 1530s; when the senior branch of the family died out in 1559, the electorate passed to Frederick III of Simmern, a staunch Calvinist, and the Palatinate became one of the major centers of Calvinism in Europe, supporting Calvinist rebellions in both the Netherlands and France. Elector Frederick IV became the leader of the Protestant Union in 1608.\nThirty Years' War.\nIn 1619, the Protestant Frederick V, Elector Palatine, accepted the throne of Bohemia from the Bohemian Diet. This initiated the 1618\u20131648 Thirty Years' War, one of the most destructive conflicts in human history; it caused over eight million fatalities from military action, violence, famine, and plague in the vast majority in the German states of the Holy Roman Empire. In terms of proportional German casualties and destruction, it was surpassed only by the period January to May 1945 and remains the single greatest war trauma in German memory.\nFrederick was evicted from Bohemia in 1620 following his defeat by the forces of Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor, at the Battle of the White Mountain. Over the period 1621\u20131622, the Palatinate was occupied by Spanish and Bavarian troops and Frederick was exiled to the Dutch Republic. His territories and electoral rights were transferred to the distantly related but Catholic Maximilian I of Bavaria, Duke of Bavaria and now Prince Elector Palatine.\nAfter his death in 1632, Frederick's daughter Princess Elizabeth and wife Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of Bohemia, worked tirelessly to have the Palatinate restored to her son Charles Louis and the Protestant cause. When the Peace of Westphalia ended the war in 1648, he regained the Lower Palatinate and the title 'Elector Palatine' but now ranked lower in precedence than the others. He was succeeded by Charles II, Elector Palatine, in 1680, but the Simmern branch became extinct in the male line after he died in 1685.\nIn 1670, Charles II's sister Elizabeth Charlotte of the Palatinate married Philippe of Orl\u00e9ans, younger brother of Louis XIV; on this basis, Louis claimed the Rhineland territories of the Palatinate for France. However, he was outmaneuvered by Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor, whose third wife was Eleonore-Magdalena of Pfalz-Neuburg, eldest daughter of Philip William, a Catholic who was the closest male heir in the direct line. Leopold installed his father-in-law as Elector Palatine, ensuring that his electoral vote and this strategic region remained in Imperial control.\nNine Years' War.\nWhen France invaded the Palatinate in September 1688 to enforce its claim, these wider connections meant the conflict rapidly escalated, leading to the outbreak of the Nine Years' War. The French were forced to withdraw in 1689 but before doing so, destroyed much of Heidelberg, another 20 substantial towns and numerous villages. This destruction was systematically applied across a large section of the Rhineland but especially the Palatinate, which was raided again in 1693; the devastation shocked much of Europe. France later renounced its claim to the region in the 1697 Treaty of Ryswick.\nJohann Wilhelm succeeded as elector in 1690, changing his residence first to D\u00fcsseldorf, then back to Heidelberg and finally Mannheim in 1720. Like his father, he was a Catholic, which under the 1555 Peace of Augsburg meant the Protestant majority in the Palatinate was theoretically obliged to convert to Catholicism. The 1705 'Palatine Church Division' compromised by allocating five-sevenths of public church property to the Reformed or Calvinist church and the remainder to Catholicism, while excluding the Lutheran Church, whose membership exceeded 40% of the population in some areas.\nIn 1716, Charles Philip succeeded his brother as elector and in January 1742, helped his cousin Charles Albert become the first non-Habsburg emperor in over 300 years. He died in December and the Palatinate passed to Charles Theodore, then Duke of Sulzbach, who also inherited the Electorate of Bavaria in 1777. The title and authority of the two electorates were combined, Charles and his heirs retaining only the vote and precedence of the Bavarian elector, although continuing to use the title 'Count Palatine of the Rhine'.\nMediatisation.\nThe Palatine territories on the left bank of the Rhine were annexed by France in 1795, mainly becoming part of the Mont-Tonnerre department. In 1799 Elector Charles Theodore died and the territory was inherited by the Duke of Palatine Zweibr\u00fccken, uniting all the Wittelsbach lands. The loss of the left bank territories was accepted by the new Elector Maximilian Joseph in the Treaty of Paris. Those on the right were taken by the Elector of Baden, after the 1805 Peace of Pressburg dissolved the Holy Roman Empire; the remaining Wittelsbach territories were united by Maximilian Joseph as the Kingdom of Bavaria.\nCoat of arms and flag.\nIn 1156 Conrad of Hohenstaufen, brother of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, became Count Palatine. The old coat of arms of the House of Hohenstaufen, the single lion, became coat of arms of the Palatinate.\nBy marriage, the Palatinate's arms also became quartered with those of Welf and later Wittelsbach. The arms of Bavaria were used with reference to the elector's holdings in Bavaria. This was extended to quartering of the lion and the Bavarian Arms upon the ascension of Maximilian I to the position of elector of the Palatinate in 1623, used concurrently with the arms shown. From 1356 onwards, the orb represented their position as Arch-Steward of the Holy Roman Empire.\nLegacy.\nIn 1806, Baden was raised to a grand duchy and parts of the former Palatinate including Mannheim became part of it. At the Congress of Vienna in 1814 and 1815, southern parts of the left-bank Palatinate were restored and enlarged by mediatisation (consuming the former Prince-Bishopric of Speyer, the Free Imperial City of Speyer, and others) up to the new border with France, and given (temporarily) to the Habsburg Austrian Empire; after this time, it was this new region that was principally known as \"the Palatinate\". The right-bank Palatinate remained with Baden while northern parts became part of Prussia (Rhine Province) and Hesse (Rhenish Hesse).\nIn 1816, the Palatinate became a formal part of the Wittelsbach Kingdom of Bavaria (the or Circle of the Rhine) in a pre-arranged exchange for Tyrol, which Bavaria returned to Austria. Most of the area remained a part of Bavaria until after the Second World War (after 1918 the Free State of Bavaria), with some western parts becoming part of the Territory of the Saar Basin after World War I.\nIn September 1946 the territory was made part of the federal state of Rhineland-Palatinate, along with former left bank territories of Prussia (southern part of the Rhine Province, including the former Principality of Birkenfeld which had been an exclave of Oldenburg until 1937, and western parts of the Province of Nassau) and Rhenish Hesse. The former Territory of the Saar Basin was reinstated and expanded to create the French Saar Protectorate, which returned to Germany in 1956 as the modern state of Saarland.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38847", "revid": "47098376", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38847", "title": "Unpowered aircraft", "text": "Aerial vehicle capable of sustaining flight without onboard propulsion\nUnpowered aircraft can remain airborne for a significant period of time without onboard propulsion. They can be classified as gliders, lighter-than-air balloons and tethered kites. In the case of kites, lift is obtained by tethering to a fixed or moving object, perhaps another kite, to obtain a flow of wind over the lifting surfaces. In the case of balloons, lift is obtained through inherent buoyancy and the balloon may or may not be tethered. Free balloon flight has little directional control. Gliding aircraft include sailplanes, hang gliders, and paragliders that have full directional control in free flight.\nHistory.\nThe first manned aircraft were kites, balloons and gliders. Man-lifting kites were used in ancient China and Japan, often as a punishment for prisoners. Unmanned hot-air balloons and toy \"bamboo-copters\" are also recorded in Chinese history.\nThe first manned free flight was in a hot-air balloon built by the brothers Joseph-Michel and Jacques-Etienne Montgolfier in Annonay, France in 1783. The hydrogen balloon appeared at about the same time and proved more practical.\nThe first practical, controllable glider was designed and built by the British scientist and pioneer George Cayley who many recognise as the first aeronautical engineer. It flew in 1849.\nTethered balloons and, to a lesser extent, kites were developed for military and meteorological observation, however the use of kites has remained largely recreational. Free-flying ballooning using coal gas (which has about half the lifting effect of hydrogen) became a popular sport. Gliders were used mainly for aerodynamic research until their sporting use was developed in the 1920s.\nDuring the two World Wars, tethered barrage balloons were made and deployed in large numbers. Military assault gliders were also developed during World War II, while the rotor kite was used by the German Navy for seaborne observation.\nModern applications include experimental high altitude wind power generation.\nGliders.\nSailplanes, hang gliders and paragliders are all types of glider aircraft.\nFor a glider to generate lift, it must first gain and then maintain sufficient forward air speed.\nLaunching a glider gives it the initial forward airspeed to start flying. This is often done by towing the aircraft into the air on a long line, using either a ground-based winch or vehicle, or a powered \"tug\" aircraft. A small foot-launched glider is launched by running downhill or stepping off a high location.\nForward speed is then maintained by a gradual descent through the surrounding air, with the wings angled slightly down so that their lift also provides a small forward thrust to counter the drag of the wing.\nIf the air is rising faster than the aircraft is descending through it, the glider will gain height and additional potential energy. Sources of such rising air include warm thermals and hill ridges.\nIn the past, unpowered military gliders have been used for military applications.\nToday, the majority of use of all types of glider aircraft is recreational.\nBalloons.\nFree-flying Balloons drift with the wind. The pilot controls the altitude either by heating the air more or by releasing ballast weight. The wind direction usually changes with altitude, so crude directional control can be obtained by changing altitude.\nA round tethered balloon is unstable in any significant wind. A kite balloon is streamlined to make it stable in strong winds.\nToday, the majority of manned balloon flights are recreational, whereas unmanned and usually free-flying balloons are widely used for meteorological measurement.\nKites.\nKites are aircraft that are tethered to some other object (fixed or mobile) or other means that maintain tension in the kite line; and rely on virtual or real wind blowing over and under them to generate lift and drag. Kytoons are balloon kites that are shaped and tethered to obtain kiting deflections, and can be lighter-than-air, neutrally buoyant, or heavier-than air. Kites have been developed for commercial applications using kite control systems, including the airborne wind energy systems of high altitude wind power.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38848", "revid": "51039806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38848", "title": "House of Wittelsbach", "text": "German royal family of Bavaria\nThe House of Wittelsbach () is a former Bavarian dynasty, with branches that have ruled over territories including the Electorate of Bavaria, the Electoral Palatinate, the Electorate of Cologne, Holland, Zeeland, Sweden (with Swedish-ruled Finland), Denmark, Norway, Hungary, Bohemia, and Greece. Their ancestral lands of Bavaria and the Palatinate were prince-electorates, and the family had three of its members elected emperors and kings of the Holy Roman Empire. They ruled over the Kingdom of Bavaria which was created in 1805 and continued to exist until 1918.\nThe House of Windsor, the reigning royal house of the British monarchy, are descendants of Sophia of Hanover (1630\u20131714), a Wittelsbach Princess of the Palatinate by birth and Electress of Hanover by marriage, who had inherited the succession rights of the House of Stuart and passed them on to the House of Hanover.\nHistory.\nWhen Otto I, Count of Scheyern (himself of uncertain origins) died in 1072, his third son Otto II, Count of Scheyern acquired Wittelsbach Castle (near Aichach). The Counts of Scheyern left Scheyern Castle (constructed around 940) in 1119 for Wittelsbach Castle and the former was given to monks to establish Scheyern Abbey. The origins of the Counts of Scheyern are unclear. Some speculative theories link them to Margrave Henry of Schweinfurt and his father Berthold, whose background is also disputed. Some speculate that the Schweinfurters may be descendants of the Luitpolding dynasty, the Bavarian dukes of the 10th century.\nThe Wittelsbach Conrad of Scheyern-Dachau, a great-grandson of Otto I, Count of Scheyern, became Duke of Merania in 1153 and was succeeded by his son Conrad II. It was the first duchy held by the Wittelsbach family (until 1180/82).\nOtto I's eldest son Eckhard I, Count of Scheyern was father of the count palatine of Bavaria, Otto IV (died 1156), who was the first Count of Wittelsbach and whose son Otto was invested with the Duchy of Bavaria in 1180 after the fall of Henry the Lion and hence the first Bavarian ruler from the House of Wittelsbach. Duke Otto's son Louis I, Duke of Bavaria acquired the Electorate of the Palatinate in 1214.\nThroughout history, members of the royal house have reigned as Dukes of Merania (1153\u20131180/82); Dukes, Electors, and Kings of Bavaria (1180\u20131918); Counts Palatine of the Rhine (1214\u20131803 and 1816\u20131918); Margraves of Brandenburg (1323\u20131373); Counts of Holland, Hainaut, and Zeeland (1345\u20131433); Elector-Archbishops of Cologne (1583\u20131761); Dukes of J\u00fclich and Berg (1614\u20131794/1806); Kings of Sweden (1441\u20131448 and 1654\u20131720); and Dukes of Bremen-Verden (1654\u20131719).\nThe family also provided two Holy Roman Emperors (1328\u20131347/1742\u20131745), one King of the Romans (1400\u20131410), two Anti-Kings of Bohemia (1619\u201320/1742\u201343), one King of Hungary (1305\u20131308), one King of Denmark and Norway (1440\u20131448), and one King of Greece (1832\u20131862).\nBavaria and Palatinate within the Holy Roman Empire.\nThe Wittelsbach dynasty ruled the German territories of Bavaria from 1180 to 1918 and the Electorate of the Palatinate from 1214 until 1805. In both countries they had succeeded rulers from the House of Welf. The Duchy of Bavaria was elevated to the Electorate of Bavaria in 1623, and in 1806, Napoleon elevated it to the Kingdom of Bavaria. In 1815, the majority of the Palatinate was annexed by the Grand Duchy of Baden, with the remainder becoming the Circle of the Rhine.\nOn Duke Otto II's death in 1253, his sons divided the Wittelsbach possessions between them: Henry became Duke of Lower Bavaria, and Louis II Duke of Upper Bavaria and Count Palatine of the Rhine. When Henry's branch died out in 1340 the Emperor Louis IV, a son of Duke Louis II, reunited the duchy.\nThe family provided two Holy Roman Emperors: Louis IV (1314\u20131347) and Charles VII (1742\u20131745), both members of the Bavarian branch of the family, and one German King with Rupert of Germany (1400\u20131410), a member of the Palatinate branch.\nThe House of Wittelsbach split into these two branches in 1329: Under the Treaty of Pavia, Emperor Louis IV granted the Palatinate including the Bavarian Upper Palatinate to his brother Duke Rudolf's descendants, Rudolf II, Rupert I and Rupert II. Rudolf I in this way became the ancestor of the older (Palatinate) line of the Wittelsbach dynasty, which returned to power also in Bavaria in 1777 after the extinction of the younger (Bavarian) line, the descendants of Louis IV.\nThrough the efforts of Louis IV, the Wittelsbachs controlled the Duchy of Bavaria, the Electorate of the Palatine, the County of Tyrol, the Margraviate of Brandenburg, the County of Holland, County of Zeeland and the County of Hainault. This gave them a chance to dominate the Empire as the previous imperial houses of Hohenstaufen, Salians, Ottonians and Carolingians had. However, in the next generation they were outmaneuvered in Imperial politics by the Habsburgs and the most importantly by the Luxemburgs who both held compact and large possessions in the Duchy of Austria for the former and the Kingdom of Bohemia for the latter that allowed them to expand eastward.\nBavarian branch.\nThe Bavarian branch kept the Duchy of Bavaria until its extinction in 1777.\nThe Wittelsbach Emperor Louis IV acquired Brandenburg (1323), Tyrol (1342), Holland, Zeeland and Hainaut (1345) for his House but he had also released the Upper Palatinate for the Palatinate branch of the Wittelsbach in 1329. His six sons succeeded him as Duke of Bavaria and Count of Holland and Hainaut in 1347. The Wittelsbachs lost the Tyrol with the death of Duke Meinhard and the following Peace of Sch\u00e4rding \u2013 the Tyrol was finally renounced to the Habsburgs in 1369. In 1373 Otto, the last Wittelsbach regent of Brandenburg, released the country to the House of Luxembourg. On Duke Albert's death in 1404, he was succeeded in the Netherlands by his eldest son, William. A younger son, John III, became Prince-Bishop of Li\u00e8ge. However, on William's death in 1417, a war of succession broke out between John and William's daughter Jacqueline of Hainaut. This last episode of the Hook and Cod wars finally left the counties in Burgundian hands in 1433.\nEmperor Louis IV had reunited Bavaria in 1340 but from 1349 onwards Bavaria was split among the descendants of Louis IV, who created the branches \"Bavaria-Landshut\", \"Bavaria-Straubing\", \"Bavaria-Ingolstadt\" and \"Bavaria-Munich\". With the Landshut War of Succession Bavaria was reunited in 1505 against the claim of the Palatinate branch under the Bavarian branch \"Bavaria-Munich\".\nFrom 1549 to 1567 the Wittelsbach owned the County of Kladsko in Bohemia.\nStrictly Catholic by upbringing, the Bavarian dukes became leaders of the German Counter-Reformation. From 1583 to 1761, the Bavarian branch of the dynasty provided the Prince-electors and Archbishops of Cologne and many other bishops of the Holy Roman Empire, namely Li\u00e8ge (1581\u20131763). Wittelsbach princes served at times as Bishops of Regensburg, Freising, M\u00fcnster, Hildesheim, Paderborn and Osnabr\u00fcck, and as Grand Master of the Teutonic Order.\nIn 1623 under Maximilian I the Bavarian dukes were invested with the electoral dignity and the duchy became the Electorate of Bavaria. His grandson Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria served also as Governor of the Habsburg Netherlands (1692\u20131706) and as Duke of Luxembourg (1712\u20131714). His son Emperor Charles VII also claimed the throne of Bohemia (1741\u20131743). With the death of Charles' son Maximilian III Joseph, Elector of Bavaria the Bavarian branch died out in 1777.\nPalatinate branch.\nThe Palatinate branch kept the Palatinate until 1918, having succeeded also to Bavaria in 1777. With the Golden Bull of 1356 the Counts Palatine were invested with the electoral dignity, and their county became the Electorate of the Palatinate. Princes of the Palatinate branch served as bishops of the Empire and also as Archbishop-Electors of Mainz and Archbishop-Electors of Trier.\nAfter the death of the Wittelsbach king Rupert of Germany in 1410 the Palatinate lands began to split under numerous branches of the family such as Neumarkt, Simmern, Zweibr\u00fccken, Birkenfeld, Neuburg, and Sulzbach. When the senior branch of the Palatinate branch died out in 1559, the electorate passed to Frederick III of Simmern, a staunch Calvinist, and the Palatinate became one of the major centers of Calvinism in Europe, supporting Calvinist rebellions in both the Netherlands and France.\nThe Neuburg cadet branch of the Palatinate branch also held the Duchy of J\u00fclich and Berg from 1614 onwards: when the last duke of J\u00fclich-Cleves-Berg died without direct heirs in 1609, the War of the J\u00fclich succession broke out, ended by the 1614 Treaty of Xanten, which divided the separate duchies between Palatinate-Neuburg and the Margraviate of Brandenburg. J\u00fclich and Berg fell to the Wittelsbach Count Palatine Wolfgang William of Neuburg.\nIn 1619, the Protestant Frederick V, Elector Palatine became King of Bohemia but was defeated by the Catholic Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria, a member of the Bavarian branch. As a result, the Upper Palatinate had to be ceded to the Bavarian branch in 1623, along with the Imperial office of Arch-Steward. When the Thirty Years' War concluded with the Treaty of M\u00fcnster (also called the Peace of Westphalia) in 1648, a new additional electorate was created for the Count Palatine of the Rhine, along with the new office of Imperial Arch-Treasurer. During their exile Frederick's sons, especially Prince Rupert of the Rhine, gained fame in England.\nThe house of Palatinate of Zweibr\u00fccken-Kleeburg as heir to the Swedish throne ruled simultaneously the Duchy of Bremen-Verden (1654\u20131719).\nIn 1685, the Simmern line died out, and the Catholic Philip William, Count Palatine of Neuburg inherited the Palatinate (and also Duke of J\u00fclich and Berg). During the reign of Johann Wilhelm (1690\u20131716) the electoral residence moved to D\u00fcsseldorf in Berg. His brother and successor Charles III Philip moved the Palatinate's capital back to Heidelberg in 1718 and then to Mannheim in 1720. To strengthen the union of all lines of the Wittelsbach dynasty Charles Philip organized a wedding on 17 January 1742 when his granddaughters were married to Charles Theodore of Palatinate-Sulzbach and the Bavarian prince Clement. In the imperial election a few days later Charles III Philip voted for his Bavarian cousin Prince-Elector Charles Albert. After extinction of the Neuburg branch in 1742, the Palatinate was inherited by Duke Charles Theodore of the branch Palatinate-Sulzbach.\nAfter the extinction of the Bavarian branch in 1777, a succession dispute and the brief War of the Bavarian Succession, the Palatinate-Sulzbach branch under Elector Charles Theodore succeeded also in Bavaria.\nWith the death of Charles Theodore in 1799 all Wittelsbach land in Bavaria and the Palatinate was reunited under Maximilian IV Joseph, a member of the Palatinate-Zweibr\u00fccken-Birkenfeld branch. At the time there were two surviving branches of the Wittelsbach family: Palatinate-Zweibr\u00fccken-Birkenfeld (headed by Maximilian Joseph) and Palatinate-Birkenfeld-Gelnhausen (headed by Count Palatine William). Maximilian Joseph inherited Charles Thedore's title of Elector of Bavaria, while William was compensated with the title of Duke \"in\" Bavaria. The form \"Duke in Bavaria\" was selected because in 1506 primogeniture had been established in the House of Wittelsbach resulting in there being only one reigning Duke of Bavaria at any given time. Maximillian Joseph assumed the title of king as Maximilian I Joseph on 1 January 1806. The new king still served as a Prince-elector until the Kingdom of Bavaria left the Holy Roman Empire (1 August 1806).\nKingdom of Bavaria, 1806\u20131918.\nThe Bavarian Army was involved in the Austrian defeat at Hohenlinden, and General Jean Victor Marie Moreau once more occupied Munich. By the Treaty of Lun\u00e9ville (9 February 1801), Bavaria lost the Palatinate and the duchies of Zweibr\u00fccken and J\u00fclich. In view of the scarcely disguised ambitions and intrigues of the Austrian court, prime minister Montgelas now believed that the interests of Bavaria lay in a frank alliance with the French Republic; he succeeded in overcoming the reluctance of Maximilian Joseph; and, on 24 August, a separate treaty of peace and alliance with France was signed at Paris, which allied Bavaria with France.\nThe 1805 Peace of Pressburg (now Bratislava) between Emperor Napoleon of France and Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor, as a consequence of the French victory over the Russians and Austrians at the Battle of Austerlitz (2 December), allowed Maximilian to raise Bavaria to the status of a kingdom. Accordingly, Maximilian proclaimed himself king on 1 January 1806. The King still served as an elector until Bavaria seceded from the Holy Roman Empire on 1 August 1806, joining the Confederation of the Rhine. The Duchy of Berg was ceded to Napoleon only in 1806.\nThe Congress of Vienna 1814\u221215 led to the establishment of significant territorial gains for the Kingdom of Bavaria. Although the Duchy of Berg remained lost, almost all of Franconia, previously ruled by a number of Prince-bishops, as well as parts of Swabia, which had belonged to various mediatised secular and ecclesiastic princes, came under Bavarian rule. In both areas a number of formerly free imperial cities were also integrated into the kingdom. The previously heavily fragmented Palatinate territory was rounded off and partially moved. Smaller, mostly ecclesiastical territories on the southern border with Austria were also added. In this way, the border of Bavaria, which largely still exists today, was redefined and the state grew by more than a third in size.\nUnder Maximilian's descendants, Bavaria became the third most powerful German state, behind only Prussia and Austria. When the German Empire was formed in 1871, Bavaria became the new empire's second most powerful state after Prussia. The Wittelsbachs reigned as kings of Bavaria until the German Revolution of 1918\u20131919. On 12 November 1918 Ludwig III issued the \"Anif declaration\" (German: \"Anifer Erkl\u00e4rung\") at Anif Palace in Austria, in which he released his soldiers and officials from their oath of loyalty to him and ended the 738-year rule of the House of Wittelsbach in Bavaria. The republican movement thereupon declared a republic.\nActivities during the Nazi regime, 1933\u20131945.\nBefore and during the Second World War, the Wittelsbachs were anti-Nazi. Crown Prince Rupert had earned Hitler's eternal enmity by opposing the Beer Hall Putsch in 1923. In 1933, shortly after Hitler's rise to power, he protested against the appointment of governors at the head of the federal states and thus the de facto abolition of German federalism. In 1938, he emigrated to Italy and, after the German Army occupied Italy in September 1943, went into hiding in Florence.\nHis son, Albrecht, Duke of Bavaria, initially left Germany for Hungary with his family, but was eventually arrested by the Gestapo in October 1944, after Germany had occupied Hungary in March. With his wife, four children and three half-sisters, he was sent to a series of Nazi concentration camps, including Oranienburg, Flossenb\u00fcrg and Dachau. Badly hit by hunger and disease, the family barely survived. At the end of April 1945, they were liberated by the United States Third Army.\nCurrent position of the head of the house.\nAlbrecht's eldest son, Franz von Bayern (Francis of Bavaria) is the current head of the house.\nIn the course of the division of state and house assets after the end of the kingdom, the \"Wittelsbach Compensation Fund\" (Wittelsbacher Ausgleichsfonds) was established through a compromise in 1923 and the \"Wittelsbach State Foundation for Art and Science\" was established by the former Crown Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria. The \"Wittelsbach State Foundation\" received the Wittelsbach family's art treasures acquired before 1804 and has since been the owner, although not the manager, of a large part of the holdings of the ancient and classical art museums in Munich, while more recent art collections came into the possession of the compensation fund, into which most of the possessions from the former \"Wittelsbach House Property Fund\" were transferred in 1923, including art treasures and collections (in particular the art collection of King Ludwig I, today mostly in the museums Alte Pinakothek and Neue Pinakothek and in the Glyptothek in Munich), the \"Secret House Archives\" (today a department of the Bavarian State Archives) and the former royal castles of Berg, Hohenschwangau (including the \"Museum of the Bavarian Kings\"), Berchtesgaden and Gr\u00fcnau hunting lodge.\nThe respective head of the House of Wittelsbach appoints a board of up to 8 directors of the foundation \"Wittelsbach Compensation Fund\". He also appoints one of the 3 board members of the \"Wittelsbach State Foundation for Art and Science\", while the other two are a representative of the Bavarian Ministry of Culture and a museum specialist appointed by the latter. There are around 13,500 cultural items belonging to the \"Wittelsbach State Foundation\" while another 43,000 are owned by the \"Wittelsbach Compensation Fund\", mainly shown in museums and collections such as the Pinakotheken.\nThe former Bavarian Royal Family receives around 14 million Euros in payments annually from the proceeds of the \"Wittelsbach Compensation Fund\" which also owns agricultural and forestry lands, while its main source of income is urban real estate in Munich. The respective head of the family decides on their distribution and use. He has the right to live in the castles mentioned. While Albrecht lived in Berg Palace from 1949 until the end of his life in 1996, his son and successor Franz primarily uses the side wing of the Nymphenburg Palace that is available to him. The administration of the House of Wittelsbach is also based there.\nThe private assets of the House of Wittelsbach include the castles of Tegernsee Abbey, Wildenwart (near Frasdorf), Leutstetten (near Starnberg) and Kaltenberg as well as agricultural lands and forestry with an area of 12,500 hectares, real estate and industrial shares. These include two breweries that only became significant after the Second World War: the Ducal Bavarian Brewery of Tegernsee and the K\u00f6nig Ludwig Schlossbrauerei. Since 2011, the Nymphenburg Porcelain Manufactory is also owned by a member of the family.\nThe head of the house is also Grand Master of the Wittelsbach House Orders, the Royal Order of Saint George for the Defense of the Immaculate Conception, the Order of Saint Hubert and the Order of Theresa.\nDuke Franz maintained the tradition founded by his father of holding a large annual reception with a sit-down dinner at Nymphenburg Palace. Around 1,500 mostly changing guests from state politics, municipalities, churches and sciences, art and medicine as well as friends and relatives are invited. He also invites smaller groups of changing guests to Berchtesgaden Castle to discuss specific topics that are important to him. His 80th birthday party, in 2013, was held at the Schleissheim Palace near Munich. The party was attended by 2,500 guests including the then-incumbent Minister-President of Bavaria, Horst Seehofer.\nIn addition to numerous honorary positions in Bavaria, including many cultural and scientific institutions, Franz was also a member of the \"European Foundation for the Imperial Cathedral of Speyer\" in the State of Rhineland-Palatinate for many years, a position that his younger brother Duke Max Emanuel in Bavaria, has since taken over, through which the House of Wittelsbach still maintains a connection to one of its former main territories, the Electoral Palatinate. Max Emanuel is considered the next in line of succession to the headship of the former ruling dynasty, followed by his and Franz's first cousin Luitpold.\nReign outside the Holy Roman Empire.\nWith Duke Otto III of Lower Bavaria, who was a maternal grandson of B\u00e9la IV of Hungary and was elected anti-king of Hungary and Croatia as Bela V (1305\u20131308) the Wittelsbach dynasty came to power outside the Holy Roman Empire for the first time. Otto had abdicated the Hungarian throne by 1308.\nPalatinate branch.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe Bill of Rights 1689 and the Act of Settlement 1701 excluded non-Protestants from inheriting the throne of Great Britain, making Sophia of Hanover, a born princess of the House of Palatinate-Simmern, the heir presumptive upon Anne's death. Sophia died two months before Anne, however, and Sophia's eldest son George I of Great Britain succeeded the throne in 1714. In this way, the House of Hanover inherited the British crown. It remained on the throne until the death of Queen Victoria in 1901.\nThe line of Jacobite succession, which recognises the right for a Catholic monarch from the House of Stuart, acknowledges Franz, Hereditary Prince of Bavaria to be the rightful heir as \"Francis II\". However, no individual since Henry Benedict Stuart has publicly taken up the claim.\nKingdom of Sweden.\nChristopher III of the House of Palatinate-Neumarkt was king of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway in 1440/1442\u20131448, but left no descendants.\nWith the House of Palatinate-Zweibr\u00fccken the Wittelsbachs succeeded to the monarchy of Sweden again 1654\u20131720 when Queen Christina of Sweden abdicated her throne on 5 June 1654 in favour of her first cousin Charles X Gustav. Under him, Charles XI, Charles XII, Sweden reached its greatest power (see Swedish Empire). Charles XII was succeeded by his sister Ulrika Eleonora.\nSweden reached its largest territorial extent under the rule of Charles X Gustav after the Treaty of Roskilde in 1658. Charles Gustav's son Charles XI rebuilt the economy and refitted the army. His legacy to his son Charles XII was one of the finest arsenals in the world, a large standing army, and a large fleet. Charles XII was a skilled military leader and tactician. However, although he was also skilled as a politician, he was reluctant in making peace. While Sweden achieved several large scale military successes early on, and won the most battles, the Great Northern War eventually ended in Sweden's defeat and the end of the Swedish Empire. Charles was succeeded to the Swedish throne by his sister, Ulrika Eleonora. Her abdication in favour of her husband Frederick I in 1720 marked the end of Wittelsbach rule in Sweden.\nKingdom of Greece.\nPrince Otto of Bavaria was chosen by the London Conference of 1832 to be king of newly independent Greece. This was confirmed by the Treaty of Constantinople, whereby Greece became a new independent kingdom under the protection of the Great Powers (the United Kingdom, France and the Russian Empire).\nThroughout his reign, Otto faced political challenges concerning Greece's financial weakness and the role of the government in the affairs of the Church. The politics of Greece of this era was based on affiliations with the three Great Powers, and Otto's ability to maintain the support of the powers was key to his remaining in power. To remain strong, Otto had to play the interests of each of the Great Powers\u2019 Greek adherents against the others, while not aggravating the Great Powers. Otto's standing amongst Greeks suffered when Greece was blockaded by the British Royal Navy in 1850 and 1853 to stop Greece from attacking the Ottoman Empire during the Crimean War. As a result, there was an assassination attempt on his wife Queen Amalia in 1861. In 1862, Otto was deposed while in the countryside, and in 1863, the Greek National Assembly elected George I of the House of Gl\u00fccksburg, aged only 17, \"King of the Hellenes\", marking the end of Wittelsbach rule in Greece.\nBavarian branch.\nJoseph Ferdinand, a son of Maximilian II Emanuel, was the favored choice of England and the Netherlands to succeed as the ruler of Spain, and Charles II of Spain chose him as his heir. Due to the unexpected death of Joseph Ferdinand in 1699 the Wittelsbachs did not come to power in Spain, leaving the Spanish Succession uncertain again.\nRulers.\nHouse of Wittelsbach.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Partitions under Wittelsbach rule\nMajor members of the family.\nPatrilineal descent.\nDuke Franz's patriline is the line from which he is descended father to son. Patrilineal descent is the principle behind membership in royal houses, as it can be traced back through the generations.\nFamily tree.\nLiving legitimate members of the House of Wittlesbach.\nBold signifies heads of the house and numbers shown indicate the pretense to the kingship of Bavaria:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCastles and palaces.\nBavaria.\nSome of the most important Bavarian castles and palaces that were built by Wittelsbach rulers, or served as seats of ruling branch lines, are the following:\nPalatinate branch.\nSome of the most important castles and palaces of the Palatinate Wittelsbach were:\nElectorate of Cologne.\nFrom 1597 to 1794, Bonn was the capital of the Electorate of Cologne and residence of the Archbishops and Prince-electors of Cologne, most of them belonging to the Bavarian branch of the House of Wittelsbach (continuously from 1583 to 1761).\nCoats of arms.\nA full armorial of the Wittelsbach family can be found on the French-language Wikipedia at .\nGrand Offices of the Prince Electors of the House of Wittelsbach (Erz\u00e4mter).\nEach of the prince electors carried one of the grand offices of the Empire. Each office was indicated by a heraldic mark; the ones that the House of Wittelsbach carried are shown below.\nPalatinate branch (senior line), issue of Rudolph I of the Palatinate and Bavaria.\nIn the German fashion, all the sons were \"Count Palatine of the Rhine\" (). There was only one Elector Palatine of the Rhine (). Similarly, all the sons were Dukes of Bavaria (), until 1506. Then, Duke in Bavaria (German: Herzog in Bayern) was the title used by all members of the House of Wittelsbach with the exception of the Duke of Bavaria. This became a unique position given to the eldest descendant of the younger branch of the Wittelsbachs, who inherited the rule of the entire duchy of Bavaria. For example, so reads the full title of the late 16th century's Charles I, Count Palatine of Zweibr\u00fccken-Birkenfeld and patriarch of the House of Palatinate-Birkenfeld: \"Count Palatine by Rhine, Duke in Bavaria, Count at Veldenz and Sponheim\" (Pfalzgraf bei Rhein, Herzog in Bayern, Graf zu Veldenz und Sponheim).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38849", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38849", "title": "Palatinate (region)", "text": "Historical region of Germany\nThe Palatinate (; ; Palatine German: \"Palz\"), or the Rhenish Palatinate (\"Rheinpfalz\"), is a historical region of Germany. The Palatinate occupies most of the southern quarter of the German state of Rhineland-Palatinate (\"Rheinland-Pfalz\"), covering an area of with about 1.4\u00a0million inhabitants. Its residents are known as Palatines (\"Pf\u00e4lzer\").\nGeography.\nThe Palatinate borders Saarland in the west, historically also comprising the state's Saarpfalz District. In the northwest, the Hunsr\u00fcck mountain range forms the border with the Rhineland region. The eastern border with Hesse and the Baden region runs along the Upper Rhine river, while the left bank, with Mainz and Worms as well as the Selz basin around Alzey, belong to the Rhenish Hesse region. In the south, the German-French border separates the Palatinate from Alsace.\nOne-third of the region is covered by the Palatinate Forest (\"Pf\u00e4lzerwald\"), including the Palatinate Forest Nature Park popular with hikers. With about , it is Germany's largest contiguous forested area, and is part of the Franco-German Palatinate Forest-North Vosges Biosphere Reserve.\nThe western and northern part of the Palatinate is densely forested and mountainous. Its highest mountain is the Donnersberg with a height of , situated in the North Palatine Uplands near Kirchheimbolanden. Most of the major Palatinate towns (Ludwigshafen, Speyer, Landau, Frankenthal, Neustadt) lie in the lower eastern part of the Upper Rhine Plain down to the River Rhine. Here the German Wine Route (\"Deutsche Weinstra\u00dfe\") passes through the \nPalatinate wine region. It is one of the greatest wine-producing regions in Germany, and in the last two decades has become well known for its prize-winning white and reds of highest quality produced by a number of talented young winemakers.\nMajor rivers include the Upper Rhine tributaries Lauter, Queich and Speyerbach, as well as Schwarzbach and Glan in the west.\nHistorically the Electoral Palatinate and several other territories were part of the Palatinate, but today belong to other German territories.\nSubdivision.\nThe Palatinate is divided into four non-administrative sub-regions, comprising the following rural districts and independent towns and cities:\nClimate.\nLike most of Southwestern Germany, the Palatinate\u2019s climate is either humid subtropical in areas below 300 meters or oceanic on higher ground. The average annual temperatures vary from around 11-14 degrees Celsius in the valleys and 8-10 degrees in the highlands. Wet air from the prevailing westerly and southwesterly winds leads to precipitation in the Mittelgebirge ranges, while it warms up on its way further down to the Rhine Valley; giving the valleys a considerably drier climate than the surrounding Palatine Forest.\nHistory.\nDuring the Holy Roman Empire prior to World War II, it was also referred to as Rhenish Bavaria and Lower Palatinate (\"Unterpfalz\"), which designated only the western part of the Electorate of the Palatinate (\"Kurf\u00fcrstentum Pfalz\"), as opposed to the Upper Palatinate (\"Oberpfalz\").\nFormerly a Celtic region, this area was conquered by the Roman Empire under Emperor Augustus in about 12 BC; thereafter,\nit was part of the province of Germania Superior. During the decline of the Empire, Alamannic tribes settled here; their territory was conquered by Francia under King Clovis I about 496. From 511 onwards, the area belonged to the eastern part of Frankish Austrasia, which\u2014as Rhenish Franconia\u2014became part of East Francia according to the 843 Treaty of Verdun.\nHoly Roman Empire.\nFrom the Middle Ages until 1792, the Palatinate was divided into 45 secular and ecclesiastical territories, some of which were very small. The largest and most important of these was the Electorate of the Palatinate (\"Kurf\u00fcrstentum Pfalz\"), encompassing a number of Franconian territories on both sides of the Rhine formerly held by the Counts palatine (\"Pfalzgrafen\") of Lotharingia. By the late 12th century, the Count palatine had achieved the status of a Prince-elector (\"Kurf\u00fcrst\"), becoming one of the seven higher nobles with the privilege of electing the Emperor, as confirmed by the Golden Bull of 1356. In 1214, the Bavarian House of Wittelsbach was enfeoffed with these estates, which they ruled until 1918, together with the collateral branch of Palatine Zweibr\u00fccken from 1410. Needing stronger protection, they lost control with the reunification with Bavaria under Elector Charles Theodore in 1777.\nThe major ecclesiastical territory in the region was the Bishopric of Speyer. The Imperial city of Landau joined the Alsatian D\u00e9capole in 1521 to preserve its status. Nevertheless, it was seized by France after the Thirty Years' War.\nOther larger regional entities included the Duchy of Zweibr\u00fccken and the Prince-Bishopric of Speyer. The Prince-Bishopric held possessions on both sides of the Rhine. For centuries, the Electoral Palatinate and Bavaria maintained dynastic links because both were ruled by members of the Wittelsbach family.\nFrench rule.\nIn 1794, the Left Bank of the Rhine, including the Palatinate, was occupied by French revolutionary troops. As a result of the Treaty of Campo Formio (1797), the First French Republic annexed the region. In 1798, the French introduced a new administrative system with the establishment of departments. The area of the Palatinate largely became the D\u00e9partement of Mont Tonnerre, laying the cornerstone of its regional identity today. Minor parts of today's region were attached to the neighbouring departments of the Sarre and Bas-Rhin. The French further subdivided the department into cantons, mayoralties and municipalities, and introduced their legal system (Napoleonic Code) and the metric system.\nBavarian rule.\nFollowing the defeat of Napoleon at the Battle of Leipzig in 1813 and the capture of the Left Bank of the Rhine by the Allies in January 1814, the region was, from 2 February 1814, initially under the provisional authority of the \"General Government of the Middle Rhine\". However, from 16 June of the same year, it was placed under the administration of the \"Imperial-Royal (\"k.k.\") Austrian and Royal Bavarian Joint Land Administration Commission\" (\"k.\u00a0k. \u00f6streichischen und k.\u00a0bairischen gemeinschaftliche Landes-Administrations-Kommission\").\nIn the main treaty agreed at the Congress of Vienna in 1815, and dated 9 June 1815, Article 51 stated (\"inter alia\") that on the Left Bank of the Rhine the former French \"d\u00e9partements\" of the Sarre and Mont-Tonnerre, except where set forth in the same treaty, were to fall \"with full sovereignty\" and ownership rights within the overlordship of His Majesty the Emperor of Austria (\"Herrschaft Sr. Maj. des Kaisers von Oesterreich\"). Initially, however, joint Austro-Bavarian administration was retained.\nOn 14 April 1816, a treaty was signed between Austria and Bavaria in which the various territorial changes were agreed on. According to Article 2 of the treaty, Emperor Francis I of Austria ceded various regions to King Maximilian I of Bavaria. These included, in addition to various regions east of the Rhine, the following regions west of the Rhine:\n \"In the D\u00e9partement of Mont-Tonnerre (Donnersberg):\"\n# \"the districts of Zweibr\u00fccken, Kaiserslautern, and Speier; the latter with the exception of the cantons of Worms and Pfeddersheim;\" \n# \"the canton of Kirchheim-Bolanden, in the district of Alzei.\" \n \"In the D\u00e9partement of the Sarre:\" \n \"In the D\u00e9partement of the Bas Rhin\":\nThese changes took effect on 1 May 1816.\nIn accordance with the prevailing Bavarian administrative structure, the region became one of eight Bavarian districts (\"Kreise\"). From 1808, Bavaria embarked on the administrative reorganisation of its territory, creating districts which, as in France, were named after the main local rivers. Thus, the new district along the Rhine was given the name Rheinkreis (i.e. the Rhine district), with Speyer as its capital. Of the former French administrative structure, the subdivision of the district into arrondissements, cantons, mayoralties, and municipalities was, in large measure, retained. The Bavarian government also preserved the French legal system (Code Napol\u00e9on), giving the Palatinate a distinct legal status within the Bavarian kingdom.\nAt the next lower level, the three former French arrondissements were continued as \"Kreisdirektion\" (\"Circle\", i.e. district, \"direction\") of Frankenthal, Kaiserslautern, and Zweibr\u00fccken. \"Kreisdirektion\" Landau was, however, a new creation. In 1818, the cantons were merged into 12 administrative districts called \"Landkommissariat\". In 1862, these were designated individually as \"Bezirksamt\". In 1939, each one became a \"Landkreis\" (rural district).\nAs his first provincial governor, King Maximilian selected the Privy Councillor (\"Hofrat\") Franz Xaver von Zwack, whose name gave rise to the popular Palatine nickname for Bavarians, \"Zwockel\".\nIn 1832 the \"Rheinkreis\" became the focal point of liberal movements. The Hambach Festival, a large gathering near Neustadt an der Weinstra\u00dfe, proved fertile ground for what came to be considered a milestone in German history.\nIn 1835, King Ludwig I of Bavaria's romantic outlook gave rise to the adoption of new, historically evocative names for the administrative districts of Bavaria. As such, the Rheinkreis officially became the \"Pfalz\" (Palatinate). The historic Electorate of the Palatinate had spanned both sides of the Rhine with Heidelberg and Mannheim as its capitals on the eastern side, whereas the new \"Palatinate\" established in 1815\u201316 lay solely on the left bank of the Rhine. It included territories that had never been part of the historical Palatinate (e.g., territories of the former Bishopric of Speyer, the imperial city of Speyer or Kirchheimbolanden, which had formerly belonged to the Weilburg branch of Nassau). To avoid confusion of the new Palatinate and the former one (and with the Upper Palatinate), the name Rhenish Palatinate (\"Rheinpfalz\") became common and is still used today, but was never made its official name. Another term, that of Rhenish Bavaria (\"Rheinbayern\"), though used occasionally, never gained great currency, but can, nonetheless, be found sometimes on older maps.\nThe Bavarian Royal Family tried to encourage Palatine unity with Bavaria by erecting a royal palace in Edenkoben, and by restoring Speyer Cathedral under the direct supervision of King Ludwig I. The new town of Ludwigshafen was named after the king. Despite these attempts, the Palatinate's representatives to the Bavarian Parliament always prided themselves on the claim that they came from a more progressive region. Indeed, they tried to promote their liberalism, which the French had introduced to the Palatinate, to the whole Bavarian kingdom. German historian Heiner Haan described the special status accorded the Palatinate within Bavaria as being one of a \"Hauptstaat\" (main state, i.e. Bavaria) with a \"Nebenstaat\" (adjacent state, i.e. the Palatinate).\nIn May/June 1849, after the failed revolution of 1848, and as part of the Imperial Constitution campaign, separatist elements wanted the district to secede from Bavaria and establish its own \"Palatine Republic\". A separatist uprising was suppressed by Prussian military intervention. The Palatinate's union with Bavaria persisted after it became part of the German Empire in 1871, and, indeed, after the Wittelsbach dynasty was deposed, and Bavaria became a free state of the Weimar Republic in 1918.\nIn 1910, the town of Landau was declared independent of the \"Bezirksamt\".\nFrench occupation of the Palatinate.\nAfter World War I, French troops occupied the Palatinate under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles. In 1920, the western \"Bezirks\u00e4mter\" of Sankt Ingbert and Homburg (\"Saarpfalz\") were separated from the Bavarian Palatinate, and became part of the newly established Saarland, which, according to the peace treaty, was governed by the League of Nations. That same year, seven more towns were declared independent of the \"Bezirks\u00e4mter\": Speyer, Ludwigshafen, Frankenthal, Neustadt an der Weinstra\u00dfe, Kaiserslautern, Pirmasens, and Zweibr\u00fccken. They remain separate to this day.\nBetween 1919 and 1923, during the occupation, there were French-backed attempts at separating the Palatinate from Bavaria and the Empire. On 1 June 1919, Eberhard Haa\u00df, founder of the \"Free Palatine Association\" (1918), proclaimed the \"Palatine Republic\", but failed to occupy the government building in Speyer.\nOn 23 November 1923, Franz Josef Heinz proclaimed the \"Government of the Autonomous Palatinate in the Association of the Rhenish Republic\" at Speyer, after gaining control of the towns of Kaiserslautern, Neustadt, and Landau, and after the capitulation of the Palatine government. In the following days, several more towns fell into his group's hands. The Bavarian government reacted sharply. It organised a squad under the command of Edgar Julius Jung. On 9 January 1924, Heinz was assassinated while dining at the Wittelsbacher Hof in Speyer. Other leading members of the separatist movement were killed on 12 February, in a shooting in Pirmasens. By then, a treaty between Bavaria and the Inter-Allied Rhineland High Commission (the supreme council of the Allied occupation forces) of January 1924 recognised the status quo and guaranteed that the Palatinate would remain a part of Bavaria, thereby putting an end to separatist attempts.\nUnder Nazi rule, from 1933 to 1945, the Palatinate officially remained part of Bavaria, but was otherwise totally reorganised\u2014it was merged with the Saarland into the Gau Westmark, with headquarters in Saarbr\u00fccken.\nRhineland-Palatinate.\nThe union with Bavaria was finally dissolved following the reorganisation of German states during the Allied occupation of Germany after World War II. While Bavaria itself was part of the U.S. occupation zone, the Palatinate was occupied by French forces. The French reorganised their occupation zone by founding new states, so that in 1947 the Palatinate was combined with Rhenish Hesse (\"Rheinhessen\"), the former parts of the People's State of Hesse west of the Rhine, and the southern part of the Prussian Rhine Province, to form the German federal state of Rhineland-Palatinate. The Palatinate formed the administrative district (\"Regierungsbezirk\") of the Pfalz. \nThis reorganisation came with smaller losses of former district territory to the Saarland, especially in the area of Sankt Wendel. As part of the 1969 administrative reform, some minor border changes were made in the north. The Diocese of Speyer and the Evangelical Church of the Palatinate still exist today largely based on the historic boundaries of the old Bavarian district.\nThe Pfalz was initially one of five districts in Rhineland-Palatinate; however, in 1968, the district was merged with the neighbouring district of \"Rheinhessen\" to form the district of \"Rheinhessen-Pfalz\". On 1 January 2000, all administrative districts of Rheinland-Pfalz were dissolved.\nPennsylvania Dutch.\nMany Pennsylvania Dutchmen are descendants of Palatine immigrants. The Pennsylvania Dutch language, spoken by the Amish, Mennonites, and Fancy Dutch in the United States, is derived primarily from the Palatine German language which many Mennonite refugees brought to Pennsylvania in the years 1717 to 1732. The only existing Pennsylvania German newspaper, \"Hiwwe wie Driwwe\", was founded 1996 in the village of Ober-Olm, close to Mainz, the state capital, and is published bi-annually as a cooperation project with Kutztown University of Pennsylvania. In the same village one can find the headquarters of the German-Pennsylvanian Association.\nMany more Palatines emigrated in the course of the 19th century, and the great majority of them to North America, so that in the US temporarily \"Palatine\" was a common designation for German Americans. Johann Heinrich Heinz (1811\u20131891), the father of Henry John Heinz who founded the H. J. Heinz Company in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, emigrated from Kallstadt, Palatinate, to the United States in 1840.\nCuisine.\nArguably the most famous dish in Palatinate is the saumagen, literally \"sow's stomach\", a dish that consists of a thick, crispy-fried casing (sow stomach) stuffed with a mixture of pork, potatoes, and seasonings. Other traditional meat dishes of the region include bratwurst, Palatinate liverwurst, a blood pudding sausage called \"grieweworscht\" (\"griewe\" are speck (bacon) cubes, so lit. \"sausage with bacon bits\"), \"lewwerknedel\" (Leberkn\u00f6del) (or \"lewwerknepp\", liver dumplings), and \"fleeschknepp\" (Fleischkn\u00f6del: meat dumplings). Sauerkraut is the typical side dish in all seasons, but especially in winter, as are mashed potatoes and brown gravy. Also eaten are dampfnudels, which can be served with either sweet sauces or side dishes (such as wine, vanilla sauce, or canned fruit such as plums, prunes, or pears) or with savory side dishes (such as potato soup, vegetable soup, goulash, or pepper pork).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38850", "revid": "698909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38850", "title": "Carboxyl group", "text": ""}
{"id": "38851", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38851", "title": "Finglas", "text": "Outer suburb of Dublin, Ireland\nFinglas (; , meaning 'clear streamlet') is a northwestern outer suburb of Dublin, Ireland. It lies close to Junction 5 of the M50 motorway, and the N2 road. Nearby suburbs include Glasnevin and Ballymun; Dublin Airport is to the north. Finglas lies mainly in the postal district of Dublin 11.\nFinglas is the core of a civil parish of the same name in the barony of Castleknock.\nName.\nThe name Finglas (), meaning \"clear streamlet\", is derived from the Finglas River, which passed through the historic settlement.\nGeography.\nThe centre of Finglas lies on a rise overlooking the valley of the River Tolka, at an altitude of . The Tolka runs through western and southern Finglas, and forms part of the boundary between Finglas and Glasnevin. Flowing from the north is the stream, the Finglas River, for which the area is named, forming in turn from branches from the townlands of Grange and Kildonan to the north. After meeting a tributary, the St. Margaret's Road Stream, the Finglas flows through the village centre in a culvert, and along the eastern side of Finglas Road, joining the Tolka at Finglas Bridge. To the west of the village centre rises the Finglaswood Stream, which joins the River Tolka via an Integrated Constructed Wetland near a small civic golf course.\nClimate.\nFinglas has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\").\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nFinglas was originally the site of an Early Christian abbey, the origin of which has been associated, from early times, with the name of St. Cainnech, or Canice, the patron of Kilkenny, said to have founded it in 560 A.D. According to an ancient legend, the ground on which Finglas stands had been sanctified by St. Patrick, who is said to have uttered a prophecy that a great town would arise at the ford of hurdles in the vale beneath. The Nethercross from the first abbey can be seen today in the old graveyard.\nSt. Canice is said to have been born at Glengiven near Derry. Several primary schools and churches in the area have been named after Canice, including the local Church of Ireland church (built in 1843) and Roman Catholic church (built in 1920 on the site of a much earlier mass house).\nEarly modern period.\nThe Finglas or Finglass family, who were prominent in the legal profession and in politics in the sixteenth century, took their name from the district. The family were recorded in Termonfeckin and Dublin but many of them had by the mid-1700s taken up residence in Drogheda (where they participated in the 1798 Rebellion); newspaper accounts report their opening up the Boyne River for salmon fishing.\nIn 1649, the Duke of Ormonde used Finglas as a staging post for his army before launching an unsuccessful Siege of Dublin.\nFollowing the Battle of the Boyne in 1690, Finglas was used as a camp for four days by William of Orange en route to Dublin city. While there he issued the Declaration of Finglas, offering a pardon for many of James II's defeated supporters.\nFor almost two centuries, Finglas was well known for its \"May Games\" to celebrate May Day and the coming of spring, and its maypole \"was one of the last to survive in Dublin\", according to historian Michael J. Tutty.\nThroughout the eighteenth century, the Finglas\nmaypole was at the centre of a week of festivity which included \"the playing of games, various competitions, and, according to one\naccount the crowning of 'Queen of the May'.\" In a letter written by Major Sirr dated 2 May 1803, he writes:\n\" \"Godfrey and I went to Finglass and found everything in order. Major Wilkinson, who resides, there, waited upon me... and told me there was not the smallest occasion for military aid nor was there the least possibility of any disturbance... I ordered the guard to return to Dublin and these gentlemen and their families seemed quite rejoiced that the old custom of Maying was not to be interrupted in Finglass where that amusement has been kept up for a century past without ever being curbed before\".\"\n20th century onwards.\nIn 1932, Ireland's first commercial airport was set up at Kildonan in Finglas. It was the site for the first Irish commercial aircraft, a Desoutter Mark II aircraft \"EI-AAD\", and the first commercial air taxi service, the Iona National Air Taxis and Flying School.\nIn the 1950s, Finglas was developed with extensive housing estates, to rehouse many north inner-city Dublin residents. Many of these estates, particularly in Finglas West, were named after prominent Irish republicans from early 20th-century Irish history, including Barry, Casement, Plunkett, Mellows, McKee, Clune and Clancy.\nAmenities.\nIn the village centre is a range of shops, including one of the first-established Superquinn stores (since rebranded as SuperValu), banking facilities, pubs and restaurants. To the north are several light industrial estates.\nCharlestown Shopping Centre and Clearwater Shopping Centre, are located outside the village core, to the north and south of Finglas respectively.\nFinglas is home to one of Dublin's four Road Safety Authority Driving Testing Centres, which is located in Jamestown Business Park.\nThe Finglas Maypole Arts Festival was launched in 2019. In its first year, the festival committee was part of a steering group that got the first blue plaque in Finglas \u2013 to honour the uileann piper S\u00e9amus Ennis.\nEducation.\nThere are 13 primary and national schools in the Finglas area, and 6 secondary schools. Col\u00e1iste \u00cdde College of Further Education is located in Finglas West and offers third-level courses.\nEconomy.\nFinglas has a mixed local economy encompassing retail, light industrial, logistics, and service-sector employment. The area is home to several business parks, including Jamestown Business Park and Finglas Business Centre, which support warehousing, small-scale manufacturing, and commercial logistics. Retail employment is concentrated around the Charlestown and Clearwater shopping centres. Strategic planning initiatives have identified the Jamestown area as a priority zone for regeneration, compact growth, and enhanced economic development.\nSports.\nThe Rugby Union club Unidare RFC and the GAA club Erin's Isle are based in the area. Soccer clubs include Tolka Rovers F.C., Valley Park United, WFTA Football Club, Willows FC, Finglas Celtic FC, Rivermount Football Club and Beneavin F.C.\nTransport.\nFinglas is served by a number of bus routes operated by Dublin Bus and Go-Ahead Ireland. These include the 23, 24, L89, F1, F2, F3, N2, N4, N6, 40D, 40E, &amp; 220. The main route serving the area is the number F3 which runs between Charlestown Shopping Centre and Limekiln Avenue via Dublin city centre. A new route, the 40E, was also introduced from Tyrellstown to provide a direct link to the extended Luas Green Line in Broombridge. Other routes serving the area include the N4 which runs between Point Village to Blanchardstown, the 140 which runs to Rathmines via the city centre and the 83 which runs to Kimmage via Glasnevin and the city centre. It is also served by the 88N Nitelink service. Two Bus \u00c9ireann routes also serve Finglas, passing along the main Finglas Road, including the 103 from Duleek/Kilmoon Cross/Ashbourne to the city centre.\nRepresentation and governance.\nFinglas is in the jurisdiction of Dublin City Council, and for local elections it is part of the Finglas-Ballymun local electoral area.\nFinglas is part of the Dublin North-West constituency for elections to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann.\nThe civil parish of Finglas is a civil parish in the barony of Castleknock.\nNotable people.\nFinglas has been the home of a number of notable figures, including:\nAnd in sport:\nIn popular culture.\nThe BBC sitcom, \"Mrs. Brown's Boys\", is set in Finglas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38853", "revid": "40126538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38853", "title": "Tantalus", "text": "Greek mythological figure and son of Zeus\nTantalus ( ), also called Atys, was a Greek mythological figure, most famous for his punishment in Tartarus: for either revealing many secrets of the gods, for stealing ambrosia from them, or for trying to trick them into eating his son, he was made to stand in a pool of water beneath a fruit tree with low branches, with the fruit ever eluding his grasp, and the water always receding before he could take a drink. This punishment, although the best-known today, was a more unusual detail in surviving early Greek sources, where variants including a stone suspended above his head are more commonly recorded.\nThe ancient Greeks used the proverb \"Tantalean punishment\" (: ), in reference to people with nice things who are unable to experience them. His name and punishment are also the source of the English word \"tantalize\", meaning to torment with the sight of something desired but out of reach; tease by arousing expectations that are repeatedly disappointed. 'The rock of Tantalus' was also used as a proverbial expression by Pindar and Archilochus, in the same vein as the Sword of Damocles, to suggest being unable to enjoy something because attempting to do so places one in a position of perpetual imminent peril.\nEtymology.\nPlato in the \"Cratylus\" (395e) interprets (\"\") as () [acc. : in the original], \"who has to bear much\" from () \"wretched\". The Third Vatican Mythographer claims that the name means \"wishing for a vision\".\nThe word ' (') is held by some to be inherited from Proto-Indo-European, although R.\u00a0S.\u00a0P.\u00a0Beekes rejects an Indo-European interpretation.\nHistorical background.\nThere may have been a historical Tantalus, possibly the ruler of an Anatolian city named \"Tantal\u00eds\", \"the city of Tantalus\", or of a city named \"Sipylus\". Pausanias reports that there was a port under his name and a sepulcher of him \"by no means obscure\", in the same region.\nTantalus is sometimes referred to as \"King of Phrygia\", although his city was located in the western extremity of Anatolia, where Lydia was to emerge as a state before the beginning of the first millennium BCE, and not in the traditional heartland of Phrygia, situated more inland. References to his son as \"Pelops the Lydian\" led some scholars to the conclusion that there would be good grounds for believing that he belonged to a primordial house of Lydia.\nOther versions name his father as Tmolus, the name of a king of Lydia and, like Sipylus, of another mountain in ancient Lydia. The location of Tantalus's mortal mountain-fathers generally placed him in Lydia; and more seldom in Phrygia or Paphlagonia, all in Asia Minor.\nThe geographer Strabo states that the wealth of Tantalus was derived from the mines of Phrygia and Mount Sipylus. Near Mount Sipylus are archaeological features that have been associated with Tantalus and his house since Antiquity. Near Mount Yamanlar in \u0130zmir (ancient Smyrna), where the Lake Karag\u00f6l (Lake Tantalus) associated with the accounts surrounding him is found, is a monument mentioned by Pausanias: the tholos \"tomb of Tantalus\" (later Christianized as \"Saint Charalambos's tomb\") and another one in Mount Sipylus, and where a \"throne of Pelops\", an altar or bench carved in rock and conjecturally associated with his son is found.\nBased on a similarity between the names Tantalus and Hantili, it has been suggested that the name Tantalus may have derived from that of these two Hittite kings.\nFamily.\nTantalus was generally said to be a son of Zeus and a woman named Pluto. In a few sources Tmolus is given as the father. The identity of his wife is variously given: generally as Dione the daughter of Atlas; Euryanassa, daughter of Pactolus, a river-god of Anatolia; Clytia, the child of Amphidamantes; and Eupryto.\nTantalus was the father of Pelops, Niobe, and Broteas. A scholium on the \"Argonautica\" of Apollonius Rhodius adds Dascylus as a child of Tantalus. Through Pelops, Tantalus was the progenitor of the House of Atreus, which was named after his grandson Atreus and which was plagued by misfortune, making the house the subject of many Greek tragedies.\nTantalus's grave-sanctuary stood on Sipylus but honours were paid him at Argos, where local tradition claimed to possess his bones. In Lesbos, there was another hero-shrine in the small settlement of Polion and a mountain named after Tantalus.\nMythology.\nPunishment in Hades.\nThe oldest surviving reference to Tantalus is the \"Odyssey\". Odysseus sees him there when he journeys to Hades, standing in a pool of water up to his chin beneath a fruit tree with low branches. Whenever Tantalus reached for the fruit, the wind blew the branches out of his reach; whenever he tried to drink, the water receded before he could reach it. However, the crime for which this is the punishment is not mentioned. The earliest account of Tantalus's crime is that found in a fragment of the lost \"Nostoi\" preserved in the \"Deipnosophistae\" of Athenaeus. Tantalus is punished by Zeus after Zeus swears an oath to give him anything he asks for, and Tantalus asks to be allowed to live like the gods. Zeus is bound by his oath to do this, but as a punishment Zeus places a giant rock above his head so that, although Tantalus has access to a banquet akin to that which the gods enjoy, fear of the rock falling prevents him from ever enjoying it.\nIn other surviving early Greek sources, the stone perpetually hanging above Tantalus's head is the more popular variant of the punishment. The rock is also mentioned in fragments of Archilochus, Alcman, Alcaeus, and Pherecydes. The crime for which this is the punishment is, however, absent from the fragments.\nPausanias (c.\u2009110\u2013180 CE) reports that in the Knidian lesche, a building at Delphi full of paintings by Polygnotus depicting different mythological scenes, Tantalus is shown enduring both the punishment of the retreating food and drink recorded in the \"Odyssey\" and that of the rock hanging above his head. Pausanias states that Polygnotus is following the tradition of the poet Archilochus, but adds that he does not know whether Archilochus was the origin of this variant or whether he was following another source. Apollodorus also records both punishments together. Other allusions to the story generally tend to continue to refer to either the rock alone, or the rock and the receding food and water. Further reference to the punishment but without mention of the specific crime are found in Horace (65 BCE\u20138 CE), who mentions the receding water in the first \"Satire\", Lucretius (c.\u200999\u201355 BCE), who mentions Tantalus's fear of a boulder hanging in the air, and Vergil, who in the \"Aeneid\" mentions a crag hanging over him.\nDespite the crime of attempting to feed his son to the gods being the most well-known variant today, in antiquity there were multiple variants reporting different crimes. Most, but not all, of these involve a feast to some degree. References to the attempt to feed the gods his dismembered son appear comparatively late in the surviving sources.\nFeasting.\nThe variant in which Tantalus attempts to feed the gods his dismembered son is, however, clearly familiar to audiences by the time of Pindar (c.\u2009518\u2013438 BCE). In his first \"Olympian Ode\", Pindar initially alludes to the story in which Pelops is killed, served as food, and partially eaten, by explaining that Clotho, one of the three Fates, revived Pelops in a cauldron, replacing his shoulder with one of ivory. A scholiast commenting on this passage in Pindar reports that according to Bacchylides (c.\u2009518\u2013c.\u2009451 BCE), it was Rhea who revived Pelops by placing him in a cauldron.\nHowever, in \"Olympian 1\" Pindar rejects this version, implying that it is a lie and adding that it is better to speak well of the gods. He then relates a different account in which Tantalus invited the gods to a meal to repay them for inviting him to feast with them. Nothing went amiss with the meal, but Poseidon, on seeing Pelops, was overcome with desire for him and carried him off in his chariot. The sudden disappearance of Pelops, and the failure of attempts to find him, led envious neighbours to spread rumours that he had been killed, cooked, and eaten. Pindar's choice of words in describing these rumoured events imply that the gods also participated in the act of killing Pelops. Although it is possible Pindar is reporting a variant he was aware of, Douglas Gerber suggests that the implication that the gods participated in the gruesome acts is meant to elevate the horror of the scene, and thus simultaneously make it seem less believable. In a similar vein, in the \"Iphigenia in Tauris\" of Euripides, Iphigenia refers to the 'feast of Tantalus' that the gods attended and enjoyed as unworthy of belief. It is unclear, however, whether her denial is that the gods enjoyed the meal, or that they ate it at all, or that Tantalus attempted to feed the gods his son, and whether Euripides meant Iphigenia's denial to follow Pindar's variant in which Tantalus is the victim of the rumours of envious neighbours cannot be established by what is given in the play. In Euripides's \"Helen\" the character of Menelaus, mentions Pelops in relation to a feast, but the feast is referred to one which Pelops himself was 'persuaded' to make. The text, however, is generally considered corrupt, rather than referring to an otherwise unknown variant in which Pelops himself agreed to host a banquet.\nAfter denying that Tantalus's crime was that of the cannibal banquet, Pindar then claims that his offence was stealing nectar and ambrosia from the gods \u2013 substances which they had used to make him immortal \u2013 and giving it to his friends. Zeus's punishment for Tantalus is to hang a boulder above his head, from which he then perpetually flees. It is unclear where Pindar imagines Tantalus's punishment as taking place. Some have argued that in the \"Nostoi\" Tantalus's punishment took place on Olympus and that Pindar was following this model. Gerber points out, however, that there are no other instances in which a mortal's punishment takes place on Olympus, and adds that it is difficult to imagine that the gods would enjoy the constant presence of the suffering Tantalus at their banquets. The punishment of the hanging rock is also mentioned by Electra in Euripides's \"Orestes\", where Tantalus is located somewhere between heaven and earth, flying hither and thither in the air (\u1f00\u03ad\u03c1\u03b9 \u03c0\u03bf\u03c4\u1fb6\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9) in an attempt to escape the bolder above his head. The crime for which this is the punishment is, however, not detailed. A scholiast on the passage states that he was placed in the sky so that he was far enough from Olympus so as not to be able to hear the conversation of the gods, and far enough away from mortals so as not to be able to tell them anything he had already heard. Similarly, Diodorus Siculus (1st century BCE) recounts that his crime was sharing with mortals the intimate conversations of the gods, an explanation which Ovid also gives in the \"Ars Amatoria\". Apollodorus gives both the theft of ambrosia and the sharing of the secrets of the gods as his crimes.\nThe first surviving source to name the Demeter as the god who ate part of Pelops is the \"Alexandra\" of Lycophron (c.\u2009300 BCE), in which she is referred to via several epithets. The details given are that she ate the shoulder of the grandfather of Menelaeus (who is himself cryptically referred to by way of his genealogy), but nothing is said about how Pelops's shoulder came to be eaten, its replacement, or the punishment of Tantalus. In the \"Metamorphoses\" Ovid relates in book 6 that Pelops has a shoulder of ivory because he was cut up by his father, and that the gods restored him, except for a part of his shoulder which was absent (\"defuit\"), and in books 4 and 10 the punishment of Tantalus is mentioned in passing and includes receding waters and retreating trees. The story is also mentioned in the \"Fabulae\". The details given are that Pelops was dismembered by Tantalus at a feast of the gods, that Ceres \u2013 the Roman counterpart to Demeter \u2013 ate a part of his arm, that the gods restored him to life, and that Ceres replaced the part of his shoulder that was missing with ivory. An explanation for why Demeter alone would fail to notice the content of the meal is given in later sources, with a scholium on Lycophron stating that Demeter was distracted by the loss of her daughter Persephone.\nLikewise, an explanation as to why Tantalus attempted to feed his son to the gods is not found in any sources until Servius (early 5th century CE), who gives as Tantalus's motivation a desire to test the gods. A scholium on Lycophron suggests that this was a gesture of hospitality, but gives no explanation as to why it should be interpreted as such.\nThe story of Tantalus is also reported by the Vatican Mythographers. The first mythographer states that it was Ceres who ate Pelops's shoulder, and it was her who gave him the ivory shoulder. The mythographer offers an allegorical interpretation of Ceres's involvement, explaining that she is the deity who ate him because goddess of earth, and earth consumes the bodies of the dead, but leaves the bones. The second and third mythographers also state that it was Ceres who ate part of Pelops, for the same allegorical reason, but does not mention the ivory replacement for the lost part, and instead states that it was Mercury who restored Pelops to life, and explains that this is because Mercury is the god of intelligence.\nA Scholium on Lykophron suggests that either Tantalus 'was attempting to be hospitable, or to make a significant contribution to the \"eranos\" to which the gods had invited him (\"schol ad Lyc.\" 152, = \"ad Ol.\" 1.40a). The scholiast also notes that according to some it is either Themis or Thetis (the scholium survives in several manuscripts, and the name differs between them) who ate the shoulder.\nThe golden dog.\nIn a different tradition, Tantalus was implicated in the theft of the gold dog which Rhea had once put to watch over the goat nourishing the infant Zeus when she hid him in a cave on Crete. The story is recorded by Antoninus Liberalis as well as in scholia on Pindar's \"Olympian\" 1 and on the \"Odyssey\".\nAntoninus Liberalis reports that Pandareus stole a golden dog who guarded the cave in Crete in which Rhea had hidden him from Cronus. Rhea had initially set the dog to guard the goat which was providing Zeus with milk. Later, after making the goat 'an immortal' Zeus ordered the dog to continue guarding the Cretan cave. Having stolen the dog, Pandareus then gave it to Tantalus for safekeeping. When he later returned and asked for the dog, Tantalus swore an oath that he had never received it. Zeus punished Pandareus for the theft by turning him to stone and Tantalus for swearing a false oath by striking him with a thunderbolt and placing Mount Sipylus on top of him.\nVariants of this appear in late sources: scholia on the \"Odyssey\" state that Zeus told Hermes to go to Tantalus and get back the dog, and it was Hermes to whom Tantalus lied (but Hermes found and retrieved it anyway), and another variant is reported therein in which Tantalus himself steals the dog. In one version, it was a mechanical dog crafted by Hephaestus to guard a temple of Zeus. There were multiple plays, now lost, written about Tantalus in antiquity, and it is generally assumed that they relate to this incident rather than anything involving a feast.\nIn classical drama.\nTantalus appeared in Aeschylus' lost play \"Niobe\", which was set after the catastrophic revenge of Artemis and Apollo that left all of Niobe's numerous children lying dead on the ground. The inconsolable Niobe was sitting veiled and speechless at her children's tomb as Tantalus arrived at Thebes, at first not knowing that had transpired; surviving fragments show Tantalus boasting of his lands in unknowing bliss, then trying in vain to comfort his daughter, and in the end escorting her back home to Lydia (as her husband Amphion had probably perished as well).\nTantalus also briefly appears in \"Thyestes\", a tragedy by Roman author Seneca. The ghost of the tormented Tantalus is brought from the Underworld by one of the Furies, and commanded to sow wickedness and enmity between his grandsons Atreus and Thyestes, exiled by their father Pelops due to the murder of their half-brother Chrysippus and further quarrelling over the rulership of their new kingdom. The play's chorus, old men from Mycenae and Argos, declare that they will prevent the imminent crimes, and speak of Tantalus' old offences.\nTantalus in art.\nTo date all known depictions of Tantalus in ancient art date from the fifth century BCE onwards. \nTantalus is depicted on the name vase of the Underworld Painter \u2013 an apulian red-figure volute-krater illustrating the palace of Hades and Persephone surrounded by scenes from the underworld. He is pictured in the lower right corner of the painting, pointing to a rock hanging over him from which he is attempting to flee. This vase, and the painting of Polygnotes described by Pausanias are to date the only known artistic representations of the punishment of the rock.\nHe is also shown in an underworld scene on the back lower register of the Velletri Sarcophagus, to the right of the central carving of Charon in the boat which escorts the departed to the underworld. Tantalus is shown naked, standing in water which reaches up to his knees. The position in which he is holding his hands suggests that he is attempted to raise to his mouth water which he has scooped up in his cupped hands.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38855", "revid": "40567980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38855", "title": "Battle of Trafalgar", "text": "1805 battle of the Trafalgar campaign\nThe Battle of Trafalgar was a naval engagement that took place on 21\u00a0October 1805 between the Royal Navy and a combined fleet of the French and Spanish navies during the War of the Third Coalition. As part of Napoleon's planned invasion of the United Kingdom, the French and Spanish fleets combined to take control of the English Channel and provide the Grande Arm\u00e9e safe passage. The allied fleet, under the command of French admiral Pierre-Charles Villeneuve, sailed from the port of C\u00e1diz in the south of Spain on 18\u00a0October 1805. They encountered a British fleet under Lord Nelson, recently assembled to meet this threat, in the Atlantic Ocean along the southwest coast of Spain, off Cape Trafalgar.\nNelson was outnumbered, with 27\u00a0British ships of the line to 33\u00a0French and Spanish, including the largest warship in either fleet, the Spanish \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\". To address this imbalance, Nelson sailed his fleet directly at the allied battle line's flank in two columns, hoping to break the line into pieces. Villeneuve had worried that Nelson might attempt this tactic, but for various reasons, failed to prepare for it. To add to the French crisis, their crews were inexperienced and poorly trained. The British plan worked almost perfectly; Nelson's columns split the Franco-Spanish fleet in three, isolating the rear half from Villeneuve's flag aboard . The allied vanguard sailed off while it attempted to turn around, giving the British temporary superiority over the remainder of their fleet. In the ensuing fierce battle 18 allied ships were captured or destroyed, while the British lost none.\nThe offensive exposed the leading British ships to intense crossfire as they approached the Franco-Spanish lines. Nelson's own led the front column and was almost knocked out of action. Nelson was shot by a French musketeer during the battle, and died shortly before it ended. Villeneuve was captured along with his flagship \"Bucentaure\". He attended Nelson's funeral while a captive on parole in Britain. The most senior Spanish commander, Admiral Federico Gravina, escaped with the surviving third of the Franco-Spanish fleet; he died six months later of wounds sustained during the battle. The victory confirmed British naval supremacy, and was achieved in part through Nelson's departure from prevailing naval tactical orthodoxy.\nBackground.\nIn 1805, the First French Empire, under Napoleon Bonaparte, was the dominant military land power on the European continent, while the British Royal Navy controlled the seas. During the course of the war, the British imposed a naval blockade on France, which affected trade and kept the French from fully mobilising their naval resources. Despite several successful evasions of the blockade by the French navy, it failed to inflict a major defeat upon the British, who were able to attack French interests at home and abroad with relative ease.\nWhen the Third Coalition declared war on France, after the short-lived Peace of Amiens, Napoleon renewed his determination to invade Britain. To allow his invasion flotilla to reach England, he needed to wrest control of the English Channel from the Royal Navy.\nThe main French fleets were at Brest in Brittany and at Toulon on the Mediterranean coast. Other ports on the French Atlantic coast harboured smaller squadrons. France and Spain were allied, so the Spanish fleet based in C\u00e1diz and Ferrol was also available.\nThe British possessed an experienced and well-trained corps of naval officers. By contrast, some of the best officers in the French navy had been executed or had left the service during the early part of the French Revolution.\nVice-Admiral Pierre-Charles Villeneuve had taken command of the French Mediterranean fleet following the death of Latouche Treville. There had been more competent officers, but they had either been employed elsewhere or had fallen from Napoleon's favour. Villeneuve had shown a distinct reluctance for facing Nelson and the Royal Navy after the French defeat at the Battle of the Nile in 1798.\nNapoleon's naval plan in 1805 was for the French and Spanish fleets in the Mediterranean and C\u00e1diz to break through the blockade and join forces in the Caribbean. They would then return, assist the fleet in Brest to emerge from the blockade, and together clear the English Channel of Royal Navy ships, ensuring a safe passage for the invasion barges.\nPursuit of Villeneuve.\nEarly in 1805, Vice Admiral Lord Nelson commanded the British fleet blockading the Mediterranean port of Toulon. Unlike William Cornwallis, who maintained a close blockade off Brest with the Channel Fleet, Nelson adopted a loose blockade in hope of luring the French out to battle, saying, \"to be able to get at the enemy you must let \"them\" come out to \"you\", if \"you\" cannot get at \"them\".\" However, Villeneuve's fleet successfully evaded Nelson's when the British were blown off station by storms. Nelson commenced a search of the Mediterranean, supposing that the French intended to make for Egypt, but Villeneuve instead took his fleet through the Strait of Gibraltar, rendezvoused with the Spanish fleet in C\u00e1diz, and sailed as planned for the Caribbean. Once Nelson realised that the French were crossing the Atlantic, he set off in pursuit. He missed them by just days in the West Indies as a result of false information.\nC\u00e1diz.\nHaving lured the British to the West Indies, Villeneuve returned from the Caribbean to Europe, intending to break the blockade at Brest. Nelson, still in fear for Egypt, made to return to the Mediterranean. The fast sailing corvette taking word of his plans back to the admiralty spotted the French heading further north. On receiving this intelligence Lord Barham immediately ordered Admiral Cornwallis to combine his squadron with that of Vice Admiral Calder off Ferrol and to stretch out thirty to forty leagues into the Atlantic to block the French from entering the Channel.\nCalder intercepted the French resulting in an inconclusive engagement during the Battle of Cape Finisterre in which two of the Spanish ships were captured. Villeneuve abandoned his plan and sailed back to Ferrol in northern Spain. There he received orders from Napoleon to return to Brest according to the main plan.\nNapoleon's invasion plans for Britain depended on having a sufficiently large number of ships of the line protecting his port of Boulogne on the English Channel. This would require Villeneuve's force of 33\u00a0ships to join Vice-Admiral Ganteaume's force of 21\u00a0ships at Brest, along with a squadron of five ships under Captain Allemand, which would have given him a combined force of 59\u00a0ships of the line.\nWhen Villeneuve set sail from Ferrol on 10\u00a0August, he was under orders from Napoleon to sail northward toward Brest. Instead, he worried that the British were observing his manoeuvres, so on 11 August, he sailed southward towards C\u00e1diz on the southwestern coast of Spain. With no sign of Villeneuve's fleet, on 25\u00a0August, the three French army corps' invasion force near Boulogne broke camp and marched into Germany, where it was later engaged. This ended the immediate threat of invasion.\nThe same month, Admiral Lord Nelson returned home to Britain after two years of duty at sea. He remained ashore for 25\u00a0days and was warmly received by his countrymen. Word reached Britain on 2\u00a0September about the combined French and Spanish fleet in C\u00e1diz harbour. Nelson had to wait until 15\u00a0September before his ship, , was ready to sail.\nOn 15\u00a0August, Cornwallis decided to detach 20\u00a0ships of the line from the fleet guarding the English Channel to sail southward to engage the French and Spanish forces in Spain, leaving the Channel with only 11\u00a0ships of the line. The detached force formed the nucleus of the British fleet at Trafalgar. This fleet, under the command of Vice-Admiral Calder, reached C\u00e1diz on 15 September. Nelson joined the fleet on 28 September to take command.\nHoping to lure the combined Franco-Spanish force out from C\u00e1diz harbor and engage it in a decisive battle, Nelson kept his main force out of sight approximately offshore and sent a squadron of frigates (faster, but too small for the line of battle) to keep watch on the harbour. This was led by Captain Blackwood aboard , with five frigates, a schooner, and a brig.\nSupply situation.\nNelson's fleet badly needed provisioning. On 2\u00a0October, five ships of the line, , , , , , and the frigate were dispatched to Gibraltar under Rear-Admiral Sir Thomas Louis for supplies.\nThese ships were later diverted for convoy duty in the Mediterranean, although Nelson had expected them to return. Similarly, under Captain Richard Goodwin Keats had been sent to the dockyard for a re-fit after four years at sea, including the chase of Villeneuve, and was expected to return to the fleet where Keats was to be Nelson's second, but the ship was not released in time. Other British ships continued to arrive, and by 15\u00a0October the fleet was up to full strength for the battle. Nelson also lost Calder's flagship, the 98-gun , which he sent home as Calder had been recalled by the Admiralty to face a court-martial for his apparent lack of aggression during the engagement off Cape Finisterre on 22\u00a0July.\nMeanwhile, Villeneuve's fleet in C\u00e1diz was also suffering from a serious supply shortage that could not be easily rectified by the cash-poor French. The blockade maintained by the British fleet had made it difficult for the Franco-Spanish allies to obtain stores, and their ships were ill-equipped. Villeneuve's ships were also more than two thousand men short of the force needed to sail. These were not the only problems faced by the Franco-Spanish fleet. The main French ships of the line had been kept in harbour for years by the British blockade with only brief sorties. The French crews included few experienced sailors, and, as most of the crew had to be taught the elements of seamanship on the few occasions when they got to sea, gunnery was neglected. The hasty voyage across the Atlantic and back used up vital supplies. Villeneuve's supply situation began to improve in October, but news of Nelson's arrival made Villeneuve reluctant to leave port. His captains had held a vote on the matter and decided to stay in harbour.\nOn 16\u00a0September, Napoleon gave orders for the French and Spanish ships at C\u00e1diz to put to sea at the first favourable opportunity, join with seven Spanish ships of the line then at Cartagena, go to Naples and land the soldiers they carried to reinforce his troops there, then fight decisively if they met a numerically inferior British fleet.\nFleets.\nBritish.\nOn 21\u00a0October, Admiral Nelson had\u00a027 ships of the line with cannons, and a total of crewmen and marines under his command. Nelson's flagship, , captained by Thomas Masterman Hardy, was one of three 100-gun first-rates in his fleet. He also had four 98-gun second-rates and 20\u00a0third-rates. One of the third-rates was an 80-gun vessel, and 16 were 74-gun vessels. The remaining three were 64-gun ships, which were being phased out of the Royal Navy at the time of the battle. Nelson also had four frigates of 38 or 36\u00a0guns, a 12-gun schooner and a 10-gun cutter.\nFranco-Spanish.\nAgainst Nelson, Vice-Admiral Villeneuve, sailing on his flagship \"Bucentaure\", fielded 33 ships of the line, including some of the largest in the world at the time. The Spanish contributed four first-rates to the fleet \u2013 three of these ships, one at 130\u00a0guns (\"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\") and two at 112\u00a0guns (\"Pr\u00edncipe de Asturias\", \"Santa Ana\"), were much larger than anything under Nelson's command. The fourth first-rate carried 100\u00a0guns. The fleet had six 80-gun third-rates (four French and two Spanish), and one Spanish 64-gun third-rate. The remaining 22\u00a0third-rates were 74-gun vessels, of which 14\u00a0were French and eight Spanish. In total, the Spanish contributed 15\u00a0ships of the line and the French\u00a018 along with some men and marines manning cannons. The fleet also included five 40-gun frigates and two 18-gun brigs, all French.\nBattle.\nNelson's plan.\nThe prevailing tactical orthodoxy at the time involved manoeuvring to approach the enemy fleet in a single line of battle and then engaging broadside in parallel lines. In previous times, fleets had usually engaged in a mixed m\u00eal\u00e9e of chaotic one-on-one battles. One reason for the development of the line of battle formation was to facilitate control of the fleet: if all the ships were in line, signalling during battle became possible. The line also allowed either side to disengage by breaking away in formation; if the opponent chose to continue, their line would be broken as well. This often led to inconclusive battles, or allowed the losing side to minimise its losses. Facing a numerically superior Franco-Spanish line, Nelson wanted to break it into a chaotic m\u00eal\u00e9e which would force his opponents to fight his well-trained crews ship to ship.\nNelson's solution was to cut the opposing line in three. Approaching in two columns sailing perpendicular to the Franco-Spanish fleet's line, one towards the centre of the opposing line and one towards the trailing end, his ships would surround the middle third, and force them to fight to the end. Nelson hoped specifically to cut the line just in front of the French flagship, \"Bucentaure\"; the isolated ships in front of the break would not be able to see the flagship's signals, which he hoped would take them out of combat while they re-formed. This echoed the tactics used by Admiral Duncan at the Battle of Camperdown and Admiral Jervis at the Battle of Cape St.\u00a0Vincent, both in 1797.\nThe plan had three principal advantages:\nThe main drawback of attacking head-on was that as the leading British ships approached, the Franco-Spanish Combined Fleet would be able to direct raking broadside fire at their bows, to which they would be unable to reply. To lessen the time the fleet was exposed to this danger, Nelson had his ships make all available sail (including stunsails), yet another departure from the norm. He was also well aware that French and Spanish gunners were ill-trained and would have difficulty firing accurately from a moving gun platform. The Combined Fleet was sailing across a heavy swell, causing the ships to roll heavily and exacerbate the problem. Nelson's plan was a carefully calculated gamble.\nDuring the blockade off the coast of Spain in October, Nelson instructed his captains, over two dinners aboard \"Victory\", on his plan for the approaching battle. In an animated conversation with his favourite captain, Richard Goodwin Keats, who was expected to be his second in the forthcoming battle, Nelson explained a refined battle plan whilst the two were walking in the garden of Merton in August\u00a01805. The order of sailing, in which the fleet was arranged when the opposing fleet was first sighted, was to be the order of the ensuing action so that no time would be wasted in forming two lines. The first, led by his second-in-command Vice-Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood, was to sail into the rear of the Franco-Spanish line, while the other, led by Nelson, was to sail into the centre and vanguard. In preparation for the battle, Nelson ordered the ships of his fleet to be painted in a distinctive yellow and black pattern (later known as the Nelson Chequer) that would make them easy to distinguish from their opponents.\nNelson was careful to point out that something had to be left to chance. Nothing is sure in a sea battle, so he left his captains free from all hampering rules by telling them that \"No captain can do very wrong if he places his ship alongside that of the enemy.\" In short, circumstances would dictate the execution, subject to the guiding rule that the Franco-Spanish fleet's rear was to be cut off and superior force concentrated on that part of the line.\nAdmiral Villeneuve himself expressed his belief that Nelson would use some sort of unorthodox attack, presciently speculating that Nelson would drive right at his line. But his long game of cat and mouse with Nelson had worn him down, and he was suffering from a loss of nerve. Fearing that his inexperienced officers would be unable to maintain formation in more than one group, he chose to keep the single line that became Nelson's target.\nDeparture.\nThe Combined Fleet of French and Spanish warships anchored in C\u00e1diz under the leadership of Admiral Villeneuve was in disarray. On 16 September 1805 Villeneuve received orders from Napoleon to sail the Combined Fleet from C\u00e1diz to Naples. At first, Villeneuve was optimistic about returning to the Mediterranean, but soon had second thoughts. A war council was held aboard his flagship, , on 8\u00a0October. While some of the French captains wished to obey Napoleon's orders, the Spanish captains and other French officers, including Villeneuve, thought it best to remain in C\u00e1diz. Villeneuve changed his mind yet again on 18\u00a0October 1805, ordering the Combined Fleet to sail immediately even though there were only very light winds.\nThe sudden change was prompted by a letter Villeneuve had received on 18\u00a0October, informing him that Vice-Admiral Fran\u00e7ois Rosily had arrived in Madrid with orders to take command of the Combined Fleet. Stung by the prospect of being disgraced before the fleet, Villeneuve resolved to go to sea before his successor could reach C\u00e1diz. At the same time, he received intelligence that a detachment of six British ships (Admiral Louis' squadron), had docked at Gibraltar, thus weakening the British fleet. This was used as the pretext for sudden change.\nThe weather, however, suddenly turned calm following a week of gales. This slowed the progress of the fleet leaving the harbour, giving the British plenty of warning. Villeneuve had drawn up plans to form a force of four squadrons, each containing both French and Spanish ships. Following their earlier vote on 8\u00a0October to stay put, some captains were reluctant to leave C\u00e1diz, and as a result they failed to follow Villeneuve's orders closely and the fleet straggled out of the harbour in no particular formation.\nIt took most of 20\u00a0October for Villeneuve to get his fleet organised; it eventually set sail in three columns for the Straits of Gibraltar to the southeast. That same evening, spotted a force of 18 British ships of the line in pursuit. The fleet began to prepare for battle and during the night, they were ordered into a single line. The following day, Nelson's fleet of 27\u00a0ships of the line and four frigates was spotted in pursuit from the northwest with the wind behind it. Villeneuve again ordered his fleet into three columns, but soon changed his mind and restored a single line. The result was a sprawling, uneven formation.\nAt 5:40 a.m. on 21\u00a0October, the British were about 21\u00a0miles (34\u00a0km) to the northwest of Cape Trafalgar, with the Franco-Spanish fleet between the British and the Cape. About 6 a.m., Nelson gave the order to prepare for battle. At 8 a.m., the British frigate \"Euryalus\", which had been keeping watch on the Combined Fleet overnight, observed the British fleet still \"forming the lines\" in which it would attack.\nAt 8 a.m., Villeneuve ordered the fleet to \"wear together\" (turn about) and return to C\u00e1diz. This reversed the order of the allied line, placing the rear division under Rear-Admiral Pierre Dumanoir le Pelley in the vanguard. The wind became contrary at this point, often shifting direction. The very light wind rendered manoeuvring virtually impossible for all but the most expert seamen. The inexperienced crews had difficulty with the changing conditions, and it took nearly an hour and a half for Villeneuve's order to be completed. The French and Spanish fleet now formed an uneven, angular crescent, with the slower ships generally to leeward and closer to the shore.\nBy 11 a.m., Nelson's entire fleet was visible to Villeneuve, drawn up in two parallel columns. The two fleets would be within range of each other within an hour. Villeneuve was concerned at this point about forming up a line, as his ships were unevenly spaced in an irregular formation drawn out nearly 5\u00a0miles (8\u00a0km) long as Nelson's fleet approached.\nAs the British drew closer, they could see that the combined French and Spanish fleet was not sailing in a tight order, but in irregular groups. Nelson could not immediately make out the French flagship as the French and Spanish were not flying command pennants.\nNelson was outnumbered and outgunned, with the opposing fleet totalling nearly men and guns to Nelson's men and guns. The Franco-Spanish fleet also had six more ships of the line, and so could more readily combine their fire. There was no way for some of Nelson's ships to avoid being \"doubled on\" or even \"trebled on\".\nAs the two fleets drew closer, anxiety began to build among officers and sailors; one British sailor described the approach thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;During this momentous preparation, the human mind had ample time for meditation, for it was evident that the fate of England rested on this battle.\nCombat.\nThe battle progressed largely according to Nelson's plan. At 11:45, Nelson sent the flag signal, \"England expects that every man will do his duty\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His Lordship came to me on the poop, and after ordering certain signals to be made, about a quarter to noon, he said, \"Mr.\u00a0Pasco, I wish to say to the fleet, \"'England confides that every man will do his duty'\"\" and he added \"You must be quick, for I have one more to make which is for close action.\" I replied, \"If your Lordship will permit me to substitute 'expects' for 'confides' the signal will soon be completed, because the word 'expects' is in the vocabulary, and 'confides' must be spelt,\" His Lordship replied, in haste, and with seeming satisfaction, \"That will do, Pasco, make it directly.\"\nThe term \"England\" was widely used at the time to refer to the United Kingdom; the British fleet included significant contingents from Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. Unlike the photographic depiction above, this signal would have been shown on the mizzen mast only and would have required 12\u00a0lifts.\nAs the battle opened, the French and Spanish were in a ragged curved line headed north. As planned, the British fleet was approaching the Franco-Spanish line in two columns. Leading the northern, windward column in \"Victory\" was Nelson, while Collingwood in the 100-gun led the second, leeward, column. The two British columns approached from the west at nearly a right angle to the allied line. Nelson led his column into a feint toward the van of the Franco-Spanish fleet and then abruptly turned toward the actual point of attack. Collingwood altered the course of his column slightly so that the two lines converged at this line of attack.\nJust before his column engaged the allied forces, Collingwood said to his officers, \"Now, gentlemen, let us do something today which the world may talk of hereafter.\" Because the winds were very light during the battle, all the ships were moving extremely slowly, and the foremost British ships were under heavy fire from several of the allied ships for almost an hour before their own guns could bear.\nAt noon, Villeneuve sent the signal \"engage the enemy\", and fired her first trial shot at \"Royal Sovereign\". \"Royal Sovereign\" had all sails out and, having recently had her bottom cleaned, outran the rest of the British fleet. As she approached the allied line, she came under fire from \"Fougueux\", , \"San Justo\", and \"San Leandro\", before breaking the line just astern of Admiral Alava's flagship , into which she fired a devastating double-shotted raking broadside. On board \"Victory\", Nelson pointed to \"Royal Sovereign\" and said, \"See how that noble fellow Collingwood carries his ship into action!\" At approximately the same moment, Collingwood remarked to his captain, Edward Rotheram, \"What would Nelson give to be here?\"\nThe second ship in the British lee column, , was engaged by , \"Achille\", , and \"Fougueux\"; she was soon completely dismasted, unable to manoeuvre and largely unable to fight, as her sails blinded her batteries, but kept flying her flag for 45\u00a0minutes until the following British ships came to her rescue.\nFor 40\u00a0minutes, \"Victory\" was under fire from , \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\", , and \"Neptune\"; although many shots went astray, others killed and wounded a number of her crew and shot her wheel away, so that she had to be steered from her tiller belowdecks, all before she could respond. At 12:45, \"Victory\" cut the Franco-Spanish line between Villeneuve's flagship \"Bucentaure\" and \"Redoutable\"; she came close to \"Bucentaure\" with her guns loaded with double or treble shots each, and her 68-pounder carronades loaded with 500 musketballs, she unleashed a devastating treble-shotted raking broadside through \"Bucentaure\"'s stern which killed and wounded some 200\u2013400 men of the ship's 800-man complement and dismasted the ship. This volley of gunfire from the \"Victory\" immediately knocked the French flagship out of action. Villeneuve thought that boarding would take place, and with the Eagle of his ship in hand, told his men, \"I will throw it onto the enemy ship and we will take it back there!\" However, \"Victory\" engaged the 74-gun \"Redoutable\"; \"Bucentaure\" was left to the next three ships of the British windward column: , , and .\nA general m\u00eal\u00e9e ensued. \"Victory\" locked masts with the French \"Redoutable,\" whose crew, including a strong infantry corps (with three captains and four lieutenants), gathered for an attempt to board and seize \"Victory\". A musket bullet fired from the mizzentop of \"Redoutable\" struck Nelson in the left shoulder, passed through his spine at the sixth and seventh thoracic vertebrae, and lodged two inches below his right scapula in the muscles of his back. Nelson exclaimed, \"They finally succeeded, I am dead.\" He was carried below decks.\n\"Victory\"'s gunners were called on deck to fight boarders, and she ceased firing. The gunners were forced back below decks by French grenades. As the French were preparing to board \"Victory\", \"Temeraire\", the second ship in the British windward column, approached from the starboard bow of \"Redoutable\" and fired on the exposed French crew with a carronade, causing many casualties.\nAt 13:55, the French Captain Lucas of \"Redoutable\", with 99\u00a0fit men out of 643 and severely wounded himself, surrendered. The French \"Bucentaure\" was isolated by \"Victory\" and \"Temeraire\", and then engaged by \"Neptune\", , and \"Conqueror\"; similarly, \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\" was isolated and overwhelmed, surrendering after three hours.\nAs more and more British ships entered the battle, the ships of the allied centre and rear were gradually overwhelmed. The allied van, after long remaining quiescent, made a futile demonstration and then sailed away. During the combat, Gravina was wounded, while Dionisio Alcal\u00e1-Galiano and Cosme Dami\u00e1n Churruca \u2013 commanders of the \"Bahama\" and , respectively \u2013 were killed after ordering their ships not to surrender. Gravina died from his wounds months later. The British took 20\u00a0vessels of the Franco-Spanish fleet and lost none. Among the captured French ships were \"Aigle\", , , \"Bucentaure\", \"Fougueux\", , \"Redoutable\", and . The Spanish ships taken were \"Argonauta\", \"Bahama\", \"Monarca\", \"Neptuno\", , \"San Ildefonso\", \"San Juan Nepomuceno\", \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\", and \"Santa Ana\". Of these, \"Redoutable\" sank, and \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\" and \"Argonauta\" were scuttled by the British. \"Achille\" exploded, \"Intr\u00e9pide\" and \"San August\u00edn\" burned, and \"Aigle\", \"Berwick\", \"Fougueux\", and \"Monarca\" were wrecked in a gale following the battle.\nAs Nelson lay dying, he ordered the fleet to anchor, as a storm was predicted. However, when the storm blew up, many of the severely damaged ships sank or ran aground on the shoals. A few of them were recaptured, some by the French and Spanish prisoners overcoming the small prize crews, others by ships sallying from C\u00e1diz. Surgeon William Beatty heard Nelson murmur, \"Thank God I have done my duty\"; when he returned, Nelson's voice had faded, and his pulse was very weak. He looked up as Beatty took his pulse, then closed his eyes. Nelson's chaplain, Alexander Scott, who remained by Nelson as he died, recorded his last words as \"God and my country.\" It has been suggested by Nelson historian Craig Cabell that Nelson was actually reciting his own prayer as he fell into his death coma, as the words 'God' and 'my country' are closely linked therein. Nelson died at half-past four, three hours after being hit.\nTowards the end of the battle, and with the combined fleet being overwhelmed, the still relatively un-engaged portion of the van under Rear-Admiral Dumanoir Le Pelley tried to come to the assistance of the collapsing centre. After failing to fight his way through, he decided to break off the engagement, and led four French ships, his flagship the 80-gun , the 74-gun ships , and away from the fighting. He headed at first for the Straits of Gibraltar, intending to carry out Villeneuve's original orders and make for Toulon. On 22\u00a0October he changed his mind, remembering a powerful British squadron under Rear-Admiral Thomas Louis was patrolling the straits, and headed north, hoping to reach one of the French Atlantic ports. With a storm gathering in strength off the Spanish coast, he sailed westwards to clear Cape St. Vincent, prior to heading north-west, swinging eastwards across the Bay of Biscay, and aiming to reach the French port at Rochefort. These four ships remained at large until their encounter with and attempt to chase a British frigate brought them in range of a British squadron under Sir Richard Strachan, which captured them all on 4\u00a0November 1805 at the Battle of Cape Ortegal.\nCosmao and MacDonnell sortie.\nOnly eleven allied ships escaped to C\u00e1diz, and, of those, only five were considered seaworthy. The seriously wounded Admiral Gravina passed command of the remainder of the fleet over to Commodore Julien Cosmao on 23 October. From shore, the allied commanders could see an opportunity for a rescue mission. Cosmao claimed in his report that the rescue plan was entirely his idea, but Vice-Admiral Esca\u00f1o recorded a meeting of Spanish and French commodores at which a planned rescue was discussed and agreed upon. Enrique MacDonnell and Cosmao were of equal rank and both raised commodore's pennants before hoisting anchor. Both sets of mariners were determined to make an attempt to recapture some of the prizes. Cosmao ordered the rigging of his ship, the 74-gun , to be repaired and reinforced her crew (which had been depleted by casualties from the battle), with sailors from the French frigate . Taking advantage of a favourable northwesterly wind, \"Pluton\", the 80-gun \"Neptune\" and \"Indomptable\", the Spanish 100-gun and 74-gun , together with five French frigates and two brigs, sailed out of the harbour towards the British.\nThe British cast off the prizes.\nSoon after leaving port, the wind shifted to west-southwest, raising a heavy sea with the result that most of the British prizes broke their tow ropes, and drifting far to leeward, were only partially resecured. The combined squadron came in sight at noon, causing Collingwood to summon his most battle-ready ships to meet the threat. In doing so, he ordered them to cast off towing their prizes. He had formed a defensive line of ten ships by three o'clock in the afternoon and approached the Franco-Spanish squadron, covering the remainder of their prizes which stood out to sea. The Franco-Spanish squadron, numerically inferior, chose not to approach within gunshot and then declined to attack. Collingwood also chose not to seek action, and in the confusion of the powerful storm, the French frigates managed to retake two Spanish ships of the line which had been cast off by their British captors, the 112-gun \"Santa Ana\" and 80-gun , taking them in tow and making for C\u00e1diz. On being taken in tow, the Spanish crews rose up against their British prize crews, putting them to work as prisoners.\nDespite this initial success the Franco-Spanish force, hampered by battle damage, struggled in the heavy seas. \"Neptuno\" was eventually wrecked off Rota in the gale, while \"Santa Ana\" reached port. The French 80-gun ship \"Indomptable\" was wrecked on the 24th or 25th off the town of Rota on the northwest point of the bay of C\u00e1diz. At the time \"Indomptable\" had 1,200 men on board, but no more than 100 were saved. \"San Francisco de As\u00eds\" was driven ashore in C\u00e1diz Bay, near Fort Santa Catalina, although her crew was saved. \"Rayo\", an old three-deck vessel with more than 50 years of service, anchored off Sanl\u00facar, a few leagues to the northwest of Rota. There, she lost her masts, already damaged in the battle. Heartened by the approach of the squadron, the French crew of the former flagship \"Bucentaure\" also rose up and retook the ship from the British prize crew but she was wrecked later on 23\u00a0October. escaped from the British ship , but was wrecked off the Port of Santa Mar\u00eda on 23\u00a0October; while the French prisoners on \"Berwick\" cut the tow cables, but caused her to founder off Sanl\u00facar on 22\u00a0October. The crew of rose up and managed to sail into C\u00e1diz.\nObserving that some of the leewardmost of the prizes were escaping towards the Spanish coast, \"Leviathan\" asked for and was granted permission by Collingwood to try to retrieve the prizes and bring them to anchor. \"Leviathan\" chased , but on 24\u00a0October she came across \"Rayo\", dismasted but still flying Spanish colours, at anchor off the shoals of Sanl\u00facar. At this point the 74-gun , en route from Gibraltar under Captain Pulteney Malcolm, was seen approaching from the south on the larboard tack with a moderate breeze from northwest-by-north and steered directly for the Spanish three-decker. At about ten o'clock, just as \"Monarca\" had got within little more than a mile of \"Rayo\", \"Leviathan\" fired a warning shot wide of \"Monarca\", to oblige her to drop anchor. The shot fell between \"Monarca\" and \"Rayo\". The latter, conceiving that it was probably intended for her, hauled down her colours, and was taken by HMS \"Donegal\", who anchored alongside and took off the prisoners. \"Leviathan\" resumed her pursuit of \"Monarca\", eventually catching up and forcing her to surrender. On boarding her, her British captors found that she was in a sinking state, and so removed the British prize crew, and nearly all of her original Spanish crew members. The nearly empty \"Monarca\" parted her cable and was wrecked during the night. Despite the efforts of her British prize crew, \"Rayo\" was driven onshore on 26\u00a0October and wrecked, with the loss of 25\u00a0men. The remainder of the prize crew were made prisoners by the Spanish.\nAftermath.\nIn the aftermath of the storm, Collingwood wrote to the British Admiralty on November 1805:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The condition of our own ships was such that it was very doubtful what would be their fate. Many a time I would have given the whole group of our capture, to ensure our own... I can only say that in my life I never saw such efforts as were made to save these [prize] ships, and would rather fight another battle than pass through such a week as followed it...\nOn balance, the allied counter-attack achieved little. In forcing the British to suspend their repairs to defend themselves, it influenced Collingwood's decision to sink or set fire to the most damaged of his remaining prizes. Cosmao retook two Spanish ships of the line, but it cost him one French and two Spanish vessels to do so. Fearing their loss, the British burnt or sank \"Sant\u00edsima Trinidad\", \"Argonauta\", \"San Antonio\", and . Only four of the British prizes, the French \"Swiftsure\" and the Spanish \"Bahama\", and \"San Juan Nepomuceno\" survived to be taken to Britain. After the end of the battle and storm only nine ships of the line were left in C\u00e1diz.\nSpanish military garrisons and civilians set out to rescue survivors from the numerous shipwrecks scattered along the Andalusian coast. British prize crews were captured and given good treatment. On 27\u00a0October, Collingwood offered the governor of C\u00e1diz to put his Spanish wounded prisoners ashore and set them free. The governor and Gravina offered in exchange to release their British prisoners, who boarded the British fleet. The French later joined this humanitarian agreement.\nThe disparity in losses has been attributed by some historians less to Nelson's daring tactics than to the difference in fighting readiness of the two fleets. Nelson's fleet was made up of ships of the line which had spent a considerable amount of sea time during the months of blockades of French ports, whilst the French fleet had generally been at anchor in port. However, Villeneuve's fleet had just spent months at sea crossing the Atlantic twice, which supports the proposition that the main difference between the two fleets' combat effectiveness was the morale of the leaders. The daring tactics employed by Nelson were to ensure a strategically decisive result. The results vindicated his naval judgement.\nResults.\nWhen Rosily arrived in C\u00e1diz, he found only five French ships, rather than the 18 he was expecting. The surviving ships remained bottled up in C\u00e1diz until 1808 when Napoleon invaded Spain. The French ships were then seized by the Spanish forces and put into service against France. HMS \"Victory\" made her way to Gibraltar for repairs, carrying Nelson's body. She put into Rosia Bay, Gibraltar and after emergency repairs were carried out, returned to Britain. Many of the injured crew were taken ashore at Gibraltar and treated in the Naval Hospital. Men who subsequently died from injuries sustained at the battle are buried in or near the Trafalgar Cemetery, at the south end of Main Street, Gibraltar. One Royal Marine officer, Captain Charles Adair, was killed on board \"Victory\", and Royal Marine Lieutenant Lewis Buckle Reeve was seriously wounded and laid next to Nelson.\nThe battle took place the day after the Battle of Ulm, and Napoleon did not hear about it for weeks\u2014the Grande Arm\u00e9e had left Boulogne to fight Britain's allies before they could combine their armies. He had tight control over the Paris media and kept the defeat a closely guarded secret for over a month, at which point newspapers proclaimed it to have been a tremendous victory. In a counter-propaganda move, a fabricated text declaring the battle a \"spectacular victory\" for the French and Spanish was published in \"Herald\" and attributed to \"Le Moniteur Universel\".\nVice-Admiral Villeneuve was taken prisoner aboard his flagship and taken back to Britain. After his parole in 1806, he returned to France, where he was found dead in his inn room during a stop on the way to Paris, with six stab wounds in the chest from a dining knife. It was officially recorded that he had committed suicide. Despite the British victory over the Franco-Spanish navies, Trafalgar had negligible impact on the remainder of the War of the Third Coalition. Less than two months later, Napoleon decisively defeated the Third Coalition at the Battle of Austerlitz, knocking Austria out of the war and forcing the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire. Although Trafalgar meant France could no longer challenge Britain at sea, Napoleon proceeded to establish the Continental System in an attempt to deny Britain trade with the continent. The Napoleonic Wars continued for another ten years after Trafalgar. Nelson's body was preserved in a barrel of brandy for the trip home to a hero's funeral.\nConsequences.\nFollowing the battle, the Royal Navy was never again seriously challenged by the French fleet in a large-scale engagement. Napoleon had already abandoned his plans of invasion before the battle and they were never revived. The battle did not mean, however, that the French naval challenge to Britain was over. First, as the French control over the continent expanded, Britain had to take active steps with the Battle of Copenhagen in 1807 and elsewhere in 1808 to prevent the ships of smaller European navies from falling into French hands. This effort was largely successful, but did not end the French threat as Napoleon instituted a large-scale shipbuilding programme that had produced a fleet of 80\u00a0ships of the line at the time of his fall from power in 1814, with more under construction. However, despite constituting a substantial fleet in being, these had no impact on Britain's naval superiority throughout the conflict. For almost 10\u00a0years after Trafalgar, the Royal Navy maintained a close blockade of French bases and observed the growth of the French fleet. In the end, Napoleon's Empire was destroyed by land before his ambitious naval build-up could be completed. \nThe Royal Navy proceeded to dominate the sea until the Second World War. Although the victory at Trafalgar was typically given as the reason at the time, modern historical analyses suggest that relative economic strength was an important underlying cause of British naval mastery.\nNelson became \u2013 and remains \u2013 Britain's greatest naval war hero, and an inspiration to the Royal Navy, yet his unorthodox tactics were seldom emulated by later generations. The first monument to be erected in Britain to commemorate Nelson may be that raised on Glasgow Green in 1806, albeit possibly preceded by a monument at Taynuilt, near Oban in Scotland dated 1805, both also commemorating the many Scots crew and captains at the battle. The \"Nelson Monument\" on Glasgow Green was designed by David Hamilton and paid for by public subscription. Around the base are the names of his major victories: Aboukir (1798), Copenhagen (1801) and Trafalgar (1805). The Nelson Monument overlooking Portsmouth was built in 1807\u201308 with money subscribed by sailors and marines who served at Trafalgar. In 1808, Nelson's Pillar was erected by leading members of the Anglo-Irish aristocracy in Dublin to commemorate Nelson and his achievements (between 10% and 20% of the sailors at Trafalgar had been from Ireland), and remained until it was destroyed in a bombing by \"Old IRA\" members in 1966. Nelson's Monument in Edinburgh was built between 1807 and 1815 in the form of an upturned telescope, and in 1853 a time ball was added which still drops at noon GMT to give a time signal to ships in Leith and the Firth of Forth. In summer this coincides with the \"one o'clock gun\" being fired. The Britannia Monument in Great Yarmouth was raised by 1819. Nelson's Column, Montreal began public subscriptions soon after news of the victory at Trafalgar arrived; the column was completed in the autumn of 1809 and still stands in Place Jacques Cartier. A statue of Lord Nelson stood in Bridgetown, Barbados, in what was also once known as Trafalgar Square, from 1813 to 2020.\nLondon's Trafalgar Square was named in honour of Nelson's victory. At the centre of the square there is the Nelson's Column, with a statue of Nelson on top. It was finished in 1843.\n100th anniversary.\nIn 1905, there were events up and down the country to commemorate the centenary, although none were attended by any member of the Royal Family, apparently to avoid upsetting the French, with whom the United Kingdom had recently entered the \"Entente cordiale\". King Edward VII did support the \"Nelson Centenary Memorial Fund\" of the British and Foreign Sailors Society, which sold Trafalgar centenary souvenirs marked with the Royal cypher. A gala was held on 21\u00a0October at the Royal Albert Hall in aid of the fund, which included a specially commissioned film by Alfred John West entitled \"Our Navy\". The event ended with \"God Save the King\" and \"La Marseillaise\". The first performance of Sir Henry Wood's \"Fantasia on British Sea Songs\" occurred on the same day at a special Promenade Concert.\n200th anniversary.\nIn 2005 a series of events around the UK, part of the \"Sea Britain\" theme, marked the bicentenary of the Battle of Trafalgar. The 200th\u00a0anniversary of the battle was also commemorated on six occasions in Portsmouth during June and July, at St Paul's Cathedral (where Nelson is entombed), in Trafalgar Square in London in October (\"T Square 200\"), and across the UK.\nOn 28\u00a0June, Queen Elizabeth II was involved in the largest Fleet Review in modern times in the Solent, in which 167\u00a0ships from 35\u00a0nations took part. The Queen inspected the international fleet from the Antarctic patrol ship . The fleet included six aircraft carriers (modern capital ships): , , , , and . In the evening a symbolic re-enactment of the battle was staged with fireworks and various small ships playing parts in the battle.\nLieutenant John Lapenoti\u00e8re's historic voyage in bringing the news of the victory from the fleet to Falmouth and thence by post chaise to the Admiralty in London was commemorated by the inauguration of The Trafalgar Way and further highlighted by the New Trafalgar Dispatch celebrations from July to September in which an actor played the part of Lapenoti\u00e8re and re-enacted parts of the historic journey.\nOn the actual anniversary day, 21\u00a0October, naval manoeuvres were conducted in Trafalgar Bay near C\u00e1diz involving a combined fleet from Britain, Spain, and France. Many descendants of people present at the battle, including members of Nelson's family, were at the ceremony.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38856", "revid": "1292549697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38856", "title": "National Botanic Gardens (Ireland)", "text": "Botanical garden\nThe National Botanic Gardens (Irish: \"Garraithe N\u00e1isi\u00fanta na Lus\") is a botanical garden in Glasnevin, 5\u00a0km north-west of Dublin city centre, Ireland. The 19.5 hectares are situated between Glasnevin Cemetery and the River Tolka where it forms part of the river's floodplain.\nThe gardens were founded in 1795 by the Dublin Society (later the Royal Dublin Society) and are today in State ownership through the Office of Public Works. They house approximately 20,000 living plants and many millions of dried plant specimens. There are several architecturally notable greenhouses. The Glasnevin site is the headquarters of the National Botanic Gardens of Ireland which has a satellite garden and arboretum at Kilmacurragh in County Wicklow.\nThe gardens participate in national and international initiatives for biodiversity conservation and sustainable development. Director of the Gardens Dr. Matthew Jebb, is also Chairman of PlantNetwork: The Plant Collections Network of Britain and Ireland. It is Ireland's seventh most visited attraction, and the second most visited free attraction.\nHistory.\nPoet Thomas Tickell owned a house and small estate in Glasnevin and, in 1795, they were sold to the Irish Parliament and given to the Royal Dublin Society for them to establish Ireland's first botanic gardens. A double line of yew trees, known as \"Addison's Walk\" survives from this period. The original function of the gardens was to advance knowledge of plants for agricultural, medicinal and dyeing purposes. The gardens were the first location in Ireland where the infection responsible for the 1845\u20131847 Great Famine was identified. Throughout the famine, research to stop the infection was undertaken at the gardens.\nWalter Wade and John Underwood, the first Director and Superintendent respectively, executed the layout of the gardens, but, when Wade died in 1825, they declined for some years. From 1834, Director Ninian Nivan brought new life into the gardens, performing some redesign. This programme of change and development continued with the following Directors into the late 1960s.\nThe gardens were placed into government care in 1877 and then became known as the Royal Botanic Gardens (until the founding of the Irish Free State in 1922). That same year, Dom Pedro II, Emperor of Brazil, visited the gardens as part of a largely unpublicised visit to Ireland.\nIn the winter of 1948/9 Ludwig Wittgenstein lived and worked in Ireland. He frequently came to the Palm House to sit and write. There is a plaque commemorating him on the steps he sat on.\nFacilities.\nAs well as being a tourist destination and an amenity for nearby residents, the gardens \u2013 offering free entry \u2013 serve as a centre for horticultural research and training, including the breeding of many prized orchids.\nThe soil at Glasnevin is strongly alkaline (in horticultural terms) and this restricts the cultivation of calcifuge plants such as rhododendrons to specially prepared areas. Nonetheless, the gardens display a range of outdoor \"habitats\" such as a rockery, herbaceous border, rose garden, bog garden and arboretum. A vegetable garden has also been established.\nThe National Herbarium is also housed at the National Botanic Gardens. The museum collection contains some 20,000 samples of plant products, including fruits, seeds, wood, fibres, plant extracts and artefacts, collected over the garden's two-hundred-year history. The gardens contain noted and historically important collections of orchids. The newly restored Palm House houses many tropical and subtropical plants. In 2002, a new multistorey complex was built; it includes a cafe and a large lecture theatre. The gardens are also responsible for the arboretum at Kilmacurragh, County Wicklow, a centre noted for its conifers and calcifuges. This is located some south of Dublin.\nA gateway into Glasnevin Cemetery adjacent to the gardens was reopened in recent years.\nArchitecture.\nThe gardens include some glasshouses of architectural importance, such as the Palm House and the Curvilinear Range.\nThe Great Palm House is situated in the southern parts of the gardens, and is connected to the cactus house on its west side, and the orchid house on its east side. The main building measures 65 feet in height, 100 feet in length and 80 feet in width.\nThe Palm House was originally built in 1862 to accommodate the ever-increasing collection of plants from tropical areas that demanded more and more protected growing conditions. The construction was overseen by David Moore, the curator of the gardens at the time. The original structure was built of wood, and was unstable, leading to it being blown down by heavy gales in 1883, twenty-one years later. Richard Turner, the great Dublin ironmaster, had already supplied an iron house to Belfast Gardens and he persuaded the Royal Dublin Society that such a house would be a better investment than a wooden house, and by 1883 construction had begun on a stronger iron structure. Fabrication of the structure took place in Paisley, Scotland, and shipped to Ireland in sections. By the early 2000s, the Palm House had fallen into a state of disrepair. After more than 100 years, the wrought iron, cast iron and timber construction had seriously deteriorated. Prior to its restoration, a large number of panes of glass were breaking each year due to the corrosion and instability of the structure. As part of the restoration, the house was completely dismantled into more than 7,000 parts, and tagged for repair and restoration off-site. 20-metre-tall cast iron columns within the Great Palm House had seriously degraded and were replaced by new cast iron columns created in moulds of the originals. To protect the structure from further corrosion, new modern paint technology was used to develop long-term protection for the Palm House, providing protection from the perpetually tropical internal climate. For Health and Safety reasons, overhead glass was laminated and vertical panes toughened, and a specialised form of mastic was used to fix the panes, replacing the original linseed oil putty that had contributed to the decay of the building over the century. The Palm House was reopened in 2004 after a lengthy replanting programme following the restoration process.\nThe Curvilinear Range was completed in 1848 by Richard Turner, and was extended in the late 1860s. This structure, has also been restored (using some surplus contemporary structural ironwork from Kew Gardens) and this work attracted the Europa Nostra award for excellence in conservation architecture.\nThere is also a third range of glasshouses: the Aquatic House, the Fern House and the original Cactus House. These structures were closed off in the early 2000s, and are currently undergoing restoration. As these glasshouses were specialised in the plants they housed, many specimens such as the Giant Amazonian Water Lily have not been grown in the gardens since the closure of the structures.\nCollege of Amenity Horticulture (Teagasc).\nBuilding on the training and education legacy of the gardens, the Teagasc College of Amenity Horticulture is located in the gardens. It runs full- and part-time courses training students for the amenity horticulture industry. Training is run in association with the Office of Public Works (OPW), Dublin local authority parks departments, and the Golfing Union of Ireland.\nDirectors.\nThe Director is the chief officer of the Gardens, with a residence provided on site. Directors have included:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38857", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38857", "title": "Lever", "text": "Simple machine consisting of a beam pivoted at a fixed hinge\nA lever is a simple machine consisting of a beam or rigid rod pivoted at a fixed hinge, or \"fulcrum\". A lever is a rigid body capable of rotating on a point on itself. On the basis of the locations of fulcrum, load, and effort, the lever is divided into three types. It is one of the six simple machines identified by Renaissance scientists. A lever amplifies an input force to provide a greater output force, which is said to provide leverage, which is mechanical advantage gained in the system, equal to the ratio of the output force to the input force. As such, the lever is a mechanical advantage device, trading off force against movement. \nEtymology.\nThe word \"lever\" entered English around 1300 from . This sprang from the stem of the verb \"lever\", meaning \"to raise\". The verb, in turn, goes back to , itself from the adjective \"levis\", meaning \"light\" (as in \"not heavy\"). The word's primary origin is the Proto-Indo-European stem , meaning \"light\", \"easy\", or \"nimble\", among other things. The PIE stem also gave rise to the English-language antonym of \"heavy\", \"light\".\nLever history.\nAutumn Stanley argues that the digging stick can be considered the first lever, which would position prehistoric women as the inventors of lever technology. The next earliest known cultural evidence of the application of the lever mechanism dates back to the ancient Egypt c.\u20095000 BC, when it was used in a simple balance scale. In ancient Egypt c.\u20094400 BC, a foot pedal was used for the earliest horizontal frame loom. In Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) c.\u20093000 BC, the shadouf, a crane-like device that uses a lever mechanism, was invented. In ancient Egypt, workmen used the lever to move and uplift obelisks weighing more than 100 tons. This is evident from the recesses in the large blocks and the handling bosses that could not be used for any purpose other than for levers. \nThe earliest remaining writings regarding levers date from the third century BC and were provided, by common belief, by the Greek mathematician Archimedes, who famously stated \"Give me a lever (long enough and a fulcrum on which to place it), and I shall move the world\". (The Greek usually attributed to Archimedes does not include details about length of lever or fulcrum, i.e., \u03b4\u1ff6\u03c2 \u03bc\u03bf\u03b9 \u03c0\u1fb6 \u03c3\u03c4\u1ff6 \u03ba\u03b1\u1f76 \u03c4\u1f70\u03bd \u03b3\u1fb6\u03bd \u03ba\u03b9\u03bd\u03ac\u03c3\u03c9 .) That statement has given rise to the phrase \"an Archimedean lever\" being adopted for use in many instances, not just regarding mechanics, including abstract concepts about the successful effect of a human behavior or action intended to achieve results that could not have occurred without it.\nForce and levers.\nA lever is a beam connected to ground by a hinge, or pivot, called a fulcrum. The ideal lever does not dissipate or store energy, which means there is no friction in the hinge or bending in the beam. In this case, the power into the lever equals the power out, and the ratio of output to input force is given by the ratio of the distances from the fulcrum to the points of application of these forces. This is known as the law of the lever.\nThe mechanical advantage of a lever can be determined by considering the balance of moments or torque, \"T\", about the fulcrum. If the distance traveled is greater, then the output force is lessened.\nformula_1\nwhere F1 is the input force to the lever and F2 is the output force. The distances \"a\" and \"b\" are the perpendicular distances between the forces and the fulcrum.\nSince the moments of torque must be balanced, formula_2. So, formula_3.\nThe mechanical advantage of a lever is the ratio of output force to input force.\nformula_4\nThis relationship shows that the mechanical advantage can be computed from ratio of the distances from the fulcrum to where the input and output forces are applied to the lever, assuming a weightless lever and no losses due to friction, flexibility, or wear. This remains true even though the \"horizontal\" distance (perpendicular to the pull of gravity) of both \"a\" and \"b\" change (diminish) as the lever changes to any position away from the horizontal.\nTypes of levers.\nLevers are classified by the relative positions of the fulcrum, effort, and resistance (or load). It is common to call the input force \"effort\" and the output force \"load\" or \"resistance\". This allows the identification of three classes of levers by the relative locations of the fulcrum, the resistance and the effort:\nThese cases are described by the mnemonic \"fre 123\" where the \"f\" fulcrum is between \"r\" and \"e\" for the 1st class lever, the \"r\" resistance is between \"f\" and \"e\" for the 2nd class lever, and the \"e\" effort is between \"f\" and \"r\" for the 3rd class lever.\nCompound lever.\nA compound lever comprises several levers acting in series: the resistance from one lever in a system of levers acts as effort for the next, and thus the applied force is transferred from one lever to the next. Examples of compound levers include scales, nail clippers, and piano keys.\nThe \"malleus\", \"incus\", and \"stapes\" are small bones in the middle ear, connected as compound levers, that transfer sound waves from the eardrum to the oval window of the cochlea.\nLaw of the lever.\nThe lever is a bar that pivots on a point or hinge(fulcrum) attached to a fixed point. The lever operates by applying forces at different distances from the fulcrum, or a pivot.\nAs the lever rotates around the fulcrum, points farther from this pivot move faster than points closer to the pivot. Therefore, a force applied to a point farther from the pivot must be less than the force located at a point closer in, because power is the product of force and velocity.\nIf \"a\" and \"b\" are distances from the fulcrum to points \"A\" and \"B\" and the force \"FA\" applied to \"A\" is the input and the force \"FB\" applied at \"B\" is the output, the ratio of the velocities of points \"A\" and \"B\" is given by \"a/b\", so the ratio of the output force to the input force, or mechanical advantage, is given by:\nformula_5\nThis is the \"law of the lever\", which was proven by Archimedes using geometric reasoning. It shows that if the distance \"a\" from the fulcrum to where the input force is applied (point \"A\") is greater than the distance \"b\" from fulcrum to where the output force is applied (point \"B\"), then the lever amplifies the input force. On the other hand, if the distance \"a\" from the fulcrum to the input force is less than the distance \"b\" from the fulcrum to the output force, then the lever reduces the input force.\nThe use of velocity in the static analysis of a lever is an application of the principle of virtual work.\nVirtual work and the law of the lever.\nA lever is modeled as a rigid bar connected to a ground frame by a hinged joint called a fulcrum. The lever is operated by applying an input force F\"A\" at a point \"A\" located by the coordinate vector r\"A\" on the bar. The lever then exerts an output force F\"B\" at the point \"B\" located by r\"B\". The rotation of the lever about the fulcrum \"P\" is defined by the rotation angle \"\u03b8\" in radians.\nLet the coordinate vector of the point \"P\" that defines the fulcrum be r\"P\", and introduce the lengths\nformula_6\nwhich are the distances from the fulcrum to the input point \"A\" and to the output point \"B\", respectively.\nNow introduce the unit vectors e\"A\" and e\"B\" from the fulcrum to the point \"A\" and \"B\", so\nformula_7\nThe velocity of the points \"A\" and \"B\" are obtained as\nformula_8\nwhere e\"A\"\u22a5 and e\"B\"\u22a5 are unit vectors perpendicular to e\"A\" and e\"B\", respectively.\nThe angle \"\u03b8\" is the generalized coordinate that defines the configuration of the lever, and the generalized force associated with this coordinate is given by\nformula_9\nwhere \"F\"\"A\" and \"F\"\"B\" are components of the forces that are perpendicular to the radial segments \"PA\" and \"PB\". The principle of virtual work states that at equilibrium the generalized force is zero, that is\nformula_10\nThus, the ratio of the output force \"F\"\"B\" to the input force \"F\"\"A\" is obtained as\nformula_11\nwhich is the mechanical advantage of the lever.\nThis equation shows that if the distance \"a\" from the fulcrum to the point \"A\" where the input force is applied is greater than the distance \"b\" from fulcrum to the point \"B\" where the output force is applied, then the lever amplifies the input force. If the opposite is true that the distance from the fulcrum to the input point \"A\" is less than from the fulcrum to the output point \"B\", then the lever reduces the magnitude of the input force.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38860", "revid": "35351935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38860", "title": "Zwinger (Dresden)", "text": "Palatial complex in Dresden, Germany\nThe Zwinger (, ) is a palatial complex with gardens in Dresden, Germany. Designed by architect Matth\u00e4us Daniel P\u00f6ppelmann, it is one of the most important buildings of the Baroque period in Germany. Along with the Frauenkirche, the Zwinger is the most famous architectural monument of Dresden. \nThe name \"Zwinger\" goes back to the name used in the Middle Ages for a fortress part between the outer and inner fortress walls, even though the Zwinger no longer had a function corresponding to the name at the start of construction.\nThe Zwinger was built in 1709 as an orangery and garden as well as a representative festival area. Its richly decorated pavilions and the galleries lined with balustrades, figures and vases testify to the splendor during the reign of Augustus the Strong, Elector of Saxony and elected King of Poland. In the original conception of the elector, the Zwinger was the forecourt of a new castle that would take up the area between it and the Elbe; therefore, the Zwinger remained undeveloped on the Elbe side (provisionally closed with a wall). The plans for a new castle were abandoned after the death of Augustus the Strong, and with the departure from the Baroque period, the Zwinger initially lost importance. It was only over a century later that the architect Gottfried Semper completed it with the Semper Gallery towards the Elbe.\nThe Sempergalerie, opened in 1855, was one of the most important German museum projects of the 19th century and made it possible to expand the use of the Zwinger as a museum complex, which had grown under the influence of time since the 18th century. The Bombing of Dresden on February 13 and 14, 1945 hit the Zwinger extensively and led to extensive destruction. Since the reconstruction in the 1950s and 1960s, the (Old Masters Picture Gallery), the Dresden Porcelain Collection (\"Dresdener Porzellansammlung\") and the \"Mathematisch-Physikalischer Salon\" (Royal Cabinet of Mathematical and Physical Instruments) have opened to the public. The original intended use as an orangery, garden and as a representative festival area has taken a back seat; the latter continues to be cultivated with the performance of music and theater events.\nCurrent inner city location.\nThe Zwinger covers an area on the northwestern edge of the \"Innere Altstadt\" (\"inner old town\") that is part of the historic heart of Dresden. It is located in the immediate vicinity of other famous sights, including Dresden Castle and the Semperoper. The Zwinger is bounded by \"Sophienstra\u00dfe\" in the southeast, \"Postplatz\" in the south, \"Ostra-Allee\" in the southwest, the \"Am Zwingerteich\" road in the northwest and Theatre Square (\"Theaterplatz\") in the east. Nearby buildings include the Dresden State Theatre to the southwest, the \"Haus am Zwinger\" to the south, the Taschenbergpalais hotel to the southeast, the west wing of the palace with its Green Vault to the east, the \"Altst\u00e4dtische Hauptwache\" to the northeast, the Semper Opera to the north and the former royal stables to the northwest. Within view lie the Catholic Court Church and the Italian Village in Theatre Square, the \"Wilsdruffer Kubus\" on \"Postplatz\" and the Duchess Garden with the remnants of the former orangery building in the west. The terraced banks of the Elbe river are located 200 metres northeast of the Zwinger.\nHistory.\nOrigin of the name.\nThe name \"Zwinger\" goes back to the common medieval German term for that part of a fortification between the outer and inner defensive walls, or \"outer ward\". Archaeological evidence indicates that the construction of the first city wall took place in the last quarter of the 12th century. A documentary entry as \"civitas\" in 1216 points to the existence of an enclosed Dresden Fortification at that time.\nIn 1427, during the Hussite Wars, work began on strengthening the city's defences and they were enhanced by a second \u2013 outer \u2013 wall. These improvements began near the \"Wilsdruffer Tor\" gate. Step by step the old moat had to be filled in and moved. The area between the two walls was generally referred to as the \"Zwinger\" and, in the vicinity of the castle, was utilised by the royal court at Dresden for garden purposes. The location of the so-called \"Zwingergarten\" from that period is only imprecisely known to be between the fortifications on the western side of the city. Its extent varied in places as a result of subsequent improvements to the fortifications and is depicted differently on the various maps.\nThis royal \"Zwingergarten\", a garden used to supply the court, still fulfilled one of its functions, as indicated by the name, as a narrow defensive area between the outer and inner defensive walls. This was no longer the case when work on the present-day Zwinger palace began in the early 18th century, nevertheless the name was transferred to the new building. Admittedly the southwestern parts of the building of the baroque Dresden Zwinger including the \"Kronentor\" gate stand on parts of the outer curtain wall that are still visible today; but there is no longer any trace of the inner wall.\nEarly development of the city in the area of the Zwinger.\nUntil well into the 16th century, the area of the present-day Zwinger complex was still outside the city fortifications. Close by ran an old stretch of the Wei\u00dferitz river that no longer exists, which emptied into the Elbe by the Old Castle. In 1569, major work began on redevelopment and new buildings by the fortifications west of the castle based on plans by master builder, Rochus Quirin, Count of Lynar, who came from Florence. The embankments needed in the area of the river confluence proved to be a major challenge. In spring 1570 the Wei\u00dferitz caused severe flood damage at an embankment, which hampered the building project for a short time. Then, in 1572, the rebuilding work by the fortifications came to a temporary halt.\nEarly history.\nAugustus the Strong returned from a grand tour through France and Italy in 1687\u201389, just at the moment that Louis XIV moved his court to Versailles. On his return to Dresden, having arranged his election as King of Poland (1697), he wanted something similarly spectacular for himself. The fortifications were no longer needed and provided readily available space for his plans. The original plans, as developed by his court architect Matth\u00e4us Daniel P\u00f6ppelmann before 1711, covered the space of the present complex of palace and garden, and also included as gardens the space down to the Elbe river, upon which the Semperoper and its square were built in the nineteenth century.\nThe Zwinger was designed by P\u00f6ppelmann and constructed in stages from 1710 to 1728. Sculpture was provided by Balthasar Permoser. The Zwinger was formally inaugurated in 1719, on the occasion of the electoral prince Frederick August's marriage to the daughter of the Habsburg emperor, the Archduchess Maria Josepha. At the time, the outer shells of the buildings had already been erected and, with their pavilions and arcaded galleries, formed a striking backdrop to the event. It was not until the completion of their interiors in 1728, however, that they could serve their intended functions as exhibition galleries and library halls.\nThe death of Augustus in 1733 put a halt to the construction because the funds were needed elsewhere. The palace area was left open towards the Semperoper square (Theatre Square) and the river. Later the plans were changed to a smaller scale, and in 1847\u20131855 the area was closed by the construction of the gallery wing now separating the Zwinger from the Theatre Square. The architect of this building, later named Semper Gallery, was Gottfried Semper.\nDestruction and rebuilding.\nThe building was mostly destroyed by the carpet bombing raids of 13\u201315 February 1945. The art collection had been previously evacuated, however. Reconstruction, supported by the Soviet military administration, began in 1945; parts of the restored complex were opened to the public in 1951. By 1963 the Zwinger had largely been restored to its pre-war state.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38861", "revid": "1216158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38861", "title": "Sikorsky HH-60 Pave Hawk", "text": "American medium-lift military helicopter\nThe Sikorsky MH-60/HH-60 Pave Hawk is a four-blade, twin-engine, medium-lift utility military helicopter manufactured by Sikorsky Aircraft. Both are derived from the Sikorsky S-70 and the UH-60 Black Hawk; they incorporate the U.S. Air Force PAVE electronic systems program and are designed for day or night operations into hostile environments. \nThe MH-60G Pave Hawk's primary mission was insertion and recovery of special operations personnel. The HH-60G Pave Hawk's core mission is recovery of personnel under hostile conditions, including combat search and rescue. The HH-60G may also perform peacetime operations such as civil search and rescue, emergency aeromedical evacuation (MEDEVAC), disaster relief, international aid and counter-drug activities.\nAs of the 2020s, the USAF is replacing its HH/MH-60Gs with a new variant, the HH-60W Jolly Green II. Another variant, the HH-60P, is operated by South Korea.\nDesign and development.\nIn 1981, the U.S. Air Force chose the UH-60A Black Hawk to replace its HH-3E Jolly Green Giant helicopters. After acquiring some UH-60s, the Air Force began upgrading each with an air refueling probe and additional fuel tanks in the cabin. The machine guns were changed from 7.62\u00a0mm (0.308\u00a0in) M60s to .50\u00a0caliber (12.7\u00a0mm) XM218s. These helicopters were referred to as \"Credible Hawks\" and entered service in 1987.\nAfterwards, the Credible Hawks and new UH-60As were upgraded and designated MH-60G Pave Hawk. These upgrades were to be done in a two-step process. However, funding allowed only 16 Credible Hawks to receive the second step equipment. These helicopters were allocated to special operations use. The remaining 82 Credible Hawks received the first step upgrade equipment and were used for combat search and rescue. In 1991, these search and rescue Pave Hawks were redesignated HH-60G.\nThe Pave Hawk is a highly modified version of the Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk. It features an upgraded communications and navigation suite that includes an integrated inertial navigation/global positioning/Doppler navigation systems, satellite communications, secure voice, and Have Quick communications. The term PAVE stands for Precision Avionics Vectoring Equipment.\nAll HH-60Gs have an automatic flight control system, night vision goggles lighting and forward looking infrared system that greatly enhances night low-level operations. Additionally, some Pave Hawks have color weather radar and an engine/rotor blade anti-ice system that gives the HH-60G an all-weather capability. Pave Hawk mission equipment includes a retractable in-flight refueling probe, internal auxiliary fuel tanks, two crew-served (or pilot-controlled) 7.62\u00a0mm (0.308 in) miniguns or 0.50-caliber machine guns and an 8,000 pound (3,600\u00a0kg) capacity cargo hook. To improve air transportability and shipboard operations, all HH-60Gs have folding rotor blades.\nPave Hawk combat enhancements include a radar warning receiver, infrared jammer and a flare/chaff countermeasure dispensing system. HH-60G rescue equipment includes a hoist capable of lifting a 600-pound (270\u00a0kg) load from a hover height of 200 feet (60 m), and a personnel locating system. A number of Pave Hawks are equipped with an over-the-horizon tactical data receiver that is capable of receiving near real-time mission update information.\nReplacement.\nIn 1999, the USAF identified a need for a helicopter with improved range, speed, and cabin space. An options analysis was completed in 2002 and funding for 141 aircraft under the \"personnel recovery vehicle\" program began in 2004. In 2005, it was renamed \"CSAR-X\", meaning combat search and rescue. Sikorsky entered the HH-92 Superhawk, Lockheed Martin entered the VH-71 Kestrel, and Boeing entered the HH-47 Chinook. The HH-47 won the competition in November 2006, but the award was cancelled after successful protests from both rival competitors. A Request for Proposals (RFP) was reissued in 2007, but protested again before proposals were received, leading to a second cancellation. In March 2010, the USAF announced a recapitalization plan to return its 99-aircraft inventory to 112 airframes, incrementally replacing aging HH-60Gs; a secondary plan to replace 13 attrition HH-60s, seven of which were lost in combat since 2001, was also initiated. The USAF deferred secondary combat search and rescue requirements calling for a larger helicopter. A UH-60M-based version was offered as a replacement.\nOn 22 October 2012, the USAF issued an RFP for up to 112 \"Combat Rescue Helicopter\"s (CRH) to replace the HH-60G with the primary mission of personnel recovery from hostile territory; other missions include civil search and rescue, disaster relief, casualty and medical evacuation. It had to have a combat radius of , a payload of 1,500\u00a0lb (680\u00a0kg), and space for up to four stretchers. The AgustaWestland AW101 was one entrant. By December 2012, competitors AgustaWestland, EADS, Boeing, and Bell Helicopter had withdrawn amid claims that the RFP favored Sikorsky and did not reward rival aircraft's capabilities. The USAF argued that the competition was not written to favor Sikorsky, and that the terms were clear as to the capabilities they wanted and could afford. Sikorsky was the only bidder remaining, with subcontractor Lockheed Martin supplying mission equipment and the electronic survivability suite. Sikorsky and the USAF extensively evaluated the proposed CRH-60, a variant of the MH-60 special operations helicopter; the CRH-60 differed from the MH-60 by its greater payload and cabin capacity, wider rotor blades, and better hover capability.\nIn September 2013, the initial USAF FY 2015 budget proposal would have cancelled the CRH program due to sequestration budget cuts, instead retaining the existing HH-60 fleet. Congress allocated over $300 million to the program in FY 2014, with $430 million to be moved from other areas through FY 2019 to finance it. On 26 June 2014, the USAF awarded Sikorsky and Lockheed Martin a $1.3 billion contract for the first four aircraft, with 112 total to be procured for a total of up to $7.9 billion. Five more are to be delivered by 2020 and the order is to be completed by 2029. On 24 November 2014, the Air Force officially designated the UH-60M-derived CRH the HH-60W. It first flew on 17 May 2019. In February 2020, the HH-60W was named the \"Jolly Green II\" by the USAF. The 41st Rescue Squadron received the first two HH-60W helicopters on 5 November 2020.\nIn July 2025, the U.S. State Department approved a possible Foreign Military Sale of up to nine HH\u201160W Jolly Green II combat rescue helicopters to Norway, along with associated equipment, training, and support, at an estimated cost of US$2.6\u202fbillion. Norway has not signed a procurement contract as of mid-July 2025.\nOperational history.\nAs of 2015, the U.S. Air Force HH-60G Pave Hawk was operated by the Air Combat Command (ACC), U.S. Air Forces in Europe (USAFE), Pacific Air Forces (PACAF), Air Education and Training Command (AETC), the Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC) and the Air National Guard (ANG). Some HH-60Gs are also operated by the Air Force Materiel Command (AFMC) for flight tests.\nDuring Operation Desert Storm, Pave Hawks provided combat search and rescue coverage for coalition air forces in western Iraq, Saudi Arabia, coastal Kuwait and the Persian Gulf. They also provided emergency evacuation coverage for U.S. Navy SEAL teams landing on the Kuwaiti coast before the invasion.\nThe Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC) got rid of its MH-60Gs configured for CSAR operations in 1991, redesignating them as HH-60Gs and giving them to Air Combat Command (ACC) and ACC-gained Air Force Reserve Command and Air National Guard units. AFSOC ceased all MH-60 operations in 1999.\nOn 29 October 1992, a MH-60G Pave Hawk crashed in the Great Salt Lake of Utah about 100 yards north of Antelope Island during a training exercise in bad weather. Twelve members of the Army's 75th Ranger Regiment and the Air Force's 1st Special Operations Wing died in the accident. The pilot, Air Force Maj. Stephan J. Laushine, was the only survivor.\nDuring Operation Allied Force, the Pave Hawk provided continuous combat search and rescue coverage for NATO air forces, and recovered two U.S. Air Force pilots who were isolated behind enemy lines.\nIn March 2000, three Pave Hawks deployed to Hoedspruit Air Force Base in South Africa to support international flood relief operations in Mozambique. The HH-60Gs flew 240 missions in 17 days and delivered more than 160 tons of humanitarian relief supplies.\nIn early 2005, Air Force Pave Hawks also took part in a massive humanitarian relief effort to help in Sri Lankan victims of the tsunami. In the fall of 2005, Pave Hawks from various Air Force commands helped rescue thousands of stranded survivors of Hurricane Katrina.\nPave Hawks operated during Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation New Dawn, and Operation Enduring Freedom, supporting Army and Marine Corps ground combat operations and standby search and rescue support for U.S. and coalition fixed-wing combat aircraft.\nOn 15 March 2018, a CSAR HH-60G crashed near the Iraqi city of al-Qa'im, killing all seven on board.\nSpecifications (HH-60G).\n\"Data from\" USAF 2008 Almanac USAF fact sheet,General characteristics* Crew: 4(two pilots, two special mission aviators/aerial gunners)* Capacity: maximum crew six / eight\u2013twelve troops / litters and/or other cargo\nPerformance* Endurance: \nArmament\nAvionics\nAvionics and navigation upgrades.\nModern variants of the HH-60 Pave Hawk incorporate advanced avionics and satellite-based navigation systems to enhance mission effectiveness in complex environments. The aircraft features a fully integrated glass cockpit, GPS/INS hybrid navigation, digital moving maps, and weather radar. These systems enable precision navigation under instrument flight rules (IFR) and in degraded visual environments. Recent upgrades also support performance-based navigation (PBN) and automatic dependent surveillance (ADS-B) for improved situational awareness and interoperability with civil air traffic management systems.\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38862", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38862", "title": "Georg Hackl", "text": "German luger (born 1966)\nGeorg Hackl (; born 9 September 1966), often named Hackl Schorsch, is a German former luger who was three time Olympic and World Champion. He is known affectionately as \"Hackl-Schorsch\" or as the \"Speeding Wei\u00dfwurst\", a reference to what he looks like in his white bodysuit coming down the luge at fast speeds.\nBiography.\nHackl was born in Berchtesgaden, Bavaria. He took up luge as part of his physical education lessons whilst at school, learning to slide at the K\u00f6nigssee track.\nHackl was known for his rivalry with Markus Prock, with Prock being dominant in World Cup competition whilst Hackl consistently achieved success at the Winter Olympics. Although Hackl was not as natural an athlete as Prock, he was noted as being extremely skilled at setting up his sled to suit particular ice conditions on a given day. In addition his coach and former luger Thomas Schwab highlighted Hackl's mental strength as being key to his success.\nHe won his first Winter Olympic Games luge medal in 1988 in Calgary, when he finished second in the singles event, while placing fourth in the doubles. Four years later, he improved his performance to win the gold, a feat he repeated in 1994 and 1998. In 1998, he won the gold by clocking the fastest time in all four runs, the first in Olympic history in the men's singles to do so (Vera Zozula of the Soviet Union did that feat in the women's singles event at the 1980 Winter Olympics in Lake Placid, New York). That year he was named as German Sportsman of the Year. Hackl won the silver medal again in the 2002 Games, becoming the first Winter Olympian to win a medal in five consecutive Winter Olympics. Most recently, he placed 7th in the 2006 Winter Olympics.\nHackl has retired from active participation and got involved in coaching after the 2006 Winter Olympics. He is responsible for a group of German lugers nicknamed the \"Sunshine Training Group\", alongside Patric Leitner, with Hackl having responsibility for their sleds. Members of the group include Felix Loch, Natalie Geisenberger, Tobias Wendl and Tobias Arlt, who between them took a clean sweep of the gold medals in luge at the 2014 Winter Olympics.\nHackl won a total of 22 medals at the FIL World Luge Championships, including ten golds (Men's singles: 1989, 1990, 1997; Mixed team: 1991, 1993, 1995, 2000, 2001, 2003, 2005), ten silvers (Men's singles: 1991, 1993, 1995, 1996, 2001, 2004, 2005; Men's doubles: 1987, Mixed team: 1996, 1997), and two bronzes (Men's singles: 2000, Mixed team: 1999).\nAt the FIL European Luge Championships, Hackl won twelve medals. This included seven golds (Men's singles: 1988, 1990; Mixed team: 1988, 1992, 1996, 2000, 2002), four silvers (Men's singles: 1994, 2000; Mixed team: 1990, 1994), and one bronze (Men's singles: 1992).\nHe won the overall Luge World Cup title in men's singles twice (1988\u20139, 1989\u201390) and also had his best overall finish of second in men's doubles twice (1986\u20137, 1987\u20138).\nHackl is also a nine-time wok racing world champion.\nHe was inducted into the International Luge Federation's Hall of Fame in 2013.\nIn 1999, Hackl married his long-term girlfriend, Margit (n\u00e9e Datzmann).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38863", "revid": "42783819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38863", "title": "Motorola 68010", "text": "Microprocessor model\nThe Motorola MC68010 and Motorola MC68012 are 16/32-bit microprocessors from Motorola, released in 1982 as successors to the Motorola 68000. The 68010 and 68012 added virtualization features, optimized loops and fixed several small flaws to the 68000. The MC68010 variants were pin compatible with its predecessor while the MC68012 is an 84-pin PGA version with its directly accessible memory space extended to 2\u00a0GiB.\nDifferences between 68010/68012 and 68000.\nThe 68010 and 68012 are completely user-mode compatible with the 68000, except that the MOVE from SR instruction traps in user mode, so that, to support user-mode code using that instruction, a supervisor-mode trap handler must simulate the instruction and continue the user-mode code after that instruction. This was done so that the 68010 and 68012 would meet the Popek and Goldberg virtualization requirements, specifically that a new OS could run as guest and not be aware.\u00a71.3.2 A new unprivileged MOVE from CCR instruction was added to compensate for the penalty of trapping user-mode MOVE from SR.\nThe 68010 and 68012 can recover from bus faults, and continue the faulting instruction, allowing them to implement virtual memory. This means that the exception stack frame is different.\nA 32-bit Vector Base Register (VBR) holds the base address for the exception vector table. The 68000 vector table was always based at address zero.\nA \"loop mode\" accelerates loops consisting of only a \"loopable\" instruction and a DBcc (Decrement/Branch on condition); an example would be MOVE and DBRA. The two-instruction mini-loop opcodes are prefetched and held in the 6-byte instruction cache while subsequent memory read/write cycles are only needed for the data operands for the duration of the loop.\u00a77.1.3 It provided for performance improvements averaging 50%, as a result of the elimination of instruction opcodes fetching during the loop.\nThe MC68012 variant, in addition to its memory space being extended to 2\u00a0GiB, also added a read-modify-write cycle (RMC) pin, indicating that an indivisible read-modify-write cycle in progress, in order to help the design of multiprocessor systems with virtual memory.\nThe expansion of the memory space in the 68012 caused an issue for any programs that used the high byte of an address to store data, a programming trick that was successful with those processors that only have a 24-bit address bus (68000 and 68010). A similar problem affected the 68020.\nUsage.\nThe 68010 could be used with the 68451 MMU. However, aspects of its design, such as its 1 clock memory access penalty, made this configuration unpopular. Some vendors used their own MMU designs, such as Sun Microsystems in their Sun-2 workstation and Convergent Technologies in the AT&amp;T UNIX PC/3B1.\nThe 68010 was never as popular as the 68000 in the years when it was available. However, because of the 68010's small speed boost over the 68000 and its support for virtual memory, it can be found in a number of smaller Unix systems, both with the 68451 MMU (for example in the Torch Triple X), and with a custom MMU (such as the Sun-2 workstation, AT&amp;T UNIX PC/3B1, Convergent Technologies MiniFrame, Plexus P/15 and P/20, NCR Tower XP, Apollo Computer's DN300 and DN320, and HP 9000 Model 310), as well as various research machines. Most other vendors (such as Apple Computer) stayed with the 68000 until the 68020 was introduced.\nThe 68010 was used on some arcade video games, most notably \"Marble Madness\" for the Atari System 1. Some owners of Amiga and Atari ST computers and even Sega Genesis game consoles replaced their system's 68000 CPU with a 68010 to gain a small speed boost. In practice, the overall speed gain over a 68000 at the same frequency is less than 10%."}
{"id": "38866", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38866", "title": "Theodor Zwinger", "text": "Swiss physician and scholar\nTheodor Zwinger the Elder (2 August 1533 \u2013 10 March 1588) was a Swiss physician and Renaissance humanist scholar. He made significant contributions to the emerging genres of reference and travel literature. He was the first distinguished representative of a prominent Basel academic family.\nLife and work.\nZwinger was the son of Leonhard Zwinger, a furrier who had become a citizen of Basel in 1526. His mother was Christina Herbster, the sister of Johannes Oporinus (Herbster) the famed humanist printer. After Zwinger's father's death, Christina married the noted humanist Conrad Lycosthenes (Wolffhart).\nZwinger studied at the Universities of Basel, Lyon, and Paris before taking a doctorate in medicine at the University of Padua with Bassiano Landi, the successor of Johannes Baptista Montanus. In Paris he studied with the iconoclastic philosopher Petrus Ramus. He joined the faculty of the University of Basel as a member of the \"consilium facultatis medicae\" from 1559. At Basel he held successively chairs in Greek (1565), Ethics (1571), and finally theoretical medicine (1580). While originally hostile to Paracelsus, in his later career he took an interest in Paracelsian medical theory for which he experienced some hostility. He associated with Paracelsians such as Thomas Moffet, Petrus Severinus and Claude Aubery.\nZwinger was the editor of the early encyclopedia \"Theatrum Humanae Vitae\" (editions 1565, 1571, 1586, 1604). The work is considered \"perhaps the most comprehensive collection of knowledge to be compiled by a single individual in the early modern period.\" He was able to draw on the knowledge base of his stepfather Conrad Lycosthenes in compiling the \"Theatrum Humanae Vitae\".\nA Catholicized version of the \"Theatrum\" entitled the \"Magnum theatrum vitae humanae\" (1631) by Lawrence Beyerlinck was one of the largest printed commonplace books of the early modern era. These two works \"may fairly be described as the early modern ancestors of the great \"dictionnaire raisonn\u00e9\" of the eighteenth-century Enlightenment, the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" of Diderot.\"\nPersonal life.\nHe seemed to have a difficult to read handwriting and Casiodoro de Reyna once would have liked to travel from Frankfurt to Basel in order for Zwinger to read de Reyna his own letters. The house he resided in, is named Zwingerhouse in his memory. Zwinger's son, Jakob Zwinger, briefly served as his successor as editor of the \"Theatrum\". His descendant Theodor Zwinger the Younger (1597\u20131654) was a prominent preacher and theology professor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38867", "revid": "50568437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38867", "title": "Bill of Rights 1689", "text": "English civil rights legislation\nThe Bill of Rights 1689 (1 Will. &amp; Mar. Sess. 2. c. 2) (sometimes known as the Bill of Rights 1688) is an act of the Parliament of England that set out certain basic civil rights and changed the succession to the English Crown. It remains a crucial statute in English constitutional law. \nLargely based on the ideas of political theorist John Locke, the Bill sets out a constitutional requirement for the Crown to seek the consent of the people as represented in Parliament. As well as setting limits on the powers of the monarch, it established the rights of Parliament, including regular parliaments, free elections, and parliamentary privilege. It also listed individual rights, including the prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment and the right not to pay taxes levied without the approval of Parliament. Finally, it described and condemned several misdeeds of James II of England. The Bill of Rights received royal assent on 16 December 1689. It is a restatement in statutory form of the Declaration of Right presented by the Convention Parliament to William III and Mary II in February 1689, inviting them to become joint sovereigns of England, displacing James II, who was stated to have abdicated and left the throne vacant. \nIn the United Kingdom, the Bill is considered a basic document of the uncodified British constitution, along with Magna Carta, the Petition of Right, the Habeas Corpus Act 1679 and the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949. A separate but similar document, the Claim of Right Act 1689, applies in Scotland. The Bill was one of the models used to draft the United States Bill of Rights, the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights. Along with the Act of Settlement 1701, it remains in effect within all Commonwealth realms, as amended by the Perth Agreement.\nBackground.\nDuring the 17th\u00a0century, there was renewed interest in Magna Carta. The Parliament of England passed the Petition of Right in 1628 which established certain liberties for subjects. The English Civil War (1642\u20131651) was fought between the King and an oligarchic but elected Parliament, during which the notion of long-term political parties took form with the New Model Army Grandees and humble, leveller-influenced figures debating a new constitution in the Putney Debates of 1647. Parliament was largely cowed by the executive during the Protectorate (1653\u20131659) and most of the twenty-five years of Charles II's English Restoration from 1660. However, it, with the advantage of the growth in printed pamphlets and support of the City of London, was able to temper some of the executive excess, intrigue and largesse of the government, especially the Cabal ministry who signed a Secret Treaty of Dover that allied England to France in a prospective war against oft-allies the Dutch Republic. It had already passed the Habeas Corpus Act 1679, which strengthened the convention that forbade detention lacking sufficient cause or evidence.\nGlorious Revolution.\nObjecting to the policies of King James II of England (James\u00a0VII of Scotland and James\u00a0II of Ireland), a group of English Parliamentarians invited the Dutch stadtholder William\u00a0III of Orange-Nassau (William of Orange) to overthrow the King. William's successful invasion with a Dutch fleet and army led to James' fleeing to France. In December\u00a01688, peers of the realm appointed William as provisional governor. It was widely acknowledged that such action was constitutional if the monarch were incapacitated. The peers summoned an assembly of many members of parliament. This assembly called for an English Convention Parliament to be elected, which convened on 22\u00a0January 1689.\nDeclaration of Right.\nThe proposal to draw up a statement of rights and liberties and James's violation of them was first made on 29\u00a0January 1689 in the House of Commons, with members arguing that the House \"cannot answer it to the nation or Prince of Orange till we declare what are the rights invaded\" and that William \"cannot take it ill if we make conditions to secure ourselves for the future\" in order to \"do justice to those who sent us hither\". On 2\u00a0February a committee specially convened reported to the Commons 23\u00a0Heads of Grievances, which the Commons approved and added some of their own. However, on 4\u00a0February the Commons decided to instruct the committee to differentiate between \"such of the general heads, as are introductory of new laws, from those that are declaratory of ancient rights\". On 7\u00a0February the Commons approved this revised Declaration of Right, and on 8\u00a0February instructed the committee to put into a single text the Declaration (with the heads which were \"introductory of new laws\" removed), the resolution of 29\u00a0January and the Lords' proposal for a revised oath of allegiance. It passed the Commons without division.\nOn 13\u00a0February the clerk of the House of Lords read the Declaration of Right, and the Marquess of Halifax, in the name of all the estates of the realm, asked William and Mary to accept the throne. William replied for his wife and himself: \"We thankfully accept what you have offered us\". They then went in procession to the Great Gate at Whitehall. In a ceremony in the Banqueting House, Garter King of Arms proclaimed them King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, whereupon they adjourned to the Chapel Royal, with the Bishop of London preaching the sermon. They were crowned on 11\u00a0April, swearing an oath to uphold the laws made by Parliament. The Coronation Oath Act 1688 had provided a new coronation oath, whereby the monarchs were to \"solemnly promise and swear to govern the people of this kingdom of England, and the dominions thereunto belonging, according to the statutes in parliament agreed on, and the laws and customs of the same\". They were also to maintain the laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed faith established by law. This replaced an oath which had deferred more to the monarch. The previous oath required the monarch to rule based on \"the laws and customs ... granted by the Kings of England\".\nThe Act.\nThe Declaration of Right was enacted in an Act of Parliament, the Bill of Rights 1689, which received royal assent in December\u00a01689. \nThe Act asserted \"certain ancient rights and liberties\" by declaring that: \nThe Act declared James's flight from England following the Glorious Revolution to be an abdication of the throne. It listed twelve of James's policies by which James designed to \"endeavour to subvert and extirpate the protestant religion, and the laws and liberties of this kingdom\". These were:\nall of which were declared to be utterly and directly contrary to the known laws and statutes and freedom of the realm.\nIn a prelude to the Act of Settlement to come twelve years later, the Bill of Rights barred Roman Catholics from the throne of England as \"it hath been found by experience that it is inconsistent with the safety and welfare of this Protestant kingdom to be governed by a papist prince\"; thus William\u00a0III and Mary\u00a0II were named as the successors of James II and that the throne would pass from them first to Mary's heirs, then to her sister, Princess Anne of Denmark and her heirs (and, thereafter, to any heirs of William by a later marriage).\nAmendments and legacy.\nThe Bill of Rights was later supplemented by the Act of Settlement 1701, which was agreed to by the Parliament of Scotland as part of the Treaty of Union. The Act of Settlement altered the line of succession to the throne laid out in the Bill of Rights. However, both the Bill of Rights and the Claim of Right contributed a great deal to the establishment of the concept of parliamentary sovereignty and the curtailment of the powers of the monarch. These have been held to have established the constitutional monarchy, and, along with the penal laws, settled much of the political and religious turmoil that had convulsed Scotland, England and Ireland in the 17th\u00a0century.\nThe Act reinforced the Petition of Right and the Habeas Corpus Act 1679 by codifying certain rights and liberties. Described by William Blackstone as \"Fundamental Laws of England\", the rights expressed in these Acts became associated with the idea of the rights of Englishmen. The Bill of Rights directly influenced the 1776 Virginia Declaration of Rights, which in turn influenced the Declaration of Independence.\nAlthough not a comprehensive statement of civil and political liberties, the Bill of Rights stands as one of the landmark documents in the development of civil liberties in the United Kingdom and a model for later, more general, statements of rights; these include the United States Bill of Rights, the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the European Convention on Human Rights. For example, as with the Bill of Rights 1689, the US Constitution prohibits excessive bail and \"cruel and unusual punishment\"; in fact, the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution which imposes this prohibition is a near-verbatim reproduction of the corresponding article in the Bill of Rights 1689. Similarly, \"cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment\" is banned under Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article\u00a03 of the European Convention on Human Rights.\nCurrent legal status.\nThe Bill of Rights remains in statute and continues to be cited in legal proceedings in the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth realms, particularly Article\u00a09 on parliamentary freedom of speech. Following the Perth Agreement in 2011, legislation amending the Bill of Rights and the Act of Settlement 1701 came into effect across the Commonwealth realms on 26\u00a0March 2015 which changed the laws of succession to the British throne.\nAustralia.\nThe Bill of Rights 1689 remains a part of Australian law, however in some states the Bill has been re-enacted in local legislation.\nThe ninth article, regarding parliamentary freedom of speech, was inherited by Federal Parliament in 1901 under section 49 of the Australian Constitution. It was incorporated into the \"Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987\" which \"preserves the application of the traditional expression of this privilege, but spells out in some detail just what may be covered by the term 'proceedings in Parliament'\".\nCanada.\nIn Canada, the Bill of Rights remains in statute, although it has been largely superseded by domestic constitutional legislation. The ninth article on parliamentary freedom of speech remains in active use.\nIreland.\nThe application of the Bill of Rights to the Kingdom of Ireland was uncertain. While the English Parliament sometimes passed acts relating to Ireland, the Irish Patriot Party regarded this as illegitimate, and others felt that English acts only extended to Ireland when explicitly stated to do so, which was not the case for the Bill of Rights. The Crown of Ireland Act 1542 meant the Bill's changes to the royal succession extended to Ireland. Bills modelled on the Bill of Rights were introduced in the Parliament of Ireland in 1695 and 1697 but not enacted. After the Acts of Union 1800, provisions relating to the rights of Parliament implicitly extended to Ireland, but provisions relating to the rights of the individual were a grey area. Some jurists regarded the bill not as positive law but as declaratory of the common law, and as such applicable to Ireland.\nThe Constitution of the Irish Free State, and the subsequent Constitution of Ireland, carry over laws in force in the former United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland to the extent they were not repugnant to those constitutions. The Bill of Rights was not referred to in subsequent Irish legislation until the Statute Law Revision Act 2007, which retained it, changed its short title to \"Bill of Rights 1688\" and repealed most of section 1 (the preamble) as being religiously discriminatory, which included: all words down to \"Upon which Letters Elections having been accordingly made\"; Article 7, which allowed Protestants to bear arms; and all words from \"And they doe Claime Demand and Insist\".\nThe Houses of the Oireachtas (Inquiries, Privileges and Procedures) Act 2013 repealed Article 9 on \"freedom of speech and debates or proceedings in Parliament\" as part of a consolidation of the law on parliamentary privilege.\nNew Zealand.\nThe Bill of Rights is part of the laws of New Zealand. The Act was invoked in the 1976 case of \"Fitzgerald v Muldoon and Others\", which centred on the purporting of newly appointed Prime Minister Robert Muldoon that he would advise the Governor-General to abolish a superannuation scheme established by the New Zealand Superannuation Act 1974, without new legislation. Muldoon felt that the dissolution would be immediate and he would later introduce a bill in parliament to retroactively make the abolition legal. This claim was challenged in court and the Chief Justice declared that Muldoon's actions were illegal as they had violated Article\u00a01 of the Bill of Rights, which provides \"that the pretended power of dispensing with laws or the execution of laws by regal authority ... is illegal.\"\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe Bill of Rights applies in England and Wales; it was enacted in the Kingdom of England which at the time included Wales. Scotland has its own legislation, the Claim of Right Act 1689, passed before the Acts of Union between England and Scotland. There are doubts as to whether, or to what extent, the Bill of Rights applies in Northern Ireland, reflecting earlier doubts as regards Ireland.\nThe requirement that jurors be freeholders in cases of high treason was abolished in England and Wales by the Juries Act 1825, and in Northern Ireland (to the extent it applied) by the Statute Law Revision Act 1950.\nNatural justice, the right to a fair trial, is in constitutional law held to temper unfair exploitation of parliamentary privilege. On 21\u00a0July 1995 a libel case, \"Neil Hamilton, MP v The Guardian\", collapsed as the High Court ruled that the Bill of Rights' total bar on bringing into question anything said or done in the House prevented \"The Guardian\" from obtaining a fair hearing. Hamilton could otherwise have carte blanche to allege any background or meaning to his words, and no contradicting direct evidence, inference, extra submission or cross-examination of his words could take place due to the tight strictures of the Bill of Rights. Equally, the House of Lords decided that, absent a 1996 statutory provision, the Bill of Rights' entrenched parliamentary privilege would have prevented a fair trial for Hamilton in the 2001 defamation action of \"Hamilton v Al-Fayed\" which went through the two tiers of appeal to like effect. That provision was section 13 of the Defamation Act 1996, which permits MPs to waive their parliamentary privilege and thus cite and have examined their own speeches if relevant to litigation.\nFollowing the United Kingdom European Union membership referendum in 2016, the Bill of Rights was cited by the Supreme Court in the \"Miller\" case, in which the court ruled that triggering EU exit must first be authorised by an act of Parliament, because not doing so would abrogate rights secured by an Act of Parliament (namely, rights of EU citizens arising from the EU treaties given effect in UK law by the European Communities Act 1972, as amended). It was cited again by the Supreme Court in its 2019 ruling that the prorogation of parliament was unlawful. The Court disagreed with the Government's assertion that prorogation could not be questioned under the Bill of Rights 1689 as a \"proceeding of Parliament\"; it ruled the opposite assertion, that prorogation \"cannot sensibly be described as a 'proceeding in Parliament'\", as it was imposed upon and not debatable by Parliament, and could bring \"core or essential business of Parliament\" to an end without debate.\nRecognition.\nTwo special designs of commemorative two pound coins were issued in the United Kingdom in 1989 to celebrate the tercentenary of the Glorious Revolution. One referred to the Bill of Rights and the other to the Claim of Right. Both depict the Royal Cypher of William and Mary and the mace of the House of Commons, one also shows a representation of the St Edward's Crown and the other the Crown of Scotland.\nIn May\u00a02011, the Bill of Rights was inscribed in UNESCO's UK Memory of the World Register recognising that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs part of the Parliament in the Making programme, the Bill of Rights was on display at the Houses of Parliament in February\u00a02015 and at the British Library from March to September\u00a02015.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38869", "revid": "25954311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38869", "title": "Flax", "text": "Flowering plant; Linum usitatissimum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFlax, also known as common flax or linseed, is a flowering plant, Linum usitatissimum, in the family Linaceae. It is cultivated as a food and fiber crop in regions of the world with temperate climates. In 2022, France produced 75% of the world's supply of flax.\nTextiles made from flax are known in English as linen and are traditionally used for bed sheets, underclothes, and table linen. Its oil is known as linseed oil. In addition to referring to the plant, the word \"flax\" may refer to the unspun fibers of the flax plant.\nThe plant species is known only as a cultivated plant and appears to have been domesticated just once from the wild species \"Linum bienne\", called pale flax. The plants called \"flax\" in New Zealand are, by contrast, members of the genus \"Phormium\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDescription.\nSeveral other species in the genus \"Linum\" are similar in appearance to \"L.\u00a0usitatissimum\", cultivated flax, including some that have similar blue flowers, and others with white, yellow, or red flowers. Some of these are perennial plants, unlike \"L. usitatissimum\", which is an annual plant.\nCultivated flax plants grow to tall, with slender stems. The leaves are glaucous green, slender lanceolate, long, and 3\u00a0mm broad.\nThe flowers are 15\u201325\u00a0mm in diameter with five petals, which can be coloured white, blue, yellow, and red depending on the species. The fruit is a round, dry capsule 5\u20139\u00a0mm in diameter, containing several glossy brown seeds shaped like apple pips, 4\u20137\u00a0mm long.\nTaxonomy.\nThe scientific name for flax was coined by Carl Linnaeus in his book \"Species Plantarum\" in 1753.\nVarieties.\nAccording to Plants of the World Online the flax species has two botanical varieties, \"Linum usitatissimum var. usitatissimum\" and \"Linum usitatissimum\" var. \"stenophyllum\".\nCultivation.\nFlax is native to the region extending from the eastern Mediterranean to India and was first domesticated in the Fertile Crescent. The soils most suitable for flax, besides the alluvial kind, are deep loams containing a large proportion of organic matter. Flax is often found growing just above the waterline in cranberry bogs. Heavy clays are unsuitable, as are soils of a gravelly or dry sandy nature. Farming flax requires few fertilizers or pesticides. The plant can reach a height of around 3 feet.\nHistory.\nThe earliest evidence of humans using wild flax as a textile comes from the present-day Republic of Georgia, where spun, dyed, and knotted wild flax fibers found in Dzudzuana Cave date to the Upper Paleolithic, 30,000 years ago. Humans first domesticated flax in the Fertile Crescent region. Evidence exists of a domesticated oilseed flax with increased seed-size from Tell Ramad in Syria and flax fabric fragments from \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck in Turkey by c.\u20099,000 years ago. Use of the crop steadily spread, reaching as far as Switzerland and Germany by 5,000 years ago. In China and India, domesticated flax was cultivated at least 5,000 years ago.\nFlax was cultivated extensively in ancient Egypt, where the temple walls had paintings of flowering flax, and mummies were embalmed using linen. Egyptian priests wore only linen, as flax symbolized purity. Phoenicians traded Egyptian linen throughout the Mediterranean and the Romans used it for their sails. As the Roman Empire declined, so did flax production. But with laws designed to publicize the hygiene of linen textiles and the health of linseed oil, Charlemagne revived the crop in the eighth century CE. Eventually, Flanders became the major center of the European linen industry in the Middle Ages. In North America, colonists introduced flax, and it flourished there, but by the early 20th century, cheap cotton and rising farm wages had caused production of flax to become concentrated in northern Russia, which came to provide 90% of the world's output. Since then, flax has lost its importance as a commercial crop, due to the easy availability of more inexpensive synthetic fibres.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2022, world production of raw or retted flax was 875,995 tonnes, led by France with 75% of the total. One of the largest regions in France for flax production is Normandy with nearly one-third of the world's production.\nHarvesting.\nMaturation.\nFlax is harvested for fiber production after about 100 days, or a month after the plants flower, and two weeks after the seed capsules form. The bases of the plants begin to turn yellow. If the plants are still green, the seed will not be useful, and the fiber will be underdeveloped. The fiber degrades once the plants turn brown.\nFlax grown for seed is allowed to mature until the seed capsules are yellow and just starting to split; it is then harvested in various ways. A combine harvester may either cut only the heads of the plants, or the whole plant. These are then dried to extract the seed. The amount of weeds in the straw affects its marketability, and this, coupled with market prices, determines whether the farmer chooses to harvest the flax straw. If the flax straw is not harvested, typically, it is burned, since the stalks are quite tough and decompose slowly (\"i.e.\", not in a single season). Formed into windrows from the harvesting process, the straw often clogs up tillage and planting equipment. Flax straw of insufficient quality for fiber use can be baled to build shelters for farm animals, sold as biofuel, or removed from the field in the spring.\nTwo ways are used to harvest flax fiber, one involving mechanized equipment (combines), and the second method, is more manual and targets maximum fiber length.\nHarvesting for fiber.\nMechanical.\nFlax for fiber production is usually harvested by a specialized flax harvester. Usually built on the same machine base as a combine, but instead of the cutting head, it has a flax puller. The flax plant is turned over and is gripped by rubber belts roughly 20\u201325\u00a0cm (8\u201310\u00a0inches) above ground, to avoid getting grasses and weeds in the flax. The rubber belts then pull the whole plant out of the ground with the roots so the whole length of the plant fiber can be used. The plants then pass over the machine and are placed on the field crosswise to the harvester's direction of travel. The plants are left in the field for field retting. The mature plant can also be cut with mowing equipment, similar to hay harvesting, and raked into windrows. When dried sufficiently, a combine then harvests the seeds similar to wheat or oat harvesting.\nManual.\nThe plant is pulled up with the roots (not cut), so as to increase the fiber length. After this, the flax is allowed to dry, the seeds are removed, and it is then retted. Depending upon climatic conditions, characteristics of the sown flax, and fields, the flax remains on the ground between two weeks and two months for retting. As a result of alternating rain and the sun, an enzymatic action degrades the pectins that bind fibers to the straw. The farmers turn over the straw during retting to evenly rett the stalks. When the straw is retted and sufficiently dry, it is rolled up. It is then stored by farmers before extracting the fibers.\nProcessing.\nThreshing is the process of removing the seeds from the rest of the plant. Separating the usable flax fibers from other components requires pulling the stems through a hackle and/or beating the plants to break them.\nFlax processing is divided into two parts: the first part is generally done by the farmer, to bring the flax fiber into a fit state for general or common purposes. This can be performed by three machines: one for threshing out the seed, one for breaking and separating the straw (stem) from the fiber, and one for further separating the broken straw and matter from the fiber.\nThe second part of the process brings the flax into a state for the very finest purposes, such as lace, cambric, damask, and very fine linen. This second part is performed by a refining machine.\nUses.\nFlax is grown for its seeds, which can be ground into a meal or turned into linseed oil, a product used as a nutritional supplement and as an ingredient in many wood-finishing products. Flax is also grown as an ornamental plant in gardens. Moreover, flax fibers are used to make linen. The specific epithet in its binomial name, \"usitatissimum,\" means \"most useful\".\nFlax fibers taken from the stem of the plant are two to three times as strong as cotton fibers. Additionally, flax fibers are naturally smooth and straight. Europe and North America both depended on flax for plant-based cloth until the 19th century, when cotton overtook flax as the most common plant for making rag-based paper. Flax is grown on the Canadian prairies for linseed oil, which is used as a drying oil in paints and varnishes and in products such as linoleum and printing inks.\nLinseed meal, the by-product of producing linseed oil from flax seeds, is used as livestock fodder.\nFlax seeds.\nFlax seeds occur in brown and yellow (golden) varieties. Most types of these basic varieties have similar nutritional characteristics and equal numbers of short-chain omega-3 fatty acids. Yellow flax seeds, called solin (trade name \"Linola\"), have a similar oil profile to brown flax seeds and both are very high in omega-3s (alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), specifically).\nFlax seeds produce a vegetable oil known as flax seed oil or linseed oil, which is one of the oldest commercial oils. It is an edible oil obtained by expeller pressing and sometimes followed by solvent extraction. Solvent-processed flax seed oil has been used for centuries as a drying oil in painting and varnishing.\nCulinary.\nA 100-gram portion of ground flax seed supplies about of food energy, 41g of fat, 28g of fiber, and 20g of protein. Whole flax seeds are chemically stable, but ground flax seed meal, because of oxidation, may go rancid when left exposed to air at room temperature in as little as a week. Refrigeration and storage in sealed containers will keep ground flax seed meal for a longer period before it turns rancid. Under conditions similar to those found in commercial bakeries, trained sensory panelists could not detect differences between bread made with freshly ground flax seed and bread made with flax seed that had been milled four months earlier and stored at room temperature. If packed immediately without exposure to air and light, milled flax seed is stable against excessive oxidation when stored for nine months at room temperature, and under warehouse conditions, for 20 months at ambient temperatures.\nThree phenolic glucosides\u2014secoisolariciresinol diglucoside, p-coumaric acid glucoside, and ferulic acid glucoside\u2014are present in commercial bread containing flax seed.\nNutrition.\nFlax seeds are 7% water, 18% protein, 29% carbohydrates, and 42% fat (see table). In as a reference amount, flax seeds provide 534 kilocalories and contain high levels (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of protein, dietary fiber, several B vitamins, and dietary minerals. Flax seeds are especially rich in thiamine, magnesium, and phosphorus (DVs above 90%) (see table).\nAs a percentage of total fat, flax seeds contain 54% omega-3 fatty acids (mostly ALA), 18% omega-9 fatty acids (oleic acid), and 6% omega-6 fatty acids (linoleic acid); the seeds contain 9% saturated fat, including 5% as palmitic acid. Flax seed oil contains 53% 18:3 omega-3 fatty acids (mostly ALA) and 13% 18:2 omega-6 fatty acids.\nHealth research.\nA meta-analysis showed that consumption of more than 30\u00a0g of flax-seed daily for more than 12\u00a0weeks reduced body weight, body mass index (BMI), and waist circumference for persons with a BMI greater than 27. Another meta-analysis showed that consumption of flax seeds for more than 12\u00a0weeks produced small reductions in systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure. A third showed that consuming flax seed or its derivatives may reduce total and LDL-cholesterol in the blood, with greater benefits in women and people with high cholesterol. A fourth showed a small reduction in c-reactive protein (a marker of inflammation) only in persons with a body mass index greater than 30.\nSafety.\nFlax seed and its oil are generally recognized as safe for human consumption. Like many common foods, flax contains small amounts of cyanogenic glycoside, which is nontoxic when consumed in typical amounts. Typical concentrations (for example, 0.48% in a sample of defatted dehusked flax seed meal) can be removed by special processing. Flax seed is a potential allergen in both adults and children.\nFodder.\nAfter crushing the seeds to extract linseed oil, the resultant linseed meal is a protein-rich feed for ruminants, rabbits, and fish. It is also often used as feed for swine and poultry, and has also been used in horse concentrate and dog food. The high omega-3 fatty acid (ALA) content of linseed meal \"softens\" milk, eggs, and meat, which means it causes a higher unsaturated fat content and thus lowers its storage time. The high omega-3 content also has a further disadvantage, because this fatty acid oxidises and goes rancid quickly, which shortens the storage time. Linola was developed in Australia and introduced in the 1990s with less omega-3, specifically to serve as fodder. Another disadvantage of the meal and seed is that it contains a vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) antagonist, and may require this vitamin be supplemented, especially in chickens, and furthermore linseeds contain 2\u20137% of mucilage (fibre), which may be beneficial in humans and cattle, but cannot be digested by non-ruminants and can be detrimental to young animals, unless possibly treated with enzymes.\nLinseed meal is added to cattle feed as a protein supplement. It can only be added at low percentages due to the high fat content, which is unhealthy for ruminants. Compared to oilseed meal from crucifers it measures as having lower nutrient values, however, good results are obtained in cattle, perhaps due to the mucilage, which may aid in slowing digestion and thus allowing more time to absorb nutrients. One study found that feeding flax seeds may increase omega-3 content in beef, while another found no differences. It might also act as a substitute for tallow in increasing marbling. In the US, flax-based feed for ruminants is often somewhat more expensive than other feeds on a nutrient basis. Sheep feeding on low quality forage are able to eat a large amount of linseed meal, up to 40% in one test, with positive consequences. It has been fed as a supplement to water buffaloes in India and provided a better diet than forage alone, but not as good as when substituted with soy meal. It is considered an inferior protein supplement for swine because of its fibre, vitamin antagonist, high omega-3 content, and its low lysine content, and can only be used in small amounts in the feed. Although it may increase the omega-3 content in eggs and meat, it is also an inferior and potentially toxic feed for poultry, although it can be used in small amounts. The meal is an adequate and traditional source of protein for rabbits at 8\u201310%. Its use in fish feeds is limited.\nRaw, immature linseeds contain an amount of cyanogenic compounds and can be dangerous for monogastric animals, like horses and rabbits. Boiling removes the danger. This is not an issue in meal cake due to the processing temperature during oil extraction.\nFlax straw left over from the harvesting of oilseed is not very nutritious; it is tough and indigestible and is not recommended for use as ruminant fodder, although it may be used as bedding or baled as windbreaks.\nWarfare.\nA British biowarfare military operation plan developed from 1942 to 1944 during World War II was planned to disseminate linseed with anthrax spores to be eaten by livestock, and eventually consumed by the human population. This would have led to widespread death, but the plan was eventually abandoned for Operation Overlord.\nFlax fibers.\nFlax fiber is extracted from the bast beneath the surface of the stem of the flax plant. Flax fiber is soft, lustrous, and flexible; bundles of fiber have the appearance of blonde hair, hence the description \"flaxen\" hair. It is stronger than cotton fiber, but less elastic.\nThe use of flax fibers dates back tens of millennia; linen, a refined textile made from flax fibers, was worn widely by Sumerian priests more than 4,000 years ago. Industrial-scale flax fiber processing existed in antiquity. A Bronze Age factory dedicated to flax processing was discovered in Euonymeia, Greece.\nThe best grades are used for fabrics such as damasks, lace, and sheeting. Coarser grades are used for the manufacturing of twine and rope, and historically, for canvas and webbing equipment. Flax fiber is a raw material used in the high-quality paper industry for the use of printed banknotes, laboratory paper (blotting and filter), rolling paper for cigarettes, and tea bags.\nFlax mills for spinning flaxen yarn were invented by John Kendrew and Thomas Porthouse of Darlington, England, in 1787. New methods of processing flax have led to renewed interest in the use of flax as an industrial fiber.\nPreparation for spinning.\nBefore the flax fibers can be spun into linen, they must be separated from the rest of the stalk. The first step in this process is retting, which is the process of rotting away the inner stalk, leaving the outer parts intact. At this point, straw, or coarse outer stem (cortex and epidermis), is still remaining. To remove this, the flax is \"broken\", the straw is broken up into small, short bits, while the actual fiber is left unharmed. Scutching scrapes the outer straw from the fiber. The stems are then pulled through \"hackles\", which act like combs to remove the straw and some shorter fibers out of the long fiber.\nRetting flax.\nSeveral methods are used for retting flax. It can be retted in a pond, stream, field, or tank. When the retting is complete, the bundles of flax feel soft and slimy, and quite a few fibers stand out from the stalks. When wrapped around a finger, the inner woody part springs away from the fibers. Pond retting is the fastest. It consists of placing the flax in a pool of water which will not evaporate. It generally takes place in a shallow pool which will warm up dramatically in the sun; the process may take from a few days to a few weeks. Pond-retted flax is traditionally considered of lower quality, possibly because the product can become dirty, and is easily over-retted, damaging the fiber. This form of retting also produces quite an odor. Stream retting is similar to pool retting, but the flax is submerged in bundles in a stream or river. This generally takes two or three weeks longer than pond retting, but the end product is less likely to be dirty, does not smell as bad, and because the water is cooler, is less likely to be over-retted. Both pond and stream retting were traditionally used less because they pollute the waters used for the process.\nIn field retting, the flax is laid out in a large field, and dew is allowed to collect on it. This process normally takes a month or more but is generally considered to provide the highest quality flax fibers, and it produces the least pollution.\nRetting can also be done in a plastic trash can or any type of water-tight container of wood, concrete, earthenware, or plastic. Metal containers will not work, as acid is produced when retting, and it would corrode the metal. If the water temperature is kept at , the retting process under these conditions takes 4 or 5 days. If the water is colder, it takes longer. Scum collects at the top, and an odor is given off the same as in pond retting. 'Enzymatic' retting of flax has been researched as a technique to engineer fibers with specific properties.\nDressing the flax.\nDressing the flax is the process of removing the straw from the fibers. Dressing consists of three steps: breaking, scutching, and heckling. The breaking breaks up the straw. Some of the straw is scraped from the fibers in the scutching process, and finally, the fiber is pulled through heckles to remove the last bits of straw.\nBreaking breaks up the straw into short segments. \nScutching removes some of the straw from the fiber.\nHeckling is pulling the fiber through various sizes of heckling combs or heckles. A heckle is a bed of \"nails\"\u2014sharp, long-tapered, tempered, polished steel pins driven into wooden blocks at regular spacing. \nGenetically modified flax contamination.\nIn September 2009, Canadian flax exports reportedly had been contaminated by a deregistered genetically modified cultivar called 'Triffid' that had food and feed safety approval in Canada and the U.S. Canadian growers and the Flax Council of Canada raised concerns about the marketability of this cultivar in Europe where a zero tolerance policy exists regarding unapproved genetically modified organisms. Consequently, Triffid was deregistered in 2010 and never grown commercially in Canada or the U.S. Triffid stores were destroyed, but future exports and further tests at the University of Saskatchewan proved that Triffid persisted in at least two Canadian flax varieties, possibly affecting future crops. Canadian flax seed cultivars were reconstituted with Triffid-free seed used to plant the 2014 crop. Laboratories are certified to test for the presence of Triffid at a level of one seed in 10,000.\nIn culture.\nFlax is an emblem of Northern Ireland and is displayed by the Northern Ireland Assembly. In a coronet, it appeared on the reverse of the British one-pound coin to represent Northern Ireland on coins minted in 1986, 1991, and 2014. Flax also represents Northern Ireland on the badge of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom and on various logos associated with it.\nCommon flax is the national flower of Belarus.\nIn early versions of the Sleeping Beauty tale, such as \"Sun, Moon, and Talia\" by Giambattista Basile, the princess pricks her finger, not on a spindle, but on a sliver of flax, which later is sucked out by her children conceived as she sleeps.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38871", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38871", "title": "Greyhound racing", "text": "Canine racing sport involving the Greyhound dog breed\nGreyhound racing is an organized, competitive sport in which greyhounds are raced around an oval track. The sport originates from coursing. Track racing uses an artificial lure (usually a form of windsock) that travels ahead of the greyhounds on a rail until the greyhounds cross the finish line. As with horse racing, greyhound races often allow the public to bet on the outcome.\nAnimal rights and animal welfare groups have been critical of the welfare of greyhounds in the commercial racing industry for many years which has contributed to the reforms of the industries in recent times. A greyhound adoption movement spearheaded by kennel owners has arisen to assist retired racing dogs in finding homes as pets, with an estimated adoption rate of over 95% in the United States. In the UK, under the Greyhound Board of Great Britain retirement scheme (introduced in 2020) greyhounds are ensured an approved GRS (greyhound retirement scheme) homing centre after racing.\nIn many countries, greyhound racing is purely amateur and solely for enjoyment. In other countries, particularly Australia, Ireland, the United Kingdom and the United States, greyhound racing is similar to horse racing in that it is part of the gambling industry.\nHistory.\nModern greyhound racing has its origins in coursing. The first recorded attempt at racing greyhounds on a straight track was made beside the Welsh Harp reservoir, Hendon, England, in 1876, but this experiment did not develop. The industry emerged in its recognizable modern form, featuring circular or oval tracks, with the invention of the mechanical, or artificial, hare in 1912 by an American, Owen Patrick Smith. Smith had altruistic aims for the industry to stop the killing of the jack rabbits and see \"greyhound racing as we see horse racing\". In 1919, Smith opened the first professional dog-racing track with stands in Emeryville, California. The Emeryville arena was torn down in February 1920 to make way for the construction of a modern racetrack using the mechanical lure, described in the press as the \"automatic rabbit.\" The first race at the new park was on Saturday, May 29, 1920.\nThe oval track and mechanical hare were introduced to Britain, in 1926, by another American, Charles Munn, in association with Major Lyne-Dixson, a Canadian, who was a key figure in coursing. Finding other supporters proved rather difficult, however, and with the General Strike of 1926 looming, the two men scoured the country in an attempt to find others who would join them. Eventually they met Brigadier-General Critchley, who introduced them to Sir William Gentle. Between them they raised \u00a322,000, and like the American 'International Greyhound Racing Association' (or the I.G.R.A.), they launched the Greyhound Racing Association, holding the first British meeting at Manchester's Belle Vue Stadium. The industry was successful in cities and towns throughout the UK \u2013 by the end of 1927, there were forty tracks operating.\nMiddle-class reformers were outraged, and the working-class delighted, with the emergence in the late-1920s of Greyhound racing as an entertaining new sport and betting opportunity. At first it seemed modern, glamorous, and American, but the middle class lost interest when working-class audiences took over. The working class appreciated the nearby urban locations of the tracks and the evening times of the meetings. Betting has always been a key ingredient of greyhound racing, both through on-course bookmakers and the totalisator, first introduced in 1930. Like horse racing, it is popular to bet on the greyhound races as a form of parimutuel betting.\nGreyhound racing enjoyed its highest United Kingdom attendances just after the Second World War\u2014for example, attendances during 1946 were estimated to be around 75 million based on an annual totalisator turnover of \u00a3196,431,430. The industry experienced a decline beginning in the early 1960s, after the 1960 UK Betting and Gaming Act permitted off-course cash betting. Sponsorship, limited television coverage, and the later abolition of on-course betting tax have partially offset this decline.\nBy country.\nCommercial greyhound racing is characterized by several criteria (varying depending on country) and can include legalized gambling, the existence of a regulatory structure, the physical presence of racetracks, whether the host state or subdivision shares in any gambling proceeds, fees charged by host locations, the use of professional racing kennels, the number of dogs participating in races, the existence of an official racing code, and membership in a greyhound racing federation or trade association.\nAustralia.\nGreyhounds Australasia was formed in 1937 (as the Australian and New Zealand Greyhound Association) and consists of governing bodies in Australian states and New Zealand, which regulate greyhound welfare and living conditions.\nIreland.\nGreyhound racing is a popular industry in Ireland with the majority of tracks falling under the control of R\u00e1sa\u00edocht Con \u00c9ireann (GRI) which is a commercial semi-state body and reports to the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine. The vast majority of greyhounds racing in the UK are imported from Irish breeders (estimated 90%). \nIn the greyhound industry Northern Irish tracks are considered to be in the category of Irish greyhound racing and the results are published by the GRI. They do not come under the control of the Greyhound Board of Great Britain.\nUnited Kingdom.\nGreyhound racing in Great Britain is regulated by the Greyhound Board of Great Britain and accredited by United Kingdom Accreditation Service.\nIn February 2025, a ban on greyhound racing was announced in Wales, which would result in the closure of its only track at the Valley Greyhound Stadium in Ystrad Mynach. In response, GBGB CEO Mark Bird stated \"This announcement has nothing to do with greyhound welfare and everything to do with pressure from the extreme animal rights movement. The Welsh Government\u2019s own Summary of Consultation Responses highlighted the lack of evidence to support the case for a ban on the sport.\". The Prohibition of Greyhound Racing (Wales) Bill was introduced to the Senedd on the 29 September 2025, with the aim of making it an offence to operate a stadium or similar venue for greyhound racing, or to be involved in organising greyhound racing.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, greyhound racing is governed by state or local law, however, as of 2025 only two racetracks in West Virginia continue to operate. Greyhound care is regulated by the American Greyhound Council and the National Greyhound Association.\nNew Zealand.\nRacing in New Zealand is currently governed by the New Zealand Racing Board (NZRB) in accordance with the Racing Act 2003 but on 10 December 2024, Winston Peters the Minister for Racing announced that greyhound racing was to be banned in New Zealand to protect the welfare of the racing dogs. The sport was to be phased out gradually over 20 months to allow time to rehome the estimated 2900 racing dogs. The last race is slated to be July 2026 at the latest.\nFormer.\nThere was a greyhound track called the Canidrome located in Macau, China, which conducted racing from 1932 to 1938 and again from 1963 to 2018.\nThere was formerly a greyhound racing track in Vietnam at the Lam Son Stadium in Vung Tau, Vietnam from 2000 to March 2023.\nThere was one greyhound racing track in Mexico, the Caliente Hipodrome in Tijuana, that hosted races from 1947 to July 14, 2024.\nRetirement.\nGenerally, a greyhound's career will end between the ages of four and six \u2013 after the dog can no longer race, or possibly when it is no longer competitive. The best dogs are kept for breeding and there are industry-associated adoption groups and rescue groups that work to obtain retired racing greyhounds and place them as pets. In the United Kingdom, the Greyhound Board of Great Britain (GBGB) has introduced measures to locate where racing greyhounds reside after they have retired from racing and as from 2017 records have been available to the public.\nSeveral organizations, such as British Greyhounds Retired Database, Greyhound Rescue West of England, Birmingham Greyhound Protection, GAGAH, Adopt-a-Greyhound and Greyhound Pets of America, and the Greyhound Trust try to ensure that as many of the dogs as possible are adopted. Some of these groups also advocate better treatment of the dogs while at the track and/or the end of racing for profit. In recent years the racing industry has made significant progress in establishing programs for the adoption of retired racers. In addition to actively cooperating with private adoption groups throughout the country, many race tracks have established their own adoption programs at various tracks.\nMedical care.\nThe medical care of a racing greyhound is primarily the responsibility of the trainer while in training. All tracks in the United Kingdom have to have a veterinary surgeon and veterinary room facilities on site during racing. The greyhounds require microchipping, annual vaccinations against distemper, infectious canine hepatitis, parvovirus, leptospirosis, and a vaccination to minimize outbreaks of diseases such as kennel cough. All greyhounds in the UK must pass a pre-race veterinary inspection before being allowed to take part in that race.\nThe racing industry (in several countries) actively works to prevent the spread of doping cases. Attempts are being made to recover urine samples from all greyhounds in a race, not just the winners. Greyhounds from which samples cannot be obtained for a certain number of consecutive races are subject to being ruled off the track in some countries. Violators are subject to criminal penalties and loss of their racing licenses by state gaming commissions and a permanent ban from the National Greyhound Association. The trainer of the greyhound is at all times the \"absolute insurer\" of the condition of the animal. The trainer is responsible for any positive test regardless of how the banned substance has entered the greyhound's system.\nA series of research papers have indicated that the greyhound racing industry played an important role in the rise of drug-resistant hookworms. Greyhound farms tended to treat greyhounds with dewormers even when the dogs did not have an active infection, thus enabling worms, which are constantly exposed to drugs, to develop immunity against the drugs among the surviving worms. The rise of drug-resistant hookworms poses a threat to pets and humans more generally.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38872", "revid": "49440083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38872", "title": "Bessarabia", "text": "Historical region in Moldova and Ukraine\nBessarabia () is a historical region in Eastern Europe, bounded by the Dniester river on the east and the Prut river on the west. About two thirds of Bessarabia lies within modern-day Moldova, with the Budjak region covering the southern coastal region and part of the Ukrainian Chernivtsi Oblast covering a small area in the north.\nIn the late 14th century, the newly established Principality of Moldavia encompassed what later became known as Bessarabia. Afterward, this territory was directly or indirectly, partly or wholly controlled by: the Ottoman Empire (as suzerain of Moldavia, with direct rule only in Budjak and Khotyn), the Russian Empire, Romania, the USSR. \nIn the aftermath of the Russo-Turkish War (1806\u20131812), and the ensuing Peace of Bucharest, the eastern parts of the Principality of Moldavia, an Ottoman vassal, along with some areas formerly under direct Ottoman rule, were ceded to Imperial Russia. The acquisition was among the Russian Empire's last territorial acquisitions in Europe. The newly acquired territories were organised as the Bessarabia Governorate of the Russian Empire, adopting a name previously used for the southern plains between the Dniester and the Danube rivers. After the Crimean War, in 1856, the southern areas of Bessarabia were returned to Moldavian rule; Russian rule was restored over the whole of the region in 1878, when Romania, the result of Moldavia's union with Wallachia, was pressured into exchanging those territories for the Dobruja.\nIn 1917, in the wake of the Russian Revolution, the area constituted itself as the Moldavian Democratic Republic, an autonomous republic part of a proposed federative Russian state. Bolshevik agitation in late 1917 and early 1918 resulted in the intervention of the Romanian Army, ostensibly to pacify the region. Soon after, the parliamentary assembly declared independence, and then union with the Kingdom of Romania. However, the legality of these acts was disputed, most prominently by the Soviet Union, which regarded the area as a territory occupied by Romania.\nIn 1940, after securing the assent of Nazi Germany through the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, the Soviet Union pressured Romania, under threat of war, into withdrawing from Bessarabia, allowing the Red Army to enter and the Soviet Union to annex the region. The area was formally integrated into the Soviet Union: the core joined parts of the Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic to form the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic, while territories in the north and the south of Bessarabia were transferred to the Ukrainian SSR. Axis-aligned Romania recaptured the region in 1941 with the success of Operation M\u00fcnchen during the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, but lost it in 1944 as the tide of war turned. In 1947, the Soviet-Romanian border along the Prut was internationally recognised by the Treaty of Paris that formally ended hostilities of World War II.\nDuring the process of the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Moldavian and Ukrainian SSRs proclaimed their independence in 1991, becoming the modern states of Moldova and Ukraine while preserving the existing partition of Bessarabia. After a short war in the early 1990s, the Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic was proclaimed in the Transnistria, extending its authority also over the municipality of Bender on the right bank of Dniester river. Part of the Gagauz-inhabited areas in southern Bessarabia was organized in 1994 as an autonomous region within Moldova.\nEtymology.\nAccording to the traditional explanation, the name Bessarabia (\"Basarabia\" in Romanian) derives from the Wallachian Basarab dynasty, who allegedly ruled over the southern part of the area in the 14th century. The name \"Basarab\" is likely of Cuman or Pecheneg Turkic origin and most likely meant \"father ruler\". However, some scholars question this, arguing that:\nAccording to Dimitrie Cantemir, the name Bessarabia originally applied only to the part of the territory south of the Upper Trajanic Wall, i.e. an area only slightly larger than present-day Budjak.\nLinguist Dan Alexe argues that the name Bessarabia/\"Basarabia\" is most probably of Iranian origin. He states that Neagu Djuvara's proposed Cuman origin, from \"basar\" (\"to rule\") and \"aba\" (\"father\") is not realistic. Instead, he proposes the origin as an Iranian \"ba sar ab\", composed of \"ba\" (\"at\", \"on\", \"to\"), \"sar\" (meaning either \"head\" or the preposition \"on\") and \"ab\" (\"water\"). To strengthen his hypothesis, Alexe mentions how many other rivers, including the Ob, were simply named \"water\" (\"ab\") by Iranophone populations. He states how the \"ab\" particle can also be found in other toponyms, such as Punjab (\"five rivers\"). Moreover, Djuvara talks about a possible Cuman origin of the Basarab family, to which Alexe adds that the Cuman nobility is known from the \"Codex Cumanicus\" to have also been Iranophone. Thus, Bessarabia (\"ba sar ab\") would simply mean \"by the water\" or \"headwater\", as in the point where the Danube flows into the Black Sea. Yet another argument used by Alexe is that many rivers in the Black Sea area have, since antiquity, names stemming from Iranophone tribes containing the \"don\"- (\"water\", \"river\") particle, such as the Don, the Danube, the Dnieper and the Dniester.\nGeography.\nThe region is bounded by the Dniester to the north and east, the Prut to the west, and the lower River Danube and Black Sea to the south. It has an area of . The area is mostly hilly plains and flat steppes. It is very fertile and has lignite deposits and stone quarries. People living in the area grow sugar beet, sunflower, wheat, maize, tobacco, wine grapes, and fruit. They raise sheep and cattle. The main industry in the region is agricultural processing.\nThe main Bessarabian cities are Chi\u0219in\u0103u, the former capital of the Russian Bessarabia Governorate, now capital of Moldova; B\u0103l\u021bi, on the river R\u0103ut, often dubbed the \"Northern capital\" of Moldova; Bender/Tighina, on the Dniester, currently controlled by the unrecognized Russian-backed separatist region of Transnistria; Izmail, in the southwest corner of Ukraine on the Danube; and Bilhorod-Dnistrovs'kyi, historically known as Cetatea Alb\u0103 or Akkerman, also in southwestern Ukraine near Odesa. Other towns of administrative or historical importance include Cahul, Soroca, Orhei, Ungheni and Comrat, all now in Moldova; and Khotyn, Kilia, Reni and Bolhrad, all now in Ukraine.\nHistory.\nIn the late 14th century, the newly established Principality of Moldavia encompassed what later became known as Bessarabia. Afterward, this territory was directly or indirectly, partly or wholly controlled by: the Ottoman Empire (as suzerain of Moldavia, with direct rule only in Budjak and Khotyn), the Russian Empire, Romania, the USSR. Since 1991, most of the territory forms the core of Moldova, with smaller parts in Ukraine.\nPrehistory.\nPeople have inhabited the territory of Bessarabia for thousands of years. Cucuteni\u2013Trypillia culture flourished between the 6th and 3rd millennium BC.\nAncient times.\nIn Antiquity the region was inhabited by Thracians, as well as for shorter periods by Cimmerians, Scythians, Sarmatians, and Celts, specifically by tribes such as the Costoboci, Carpi, Britogali, Tyragetae, and Bastarnae. In the 6th century BC, Greek settlers established the colony of Tyras along the Black Sea coast and traded with the locals. Celts also settled in the southern parts of Bessarabia, their main city being Aliobrix.\nThe first polity that is believed to have included the whole of Bessarabia was the Dacian polity of Burebista in the 1st century BC. After his death, the polity was divided into smaller pieces, and the central parts were unified in the Dacian kingdom of Decebalus in the 1st century AD. The kingdom was defeated by the Roman Empire in 106. Southern Bessarabia was included in the empire even before that, in 57 AD, as part of the Roman province Moesia Inferior, but it was secured only when the Dacian Kingdom was defeated in 106. The Romans built defensive earthen walls in Southern Bessarabia (e.g. Lower Trajan Wall) to defend the Scythia Minor province against invasions. Except for the Black Sea shore in the south, Bessarabia remained outside direct Roman control; the myriad of tribes there are called by modern historians Free Dacians. The 2nd to the 5th centuries also saw the development of the Chernyakhov culture.\nIn 270, the Roman authorities began to withdraw their forces south of the Danube, especially from the Roman Dacia, due to the invading Goths and Carpi. The Goths, a Germanic tribe, poured into the Roman Empire from the lower Dniepr River, through the southern part of Bessarabia (Budjak steppe), which due to its geographic position and characteristics (mainly steppe), was swept by various nomadic tribes for many centuries. In 378, the area was overrun by the Huns.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nFrom the 3rd century until the 11th century, the region was invaded numerous times in turn by different tribes: Goths, Huns, Avars, Bulgars, Magyars, Pechenegs, Cumans and Mongols. The territory of Bessarabia was encompassed in dozens of ephemeral kingdoms which were disbanded when another wave of migrants arrived. Those centuries were characterized by a terrible state of insecurity and mass movement of these tribes. The period was later known as the Dark Ages of Europe, or age of migrations.\nIn 561, the Avars captured Bessarabia and executed the local ruler Mesamer. After the Avars, Slavs arrived in the region and established settlements. Then, in 582, Onogur Bulgars settled in southeastern Bessarabia and northern Dobruja, from which they moved to Moesia Inferior (allegedly under pressure from the Khazars), and formed the nascent region of \"Bulgaria\". With the rise of the Khazars' state in the east, the invasions began to diminish and it was possible to create larger states. According to some opinions, the southern part of Bessarabia remained under the influence of the First Bulgarian Empire until the end of the 9th century.\nBetween the 8th and 10th centuries, the southern part of Bessarabia was inhabited by people from the Balkan-Danubian culture (the culture of the First Bulgarian Empire). Between the 9th and 13th centuries, Bessarabia is mentioned in Slav chronicles as part of \"Bolohoveni\" (north) and \"Brodnici\" (south) voivodeships, believed to be Vlach principalities of the early Middle Ages.\nThe last large-scale invasions were those of the Mongols of 1241, 1290, and 1343. Sehr al-Jedid (near Orhei), an important settlement of the Golden Horde, dates from this period. They led to a retreat of a big part of the population to the mountainous areas in Eastern Carpathians and to Transylvania. The population east of Prut became especially low at the time of the Tatar invasions.\nIn the Late Middle Age, chronicles mention a Tigheci \"republic\", predating the establishment of the Principality of Moldavia, situated near the modern town of Cahul in the southwest of Bessarabia, preserving its autonomy even during the later Principality even into the 18th century. Genovese merchants rebuilt or established a number of forts along the Dniester (notably Moncastro) and Danube (including Kyliya/Chilia-Licostomo).\nPrincipality of Moldavia.\nAfter the 1360s, the region was gradually included in the principality of Moldavia, which by 1392 established control over the fortresses of Akkerman and Chilia, its eastern border becoming the River Dniester. Based on the name of the region, some authors consider that in the latter part of the 14th century the southern part of the region was under the rule of Wallachia (the ruling dynasty of Wallachia during the period was called Basarab). In the 15th century, the entire region was a part of the principality of Moldavia. Stephen the Great ruled between 1457 and 1504, a period of nearly 50 years during which he won 32 battles defending his country against virtually all his neighbours (mainly the Ottomans and the Tatars, but also the Hungarians and the Poles) while losing only two. During this period, after each victory, he raised a monastery or a church close to the battlefield honoring Christianity. Many of these battlefields and churches, as well as old fortresses, are situated in Bessarabia (mainly along Dniester).\nIn 1484, the Ottoman Empire invaded and captured Chilia and Cetatea Alb\u0103 (Akkerman in Turkish), and annexed the shoreline southern part of Bessarabia, which was then divided into two sanjaks (districts) of the Ottoman Empire. In 1538, the Ottomans annexed more Bessarabian land in the south as far as Tighina, while the central and northern Bessarabia remained part of the Principality of Moldavia (which became a vassal of the Ottoman Empire). Between 1711 and 1812, the Russian Empire occupied the region five times during its wars against the Ottoman and Austrian Empires.\nAnnexation by the Russian Empire.\nBy the Treaty of Bucharest of May 28, 1812\u2014concluding the Russo-Turkish War of 1806-1812\u2014the Ottoman Empire ceded the land between the Pruth and the Dniester, including both Moldavian and Turkish territories, to the Russian Empire. That entire region was then called \"Bessarabia\".\nIn 1814, the first German settlers arrived and mainly settled in the southern parts, and Bessarabian Bulgarians began settling in the region too, founding towns such as Bolhrad. Between 1812 and 1846, the Bulgarian and Gagauz population migrated to the Russian Empire via the River Danube, after living many years under oppressive Ottoman rule, and settled in southern Bessarabia. Turkic-speaking tribes of the Nogai horde also inhabited the Budjak Region (in Turkish Bucak) of southern Bessarabia from the 16th to 18th centuries but were totally driven out prior to 1812.\nAdministratively, Bessarabia became an \"oblast\" of the Russian Empire in 1818, and a \"guberniya\" in 1873.\nThe Treaty of Adrianople, which concluded the Russo-Turkish War of 1828-1829, stated that the entire Danube Delta would be ceded to the Bessarabian oblast. According to Vasile Stoica, emissary of the Romanian government to the United States, in 1834, Romanian was banned from schools and government facilities, despite 80% of the population speaking the language. This later lead to the banning of Romanian in churches, media, and books. According to the same author, those who protested the banning of Romanian could be sent to Siberia.\nSouthern Bessarabia returned to Moldavia.\nAt the end of the Crimean War, in 1856, by the Treaty of Paris, Southern Bessarabia (organised as the Cahul and Ismail counties, with the Bolgrad county split from the latter in 1864) was returned to Moldavia, causing the Russian Empire to lose access to the Danube river. In 1859, Moldavia and Wallachia united to form the Romanian United Principalities (Romania), which included the southern part of Bessarabia.\nThe railway Chi\u0219in\u0103u-Ia\u0219i was opened on June 1, 1875, in preparation for the Russo-Turkish War (1877\u20131878) and the Eiffel Bridge was opened on April 21\u00a0[O.S. April 9]\u00a01877, just three days before the outbreak of the war. The Romanian War of Independence was fought in 1877\u201378, with the help of the Russian Empire as an ally. Northern Dobruja was awarded to Romania for its role in the 1877\u201378 Russo-Turkish War, and as compensation for the transfer of Southern Bessarabia.\nEarly 20th century.\nThe Kishinev pogrom took place in the capital of Bessarabia on April 6, 1903, after local newspapers published articles inciting the public to act against Jews; 47 or 49 Jews were killed, 92 severely wounded and 700 houses destroyed. The anti-Semitic newspaper \u0411\u0435\u0441\u0441\u0430\u0440\u0430\u0431\u0435\u0446 (Bessarabetz, meaning \"Bessarabian\"), published by Pavel Krushevan, insinuated that local Jews killed a Russian boy. Another newspaper, \u0421\u0432\u0435\u0442 (Lat. Svet, meaning \"World\" or Russian for \"Light\"), used the age-old blood libel against the Jews (alleging that the boy had been killed to use his blood in preparation of matzos).\nAfter the 1905 Russian Revolution, a Romanian nationalist movement started to develop in Bessarabia. In the chaos brought by the Russian revolution of October 1917, a National Council (Sfatul \u021a\u0103rii) was established in Bessarabia, with 120 members elected from Bessarabia by some political and professional organizations and 10 elected from Transnistria (the left bank of Dniester where Romanians accounted for half of the population, the rest being Russians and Ukrainians. See Demographics of Transnistria).\nThe \"Rumcherod\" Committee (Central Executive Committee of the Soviets of Romanian Front, Black Sea Fleet and Odesa Military District) proclaimed itself the supreme power in Bessarabia.\nOn the pretext of securing supply lines against raids by Bolsheviks and armed bandits, members of the Moldavian legislative council Sfatul \u021a\u0103rii and the Entente Powers requested military assistance from Romania, and the Romanian Army crossed the republic's border on January 23\u00a0[O.S. January 10]\u00a01918; following several skirmishes with Moldovan and Bolshevik troops, the occupation of the whole region was completed in early March. The occupation of Bessarabia by the Romanians was not universally welcomed, and the members of the Bessarabian government denied that the Romanian troops had ever been invited to occupy the republic.\nAfter Ukraine issued its Fourth Universal, breaking ties with Bolshevik Russia and proclaiming a sovereign Ukrainian state, Sfatul \u021a\u0103rii declared Bessarabia's independence on February 6\u00a0[O.S. January 24]\u00a01918, as the Moldavian Democratic Republic.37\nUnification with Romania.\nOn March 5 [O.S. 20 February] 1918, in a secret agreement signed along the Treaty of Buftea, the German Empire allowed Romania to annex Bessarabia in exchange for free passage of German troops toward Ukraine. The county councils of B\u0103l\u021bi, Soroca and Orhei were the earliest to ask for unification of the Moldavian Democratic Republic with the Kingdom of Romania, and on April 9 [O.S. March 27] 1918, in the presence of the Romanian Army, The Country Council, called \"Sfatul \u021a\u0103rii\", voted in favour of the union, with the following conditions:\n86 deputies voted in support, three voted against and 36 abstained. The Romanian prime minister at the time, Alexandru Marghiloman, would later admit that the union was decided in Bucharest and Ia\u0219i, the seats of the Romanian government.\nThe first condition, the agrarian reform, was debated and approved in November 1918. The Country Council also decided to remove the other conditions and made unification with Romania unconditional. The legality of this vote was considered highly debatable since the meeting had not been publicly announced, there was no quorum (only 44 of the 125 members took part in it, mostly Moldavian conservatives), and then the Country Council voted for its self-dissolution, preventing the protests of the Moldavians and minorities members who had not participated in the parliamentary session from being taken into account.\nIn the autumn of 1919, elections for the Romanian Constituent Assembly were held in Bessarabia; 90 deputies and 35 senators were chosen. On December 20, 1919, these men voted, along with the representatives of Romania's other regions, to ratify the unification acts that had been approved by the Country Council and the National Congresses in Transylvania and Bukovina.\nThe union was recognized by France, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Japan in the Treaty of Paris of 1920. However, the treaty never came into force, as Japan did not ratify it. The United States refused to sign the treaty on the grounds that Russia was not represented at the Conference. The US also considered Bessarabia a territory under Romanian occupation, rather than Romanian territory, despite existing political and economic relations between the US and Romania.131 Soviet Russia (and later, the USSR) did not recognize the union, and by 1924, after its demands for a regional plebiscite were declined by Romania for the second time, declared Bessarabia to be Soviet territory under foreign occupation. On all Soviet maps, Bessarabia was highlighted as a territory not belonging to Romania.\nAftermath.\nA Provisional Workers' &amp; Peasants' Government of Bessarabia was founded on May 5, 1919, in exile at Odesa, by the Bolsheviks. On May 11, 1919, the Bessarabian Soviet Socialist Republic was proclaimed as an autonomous part of Russian SFSR, but was abolished by the military forces of Poland and France in September 1919 (see Polish\u2013Soviet War). After the victory of Bolshevist Russia in the Russian Civil War, the Ukrainian SSR was created in 1922, and in 1924 the Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was established on a strip of Ukrainian land on the west bank of Dniester where Moldovans and Romanians accounted for less than a third and the relative majority of the population was Ukrainian. (See Demographics of the Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic).\nPart of Romania.\nHistoriography.\nSvetlana Suveic\u0103 considers that historical discourse regarding interwar Bessarabia was heavily influenced by the political association of the authors, and sought mainly to argue for or against the legality of Romanian rule in Bessarabia. The impact of the various reforms on the progress of the province was mostly ignored.\nRomanian historiography, for the most part, consistently sought to demonstrate the legitimacy of the regime established after the Union of Bessarabia with Romania. During the interwar period, Romanian historians countered Soviet historians' description of it as the establishment of an \"occupation regime\". The agrarian reform, considered one of the most radical in Europe (an idea also supported by Western historians), was appreciated as having a positive role, emphasizing the national emancipation of the Romanian peasantry, while the modernization of agriculture was presented as a complex phenomenon, which also required further mechanism to support the new owner. However, agriculture was ignored by the state, and the new owners were greatly affected by the lack of credit, Romanian authors of the time suggested various ways this situation could have been overcome. Ultimately, as the state failed to create an adequate agricultural policy, by the end of the 1920 authors were hoping progress could be made through private initiative. Romanian authors also paid particular attention to the unification of administrative legislation, norms, and principles of administrative law, as well as their application in Romanian practice. The institute of the \"zemstvo\" was regarded by some of them as the most democratic form of government, and its dissolution by the Romanian authorities was deplored; authors such as Onisifor Ghibu expressed a critical view on the relation between Romanian administrative personnel from outside Bessarabia and the locals, as well as the general structure of the administrative corps.\nDuring the Communist period, Romanian historians initially treated the reforms applied after World War I mainly from social class perspectives. Starting with the 1960s, the first studies that mentioned the existence of a \"Bessarabian historical problem\" appeared. From the second half of the 1970s, studies on the agrarian reform considered that while this led to a \"natural and rational distribution of agricultural property\", it also led to fragmentation of agricultural land. This made the practice of intensive agriculture difficult, since peasants had reduced opportunity to purchase agricultural equipment. Towards the end of the Communist period, the two interwar concepts of development and modernization were re-embraced.\nAfter the fall of Communism, Romanian historiography treated Bessarabia mainly in the context of Romanian nation-building, seen as the main issue affecting Greater Romania; authors focused mainly on issues related to the general and specific context of Bessarabia after the Union, the state's efforts for social-political and economic integration, and cultural development of Bessarabia. The internal and external factors that determined the specifics of the province's integration into the Romanian common framework are also of interest. Romanian authors mainly blamed the lasting effects of Russian domination and the destabilizing role of Soviet Russia (USSR) for the malfunctioning of the Romanian administration, with some also pointing to the difficult and non-uniform character of the integration generated by the non-uniform character of the development of the provinces until 1918, of a different degree of their adaptability to the new conditions. The modernization interwar period is also seen as the third phase of a continuous process, begun in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and brutally interrupted by the establishment of Communism. In this context, some authors consider the comparative studies of the interwar and post-Communist periods in different fields as particularly current.\nSoviet historiography considered the changes that took place in interwar Bessarabia expressed were directed either towards strengthening the political, economical, and social position of the bourgeoisie, to the detriment of the peasantry, or towards creating a favourable position for the Romanian population, to the detriment of the national minorities; Soviet authors thus reportedly rejected the notion that any modernization and progress took place in the region during Romanian rule. The transformations that took place on different levels of the Bessarabian society at that time were treated from a social class and/or ethnopolitical positions; Svetlana Suveic\u0103 states \"the writings from the Soviet period, directly determined by the interference of politics in historical science, alternated the ideas regarding the \"Moldovan\" nation and the national identity, with severe condemnations of the Romanian interwar period\". In Suveic\u0103's opinion, the conception of Soviet historiography was based on distorted facts that would serve as \"indisputable arguments\" for the establishment of an illegal \"occupation\" regime. According to Wim P. van Meurs \"the legitimation of the political regime has been the main function of (the Soviet) historiography and such a legitimation has usually been based on a number of historical myths\". The discussion of the social-economic and politico-administrative situation in the region was also closely related to the Romanian-Soviet conflictual relations of the 1960s and 1970s, during which both communist countries treated the Bessarabian problem for political purposes.\nThe presence of the ideological factor in writing the history of Bessarabia was manifested itself not only at the central level, but also at the level of the historiography of Soviet Moldavia. It was not until the second half of the '80s that the Moldovan historiography raised the issue of the Soviet political and ideological pressures.\nAfter the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Moldovan historiography, largely marked by the public identity discourse, deals with the problems of the interwar Bessarabian history, depending on the context. On the one hand, the supporters of the idea of Moldovan statehood reject the option of modernization and progress of Bessarabia after the Union with Romania while, on the other hand, the historians who, starting from the idea of the Romanian character of Bessarabia, and using new sources, \"contribute to the in-depth knowledge of the integrating and modernizing processes that marked the history of the (Bessarabian) land in the interwar period\". This ongoing controversy highlights the two antagonistic geopolitical tendencies present in the contemporary Moldovan historiography: the pro-East current versus the pro-West current.\nThe Western historiography pointed out that the reforms at the beginning of Romania's rule were mainly directed at easing the social tensions existing across Eastern Europe and were, therefore, similar to the ones taking place elsewhere in the region. In the case of the agrarian reform, G. Clenton Logio states that the Romanians were pressed into legislating it, as expropriation had begun before the Union and there was the danger that Bessarabians would undo this act; he notes that no planning took place regarding the effects of the reform and the problems of the peasantry were ignored, transforming the latter in \"a numerous and profitable mass of clients for the banks\". According to the analysis Western authors, the reform only changed the distribution of the land, and not agricultural policies; as a result of the economical and social policies of the Romanian governments, small and medium-sized farms remained unprofitable, while the large farms not affected by the reform also lost their economic role. Western authors also criticized the administrative corps of Bessarabia-\"an unstable and corrupt stratum\"-observing that transfer of administrative personnel from Romania to Bessarabia was regarded as a severe punishment, and the clerks affected generally sought personal enrichment; the local administration was also considered rigid and unwilling to reform. In general, Western historiography analyzed the modernization of Bessarabia in a general Romanian context in relation to the previous Russian period, as well as the uneven and not so fast modernization process, determined by both internal and external factors.\nOverview.\nAccording to Vladimir Solonar and Vladimir Bruter, Bessarabia under Romanian rule experienced low population growth due to high mortality (highest in Romania and one of the highest in Europe) as well as emigration; Bessarabia was also characterized by economic stagnation and high unemployment. Access to social services declined after the abolition of the zemstvos in the early 1920s, as these had previously provided local autonomy in managing education and public health. In the late 1930s, the Bessarabian population had among the highest incidences of several major infectious diseases and some of the highest mortality rates from these diseases.\nAccording to Dan Dungaciu, the only European modernization process of Bessarabia was carried out during the Romanian interwar period, despite the all unfavorable domestic and international conditions (post-war recession, actions backed by the Soviet Union, worldwide Great Depression). Gheorghe Duca considers that, in terms of science, economy, art, political and social life, Bessarabia made considerable progress in the interwar period.\nNicolae Enciu appreciates that through the political, social-economic, and cultural modernization, the interwar period meant a progress of the Romanian society, with beneficial effects in all its historical regions. At the same time, the interwar period also experienced failures, being too short to be able to produce radical transformations, in order to reduce the economic and social polarization.\nPolitics.\nAccording to Wim P. van Meurs, after 1918 Bessarabia remained for a long time in a state of emergency, under a military administration, due to border incidents and agitation among the peasantry and the minorities. Strict censorship was imposed in order to restrain Bolshevik propaganda. Three major revolts or Soviet raids took place in the province during the first decade of Romanian rule. In January 1919, local peasants, with support from across the Dniester, rebelled against the Romanian army in the area of Hotin. A similar uprising took place later that year in Tighina. While in the first case Soviet participation is not documented, the latter was probably a Soviet raid, though van Meurs indicates it was most likely a local initiative not coordinated with the central government in Moscow. The longest-lasting rebellion took place for several weeks in 1924 in the area of Tatarbunary when the local population was instigated by agitators from the Soviet Union and proclaimed a Bessarabian Soviet Republic. In all cases, the rebellions were brutally suppressed by the Romanian army, which at times fielded artillery against the rebels.\nAccording to Anatol Petrencu, during most of the Romanian period, Bessarabia benefited by democracy, with a multiparty and a modern electoral system, based on the 1923 Constitution and laws. In November 1919, Romania elected the first post-war parliament based on the proportional representation of the mandates according to the number of the population. As of mid 1919, the population of Bessarabia was estimated at 2 million. With a voter turnout of 72.2%, the Bessarabians elected and sent to the Romanian Parliament 90 deputies and 37 senators.\nAccording to Charles King, in Romania \"the budding democracy [...] was soon crushed beneath the weight of corruption, court intrigues, and right-wing reaction\". The same author notes that corrupt and heavy-handed Romanian administrators were especially prevalent in the region, and the Siguran\u021ba, the Romanian secret police, conducted extensive surveillance among the minorities and regarded Transnistrian refugees and Bessarabian students as potential Bolshevik agents. This resulted in \"a sense among locals that Bessarabia had been occupied by Romania rather than united with\". Russians, in particular, were regarded as \"Bolsheviks in disguise\", with their churches and libraries closed down or Romanianized.\nEconomy.\nAt the beginning of World War I, around 80% of the population worked in agriculture. While the \"Sfatul \u021a\u0103rii\" envisioned distributing land freely to the peasants, Romanian pressure resulted in a significant modification of the plans, bringing the reform more in line with similar ones taking place in the Old Kingdom and Transylvania. While more radical than elsewhere, as it provided lower payments, lower limits for land exempt from expropriation and larger plots, the Romanian land reform also reverted some of the ad-hoc land distribution that had taken place during the Russian Revolution, raising discontent among the peasantry. Thus, of the 1.5 million dessiatin (40% of the agricultural land) held by the large landowners in 1917, more than one third (38.6%) was distributed to peasants, another third was restored to its previous owners, while the rest became state property and was to a large degree later awarded to officers of the Romanian army, officials and clergy. A significant number of plots were awarded to Romanians immigrants from Wallachia and Western Moldavia, while Romanian offices who married Bessarabian women were eligible to receive 100 hectares. Though the reform set the lot at 6 hectares, more than two-thirds of the peasant households received less than 5 hectares each, and, as of 1931, 367.8 thousand peasant families were still landless. The average size of the peasant household further dropped after the land reform due to land division among heirs.52\u201356\nAccording to Alla Skvortsova, while the reform stimulated the development of commodity farming in the countryside and expanded the market for industrial products, it failed to produce the expected results. The peasants had to pay for the land they received during the following 20 years, there was little to no state support provided for them to acquire technical equipment required for the development of successful farms and credit was only accessible to the more prosperous among them and therefore insignificant overall. The region also lacked qualified specialists and lagged behind in infrastructure, as the government had few resources and other priorities. The main factors which impeded the creation of a prosperous peasant class were the payments for land redemption, peasant debts, and taxes, lack of access to the traditional Russian market, difficulties to break into the Romanian and European agricultural market and frequent droughts (1921, 1924, 1925, 1927\u201328 and 1935). Winemaking, one of the mainstays of the local economy, was particularly affected by the external policy of the Romanian state: the most favoured nation status awarded to France brought inexpensive French wine to the local market, access to the Soviet market was blocked, while exports to the traditional markets in Poland were hindered by the trade war started in 1926.52\u201356\nAccording to Alla Skvortsova, the peasant situation was further aggravated by the Great Depression in Romania, with prices for agricultural products dropping catastrophically and not recovering until the end of the decade. While only 2.8% of the national agricultural credit was directed by the National Bank of Romania towards Bessarabia in 1936, by 1940 70% of the peasants were in debt to the large landowners and moneylenders. In order to pay debts, many of the poorer peasants had to sell their livestock and even their land. Failure to pay the redemption payments for 2.5 years also resulted in the land reverting to state property; thus, by 1938, in the district of Soroca only a quarter of the peasant households had retained their allotment. By 1939 farms of up to 5 hectares throughout the region had lost a seventh of their land, while farms with more than 10 hectares had increased their land by 26%. According to a study of the new Soviet administration, in June 1940 7.3% of the peasant households in the Bessarabian regions of the Moldavian SSR were completely landless, 38.15% had up to 3 hectares (an average of 1.7 hectares per lot) and 22.4% had 3 to 5 hectares (an average of 2.6 hectares per one household), i.e. more than two-thirds of the peasant households were farm laborers and poor peasants. \nBetter off was the middle peasantry, which owned 5 to 10 hectares, and constituted 22.73% of peasant farms. The rest, constituting 9.4% of the farms, owned more than 10 hectares each, but held under their control 36% of peasant land, i.e. more than all small farms taken together. The 818 large landowners held an average of 100 hectares each, while institutional owners (the state, churches, and monasteries) held another 59 thousand hectares. About 54% of peasant households had no livestock, about two-thirds had no horse, a little more than a sixth had one horse each, and only 13.2% had two or more working horses. In the whole of Bessarabian region of the Moldavian SSR there were at the beginning of Soviet administration only 219 obsolete tractors, mostly owned by larger farms and used primarily as threshing engines. With little serviceable equestrian equipment, tillage, sowing, and harvesting of all crops were mostly carried out manually. Throughout the interwar era, Bessarabia witnessed several negative phenomena: further social stratification in the countryside, deepening poverty, lowering yields, worsening of the structure of crops grown, reduction of the total agricultural production. The number of cattle fell by 26% between 1926 and 1938, the number of sheep by 5%, the number of pigs by 14%. Average grain yield also decreased from 1920/1925 to 1935/1939 from 850\u00a0kg per hectare to 800\u00a0kg. The area used in wine-making grew by 15,000 hectares between 1930 and 1938. However, wine quality dropped, as slightly over 80% of the vineyards were planted with lower quality grape varieties. According to V.I. Tsaranov, adding to the lack of land, small plots, poor crop yields, unemployment was also high among rural residents, with around 550 thousand recorded in June 1940.\nAccording to Alla Skvortsova, the Romanian government, either directly or through the banking system, encouraged the development of industry in the areas of prewar Romania, while hindering the process in new territories. As a consequence, even Bessarabian entrepreneurs preferred to invest their capital in those areas instead of using it within the region. Local industry faced fierce competition from larger Romanian companies, which had access to preferential rail tariffs, limited credit to local entrepreneurs, and flooded the local market with cheaper industrial goods produced in Romania or imported from abroad. Nevertheless, some new small-scale industrial enterprises were established in the 1920s, using primarily local raw materials and producing for the local market. The total engine power rose from 7.8 thousand hp in 1925 to 12.2 thousand in 1929. Although the number of industrial enterprises more than doubled after 1918, small semi-handicraft production prevailed, seldom using hired labor: in 1930 there were an average of only 2.4 employees per enterprise. During the 22 years of Romanian rule, only one large enterprise was built in Bessarabia: the B\u0103l\u021bi sugar plant.35\u201342\nAccording to Alla Skvortsova, not all new enterprises survived for long, and the Great Depression had a particularly strong impact on the region, many of the companies going bankrupt or closing in 1929\u20131933. Governmental policy, influenced by the banking system and the industrial cartels, prevented a rebound, the industry of the \"Old Kingdom\" again receiving preferential treatment. The main factors that affected the development of Bessarabia in the 1930s were severe credit restrictions, increases in transport tariffs and customs restrictions, and special tax policies. The tax burden was notably high, with enterprises required to fully provide the assigned tax agent with housing, heating, lighting, and office space. Bessarabia was reduced mostly to a supplier of raw materials and a market for industrial goods of Romanian or foreign origin. \nBy the end of the 1930s, the only industrial sectors that managed to rebound were the food and woodworking industries, the rest witnessing either stagnation or a decrease compared to pre-Depression levels. Most industrial facilities in the food industry worked significantly below their installed capacity even in prosperous years such as 1937. Several large factories, such as the Basarabeasca, Cetatea Alb\u0103, Flore\u0219ti and Tighina, railway workshops, the Cetatea Alb\u0103 and Chi\u0219in\u0103u textile and knitwear factories and the Cetatea Alb\u0103 canning factory and distillery were dismantled and relocated to the \"Old Kingdom\" by 1938. Between 1929 and 1937, fixed capital in the industry dropped by 10%, and the number of industrial workers in Bessarabia dropped from 5,400 in 1925 to 3,500 in 1937, while their overall number in Romania had increased by almost 27% during the same period. Between 1926 and 1937 the share of the food industry in the total production of large manufacturing industries increased from 77.1% to 92.4%, with sharp decreases observed in sectors with higher added value, such as the metalworking, textile and leather processing industries. Even so, the food industry failed to fulfill local needs; most industries heavily relied on manual labor and primitive technologies. Electricity production in Chi\u0219in\u0103u, Bessarabia's center and Romania's second-largest city, recorded in 1925 at 4.47 million kWh, only increased by 6.7% during the following decade, lagging far behind other Romanian cities: 572.3% in Gala\u021bi, 238.2% in Bucharest, and over 101% in Ia\u0219i.35\u201342 By the end of the 1930s, only one in seven Bessarabians had access to electricity, compared to one in four among the general Romanian population.\nThe Romanian administration carried out many projects aimed at improving the infrastructure of the province to introduce European gauge and reorient it towards Romania. The total length of the railway lines in Bessarabia increased only by 78\u00a0km (from 1140 in 1918 to 1218 in 1940). Local businessmen remained dissatisfied with the pace of the construction of new railways (the Chi\u0219in\u0103u-C\u0103inari was the only one built anew) and the closure of a number of lines. Road infrastructure was also improved, as new highways and bridges over the Prut were built, while part of the existing roads were repaired and paved, increasing the length of highways from 150 to 754\u00a0km. However, most other roads remained impassable during rainy periods. Shipping on the Dniester was closed, and was never established on the Prut. In the 1930s, new airports were built, telephone lines were laid out, and radio transmitters were installed; nevertheless, the region still lagged behind Transylvania and the \"Old Kingdom\".\nAccording to Alla Skvortsova, overall, the share of Bessarabian enterprises in the Romanian industry fell between 1919 and 1937 from 9% to 5.7%, while the number of enterprises employing at least 20 employees dropping from 262 to 196. The share of investments in Bessarabian industry also fell from 0.3% in 1923 to 0.1% in 1936. Sociologist T. Al. \u0218tirbu observed, commenting on the Romanian government's apparent long-term economical plans, that \"Bessarabia can only be considered as a reserve of labor and cheap bread for the industry of the rest of the country\". In a 1938 review, the Bessarabian Federation of Chambers of Commerce noted that \"the decline in industrial production in Bessarabia hinders the rational processing of local raw materials, thereby turning our province into a colony for industry in the rest of the country\". According to V.I. Tsaranov, throughout the period, industrial workers in the region faced long working hours (up to fourteen per day), lack of proper safety measures, unsanitary conditions, the perspective of unemployment and a general decrease in the standard of living: the real wage of a Chi\u0219in\u0103u worker dropped 60% between 1913 and 1937.35\u201342\nEducation.\nIn 1919, Bessarabia became the Romanian region with the highest illiteracy rate. Although the Romanian/Moldovan population was the largest, no Romanian language school operated in Bessarabia before 1918. As a result, among them, only 10.5% of men and 1.77% of women were literate. By 1930, although Bessarabia continued to be the region with the most illiterate people in Romania, the number of literates doubled, to 38,1% of the total population. In the 1920-1938 period, the number of primary schools increased from 1,747 to 2,718, and the number of students from 136,172 to 346,747. In 1940, there were also 24 gymnasiums and middle schools and 26 high schools. Despite a large number of minorities (over 870,000 Russians, Ukrainians, and Jews), education in minority languages was curtailed: private schools were allowed to function after 1925 only if the instruction was in Romanian and, by 1938, there were no state- \nsponsored Russian or Ukrainian schools and only one each in private hands. In 1939, after the German and Soviet attacks on Poland, the government reverted on its earlier policy and decided to reintroduce minority language classes in state schools and allow a greater degree of cultural expression for the Slavic minorities, in an effort to improve its image among the local population.\nAlso, during the interwar period, the foundations were laid for the first higher education institutions in Bessarabia. In 1926, the Faculty of Theology was established in Chi\u0219in\u0103u, followed by the National Conservatory in 1928, and the Faculty of Agricultural Sciences in 1933. The two faculties were sections of the University of Ia\u0219i, in pre-war Romania.\nWorld War II.\nThe Soviet Union did not recognize the incorporation of Bessarabia into Romania and throughout the entire interwar period engaged in attempts to undermine Romania and diplomatic disputes with the government in Bucharest over this territory. The Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact was signed on August 23, 1939. By Article 4 of the secret Annex to the Treaty, Nazi Germany recognized Bessarabia as belonging to the Soviet \"sphere of interest\".\nIn the spring of 1940, Western Europe was overrun by Germany. With world attention focused on those events, on June 26, 1940, the USSR issued a 24-hour ultimatum to Romania, demanding immediate cession of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina under threat of war. Romania was given four days to evacuate its troops and officials. The two provinces had an area of , and were inhabited by about 3.75 million people, half of them Romanians, according to official Romanian sources. Two days later, Romania yielded and began evacuation. During the evacuation, from June 28 to July 3, groups of local Communists and Soviet sympathizers attacked the retreating forces and civilians who chose to leave. Many members of the minorities (Jews, ethnic Ukrainians and others) joined in these attacks. The Romanian Army was also attacked by the Soviet Army, which entered Bessarabia before the Romanian administration finished retreating. The casualties reported by the Romanian Army during those seven days consisted of 356 officers and 42,876 soldiers dead or missing.\nOn August 2, the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic was established on most of the territory of Bessarabia, merged with the western parts of the former Moldavian ASSR. Bessarabia was divided between the Moldavian SSR (65% of the territory and 80% of the population) and the Ukrainian SSR. Bessarabia's northern and southern districts (now Budjak and parts of the Chernivtsi oblast) were allotted to Ukraine, while some territories (4,000\u00a0km2) on the left (eastern) bank of Dniester (present Transnistria), previously part of Ukraine, were allotted to Moldavia. After the Soviet takeover, many Bessarabians, who were accused of supporting the deposed Romanian administration, were executed or deported to Siberia and Kazakhstan.\nBetween September and November 1940, the ethnic Germans of Bessarabia were offered resettlement to Germany, following a German-Soviet agreement. Fearing Soviet oppression, almost all Germans (93,000) agreed. Most of them were resettled to the newly annexed Polish territories.\nOn June 22, 1941, the Axis invasion of the Soviet Union commenced with Operation Barbarossa. Between June 22 and July 26, 1941, Romanian troops recovered Bessarabia and northern Bukovina with the help of Wehrmacht. The Soviets employed scorched earth tactics during their forced retreat from Bessarabia, destroying the infrastructure and transporting movable goods to Russia by railway. At the end of July, after a year of Soviet rule, the region was once again under Romanian control, being organized as the Bessarabia Governorate.\nAs the military operation was still in progress, there were cases of Romanian troops \"taking revenge\" on Jews in Bessarabia, in the form of pogroms on civilians and murder of Jewish POWs, resulting in several thousand dead. The supposed cause for murdering Jews was that in 1940 some Jews welcomed the Soviet takeover as liberation. At the same time the notorious SS Einsatzgruppe D, operating in the area of the German 11th Army, committed summary executions of Jews under the pretext that they were spies, saboteurs, Communists, or under no pretext whatsoever.\nThe political solution of the \"Jewish Question\" was apparently seen by the Romanian dictator Marshal Ion Antonescu more in expulsion rather than extermination. That portion of the Jewish population of Bessarabia and Bukovina which did not flee before the retreat of the Soviet troops (147,000) was initially gathered into ghettos or Nazi concentration camps, and then deported during 1941\u20131942 in death marches into Romanian-occupied Transnistria, where the \"Final Solution\" was applied.\nAfter three years of relative peace, the German-Soviet front returned in 1944 to the land border on the Dniester. On August 20, 1944, a c. 3,400,000-strong Red Army began a major summer offensive codenamed Second Jassy\u2013Kishinev offensive. The Soviet armies overran Bessarabia in a two-pronged offensive within five days. In pocket battles at Chi\u0219in\u0103u and S\u0103rata the German 6th Army of c. 650,000 men, newly reformed after the Battle of Stalingrad, was obliterated. Simultaneously with the success of the Russian attack, Romania broke the military alliance with the Axis and changed sides. On August 23, 1944, Marshal Ion Antonescu was arrested by King Michael, and later handed over to the Soviets.\nPart of the Soviet Union.\nThe Soviet Union regained the region in 1944, and the Red Army occupied Romania. By 1947, the Soviets had imposed a communist government in Bucharest, which was friendly and obedient towards Moscow. The Soviet occupation of Romania lasted until 1958. The Romanian communist regime did not openly raise the matter of Bessarabia or Northern Bukovina in its diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. At least 100,000 people died in a post-war famine in Moldavia.\nBetween 1969 and 1971, a clandestine National Patriotic Front was established by several young intellectuals in Chi\u0219in\u0103u, totaling over 100 members, vowing to fight for the establishment of a Moldavian Democratic Republic, its secession from the Soviet Union and union with Romania.\nIn December 1971, following an informative note from Ion St\u0103nescu, the President of the Council of State Security of the Romanian Socialist Republic, to Yuri Andropov, the chief of KGB, three of the leaders of the National Patriotic Front, Alexandru Usatiuc-Bulgar, Gheorghe Ghimpu and Valeriu Graur, as well as a fourth person, Alexandru Soltoianu, the leader of a similar clandestine movement in northern Bukovina (Bucovina), were arrested and later sentenced to long prison terms.\nRise of independent Moldova.\nWith the weakening of the Soviet Union, in February 1988, the first non-sanctioned demonstrations were held in Chi\u0219in\u0103u. At first pro-Perestroika, they soon turned anti-government and demanded official status for the Romanian (Moldavian) language instead of the Russian language. On August 31, 1989, following a 600,000-strong demonstration in Chi\u0219in\u0103u four days earlier, Romanian (Moldavian) became the official language of the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic. However, this was not implemented for many years. In 1990, the first free elections were held for Parliament, with the opposition Popular Front winning them. A government led by Mircea Druc, one of the leaders of the Popular Front, was formed. The Moldavian SSR became SSR Moldova, and later the Republic of Moldova. The Republic of Moldova became independent on August 27, 1991; it took over unchanged the boundaries of the Moldavian SSR.\nPopulation.\nAccording to Bessarabian historian \u0218tefan Ciobanu and Moldovan philologist Viorica R\u0103ileanu, in 1810, the Romanian population was approximately 95%. During the 19th century, as a result of the Russian policy of colonization and Russification,20\u2013 the Romanian population decreased to (depending on data sources) 47.6% (in 1897), 52% or 75% for 1900 (Krusevan), 53.9% (1907), 70% (1912, Laskov), or 65\u201367% (1918, J. Kaba).\nThe Russian Census of 1817, which recorded 96,526 families and 482,630 inhabitants, did not register ethnic data except for recent refugees (primarily Bulgarians) and certain ethno-social categories (Jews, Armenians and Greeks). Official records indicated 3,826 Jewish families (4.2%), 1,200 Lipovan families (1.5%), 640 Greek families (0.7%), 530 Armenian families (0.6%), 482 Bulgarian and Gagauz families (0.5%). In the 20th century, Romanian historian Ion Nistor extrapolated the number of Romanians at 83,848 families (86%) and Ruthenians at 6,000 families (6.5%). The estimate was based on the assumption that Ruthenes constituted up to a third of the population of the Khotyn county, and the rest of the recorded population was exclusively Romanian. An alternative estimate for the same year indicates 76.4% Romanians, 8.7% Ukrainians, 5.1% Bulgarians and Gaguzes, 4.5% Jews and 2% Russians. An 1818 statistic of three counties in southern Bessarabia (Akkerman, Izmail and Bender) that had witnessed strong emigration of the Muslim population and immigration from other regions, including Ottoman lands south of the Danube, recorded a total population of 113,835. There are conflicting figures regarding the national distribution (first figure cited by Po\u0219tarencu, second by Ungureanu): 48.64/37% Moldavians, 7.07/8.9% Russians, 15.65/17.9% Ukrainians, 17.02/21.5% Bulgarians and 11.62/14.7% others. Still in 1818, statistics for the Khotyn county in northern Bessarabia indicated 47.5% Moldavians and 42.6% Ukrainians.\nThe Moldovan historian Ion Gumen\u00e2i records the population of Bessarabia in 1828 as 517,135, and states that 376,910 were Romanians (72.88%), 52,000 Ruthenians (10.05%), 30,929 Jews (5.9%), 8,846 Germans (1.71%), 7,947 Russians (1.53%), 5,974 Lipovans (1.15%), 2,384 Poles (0.46%), 2,000 Greeks (0.38%), 2,000 Armenians (0.38%), and 27,445 (5.3%) settlers in the south of Bessarabia.\nThe first statistic to record ethnic groups throughout Bessarabia was an incomplete administrative census made in 1843\u20131844 at the request of the Russian Academy of Sciences. The following proportions were recorded, in a total of 692,777 inhabitants: 59.4% Romanians, 17.2% Ukrainians, 9.3% Bulgarians, 7.1% Jews, and 2.2% Russians. In the case of some urban centres, figures were not reported for all ethnic groups. Furthermore, the size of the total populations differs from other official reports of the same period, which put the population of Bessarabia at 774,492 or 793,103.\nChurch records gathered around 1850\u20131855 put the total population at 841,523, with the following composition: 51.4% Romanians, 4.2% Russians, 21.3% Ukrainians, 10% Bulgarians, 7.2% Jews and 5.7% others. On the other hand, official data for 1855 record a total population of 980,031, excluding the population on the territory under the authority of the Special Administration of the town of Izmail.\nAccording to Ion Nistor, the population of Bessarabia in 1856 was composed of 736,000 Romanians (74%), 119,000 Ukrainians (12%), 79,000 Jews (8%), 47,000 Bulgarians and Gagauz (5%), 24,000 Germans (2.4%), 11,000 Romani (1.1%), 6,000 Russians (0.6%), adding to a total of 990,274 inhabitants. Historian Constantin Ungureanu provides significantly different figures for the same year: 676,100 Romanians (68.2%), 126,000 Ukrainians (12.7%), 78,800 Jews (7.9%), 48,200 Bulgarians and Gaguz (4.9%), 24,200 (2.4%) Germans and 20,000 Russians (2%) for a total of 991,900.\nRussian data, 1889 (Total: 1,628,867 inhabitants)\nThe Russian census in 1897 had a total of 1,935,412 inhabitants. By language:\nHowever, some scholars believed in regard to the 1897 census that \"[...] the census enumerator generally has instructions to count everyone who understands the state language as being of that nationality, no matter what his everyday speech may be\". Thus, a number of Romanians might have been registered as Russians.\nAccording to N. Durnovo, the population of Bessarabia in 1900 was (1,935,000 inhabitants):\nThe Romanian estimates in 1919 (1922) gave a total populations of 2,631,000 inhabitants: \nAccording to the 1930 Romanian census, the total population of Bessarabia was 2,864,662 inhabitants:\nThe data of the Romanian census of 1939 was not completely processed before the Soviet occupation of Bessarabia. However, estimates had the total population rise to approximately 3.2 million.\nThe census of 1941, during the Romanian wartime administration (Total: 2,733,563 inhabitants):\nIn the 1979 Soviet census for the Moldavian SSR (including Transnistria, but without northern and southern Bessarabia, now both part of Ukraine): 63.9% identified themselves as Moldovans and 0.04% as Romanians. For the Soviet census of 1989 (conducted in the Moldavian SSR), 64.5% declared themselves as Moldovans and 0.06% Romanians. In the Moldovan census of 2014 (not including Transnistria), 75% declared themselves Moldovans and 7% Romanians.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; travel guide from Wikivoyage\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "38873", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38873", "title": "Raoult's law", "text": "Law of thermodynamics for vapour pressure of a mixture\nRaoult's law ( law) is a relation of physical chemistry, with implications in thermodynamics. Proposed by French chemist Fran\u00e7ois-Marie Raoult in 1887, it states that the partial pressure of each component of an ideal mixture of \"liquids\" is equal to the vapor pressure of the pure component (liquid or solid) multiplied by its mole fraction in the mixture. In consequence, the relative lowering of vapor pressure of a dilute solution of nonvolatile solute is equal to the mole fraction of solute in the solution.\nMathematically, Raoult's law for a single component in an ideal solution is stated as \n formula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the partial pressure of the component formula_3 in the gaseous mixture above the solution, formula_4 is the equilibrium vapor pressure of the pure component formula_3, and formula_6 is the mole fraction of the component formula_3 in the liquid or solid solution.\nWhere two volatile liquids A and B are mixed with each other to form a solution, the vapor phase consists of both components of the solution. Once the components in the solution have reached equilibrium, the total vapor pressure of the solution can be determined by combining Raoult's law with Dalton's law of partial pressures to give\n formula_8\nIn other words, the vapor pressure of the solution is the mole-weighted mean of the individual vapour pressures:\n formula_9\nIf a non-volatile solute B (it has zero vapor pressure, so does not evaporate) is dissolved into a solvent A to form an ideal solution, the vapor pressure of the solution will be lower than that of the solvent. In an ideal solution of a nonvolatile solute, the decrease in vapor pressure is directly proportional to the mole fraction of solute:\n formula_10\n formula_11\nIf the solute associates or dissociates in the solution (such as an electrolyte/salt), the expression of the law includes the van 't Hoff factor as a correction factor. That is, the mole fraction must be calculated using the actual number of particles in solution.\nPrinciples.\nRaoult's law is a phenomenological relation that assumes ideal behavior based on the simple microscopic assumption that intermolecular forces between unlike molecules are equal to those between similar molecules, and that their molar volumes are the same: the conditions of an ideal solution. This is analogous to the ideal gas law, which is a limiting law valid when the interactive forces between molecules approach zero, for example as the concentration approaches zero. Raoult's law is instead valid if the physical properties of the components are identical. The more similar the components are, the more their behavior approaches that described by Raoult's law. For example, if the two components differ only in isotopic content, then Raoult's law is essentially exact.\nComparing measured vapor pressures to predicted values from Raoult's law provides information about the true relative strength of intermolecular forces. If the vapor pressure is less than predicted (a negative deviation), fewer molecules of each component than expected have left the solution in the presence of the other component, indicating that the forces between unlike molecules are stronger. The converse is true for positive deviations.\nFor a solution of two liquids A and B, Raoult's law predicts that if no other gases are present, then the total vapor pressure formula_12 above the solution is equal to the weighted sum of the \"pure\" vapor pressures formula_13 and formula_14 of the two components. Thus the total pressure above the solution of A and B would be\n formula_15\nSince the sum of the mole fractions is equal to one, \n formula_16\nThis is a linear function of the mole fraction formula_17, as shown in the graph.\nThermodynamic considerations.\nRaoult's law was first observed empirically and led Fran\u00e7ois-Marie Raoult to postulate that the vapor pressure above an ideal mixture of liquids is equal to the sum of the vapor pressures of each component multiplied by its mole fraction. Taking compliance with Raoult's Law as a defining characteristic of ideality in a solution, it is possible to deduce that the chemical potential of each component of the liquid is given by\n formula_18\nwhere formula_19 is the chemical potential in the pure state and formula_6 is the mole fraction of component formula_3 in the ideal solution. From this equation, other thermodynamic properties of an ideal solution may be determined. If the assumption that the vapor follows the ideal gas law is added, Raoult's law may be derived as follows.\nIf the system is ideal, then, at equilibrium, the chemical potential of each component formula_3 must be the same in the liquid and gas states. That is,\n formula_23\nSubstituting the formula for chemical potential gives\n formula_24\nas the gas-phase mole fraction depends on its fugacity, formula_25, as a fraction of the pressure in the reference state, formula_26.\nThe corresponding equation when the system consists purely of component formula_3 in equilibrium with its vapor is\n formula_28\nSubtracting these equations and re-arranging leads to the result\n formula_29\nFor the ideal gas, pressure and fugacity are equal, so introducing simple pressures to this result yields Raoult's law:\n formula_30\nIdeal mixing.\nAn ideal solution would follow Raoult's law, but most solutions deviate from ideality. Interactions between gas molecules are typically quite small, especially if the vapor pressures are low. However, the interactions in a liquid are very strong. For a solution to be ideal, the interactions between unlike molecules must be of the same magnitude as those between like molecules. This approximation is only true when the different species are almost chemically identical. One can see that from considering the Gibbs free energy change of mixing:\n formula_31\nThis is always negative, so mixing is spontaneous. However, the expression is, apart from a factor formula_32, equal to the entropy of mixing. This leaves no room at all for an enthalpy effect and implies that formula_33 must be equal to zero, and this can only be true if the interactions between the molecules are indifferent.\nIt can be shown using the Gibbs\u2013Duhem equation that if Raoult's law holds over the entire concentration range formula_34 in a binary solution then, for the second component, the same must also hold.\nIf deviations from the ideal are not too large, Raoult's law is still valid in a narrow concentration range when approaching formula_35 for the majority phase (the \"solvent\"). The solute also shows a linear limiting law, but with a different coefficient. This relationship is known as Henry's law.\nThe presence of these limited linear regimes has been experimentally verified in a great number of cases, though large deviations occur in a variety of cases. Consequently, both its pedagogical value and utility have been questioned at the introductory college level. In a perfectly ideal system, where ideal liquid and ideal vapor are assumed, a very useful equation emerges if Raoult's law is combined with Dalton's Law:\n formula_36 \nwhere formula_6 is the mole fraction of component formula_3 in the \"solution\", and formula_39 is its mole fraction in the \"gas phase\". This equation shows that, for an ideal solution where each pure component has a different vapor pressure, the gas phase is enriched in the component with the higher vapor pressure when pure, and the solution is enriched in the component with the lower pure vapor pressure. This phenomenon is the basis for distillation.\nNon-ideal mixing.\nIn elementary applications, Raoult's law is generally valid when the liquid phase is either nearly pure or a mixture of similar substances. Raoult's law may be adapted to non-ideal solutions by incorporating two factors that account for the interactions between molecules of different substances. The first factor is a correction for gas non-ideality, or deviations from the ideal-gas law. It is called the fugacity coefficient (formula_40). The second, the activity coefficient formula_41, is a correction for interactions in the liquid phase between the different molecules.\nThis modified or extended Raoult's law is then written as\n formula_42\nReal solutions.\nIn many pairs of liquids, there is no uniformity of attractive forces, i.e., the adhesive (between dissimilar molecules) and cohesive forces (between similar molecules) are not uniform between the two liquids. Therefore, they deviate from Raoult's law, which applies only to ideal solutions.\nNotably, when the concentration of A is small, its vapor pressure instead follows Henry's law, and likewise for substance B when its concentration is small.\nNegative deviation.\nWhen the adhesion is stronger than the cohesion, fewer liquid particles turn into vapor thereby lowering the vapor pressure and leading to negative deviation in the graph.\nFor example, the system of chloroform (CHCl3) and acetone (CH3COCH3) has a negative deviation from Raoult's law, indicating an attractive interaction between the two components that have been described as a hydrogen bond. The system HCl\u2013water has a large enough negative deviation to form a minimum in the vapor pressure curve known as a (negative) azeotrope, corresponding to a mixture that evaporates without change of composition. When these two components are mixed, the reaction is exothermic as ion-dipole intermolecular forces of attraction are formed between the resulting ions (H3O+ and Cl\u2013) and the polar water molecules so that \u0394\"H\"mix is negative.\nPositive deviation.\nWhen the adhesion is weaker than cohesion, which is quite common, the liquid particles escape the solution more easily that increases the vapor pressure and leads to a positive deviation.\nIf the deviation is large, then the vapor pressure curve shows a maximum at a particular composition and forms a positive azeotrope (low-boiling mixture). Some mixtures in which this happens are (1) ethanol and water, (2) benzene and methanol, (3) carbon disulfide and acetone, (4) chloroform and ethanol, and (5) glycine and water. When these pairs of components are mixed, the process is endothermic as weaker intermolecular interactions are formed so that \u0394mix\"H\" is positive.\nMixed deviation.\nIt is possible to have mixed deviations, which are positive for one component and negative for the other, and which switch between positive and negative while moving from formula_43 to formula_44. These are not merely theoretically possible, as actual examples of mixed deviation exist. The possible physical deviations are not entirely arbitrary however, as they are constrained by the Duhem\u2013Margules equation: for example, if one component has positive deviation over the entire range then the other component cannot have negative deviation over the entire range.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38874", "revid": "1067877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38874", "title": "Raphael (disambiguation)", "text": "Raphael was an Italian Renaissance painter.\nRaphael or Rapha\u00ebl may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38875", "revid": "50066621", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38875", "title": "Riccardo Patrese", "text": "Italian racing driver (born 1954)\nRiccardo Gabriele Patrese (born 17 April 1954) is an Italian former racing driver, who competed in Formula One from to . Patrese was runner-up in the Formula One World Drivers' Championship in with Williams, and won six Grands Prix across 17 seasons.\nHe became the first Formula One driver to achieve 200 Grand Prix starts when he appeared at the 1990 British Grand Prix, and then became the first to achieve 250 starts at the 1993 German Grand Prix. For 19 years, he held the record for the most Formula One Grand Prix starts, with 256 races from 257 entries. At the age of 38 he was runner-up to Nigel Mansell in the 1992 Formula One World Championship, and third in and . He won six Grands Prix, including the 1982 Monaco Grand Prix, with a record gap of over six years between two of these \u2013 the 1983 South African Grand Prix and 1990 San Marino Grand Prix.\nPatrese also competed at the World Sportscar Championship for the Lancia factory team, finishing runner-up in 1982 and collecting eight wins.\nEarly life and career.\nRiccardo Gabriele Patrese was born on 17 April 1954 in Padua, Veneto. Patrese started kart racing aged nine. Growing up near the Italian Alps, he was also selected for the Italian national ski team as a teenager, and was in addition a competitive swimmer. In 1974, he won the Karting World Championship at the Estoril circuit, finishing ahead of second-placed teammate and fellow future F1 driver Eddie Cheever. He received an offer to drive in Formula Italia the following year, finishing second in the championship to another future F1 racer, Bruno Giacomelli. In 1976, he moved up to Formula 3, winning both the Italian and European Formula 3 championships. The following year he moved to Formula 2 before making his Formula One debut midway through the year.\nFormula One career.\nShadow and Arrows.\nHe made his debut at the 1977 Monaco Grand Prix with the Shadow racing team sponsored by Italian businessman Franco Ambrosio, replacing Renzo Zorzi. He took his first point at the Japanese Grand Prix later that year. Later that year team-leader Jackie Oliver and sponsor Ambrosio left Shadow to form the Arrows team. Patrese and Shadow teammate Alan Jones both received offers from the Williams team for 1978: whilst Jones joined Williams, Patrese linked up with Arrows, alongside Rolf Stommelen. Shadow subsequently took Arrows to court, arguing that Arrows had stolen the design of the Shadow DN9 that Arrows and were essentially running a DN9 under a different name. The court agreed, forcing Arrows to design and construct a totally new car, the Arrows A1, which became the first of the Arrows F1 bloodline.\nIn 1978 Patrese very nearly won Arrows' second race, the South African Grand Prix, until engine failure forced him to retire 15 laps from the end. He subsequently took second at the Swedish Grand Prix behind Niki Lauda's Brabham BT46B \"fan car\", in its only appearance before being withdrawn. However, his driving style was perceived by some established drivers, such as Ronnie Peterson and James Hunt, as being over-aggressive. Later that year, at the Italian Grand Prix, Patrese's reputation for aggressive driving was blamed for a first lap major incident. In part, one of the causes suggested was a premature start by the Monza race director, leading to cars at the rear of the field catching up to those in the midfield that had been fully stopped when the green signal was given. This being said, Patrese, Peterson, and 8 others were involved in a 10-car pile-up before turn one, causing a stoppage of the race. Peterson, whose injuries from the chain reaction wreck were not in and of themselves life-threatening, died from an embolism the day after the Grand Prix.\nBy the next race, the United States Grand Prix, five top drivers - Hunt, Lauda, Mario Andretti, Emerson Fittipaldi and Jody Scheckter - declared that unless Patrese was banned from the race that they would withdraw. The race organizers agreed to this: although Patrese later stated that he obtained a ruling from a local judge in Watkins Glen stating that the ban was a violation of his right to work, Arrows decided to withdraw his entry due to pressure from the organizers and the FIA. He returned to competition at the following race, the Canadian Grand Prix, where he finished fourth.\nFor years after the crash which caused Peterson's death, Hunt (along with other drivers) blamed Patrese for starting the accident, and viewers of Hunt's commentaries of Formula One races from 1980 to 1993 on BBC Television were regularly treated to bitter diatribes against Patrese when the Italian appeared on screen. Hunt, who never forgave the Italian for Peterson's death, believed that it was Patrese's muscling past that caused the McLaren driven by Hunt and the Lotus driven by Peterson to touch, but Patrese argued that he was already well ahead of the pair before the accident took place. Patrese, together with race director Gianni Restilli, stood trial in Italian criminal court on manslaughter charges for Peterson's death. Both were cleared of wrongdoing on 28 October 1981.\nTwo of Patrese's most notable performances during his Arrows years were at the United States Grand Prix West in Long Beach, where he finished second in 1980 and took pole position in the following year: he led the latter race before being forced to retire by a blocked fuel filter.\nBrabham.\nIn 1982 Patrese moved to Brabham and gained his maiden win at that year's Monaco Grand Prix in rather sensational circumstances. Patrese took the lead when Alain Prost crashed out, only to spin in dampening conditions on the next lap. This left him third behind Didier Pironi and Andrea de Cesaris, who both stopped on the final lap \u2013 Pironi with an electrical fault and de Cesaris out of fuel. Later that season he also led the Austrian Grand Prix but retired due to an engine failure. Patrese finished the season tenth, just ahead of his teammate Nelson Piquet. 1983 proved to be a more difficult season. Patrese crashed out late in the race while leading at San Marino - to the cheers of the \"tifosi\", as his shunt meant that he handed the race win to Ferrari driver Patrick Tambay. He also took pole on home ground at the Italian Grand Prix, before his engine blew up in the early stages of the race: in a 2010 interview he said he suspected that his engine had been left in its qualifying trim, rendering it extremely powerful but fragile, as he had not been offered a new contract for the following year, and had been reluctant to sacrifice his chances of winning his home Grand Prix for teammate Nelson Piquet, who was fighting for the World Championship. Despite scoring a second win at the South African Grand Prix, Patrese only finished ninth while Piquet claimed his second Drivers' Championship title. It would be seven years before he made another visit to the top step of the podium.\nAlfa Romeo.\nA move to Alfa Romeo in delivered two lacklustre seasons resulting in eight world championship points and a single visit to the podium at the 1984 Italian Grand Prix. Patrese and teammate, American Eddie Cheever, were hampered by cars with Alfa Romeo 890T V8 turbo engines that proved too thirsty for the amount of fuel they were allowed to carry (220 litres). Often both drivers drove good races to be in the points, only to run out of fuel two or three laps from the finish, dropping them out of the points. Indeed, Patrese's 3rd place at Monza in 1984 (to date the final podium finish for Alfa Romeo in F1) came at the expense of Cheever, who was robbed of a podium finish when his car ran out of fuel 6 laps from the finish.\nThe pair were also hampered by their cars. 's Alfa Romeo 184T proved fast in qualifying, but fuel restrictions saw them well off the pace in most races. The 1985 car, the 185T proved to be even less competitive to the point that halfway through the season the team replaced it with an updated version of the 184T (dubbed the 184TB). Although the updated car did prove faster, results were not forthcoming. In an interview in 2000, Patrese described the 185T as \"the worst car I ever drove\".\nAt the 1985 Monaco Grand Prix, Patrese's former teammate Nelson Piquet began his 14th lap and was attempting to lap Patrese as they crossed the start/finish line. The cars made contact, and Patrese went into a spin while Piquet lost his suspension. Patrese then bounced off the wall and back into Piquet, and both drivers were out of the race.\nReturn to Brabham.\nIn 1986 Patrese returned to Brabham alongside fellow Italian Elio de Angelis, but by now the team was a spent force and would never again take a driver to victory in a grand prix. Two more winless seasons followed despite the team's BMW engine being considered at the time to be the most powerful on the grid. Despite the trials of uncompetitive machinery, Patrese never publicly criticised the team and earned respect throughout the sport for his professionalism.\nWilliams.\nToward the end of the 1987 season, Patrese was given the chance to revitalise what seemed to be a declining career when the Williams driver Nigel Mansell was injured whilst qualifying for the Japanese Grand Prix. With the help of Brabham owner and Formula One boss Bernie Ecclestone, Patrese tested the Williams FW11B at Imola, where he set a time that was half a second quicker than Ayrton Senna's pole at that year's San Marino Grand Prix, and was drafted in to replace Mansell for the season's finale in Australia.\nPatrese had already been signed by Williams management to be Nelson Piquet's replacement for the season as the 1987 and triple World Champion was off to Lotus to replace Ayrton Senna who had signed with McLaren (Honda were staying with Lotus for 1988 but Williams had lost their Honda engines to McLaren). However, 1988 saw Williams struggling with an uncompetitive car powered by non-turbocharged Judd V8 engines. Patrese and Mansell were also hampered in the first half of the season by the Williams FW12's reactive suspension not working properly. It wasn't until the British Grand Prix at Silverstone that Williams dumped the reactive suspension for a more conventional one and the FW12s became competitive.\nAt the 1988 Spanish Grand Prix, Patrese was fined US$10,000 for 'brake testing' the Tyrrell of F1 rookie Julian Bailey during qualifying which caused the Tyrrell 017 to launch its front wheels in the air when Bailey ran into the back of the Williams. One unnamed driver allegedly said of the incident \"They should fine him his bloody retainer. There are enough accidental shunts in this business without someone deliberately causing one\".\nIt was not until and the arrival of the V10 Renault engines that Patrese and his new teammate Thierry Boutsen were able to challenge for race wins. In his record-breaking 176th Grands Prix, Patrese led the first race of the year in Brazil (the first time he led a Grand Prix since 1983) including setting a new lap record of the Aut\u00f3dromo Internacional Nelson Piquet before stopping with an engine failure. In what would prove to be his best season since 1983, he achieved an impressive 3rd place in the Drivers' Championship, taking no wins but securing 6 podium finishes, including 4 second places, as well as claiming pole position in Hungary, a race he confidently led under constant pressure from reigning World Champion Ayrton Senna in his McLaren-Honda V10 until lap 54 when a holed radiator forced his retirement.\nIn , Patrese finally won his third Grand Prix at the 1990 San Marino Grand Prix, though the competitiveness of the Renault powered FW13B with what many felt were two \"number two\" drivers waned in the second half of the year as McLaren, Ferrari and later Benetton with their Ford V8 engines took the ascendancy and he finished the Drivers' Championship in 7th place.\nIn Nigel Mansell returned to Williams after two seasons with Ferrari and, together with Patrese, the team became genuine contenders for both the Drivers' and Constructors' Championships. Two wins in Mexico and Portugal gave Patrese his most competitive F1 season thus far and a respectable third place behind Championship contenders Mansell and Senna. In addition he took four pole positions across the season. Patrese also out qualified Mansell at every race until the halfway point of the season at Silverstone for the British Grand Prix, and provided much support for the Englishman's title chase at races such as Italy and Portugal.\nWilliams dominated F1 in and Patrese continued to deliver in his role of second driver to Nigel Mansell, moving out of the way for Mansell while leading comfortably at that year's French Grand Prix. Again Patrese handled the delicate situation about team orders diplomatically, repeatedly offering a \"No comment\" to questions about the team orders that had been imposed on him at the red flag period of the French race. Patrese took a single win at the Japanese Grand Prix and had eight other podium finishes, including six second-place results. After his retirement Patrese stated that Mansell had the edge over him that season because of Mansell's greater upper body strength, as the car's steering was heavy due to the amount of downforce it generated combined with the absence of power steering, whilst Patrese's skill in low speed corners was negated by the car's traction control system.\nWith Alain Prost, Ayrton Senna and Nigel Mansell all desperately trying to sign for Williams, Patrese's position looked to be under threat and he signed for the Benetton team before the end of the year. His teammate for would be young German driver Michael Schumacher. Ironically, only Prost was able to agree terms with Williams for 1993 (Mansell went on to race in the American-based Champ Car series while Prost had a clause in his contract, signed in early 1992, that prevented Senna from being his teammate). This would have left a seat free for Patrese had he remained with the team. Although Williams offered Patrese the opportunity to stay with the team after Mansell announced his retirement from F1 at the Italian Grand Prix, he felt he could not go back on his word to Benetton. The number two seat at Williams went to the team's test driver Damon Hill, the son of the and World Champion Graham Hill.\nBenetton.\nWhile Williams continued to dominate F1 in 1993, Patrese found it difficult to get along with team manager Flavio Briatore, sensing that the team's concentration was on his new teammate Michael Schumacher. Patrese would also describe the Benetton B193 with its Ford HBA8 V8 as a step down in quality compared to the much more sophisticated Williams cars he had been driving for the previous five years. After scoring 56 points and finishing 2nd in the World Championship in 1992, Patrese scored 20 points to finish 5th in 1993 with a best finish of 2nd in Hungary in what was to prove to be his final season in Formula One. Before the end of the season Briatore informed Patrese that he was \"free to seek an alternate drive\". Ligier made Patrese an offer for 1994 but seeing it as a further step down in his career, he decided against it.\nRetirement.\nAs most top teams already had drivers signed for 1994, Patrese opted for retirement and brought what was then the longest F1 career in history to a conclusion. Patrese was invited to rejoin Williams in 1994 to fill the seat of Ayrton Senna after his fatal accident at Imola, but ultimately decided against returning to Formula One. A DTM test with Mercedes-Benz in July 1994 did not come to fruition either. In the second half of 1996, as thanks for his years of service to Williams, the team invited Patrese to test their latest car, the FW18, at Silverstone, with the Italian reportedly setting a time that would have placed him on the second row of the grid for that year's British Grand Prix.\nAfter this, Patrese competed in the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 1997. He drove a Nissan R390 GT1 for the Nissan factory team; the car was third fastest in qualifying but was forced to retire with gearbox problems. After retiring from racing, he took up show jumping, following in the footsteps of his daughters who have competed in the sport internationally. He won an Italian national amateur title before retiring from equestrianism in 2014. Outside of competition, he is a keen collector of model railways, in particular those manufactured by M\u00e4rklin.\nIn 2005 he returned to racing in the inaugural season of the Grand Prix Masters formula for retired F1 drivers. He finished third behind his former teammate Nigel Mansell and Emerson Fittipaldi in the sole 2005 race at Kyalami, South Africa. His 2006 season was less successful with a 10th-place finish at Losail in Qatar and a 6th at Silverstone.\nPatrese's record of 257 Grand Prix entries, set in a period when a typical F1 season was limited to 16 races, stood for 15 years, surviving the Schumacher era when Michael Schumacher retired on 250 race entries. Rubens Barrichello finally surpassed Patrese's total, recording his 258th Grand Prix entry at the 2008 Turkish Grand Prix. As part of the \"handover\", Patrese tested a Honda RA107 at Jerez on 9 September (Barrichello was driving for Honda at the time). Schumacher subsequently came out of retirement and became the second driver to surpass Patrese's former record.\nIn July 2018 it was announced that Patrese would come out of retirement to compete at the Spa 24 Hours that month, competing in the pro-am category in a JAS Motorsport-run Honda NSX GT3 with Lo\u00efc Depailler (the son of former F1 driver Patrick Depailler), Bertrand Baguette and Esteban Guerrieri.\nRiccardo's son Lorenzo Patrese also became a racing driver alongside being a horse rider. He started single-seater racing in the 2020 Italian F4 Championship.\nRacing record.\nCareer summary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nComplete Formula One World Championship results.\n\u2020 Driver did not finish the Grand Prix, but was classified as he completed over 90% of the race distance.\nComplete Grand Prix Masters results.\n() Races in bold indicate pole position, races in \"italics\" indicate fastest lap.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38877", "revid": "49785510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38877", "title": "Standard electrode potential (data page)", "text": "Data values of standard electrode potential\nThe data below tabulates standard electrode potentials (\"E\"\u00b0), in volts relative to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), at:\nVariations from these ideal conditions affect measured voltage via the Nernst equation.\nElectrode potentials of successive elementary half-reactions cannot be directly added. However, the corresponding Gibbs free energy changes (\u2206\"G\"\u00b0) can be added. Those free energy changes satisfy\n\u2206\"G\"\u00b0 \n \u2013z\"FE\"\u00b0,\nwhere z electrons are transferred, and the Faraday constant F is the conversion factor describing Coulombs transferred per mole electrons. For example, from \nthe energy to form one neutral atom of Fe(\"s\") from one Fe2+ ion and two electrons is 2 \u00d7 0.44 eV \n 0.88 eV, or 84 907 J/(mol \u200a\"e\"\u2212). That value is also the standard formation energy (\u2206\"G\"f\u00b0) for an Fe2+ ion, since \u200a\"e\"\u2212 and Fe(\"s\") both have zero formation energy.\nData from different sources may cause table inconsistencies. For example: formula_1 From additivity of Gibbs energies and canceling common factors, one must have formula_2 But that equation does not hold exactly with the cited values.\nTable of standard electrode potentials.\nLegend: (\"s\") \u2013 solid; (\"l\") \u2013 liquid; (\"g\") \u2013 gas; (\"aq\") \u2013 aqueous (default for all charged species); (\"Hg\") \u2013 amalgam; bold \u2013 water electrolysis equations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38879", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38879", "title": "Panettone", "text": "Italian yeasted cake\nPanettone is an Italian type of sweet bread and fruitcake, originally from Milan, Italy, usually prepared and enjoyed for Christmas and New Year in Western, Southern, and Southeastern Europe, as well as in South America, Eritrea, Australia, the United States, and Canada.\nIt has a cupola shape, which extends from a cylindrical base and is usually about high for a panettone weighing . Other bases may be used, such as an octagon, or a frustum with a star section shape more common to \"pandoro\". It is made during a long process that involves curing the dough, which is acidic, similar to sourdough. The proofing process alone takes several days, giving the cake its distinctive fluffy characteristics. It contains candied orange, citron, and lemon zest, as well as raisins, which are added dry and not soaked. Many other variations are available such as plain or with chocolate. It is served in wedge shapes, vertically cut, accompanied with sweet hot beverages or a sweet wine, such as Asti or Moscato d'Asti. In some regions of Italy, it is served with \"crema al mascarpone\", a cream made by combining eggs, mascarpone, and a sweet liqueur.\nEfforts are underway to obtain protected designation of origin (PDO) and \"denominazione di origine controllata\" (DOC) status for this product, but these have not yet been successful.\nOrigins.\nIn Italy, historical accounts of panettone invariably state that it originated in Milan. The word \"panettone\" derives from \"panetto\", a small loaf of bread. The augmentative suffix \"-one\" changes the meaning to 'large bread'.\nIt is possibly mentioned in a contemporary recipe book written by Italian Bartolomeo Scappi, personal chef to popes and emperors during the time of Charles V. The oldest and most certain attestation of the panettone is found in a register of expenses of the Borromeo college of Pavia in 1599: on 23 December of that year in the list of courses provided for Christmas lunch, costs also appear for 5 pounds of butter, 2 pounds of raisins and 3 ounces of spices given to the baker to make 13 \"loaves\" to be given to college students on Christmas Day. The first recorded association of panettone with Christmas can be found in the Italian writings of the 18th century illuminist Pietro Verri. He refers to it as \"pan de ton\" ('luxury bread').\nThe first printed recipe for panettone appears in the third edition of 1853's \"Nuovo cuoco economico milanese\" by Giovanni Felice Luraschi (\"Pasta per far panatoni\")\n20th century.\nIn the early 20th century, two enterprising Milanese bakers began to produce panettone in large quantities for the rest of Italy. In 1919, Angelo Motta started producing his eponymous brand of cakes. It was also Motta who revolutionised the traditional panettone by giving it its tall domed shape by making the dough rise three times, for almost 20 hours, before cooking, giving it its now-familiar light texture. The recipe was adapted shortly after by another baker, Gioacchino Alemagna, around 1925, who gave his name to a brand that still exists today.\nThe stiff competition between the two that then ensued led to industrial production of the cake. Nestl\u00e9 took over the brands together in the late 1990s, but Bauli, an Italian bakery company based in Verona, has since acquired Motta and Alemagna from Nestl\u00e9.\nBy the end of World War II, panettone was cheap enough for anyone and soon became the country's leading Christmas sweet. Lombard immigrants to Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay, Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, and Brazil also brought their love of panettone, and panettone is enjoyed for Christmas with hot cocoa or liquor during the holiday season, which became a mainstream tradition in those countries. In some places, it replaces the king cake.\nModern consumption.\nPanettone is widely available in South America, including in Argentina, Brazil, Chile (e.g. \"pan de Pascua\"), Peru, Colombia, Uruguay, Venezuela, Bolivia, Paraguay, and Ecuador. It is known in Spanish as \"panet\u00f3n\" or \"pan dulce\", and as \"panetone\" in Brazilian Portuguese. Peru's Antonio D'Onofrio, son of immigrants hailing from Caserta, Italy, spawned his own brand using a modified form of the Alemagna formula (e.g., candied papaya is used instead of candied citron and lemon, as these fruits are not available in Peru), which he licensed along with the packaging style. This brand is now also owned by Nestl\u00e9 and exported throughout South America. Panettone is popular within Italian communities in the US, Canada, Australia, and the UK.\nItalian food manufacturing companies and bakeries produce 117 million panettone and \"pandoro\" cakes every Christmas, collectively worth \u20ac579 million.\nPeru is the world's biggest consumer of panettone, surpassing Italy, with 1.3\u2013kg of panettone per person in a year for Peru.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38880", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38880", "title": "Via Monte Napoleone", "text": "Shopping street in Milan, Italy\nVia Monte Napoleone, also spelled Via Montenapoleone, is an upscale shopping street in Milan, Italy, and the most expensive street in the world (2024). It is famous for its ready-to-wear fashion and jewelry shops, and for being the most important street of the Milan fashion district known as the \"Quadrilatero della moda\", where many well-known fashion designers have high-end boutiques. The most exclusive Italian shoemakers maintain boutiques on this street.\nIn 2009, architect Fabio Novembre designed a months-long art installation, titled \"Per fare un albero\", \"To make a tree\", in conjunction with the city of Milan's Department of Design, Events and Fashion and Fiat \u2014 featuring 20 full-size fiberglass planter replicas of the company's 500C cabriolet along Via Monte Napoleone.\nIn 2002, the Street Association started a media project including the Radio and the Portal, in order to relaunch the Made in Italy brand. Sponsored by the Department of Fashion, Tourism and Major Events of the Municipality of Milan, Italy Fashion System, and Assomoda, today it is the first instrument of revival and information on Made in Italy worldwide.\nHistory.\nThe street traces the Roman city walls erected by Emperor Maximian. In 1783, a financial institution known as the Monte Camerale di Santa Teresa opened there in Palazzo Marliani, with the function of managing the public debt. In 1786 the street itself was named after the \"monte\". The bank was closed in 1796 but re-opened in 1804, when Milan was capital of the Napoleonic Italian Republic, as the Monte Napoleone: from this the street derived its current name. During the first part of the 19th century the street was almost entirely rebuilt in the Neoclassical manner with palaces inhabited by the highest of the aristocracy. Notable buildings from this period are Palazzo Melzi di Cusano, Palazzo Gavazzi, Palazzo Carcassola Grandi, and Palazzetto Taverna. The much earlier Palazzo Marliani however, regarded as one of the finest houses to survive from the era of the Sforza, was preserved until its destruction during the Allied bombing campaign of 1943.\nAfter World War II, Via Monte Napoleone became one of the leading streets in international fashion, somewhat equivalent to Paris' Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Honor\u00e9, Rome's Via Condotti, London's Bond Street and Sloane Street, Los Angeles' Rodeo Drive, Florence's Via de' Tornabuoni, Berlin's Kurf\u00fcrstendamm and New York's Fifth Avenue.\nCaff\u00e8 Cova, founded in 1817 and one of the city's oldest caf\u00e9s and confectioners, relocated to Via Monte Napoleone in 1950 from its original premises next to the Teatro alla Scala.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38881", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38881", "title": "Palermo", "text": "City in Sicily, Italy\nPalermo ( ; ; , locally also or ) is a city in southern Italy, the capital of both the autonomous region of Sicily and the Metropolitan City of Palermo, the city's surrounding metropolitan province. The city is noted for its history, culture, architecture and gastronomy, playing an important role throughout much of its existence; it is over 2,700 years old. Palermo is in northwestern Sicily, by the Gulf of Palermo in the Tyrrhenian Sea.\nThe city was founded in Isla Palermo 734\u00a0BC by the Phoenicians as (\"flower\"). Palermo then became a possession of Carthage. Two Greek colonies were established, known collectively as ; the Carthaginians used this name on their coins after the 5th centuryBC. As , the town became part of the Roman Republic and Empire for over a thousand years. From 831 to 1072 the city was under Arab rule in the Emirate of Sicily when the city became the capital of Sicily for the first time. During this time the city was known as . Following the Norman conquest, Palermo became the capital of a new kingdom, the Kingdom of Sicily, that lasted from 1130 to 1816.\nThe municipality of Palermo has a population of 625,956 as of 2025. The population of its urban area is estimated by Eurostat to be 855,285, while its metropolitan city is the fifth most populated in Italy, with around 1.2 million people. The inhabitants are known as Palermitani or, poetically, \"panormiti\". The languages they speak are the Italian language and the Palermitano dialect of the Sicilian language.\nPalermo is Sicily's cultural, economic and tourism capital. It is a city rich in history, culture, art, music and food. Many tourists are attracted by the Mediterranean climate, renowned gastronomy and restaurants, Romanesque, Gothic, Baroque and Art Nouveau churches, palaces and buildings, and the nightlife and music. Palermo is the main Sicilian industrial and commercial center: the main industrial sectors include tourism, services, commerce and agriculture. Palermo has an international airport and a significant underground economy. For cultural, artistic and economic reasons, Palermo is one of the largest cities in the Mediterranean and among the top tourist destinations in both Italy and Europe. It is the main seat of the UNESCO World Heritage Site \"Arab-Norman Palermo and the Cathedral Churches of Cefal\u00f9 and Monreale\". The city is also undergoing careful redevelopment, preparing to become one of the major cities of the Euro-Mediterranean area.\nRoman Catholicism is highly important in Palermitan culture. The Patron Saint of Palermo is Santa Rosalia, whose Feast Day is celebrated on 15 July. The area attracts significant numbers of tourists and is widely known for its colourful fruit, vegetable and fish markets at the heart of Palermo, known as \"Vucciria\", \"Ballar\u00f2\" and \"Capo\".\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nEvidence of human settlement in the area now known as Palermo goes back to at least the Mesolithic period, perhaps around 8000\u00a0BC, where a group of cave drawings at nearby Addaura from that period have been found. The original inhabitants were Sicani people who, according to Thucydides, arrived from the Iberian Peninsula (perhaps Catalonia).\nAntiquity.\nIn the 8th c. BC the Phoenicians built a small settlement on the natural harbour of Palermo, which became known as (, \u1e62Y\u1e62). It became one of the three main Phoenician colonies of Sicily, along with Motya and Soluntum.\nThe first settlement was later known as \"Paleapolis\" meaning \"Old City\". The site chosen by the Phoenicians was connected to the mountains with two roads that today have become Via Cappuccini and Corso Pisani.\nThe \"Neapolis\" or \"New City\", the nucleus of the subsequent expansion of the colony, soon developed in the area between the Paleapolis and the port. The new district expanded rapidly, exceeding the size of the old quarter, and soon became the site of markets, artisan and commercial activities. The walls were extended to embrace the new urban perimeter and two new gates were made, while the old gate at the port was moved to make room for the new buildings. In total there were 4 gates, one on each side of the city. The walls followed the course of the two rivers that surround the city, the Kemonia and the Papireto, creating a natural moat and improving the military security of the city. During the Roman era they were reinforced.\nThe Cassaro district was probably named after the walls themselves; the word Cassaro deriving from the Arab \"al-qa\u1e63r\" (castle, stronghold, see also alc\u00e1zar). The colony developed around a central street (decumanus) now the Corso Vittorio Emanuele.\nCarthage was Palermo's major trading partner under the Phoenicians and the city enjoyed a prolonged peace during this period. Palermo came into contact with the Ancient Greeks between the 6th and the 5th centuries BC which preceded the Sicilian Wars, a conflict fought between the Greeks of Syracuse and the Carthaginians for control over the island of Sicily. During this war the Greeks named the settlement \"P\u00e1normos\" or 'wide haven' due to its large anchorage, from which the present name of the city developed. The Carthaginians began using the Greek name on the city's coinage from the 5th centuryBC. It was from Palermo that Hamilcar I's fleet (which was defeated at the Battle of Himera) was launched. In 409\u00a0BC the city was looted by Hermocrates of Syracuse. The Sicilian Wars ended in 265\u00a0BC when Syracuse allied with the Romans of Italy and pushed the Carthaginians off of the island during the First Punic War. In 276\u00a0BC, during the Pyrrhic War, Panormos briefly became a Greek colony after being conquered by Pyrrhus of Epirus, but returned to Punic Carthage in 275\u00a0BC. In 254\u00a0BC Panormos was besieged and conquered by the Romans. Carthage attempted to reconquer Panormus in the Battle of Panormus 250\u00a0BC but failed.\nIn Roman times luxurious residences were built and have been found in several locations (piazza Sett'Angeli, Palazzo Sclafani, piazza della Vittoria).\nMiddle Ages.\nAs the Roman Empire was falling apart, Palermo fell under the control of several Germanic tribes. The first were the Vandals in 440\u00a0AD under the rule of their king Geiseric. The Vandals had occupied all the Roman provinces in North Africa by 455 establishing themselves as a significant force. They acquired Corsica, Sardinia and Sicily shortly afterwards. However, they soon lost these newly acquired possessions to the Ostrogoths. The Ostrogothic conquest under Theodoric the Great began in 488; Theodoric supported Roman culture and government unlike the Germanic Goths. The Gothic War took place between the Ostrogoths and the Eastern Roman Empire, also known as the Byzantine Empire. Sicily was the first part of Italy to be taken under control of General Belisarius who was commissioned by the Eastern Emperor. In late 535 his Byzantine army of 7,500\u20139,000 and a fleet laid siege to the city in the Siege of Panormus, which had refused to surrender unlike all the other Ostrogothic-held cities in Sicily, and eventually prevailed.\nJustinian I solidified his rule in the following years.\nThe Arabs took control of Palermo and most of Sicily in 831, and the Emirate of Sicily was established, though other cities persisted as Byzantine holdouts until as late as 965. Muslim rule in Palermo lasted for about 240 years. Palermo (\"Bal'harm\" during Arab rule) displaced Syracuse as the capital of Sicily. It was said to have then begun to compete with C\u00f3rdoba and Cairo in terms of importance and splendor. For more than a hundred years Palermo was the capital of a flourishing emirate. The Arabs also introduced many agricultural crops which remain a mainstay of Sicilian cuisine.\nAfter dynastic quarrels however, there was a Norman conquest in 1072. Normans conquered Palermo after a long siege. Indeed, the feat proved difficult because the Normans had never besieged such a populous city with such powerful walls. After 5 months siege, Normans built numerous stairs and war machines and finally conquered the city. The family who returned the city to Christianity were called the Hautevilles, including Robert Guiscard and his army, who is regarded as a hero by the natives. It was under his nephew Roger II of Sicily that Norman holdings in Sicily and the southern part of the Italian Peninsula were promoted from the County of Sicily into the Kingdom of Sicily. The kingdom's capital was Palermo, with the King's Court held at the Palazzo dei Normanni. Much construction was undertaken during this period, such as the building of Palermo Cathedral. The Kingdom of Sicily became one of the wealthiest states in Europe.\nThanks to the marriage between Constance, Queen of Sicily, and Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor, Palermo and the whole Sicily was inherited by their son Frederick II, who became King of Sicily in 1198 and Holy Roman Emperor in 1220. Palermo was the capital of Emperor Frederick II's vast empire and also his favorite city. Muslims of Palermo emigrated or were expelled during Frederick's rule. After an interval of Angevin rule (1266\u20131282), Sicily came under control of the Aragon and Barcelona dynasties. By 1330, Palermo's population had declined to 51,000.\nEarly modern era.\nFrom 1479 until 1713 Palermo was ruled by the Kingdom of Spain, and again between 1717 and 1718. Palermo was also under Savoy control between 1713 and 1717 and 1718\u20131720 as a result of the Treaty of Utrecht. It was ruled by Austria between 1720 and 1734.\nTwo Sicilies.\nAfter the Treaty of Utrecht (1713), Sicily was handed over to the House of Savoy, but by 1734 it was in Bourbon possession. Charles III chose Palermo for his coronation as King of Sicily. Charles had new houses built for the growing population, while trade and industry grew as well. However, Palermo had become just another provincial city as the Royal Court resided in Naples. Charles' son Ferdinand, though disliked by the population, took refuge in Palermo after the French Revolution in 1798. His son Alberto died on the way to Palermo and is buried in the city.\nWhen the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies was founded, the original capital city was Palermo (1816) but a year later moved to Naples.\nFrom 1820 to 1848 Sicily was shaken by upheavals, which culminated on 12 January 1848, with a popular insurrection, the first one in Europe that year, led by Giuseppe La Masa. A parliament and constitution were proclaimed. The first president was Ruggero Settimo. The Bourbons reconquered Palermo in 1849, and it remained under their rule until the Expedition of the Thousand, led by Giuseppe Garibaldi, conquered the city after the Siege of Palermo in May 1860. After the plebiscite later that year Palermo, along with the rest of Sicily, became part of the new Kingdom of Italy (1861).\nItalian unification.\nThe majority of Sicilians preferred independence to annexation by the Savoy kingdom; in 1866, Palermo became the seat of a week-long popular rebellion, which was finally crushed after martial law was declared. The Italian government blamed anarchists and the Church, specifically the Archbishop of Palermo, for the rebellion and began enacting anti-Sicilian and anti-clerical policies. A new cultural, economic and industrial growth was spurred by several families, like the Florio, the Ducrot, the Rutelli, the Sandron, the Whitaker, the Utveggio, and others. In the early twentieth century, Palermo expanded outside the old city walls, mostly to the north along the new boulevards \"Via Roma\", \"Via Dante\", \"Via Notarbartolo\", and \"Viale della Libert\u00e0\". These roads soon had a huge number of villas in the Art Nouveau style. Many of these were designed by the architect Ernesto Basile. The Grand Hotel Villa Igiea, designed by Basile for the Florio family, is a good example of Palermitan Art Nouveau. The huge Teatro Massimo was designed in the same period by Giovan Battista Filippo Basile, Ernesto's father, and built by the Rutelli &amp; Mach\u00ec building firm of the industrial and old Rutelli Italian family in Palermo. It opened in 1897.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the Second World War, Palermo was heavily bombed by the Allied air forces in 1942 and 1943 until its capture during the Allied invasion of Sicily on 22 July 1943. The harbour and the surrounding quarters were effectively destroyed, as was much of the city, with heavy civilian casualties. When U.S. troops entered Palermo in 1943 they were greeted with \"a thunderous welcome by what seemed the entire population demonstrating their feelings about Fascist rule.\" The two captured Italian generals claimed that they were happy because in their view \"the Sicilians were not human beings but animals\". Anti-Sicilian prejudice was part of the fascist regime's worldview, promoted by pro-fascist newspapers, particularly in the north of Italy.\nItalian Republic and today.\nIn 1946, the city was declared the seat of the Regional Parliament, as capital of a Special Status Region (1947) whose seat is in the Palazzo dei Normanni.\nIn 1948, the element technetium was discovered in the University of Palermo.\nA theme in the city's modern age has been the struggle against the Sicilian Mafia, Red Brigades and outlaws such as Salvatore Giuliano, who controlled the neighbouring area of Montelepre. The Italian state effectively has had to share control of the territory, economically and administratively, with the Mafia.\nThe \"Sack of Palermo\" was one of the dramatic consequences of this problem. This popular term refers to the speculative building practices that resulted in the destruction of a great number of historical buildings and green areas in favour of poor buildings, mainly between the 1950s and the 1980s. The reduced importance of agriculture in the Sicilian economy has led to massive migration to the cities, especially Palermo, which swelled in size, leading to rapid northward expansion. The regulatory plans for expansion were largely ignored in the boom. New parts of town appeared almost out of nowhere, but without parks, schools, public buildings, proper roads, or the other amenities that characterise a modern city.\nThe Cosa Nostra has traditionally been the most powerful group in Palermo. A 2019 CNN article reported that Sicilian Mafia activity in Palermo was particularly notorious in one area, Passo Rigano. \"According to Italian police, the Mafia not only engages in extortion there, but also has a large role in the town's legal economy\u2014with its involvement in business such as wholesale food supplies, online betting and gambling.\" The police investigation at the time also confirmed strong links between the Palermo area mafia and American organized crime, particularly the Gambino crime family. According to La Repubblica, \"Off they go, through the streets of Passo di Rigano, Boccadifalco, Torretta and at the same time, Brooklyn, Staten Island, New Jersey. Because from Sicily to the US, the old mafia has returned\".\nGeography.\nPalermo lies in a basin formed by the Papireto, Kemonia and Oreto rivers. The basin was named the \"Conca d'Oro\" (the Golden Basin) by the Arabs in the 9th century. The city is surrounded by a mountain range named after the city. These mountains face the Tyrrhenian Sea. Palermo is home to a natural port and offers views of the sea, especially from Monte Pellegrino.\nClimate.\nPalermo experiences a hot-summer subtropical Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\") with moderate seasonality. Summers are very long, hot and dry due to the domination of subtropical high pressure system, while winters are mild and changeable, with rainy weather due to the polar front. Temperatures in autumn and spring are typically warm. Palermo is one of the warmest cities in Europe (mainly due to its warm nights), with an average annual air temperature of ; it is one of Italy's warmest cities. It receives about 2,530 hours of sunshine per year. Snow is rare, having occurred about a dozen times since 1945. Since the 1940s, considerable snowfall has occurred at least five times. In 1949 and in 1956, when the minimum temperature went down to , the city was blanketed by centimetres of snow. Snowfall also occurred in 1981, 1986, 1999 and 2014. The lowest temperature ever recorded in Palermo was in February 1967. The average annual temperature of the sea is above ; from in February to in August. From November to May, the average sea temperature exceeds and from June to October, the average sea temperature exceeds .\nTopography.\nPalermo is surrounded by mountains, which form a cirque around the city. Some of the city's districts are divided by the mountains. Historically, it was relatively difficult to reach the inner part of Sicily from the city because of the mountains. The range's tallest peak is La Pizzuta, about high. Historically, the most important mountain is Monte Pellegrino, which is geographically separated from the rest of the range by a plain and lies right in front of the Tyrrhenian Sea. In his essay \"Italian Journey,\" Johann Wolfgang von Goethe called Monte Pellegrino's cliff \"the most beautiful promontory in the world\". \nRivers.\nToday both the Papireto river and the Kemonia are covered up by buildings, but their shape can still be recognised because the streets that were built on them follow their shapes. The only waterway not drained yet is the Oreto river, which divides the downtown of the city from the western uptown and the industrial districts. In the basins were many seasonal torrents that helped formed swampy plains, reclaimed during history; a good example can be found in the borough of Mondello.\nDistricts.\nShown above are the thirty five quarters of Palermo: these thirty five neighbourhoods or \"quartiere\" as they are known, are further divided into eight governmental community boards.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2025, there are 1,194,439 people living in the metropolitan city of Palermo, 625,956 of which resided in the city itself, of whom 47.8% are male and 52.2% are female, compared to the nationwide average of 49.0% and 51.0% respectively. Minors make up 16.5% of the population, and seniors make up 23.6%, compared to the nationwide average of 14.9% and 24.7% respectively.\nIn the ten years between 2001 and 2011, the population of Palermo declined by 3.4%, compared to the entirety of Italy, which declined only by 0.7%. The reason for Palermo's decline is a population flight to the suburbs, and to Northern Italy.\nImmigration.\nAs of 2024, the foreign-born population is 30,168, equal to 4.8% of the population. The 5 largest foreign nationalities are Bangladeshis (5,393), Romanians (2,669), Sri Lankans (2,468), Ghanaians (2,094) and Tunisians (1,521).\nCulture.\nReligion.\nPatron saints.\nThe patron saint of Palermo is Saint Rosalia, who is widely revered.\nOn 14 July, people in Palermo celebrate the annual \"Festino\", the most important religious event of the year. The Festino is a procession that goes through the main street of Palermo to commemorate the miracle attributed to Saint Rosalia who, it is believed, freed the city from the Black Death in 1624. Her remains were discovered in a cave on Monte Pellegrino, and her remains were carried around the city three times, banishing the plague. There is a sanctuary marking the spot where her remains were found which can be reached via a scenic bus ride from the.\nBefore 1624 Palermo had four patron saints, one for each of the four major parts of the city. They were Saint Agatha, Saint Christina, Saint Nympha and Saint Olivia.\nSaint Lucy is also honoured with a celebration on 13 December, during which the inhabitants of Palermo do not eat anything made with flour, but boil wheat in its natural state and use it to prepare a special dish called cucc\u00eca. This commemorates the saving of the city from famine due to a miracle attributed to Saint Lucy; A ship full of grain mysteriously arrived in the city's harbour and the hungry population wasted no time in making flour but ate the grain as it arrived.\nSaint Benedict the Moor is the heavenly protector of the city of Palermo.\nThe ancient patron of the city was the Genius of Palermo, genius loci and numen protector of the place, that became the secular patron of the modern Palermo.\nSports.\nPalermo hosts a professional football team, Palermo Football Club, commonly called simply Palermo, that competes in Serie B as of 2022, having been excluded from Serie B after the 2018\u20132019 season. After it went bankrupt in 2019, a new club was formed by the company Hera Hora Srl.\nThe Targa Florio was an open road endurance car race held near Palermo. Founded in 1906, it was one of the oldest sports car racing events until its discontinuation in 1977 due to safety concerns, but it has since run as a rallying event. Palermo was home to the grand depart of the 2008 Giro d'Italia. The initial stage was a TTT (Team Time Trial).\nThe Internazionali Femminili di Palermo is an annual ladies professional tennis event held in the city, which is part of the WTA Tour.\nThe American football team is Eagles United Palermo and it plays in stadium of Carini.\nCity emblems.\nFlag.\nThe flag of Palermo is similar to that of the autonomous region of Sicily, but with a different arrangement of colours. The flag displayed on the Palazzo Pretorio, the town hall, has no coat of arms. However, versions with coats of arms of variable appearance in the center have been observed; for example, around the 1950s or 1960s the flag bore the civic coat of arms form \"Il Blasone in Sicilia\".\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms consists of a shield with a red background, stamped by the crown of the city, in the center of which there is a gold-colored eagle with open wings holding in its claws the legend bearing the initials \"S.P.Q.P.\".\nMonuments.\nUNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nPalermo has a large architectural heritage and is notable for its many Arab-Norman buildings. UNESCO World Heritage Sites include the Palazzo Reale with the Cappella Palatina, the Chiesa di San Giovanni degli Eremiti, the Chiesa di Santa Maria dell\u2019Ammiraglio, the Chiesa di San Cataldo, the Cattedrale di Palermo, the Palazzo della Zisa and the Ponte dell\u2019Ammiraglio, adding to the list that makes Italy the country with most UNESCO world heritage sites.\nCity walls.\nPalermo had two rings of city walls, many parts of which still survive. The first ring surrounded the ancient core of the Phoenician city, the \"Palaeopolis\" or \"Paleapolis\" (in the area east of Porta Nuova) and the \"Neapolis\". Via Vittorio Emanuele was the main road east\u2013west through this early walled city. The eastern edge of the walled city was on Via Roma and the ancient port in the vicinity of Piazza Marina. The wall circuit was approximately Porto Nuovo, Corso Alberti, Piazza Peranni, Via Isodoro, Via Candela, Via Venezia, Via Roma, Piazza Paninni, Via Biscottari, Via Del Bastione, Palazzo dei Normanni and back to Porto Nuovo.\nThe walls followed the course of the two rivers that surround the city, the Kemonia and the Papireto, creating a natural moat and improving the military security of the city. During the Roman era, they were certainly implemented, as deducible from the subsequent account of Procopius of Caesarea about the capture of Palermo.\nIn the medieval period the city was expanded with a second wall. Via Vittorio Emanuele continued to be the main road east\u2013west through the walled city. The west gate was still Porta Nuova, the walls continued to Corso Alberti, to Piazza Vittorio Emanuele Orlando where it turned east along Via Volturno to Piazza Verdi and along the line of Via Cavour. At this northeast corner the Castello a Mare protected the port at La Cala. A huge chain was used to block La Cala with the other end at Santa Maria della Catena (St Mary of the Chain). The sea-side wall was along the western side of Foro Italico Umberto. The wall turns west along the northern side of Via Abramo Lincoln, continues along Corso Tukory. The wall turns north approximately on Via Benedetto, to Palazzo dei Normanni and back to Porta Nuova.\nSeveral gates in the city wall survive.\nOpera houses.\nUntil the beginning of the 20th century there were hundreds of small opera theatres known as \"magazzeni\" in Palermo.\nOther sights.\nThe \"Wall of Legality\" (\"Il Muro Della Legalit\u00e0\") depicts 38 important persons who helped in fighting the mafia. The street art project was inaugurated in July 2022 and is a joint effort by 19 artists. It can be found at Piazza degli Aragonesi.\nThe cathedral has a heliometer (solar observatory) dating to 1690, one of a number built in Italy in the 17th and 18th centuries. The device itself is quite simple: a tiny hole in one of the minor domes acts as pinhole camera, projecting an image of the sun onto the floor at solar noon (12:00 in winter, 13:00 in summer). There is a bronze line, \"la Meridiana\", on the floor, running precisely north\u2013south. The ends of the line mark the positions as at the summer and winter solstices; signs of the zodiac show the various other dates throughout the year.\nThe purpose of the instrument was to standardise the measurement of time and the calendar. The convention in Sicily had been that the (24\u2011hour) day was measured from the moment of dawn, which meant that no two locations had the same time and, more importantly, did not have the same time as in St. Peter's Basilica in Rome. It was also important to know when the vernal equinox occurred, to provide the correct date for Easter.\nThe Orto botanico di Palermo (Palermo Botanical Garden), founded in 1785, is Italy's largest, with a surface of .\nOne site of interest is the Capuchin Catacombs, with many mummified corpses in varying degrees of preservation.\nClose to the city is the Monte Pellegrino, offering a panorama of the city, its surrounding mountains and the sea.\nAnother good panoramic viewpoint is the promontory of Monte Gallo (), near Mondello Beach.\nA Moreton Bay fig of &gt;30 m girth and of 32 m height can be found on the Piazza Marina. This \"Ficus macrophylla\" is most probably the thickest tree in Europe.\nOn the boulevard Via Roma is the Palazzo delle Poste, a government building created during the Mussolini era in the stripped classicism style. It was designed by the rationalist and later fascist government architect Angiolo Mazzoni. Perhaps its most famous feature is the five-mural cycle in the Futurist style by the artist Benedetta Cappa, \"Sintesi delle Comunicazioni\" (\"Synthesis of Communication\").\nEconomy.\nAs Sicily's administrative capital, Palermo is a centre for much of the region's finance, tourism and commerce. It has an international airport, and Palermo's economic growth over the years has brought the opening of many new businesses. The economy mainly relies on tourism and services, but also has commerce, shipbuilding and agriculture. But Palermo still has high unemployment, high corruption, and a significant black market (Palermo being the home of the Sicilian Mafia).\nTransport.\nPublic transport.\nPalermo has a local railway, the Palermo metropolitan railway service.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Palermo, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 63 min. 14.% of public transit riders, ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 23 min, while 48% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 4.4\u00a0km, while 3% travel for over 12\u00a0km in a single direction.\nBuses.\nPalermo's public bus system is operated by AMAT and covers an area of . About 90 different routes reach every part of the city.\nTrams.\nPalermo has a public tram system finalized in 2015 and operated by AMAT. There are four lines:\nCoaches.\nThe local coach company, AST, with its coaches totalling 35 lines, links Palermo to all of the main cities in Sicily.\nRoads.\nPalermo is a key intersection on the Sicilian road network, being the junction between the eastern A19 motorway to Trapani, the southeastern A29 to airport and Mazara del Vallo and the southwestern A19 to Catania and A20 to Messina. Palermo is one of the main cities on European route E90. The three main national roads starting from Palermo are the SS113, SS121, SS186 and the SS624.\nAirports.\nPalermo International Airport, known as Falcone-Borsellino Airport (formerly Punta Raisi Airport), is a few kilometres west of Palermo, in Cinisi. It is dedicated to Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino, two anti-mafia judges killed by the Mafia in the early 1990s.\nThe airport's rail facility, known as Punta Raisi railway station, can be reached from Palermo Centrale, Palermo Notarbartolo and Palermo Francia railway stations.\nPalermo-Boccadifalco Airport is the city's other airport.\nNational rail.\nThe main railway station of Palermo is Palermo Centrale which links to the other cities of Sicily, including Agrigento, Trapani and Catania, and through Messina and the strait to the rest of Italy. The railways also connect to the Palermo airport with departures every thirty minutes.\nPort.\nThe port of Palermo, founded by the Phoenicians over 2,700 years ago, is, together with the port of Messina, Sicily's main port. From there, ferries link Palermo to Cagliari, Genoa, Livorno, Naples, Tunis, and other cities, and carry almost two million passengers annually. It is also an important port for cruise ships. Traffic includes also almost of cargo and 80,000 TEUs yearly. The port also has links to minor Sicilian islands such as Ustica and the Aeolian Islands (via Cefal\u00f9 in summer). Inside the Port of Palermo there is a section known as \"tourist marina\" for sailing yachts and catamarans.\nEducation.\nThe local university is the University of Palermo, the island's second oldest university. It was officially founded in 1806, although historical records indicate that medicine and law have been taught there since the late 15th century. The Orto botanico di Palermo (Palermo botanical gardens) is home to the university's Department of Botany and is also open to visitors.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nPalermo is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHonorary citizens.\nPeople awarded the honorary citizenship of Palermo are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38886", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38886", "title": "Pi meson", "text": ""}
{"id": "38888", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38888", "title": "Georgy Zhukov", "text": "Soviet military leader (1896\u20131974)\nGeorgy Konstantinovich Zhukov (1 December [O.S. 19 November] 1896\u00a0\u2013 18 June 1974) was a Soviet military leader who served as a top commander during World War II and achieved the rank of Marshal of the Soviet Union. During World War II, Zhukov served as deputy commander-in-chief of the armed forces under leader Joseph Stalin, and oversaw some of the Red Army's most decisive victories. He also served at various points as Chief of the General Staff, Minister of Defence, and a member of the Presidium of the Communist Party (Politburo).\nBorn to a poor peasant family near Moscow, Zhukov was conscripted into the Imperial Russian Army and fought in World War I. He served in the Red Army during the Russian Civil War, after which he quickly rose through the ranks. In summer 1939, Zhukov commanded a Soviet army group to a decisive victory over Japanese forces at the Battles of Khalkhin Gol, for which he won the first of his four Hero of the Soviet Union awards, and in 1940 he commanded the Soviet invasion of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina in Romania. In February 1941, Stalin appointed Zhukov as chief of the General Staff of the Red Army.\nFollowing the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, Zhukov lost his post as chief of staff after disagreeing with Stalin over the defense of Kiev. Zhukov, often in collaboration with Aleksandr Vasilevsky, was subsequently involved in the Soviet actions at Leningrad, Moscow, Stalingrad, and Kursk. He held the title of deputy commander-in-chief of the armed forces from August 1942, and was promoted to Marshal of the Soviet Union in January 1943. He participated in the planning of Operation Bagration in 1944, and in 1945 commanded the 1st Belorussian Front as it led the Vistula\u2013Oder Offensive into Germany, where he oversaw the Soviet victory at the Battle of Berlin. In recognition of Zhukov's key role in the war, he was chosen to accept the German Instrument of Surrender and to inspect the 1945 Moscow Victory Parade. He also served as the first military governor of the Soviet occupation zone in Germany from 1945 to 1946.\nAfter the war, Zhukov's popularity caused Stalin to see him as a potential threat. Stalin stripped him of his positions and relegated him to military commands of little strategic significance. After Stalin's death in 1953, Zhukov supported Nikita Khrushchev's bid for leadership, and in 1955, he was appointed Defence Minister and made a member of the Presidium. In 1957, Zhukov lost favour again and was forced to retire. He never returned to a top post, and died in 1974. Zhukov is remembered as one of the greatest Russian and Soviet military leaders of all time, along with Alexander Suvorov, Mikhail Barclay de Tolly, and Mikhail Kutuzov.\nEarly life and career.\nZhukov was born into a poor peasant family of Russian ethnicity in Strelkovka, Maloyaroslavsky, Kaluga Governorate in western Russia, approximately east of Moscow. His father, of Greek origin, Konstantin, who had been orphaned at the age of two and then adopted by Anuska Zhukova, was a cobbler. His mother Ustin'ya was a peasant laborer. Zhukov was said to resemble his mother, and he believed he inherited his physical strength from her; Ustin'ya was reportedly able to accomplish demanding tasks such as carrying sacks of grain over long distances. In an era when most members of Russia's poor and working classes completed only two years of schooling, Zhukov completed the three-year primary education course at his hometown school. He was then apprenticed to his mother's brother Mikhail as a furrier in Moscow.\nWhile working for his uncle, Zhukov supplemented his education by reading with his cousin Alexander on a wide range of topics, including the Russian language, German language, science, geography, and mathematics. In addition, he enrolled in a night school, where he completed courses as the work in his uncle's shop permitted. He completed his apprenticeship in 1914 and established his own fur business, which included three young employees under his leadership.\nAt 5 ft 5 in (1.64 m), Zhukov was quite short; Marvin Kalb, who met Zhukov in the 1950s, described him as being as \"short as he was wide\".\nWorld War I.\nIn 1915, Zhukov was conscripted into the Imperial Russian Army, where he served in the 10th Dragoon Novgorod Regiment, and was wounded in action against the Germans at Kharkov. During World War I, Zhukov was awarded the Cross of St. George twice for heroism, and promoted to the non-commissioned officer ranks in recognition of his bravery in battle.\nHe joined the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) after the 1917 October Revolution; his background of poverty became a significant asset in party circles. After recovering from a serious case of typhus, he fought in the Russian Civil War, serving in the Second Cavalry Brigade, commanded by Semyon Timoshenko, which was later absorbed into the 1st Cavalry Army, led by Semyon Budyonny. He completed a cavalry training course for officers in 1920 and received his commission as an officer. He received the Order of the Red Banner for his part in subduing the Tambov Rebellion in 1921.\nInterwar period.\nZhukov quickly advanced through the ranks as the commander of a cavalry troop and squadron, and deputy commander of a cavalry regiment. At the end of May 1923, he was appointed commander of the 39th Cavalry Regiment. In 1924, he entered the Higher School of Cavalry, from which he graduated the next year, returning afterward to command the same regiment. According to Friedrich von Mellenthin: \n\"It is not generally realized that Zhukov received much of his early training in Germany. Together with other Russian officers, and by arrangement with the Reichswehr, he attended courses at German military schools in the 1920's. For a time he was attached to the cavalry regiment in which Colonel Dingler was serving as a subaltern; Dingler has vivid recollections of the uproarious behavior of Zhukov and his companions, and the vast quantities of liquor which they were accustomed to consume after dinner. But in the military sphere it is clear that Zhukov's time was not wasted.\"\nHe attended the Frunze Military Academy beginning in 1929, and graduated in 1930.\nIn May 1930, Zhukov became commander of the 2nd Cavalry Brigade of the 7th Cavalry Division. In February 1931, he was appointed as the Assistant Inspector of Cavalry for the Red Army.\nIn May 1933, Zhukov was appointed commander of the 4th Cavalry Division. His career was accelerated by the Great Purge, when thousands of officers were arrested and shot, but those associated with the First Cavalry Army were protected, as they were battling the Japanese on the edges of Manchuria. In 1937, Zhukov became commander of first the 3rd Cavalry Corps, and later the 6th Cavalry Corps. In 1938, he became deputy cavalry commander of the Belorussian Military District.\nKhalkhin Gol.\nIn 1938, Zhukov was directed to command the First Soviet Mongolian People's Army, and saw action against Japan's Kwantung Army on the border between the Mongolian People's Republic and the Japanese-controlled state of Manchukuo. The Soviet\u2013Japanese border conflicts lasted from 1938 to 1939. What began as a border skirmish rapidly escalated into a full-scale war, with the Japanese pushing forward with an estimated 80,000\u00a0troops, 180\u00a0tanks and 450\u00a0aircraft.\nThese events led to the strategically decisive battle of Khalkhin Gol. Zhukov requested major reinforcements, and on 20 August 1939, his Soviet offensive commenced. After a massive artillery barrage, nearly 500\u00a0BT-5 and BT-7 tanks advanced, supported by over 500\u00a0fighters and bombers. This was the Soviet Air Force's first fighter-bomber operation.\nThe offensive first appeared to be a typical conventional frontal attack. However, employing a pincer movement, a classic cavalry tactic, two tank brigades were initially held back and then ordered to advance around on both flanks, supported by motorized artillery, infantry, and other tanks. This daring and successful maneuver encircled the Japanese 6th Army and captured the enemy's vulnerable rear supply areas. By 31 August, the Japanese had been cleared from the disputed border, leaving the Soviets clearly victorious.\nThis campaign had significance beyond the immediate tactical and local outcome. Zhukov demonstrated and tested the techniques later used against the Germans in the Eastern Front of the Second World War. His innovations included the deployment of underwater bridges, and improving the cohesion and battle-effectiveness of inexperienced units by adding a few experienced, battle-hardened troops to bolster morale and overall training.\nEvaluation of the problems inherent in the performance of the BT tanks led to the replacement of their fire-prone petrol (gasoline) engines with diesel engines. This battle provided valuable practical knowledge that was essential to the Soviet success in development of the T-34 medium tank used in World War II. After this campaign, veterans were transferred to untested units, to better spread the benefits of their battle experience.\nFor his victory, Zhukov was declared a Hero of the Soviet Union. However, the campaign\u2014and especially Zhukov's pioneering use of tanks\u2014remained little known outside the Soviet Union. Zhukov considered Khalkhin Gol to be invaluable preparation for conducting operations during the Second World War. In May 1940, Zhukov became an army general, making him one of the eight high-ranking Red Army officers.\nWorld War II.\nBefore the War.\nPre-war military exercises.\nIn the autumn of 1940, Zhukov started preparing plans for the military exercise concerning the defence of the Western border of the Soviet Union. It had been pushed further to the west after the Soviet Union annexed eastern Poland and the Baltic republics. In his memoirs, Zhukov reports that in this exercise, he commanded the Western or Blue forces\u2014the supposed invasion troops\u2014and his opponent was Colonel General Dmitry Pavlov, the commander of the Eastern or Red forces\u2014the supposed Soviet troops. He noted that Blue had 60\u00a0divisions, while Red had 50\u00a0divisions. Zhukov describes the exercise as being similar to events that later took place during the German invasion.\n\"In this military exercise, I commanded Blue forces representing the Germans, while Pavlov, the commander of Western Military District, commanded the Red forces representing our army [...] After knowing the original documents and the real amount of German forces, when commanding the Blue Forces, I had the attacks developed into three directions, that in the following event the Germans also attacked us in the same manners. The main strikes of us that time was also similar to the main strikes of the Germans later. The army groups built was also nearly similar to the army groups that the Germans formed during the war. [...] Comrade [Stalin] asked why the Blue forces was so powerful, why the original documents of the military exercise allocated too many large forces for the German. He was replied that such forces corresponded to the German capability and the real calculation about the potential forces that the German could unleash after they managed to achieve great superiority on the main axes. That sufficiently showed why the Blue forces could make strong advances during the military exercise.\"\nRussian historian Bobylev noted that the details of the exercises were reported differently by the various participants who published memoirs. He said that there were two exercises; one from 2 to 6 January 1941, for the North-West direction; another from 8 to 11 January, for the South-West direction. During the first, Western forces attacked Eastern forces on 15\u00a0July, but the Eastern forces counterattacked and, by 1 August, reached the original border.\nAt the time, the Eastern forces had a numerical advantage: 51 infantry divisions against 41; 8,811\u00a0tanks against 3,512\u2014with the exception of anti-tank guns. Bobylev describes how by the end of the exercise, the Eastern forces did not manage to surround and destroy the Western forces. In their turn, the Western forces threatened to surround the Eastern forces. The same historian reported that the second game was won by the Easterners, meaning that on the whole, both games were won by the side commanded by Zhukov. However, he noted that the games had a serious disadvantage since they did not consider an initial attack by Western forces, but only an attack by Eastern forces from the initial border.\nAccording to Marshal Aleksandr Vasilevsky, the war-game defeat of Pavlov's Red Troops against Zhukov was not widely known. The victory of Zhukov's Blue Troops was widely publicized, which created a popular illusion of easy success for a preemptive offensive. On 1\u00a0February 1941, Zhukov became chief of the Red Army's General Staff. He was also elected a candidate member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union In February 1941, and was appointed a Deputy People's Commissar for Defence in March.\nSoviet offensive controversy.\nFrom 2 February 1941, as the chief of the general staff, and Deputy Minister of Defense, Zhukov was said to take part in drawing up the \"Strategic plan for deployment of the forces of the Soviet Union in the event of war with Germany and its allies.\" The plan was completed no later than 15 May 1941, according to a dated document found in the Soviet archives after they were declassified in the 1990s. Some researchers, such as Victor Suvorov, have theorized that on 14 May, Soviet People's Commissar of Defense Semyon Timoshenko and General Zhukov presented these plans to Stalin for a preemptive attack against Germany through Southern Poland.\nSoviet forces would occupy the Vistula Border and continue to Katowice or even Berlin\u2014should the main German armies retreat\u2014or the Baltic coast, should German forces not retreat and be forced to protect Poland and East Prussia. The attacking Soviets were supposed to reach Siedlce, D\u0119blin, and then capture Warsaw before penetrating toward the southwest and imposing final defeat at Lublin.\nHistorians do not have the original documents that could verify the existence of such a plan, and there is no evidence that Stalin accepted it. In a transcript of an interview on 26 May 1965, Zhukov said that Stalin did not approve the plan. But Zhukov did not clarify whether execution was attempted. As of 1999[ [update]], no other approved plan for a Soviet attack had been found.\nOn 10 June 1941, Zhukov sent a message to the Military Council of the Kiev Special Military District, after someone, most likely the commander of the Kiev district, Mikhail Kirponos, had ordered troops on the border to occupy forward positions. Zhukov ordered: \"Such action could provoke the Germans into armed confrontation fraught with all sorts of consequences. Revoke this order immediately and report who, specifically, gave such an unauthorised order.\" On 11 June, he sent a telegram saying that his immediate superior, Timoshenko, had ordered that they were to report back by 16 June confirming that the troops had been withdrawn from their forward positions.\" According to the historian David E. Murphy, \"the action by Timoshenko and Zhukov must have been initiated at the request of Stalin.\"\nDavid Glantz and Jonathan House, American scholars of the Red Army, argue that \"the Soviet Union was not ready for war in June 1941, nor did it intend, as some have contended, to launch a preventative war.\" Gerhard Weinberg, a scholar of Nazi foreign policy, supports their view, arguing that Adolf Hitler's decision to launch \"Operation Barbarossa\" was not because of a sense of urgent foreboding, but rather from a \"purposeful determination\" and he had started his planning for the invasion well in advance of the summer of 1941\nThe Eastern front.\nGermany invades the Soviet Union.\nOn 22 June 1941, Germany launched Operation Barbarossa, an invasion of the Soviet Union. On the same day, Zhukov responded by signing the \"Directive of Peoples' Commissariat of Defence No. 3\", which ordered an all-out counteroffensive by Red Army forces. He commanded the troops to \"encircle and destroy [the] enemy grouping near Suwa\u0142ki and to seize the Suwa\u0142ki region by the evening of 24 June\" and \"to encircle and destroy the enemy grouping invading in [the] Vladimir-Volynia and Brody direction\" and even \"to seize the Lublin region by the evening of 24 June\". This manoeuvre failed and disorganized Red Army units were destroyed by the Wehrmacht. Furthermore the subsequent Battle of Kiev in September, where over 600,000 Soviet troops were captured or killed, lowered his standing with Stalin. Zhukov subsequently claimed that he was forced by Joseph Stalin to sign the directive, supposedly written by Aleksandr Vasilevsky, despite the reservations that he raised.\nWhen Stalin arrived unannounced at command headquarters on 29 June, demanding to know why he was not being told what was happening at the front, Zhukov courageously told him: \"Comrade Stalin, our duty is first of all to help the front commanders and only then to inform you.\" But when he had to admit that they lost contact with the front commanders in Belarus, Stalin lost his temper and called him \"useless\".\nOn 29 July, Zhukov was removed from his post of chief of the general staff. In his memoirs he gives his suggested abandoning of Kiev to avoid an encirclement as a reason for it. On the next day the decision was made official and he was appointed the commander of the Reserve Front. There he oversaw the Yelnya offensive, delivering the Red Army's first victory over the Germans. On 10 September, Zhukov was made the commander of the Leningrad Front. There he oversaw the defense of the city.\nOn 6 October, Zhukov was appointed the representative of Stavka for the Reserve and Western Fronts. On 10 October, those fronts were merged into the Western Front under Zhukov's command. This front then participated in the Battle of Moscow and several Battles of Rzhev.\nIn late August 1942, Zhukov was made deputy commander in chief, subordinate only to Stalin, and sent to the southwestern front to take charge of the defence of Stalingrad. He and Vasilevsky later planned the Stalingrad counteroffensive. In November, Zhukov was sent to coordinate the Western Front and the Kalinin Front during Operation Mars. In January 1943, he\u2014together with Kliment Voroshilov\u2014coordinated the actions of the Leningrad and Volkhov Fronts and the Baltic Fleet in Operation Iskra. On January 18, 1943, Zhukov was promoted to Marshal of the Soviet Union.\nBattle of Kursk.\nZhukov was a Stavka coordinator at the battle of Kursk in July 1943. He was considered the main architect of the Soviet victory together with Vasilevsky. According to Zhukov's memoirs, he played a central role in the planning of the battle and the hugely successful offensive that followed. Commander of the Central Front Konstantin Rokossovsky, said, however, that the planning and decisions for the Battle of Kursk were made without Zhukov, that he only arrived just before the battle, made no decisions and left soon afterward, and that Zhukov exaggerated his role. A sense of the nature of the beginning of Rokossovsky's famous World War II rivalry with Zhukov can be gathered from reading Rokossovsky's comments in an official report on Zhukov's character:\nHas a strong will. Decisive and firm. Often demonstrates initiative and skillfully applies it. Disciplined. Demanding and persistent in his demands. A somewhat ungracious and not sufficiently sympathetic person. Rather stubborn. Painfully proud. In professional terms well trained. Broadly experienced as a military leader... Absolutely cannot be used in staff or teaching jobs because constitutionally he hates them.\nFrom 12 February 1944, Zhukov coordinated the actions of the 1st Ukrainian and 2nd Ukrainian Fronts. On 1 March, Zhukov was appointed the commander of the 1st Ukrainian Front until early May following the ambush of Nikolai Vatutin, its commander, by the anti-Soviet Ukrainian Insurgent Army near Ostroh. During the Soviet offensive named Operation Bagration, Zhukov coordinated the 1st Belorussian and 2nd Belorussian Fronts, and later the 1st Ukrainian Front as well. On 23 August, Zhukov was sent to the 3rd Ukrainian Front to prepare for the advance into Bulgaria.\nSurrender of Germany.\nMarch on Berlin.\nOn 16 November, he became commander of the 1st Belorussian Front which took part in the Vistula\u2013Oder offensive and the Battle of Berlin. He called on his troops to \"remember our brothers and sisters, our mothers and fathers, our wives and children tortured to death by Germans\u00a0... We shall exact a brutal revenge for everything\". More than 20\u00a0million Soviet soldiers and civilians died as a result of the war. In a reprisal for atrocities committed by German soldiers against Soviet civilians in the eastward advance into Soviet territory during Operation Barbarossa, the westward march by Soviet forces was marked by brutality towards German civilians, which included looting, burning and systematic rapes.\nZhukov was chosen to personally accept the German Instrument of Surrender in Berlin.\nPost-war service.\nSoviet occupation zone.\nAfter the German capitulation, Zhukov became the first commander of the Soviet occupation zone in Germany. On 10 June 1945, he returned to Moscow to prepare for the 1945 Moscow Victory Parade. On 24 June, Stalin appointed him commander in chief of the parade. After the ceremony, on the night of 24 June, Zhukov went to Berlin to resume his command.\nIn May 1945, Zhukov signed three resolutions to improve living standards in the Soviet occupation zone:\nZhukov requested the Soviet government to transport urgently to Berlin 96,000\u00a0tons of grain, 60,000\u00a0tons of potatoes, 50,000\u00a0cattle, and thousands of tons of other foodstuffs, such as sugar and animal fat. He issued strict orders that his subordinates were to \"hate Nazism but respect the German people,\" and to make all possible efforts to restore and maintain a stable living standard for the German population.\nInter-allied diplomacy.\nFrom 16 July to 2 August, Zhukov participated in the Potsdam Conference with the fellow representatives of the Allied governments. As one of the four commanders of the Allied occupational forces, Zhukov established good relationships with his new colleagues, General Dwight D. Eisenhower, Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery, and Marshal Jean de Lattre, and the four frequently exchanged views about such matters as the sentencing, trials, and judgments of war criminals, geopolitical relationships between the Allied states, and how to defeat Japan and rebuild Germany.\nEisenhower developed a good relationship with Zhukov and it proved beneficial in resolving differences in post-war occupational issues. Eisenhower's successor, General Lucius D. Clay, also praised the Zhukov\u2013Eisenhower friendship, and commented: \"The Soviet\u2013America relationship should have developed well if Eisenhower and Zhukov had continued to work together.\" Zhukov and Eisenhower went on to tour the Soviet Union together in the immediate aftermath of the victory over Germany. During this tour Eisenhower introduced Zhukov to Coca-Cola. As Coca-Cola was regarded in the Soviet Union as a symbol of American imperialism, Zhukov was apparently reluctant to be photographed or reported as consuming such a product. Zhukov asked if the beverage could be made colourless to resemble vodka. A European subsidiary of the Coca-Cola Export Corporation delivered an initial 50 cases of White Coke to Marshal Zhukov.\nDecline of career.\nZhukov was not only the supreme military commander of the Soviet occupation zone in Germany, but became its military governor on 10 June 1945. He was replaced with Vasily Sokolovsky on 10 April 1946. After an unpleasant session of the main military council\u2014in which Zhukov was accused of egoism, disrespect to his peers, and of political unreliability and hostility to the Party Central Committee\u2014he was stripped of his position as commander in chief of the Soviet Army.\nHe was assigned command of the Odessa Military District, far from Moscow and lacking in strategic significance and troops. He arrived there on 13 June 1946. Zhukov suffered a heart attack in January 1948, spending a month in the hospital. In February 1948, he was given another secondary posting, this time command of the Urals Military District. Peter G. Tsouras described the move from Odessa to the Urals as a relegation from a \"second-rate\" to a \"fifth-rate\" assignment.\nThroughout this time, security chief Lavrentiy Beria was supposedly trying to topple Zhukov. Two of Zhukov's subordinates, Marshal of Aviation Alexander Novikov and Lieutenant-General Konstantin Telegin, were arrested and tortured in Lefortovo Prison at the end of 1945. After Stalin's death it was claimed that Novikov was allegedly forced by Beria into a \"confession\" which implicated Zhukov in a conspiracy. In reality, Novikov may have been encouraged to point the finger at Zhukov because he saw Zhukov's membership at the investigation commission of the Aviators Affair\u2014a purge of the Soviet aircraft industry following accusations that, during the war, the fighter planes had been of poor quality\u2014in which Novikov was implicated, as instrumental to his downfall. Regardless, in a conference, all generals except GRU director Filipp Golikov defended Zhukov against accusation of misspending. During this time, Zhukov was accused of unauthorized looting of goods confiscated by the Germans, and of Bonapartism.\nIn 1946, seven rail carriages with furniture that Zhukov was taking to the Soviet Union from Germany were impounded. In 1948, his apartments and house in Moscow were searched and many valuables looted from Germany were found. In his investigation Beria concluded that Zhukov had in his possession 17\u00a0golden rings, three gemstones, the faces of 15\u00a0golden necklaces, more than of cloth, 323\u00a0pieces of fur, 44\u00a0carpets taken from German palaces, 55\u00a0paintings and 20\u00a0guns.\" Zhukov admitted in a memorandum to Zhdanov: \"I felt very guilty. I shouldn't have collected those useless junks and put them into some warehouse, assuming nobody needs them any more. I swear as a Bolshevik that I would avoid such errors and follies thereafter. Surely I still and will wholeheartedly serve the Motherland, the Party, and the Great Comrade Stalin.\"\nWhen learning of Zhukov's \"misfortunes\"\u2014and despite not understanding all the problems\u2014Eisenhower expressed his sympathy for his \"comrade-in-arms.\" In February 1953, Stalin relieved Zhukov of his post as Commander of the Urals Military District, recalling Zhukov to Moscow. It was thought Zhukov's expertise was needed in the Korean War; however, in practice, Zhukov received no orders from Stalin after arriving in Moscow. On 5 March 1953, at 09:50, Stalin died of a stroke. Following Stalin's passing, Zhukov's life entered a new phase.\nRelationship with Stalin.\nDuring the war, as the chief of staff and deputy supreme commander, Zhukov had hundreds of meetings with Stalin, both private and during Stavka conferences. Consequently, Zhukov understood Stalin's personality and methods well. According to Zhukov, Stalin was a bold and secretive person, but he was also hot-tempered and skeptical. Zhukov was able to gauge Stalin's mood: for example, when Stalin drew deeply on his tobacco pipe, it was a sign of a good mood. Conversely, if Stalin failed to light his pipe once it was out of tobacco, it was a sign of imminent rage. His outstanding knowledge of Stalin's personality was an asset that allowed him to deal with Stalin's outbursts in a way other Soviet generals could not.\nBoth Zhukov and Stalin were hot-tempered, and both made concessions necessary to sustain their relationship. While Zhukov viewed his relationship with Stalin as one of a subordinate\u2013senior, Stalin was in awe and possibly jealous of Zhukov. Both were military commanders, but Stalin's experience was limited to a previous generation of non-mechanized warfare. By contrast, Zhukov was highly influential in the development of contemporary combined operations of highly mechanized armies. The differences in their outlooks were the cause of many tempestuous disagreements between the two of them at Stavka meetings. Nonetheless, Zhukov was less competent than Stalin as a politician, highlighted by Zhukov's many failures in politics. Stalin's unwillingness to value Zhukov beyond the marshal's military talents was one of the reasons why Zhukov was recalled from Berlin.\nSignificant to their relationship as well was Zhukov's bluntness towards his superior. Stalin was dismissive of the fawning of many of his entourage and openly criticized it. Many people around Stalin\u2014including Beria, Yezhov, and Mekhlis\u2014felt obliged to flatter Stalin to remain on his good side. Zhukov remained obstinate and argumentative, and did not hesitate to publicly contradict Stalin to the point of risking his career and life. Their heated argument about whether to abandon Kiev due to the Germans' rapid advance in summer of 1941 was typical of Zhukov's approach. Zhukov's ability to remain skeptical and unwavering at giving in to pressure did garner him the respect of Stalin.\nPolitical career.\nArresting Beria.\nAfter Stalin's death, Zhukov returned to favor, becoming Deputy Defence Minister in 1953. He then had an opportunity to avenge himself on Beria. With Stalin's sudden death, the Soviet Union fell into a leadership crisis. Georgy Malenkov temporarily became First Secretary. Malenkov and his allies attempted to purge Stalin's influence and personality cult; however, Malenkov himself did not have the courage to do this alone. Moreover, Lavrentiy Beria remained dangerous. The politicians sought reinforcement from the powerful and prestigious military men. In this matter, Nikita Khrushchev chose Zhukov because the two had forged a good relationship, and, in addition, during World War II, Zhukov had twice saved Khrushchev from false accusations.\nOn 26 June 1953, a special meeting of the Politburo was held by Malenkov. Beria came to the meeting with an uneasy feeling because it was called hastily\u2014indeed, Zhukov had ordered General Kirill Moskalenko to secretly prepare a special force and permitted the force to use two of Zhukov's and Defence Minister Nikolai Bulganin's special cars (which had tinted windows) in order to safely infiltrate the Kremlin. Zhukov also ordered him to replace the MVD Guard with the guard of the Moscow Military District.\nFinally, Khrushchev suggested expelling Beria from the Communist Party and bringing him before a military court. Moskalenko's special forces obeyed.\nZhukov was a member of the military tribunal during the Beria trial, which was headed by Marshal Ivan Konev. On 18 December 1953, the Military Court sentenced Beria to death. During the burial of Beria, Konev commented: \"The day this man was born deserves to be damned!\" Then Zhukov said: \"I considered it as my duty to contribute my little part in this matter.\"\nMinister of Defense.\nWhen Bulganin became premier in 1955, he appointed Zhukov as Defense Minister. Zhukov participated in many political activities. He successfully opposed the re-establishment of the Commissar system, arguing that the Party and political leaders were not professional military men, and thus the highest power should fall to the army commanders. Until 1955, Zhukov had both sent to and received letters from Eisenhower. Both leaders agreed that the two superpowers should coexist peacefully. In July 1955, Zhukov\u2014together with Khrushchev, Bulganin, Vyacheslav Molotov and Andrei Gromyko\u2014participated in a Summit Conference at Geneva after the USSR signed the Austrian State Treaty and withdrew its army from the country.\nZhukov followed orders from the then prime minister Georgy Malenkov and Communist Party leader Khrushchev during the invasion of Hungary following the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. Along with the majority of members of the Presidium, he urged Khrushchev to send troops to support the Hungarian authorities and to secure the Austrian border. Zhukov and most of the Presidium were not, however, eager to see a full-scale intervention in Hungary. Zhukov even recommended the withdrawal of Soviet troops when it seemed that they might have to take extreme measures to suppress the revolution.\nThe mood in the Presidium changed again when Hungary's new prime minister, Imre Nagy, began to talk about Hungarian withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact. That led the Soviets to attack the revolutionaries and to replace Nagy with J\u00e1nos K\u00e1d\u00e1r. In the same years, when the UK, France, and Israel invaded Egypt during the Suez Crisis, Zhukov expressed support for Egypt's right of self-defense. In October 1957, Zhukov visited Yugoslavia and Albania aboard the \"Kuibyshev\", attempting to repair the Tito\u2013Stalin split of 1948. During the voyage, \"Kuibyshev\" encountered units of the U.S. Sixth Fleet and \"passing honours\" in the form of full salvos were exchanged between the vessels.\nFall from power.\nOn his 60th birthday, in 1956, Zhukov received his fourth Hero of the Soviet Union title\u2014making him the first person to receive the honour four times. The only other four-time recipient was Leonid Brezhnev, who never rose above modest military rank and received all of his four Hero of the Soviet Union medals for his birthday as part of his overall cult of personality and love for medals, titles, and decorations. Despite his general lack of political ability, Zhukov became the highest-ranking military professional who was also a member of the Presidium of the Central Committee of the Communist Party. He further became a symbol of national strength, the most widely esteemed Soviet military hero of World War II. Zhukov's prestige was even higher than the police and security agencies of the USSR, and thus rekindled concerns among political leaders.\nGoing even further than Khrushchev, Zhukov demanded that the political agencies in the Red Army report to him before the Party. He demanded an official condemnation of Stalin's crimes during the Great Purge. He also supported the political vindication and rehabilitation of Mikhail Tukhachevsky, Grigoriy Shtern, Vasily Blyukher, Alexander Yegorov and many others. In response his opponents accused him of being a Reformist and Bonapartist. Such enviousness and hostility proved to be the key factor that led to his later downfall.\nThe relationship between Zhukov and Khrushchev reached its peak during the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) in 1956. After becoming the First Secretary of the Party, Khrushchev moved against Stalin's legacy and criticised his personality cult in a speech, \"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences\". To complete such startling acts, Khrushchev needed the approval\u2014or at least the acquiescence\u2014of the military, headed by Minister of Defense Zhukov.\nAt the plenary session of the Central Committee of the CPSU held in June 1957 Zhukov supported Khrushchev against the \"Anti-Party Group\", that had a majority in the Presidium and voted to replace Khrushchev as First Secretary with Bulganin. At that plenum, Zhukov stated: \"The Army is against this resolution and not even a tank will leave its position without my order!\". In the same session the \"Anti-Party Group\" was condemned and Zhukov was made a member of the Presidium.\nHis second fall was more sudden and public even than his first. On 4 October 1957, he left on an official visit to Yugoslavia, and Albania. He returned to Moscow on 26 October, straight to a meeting of the Presidium, during which he was removed from that body. On 2 November, the Central Committee convened to hear Zhukov being accused of 'non-party behaviour', conducting an 'adventurist foreign policy', and sponsoring his own personality cult. He was expelled from the Central Committee and sent into forced retirement at age 62. The same issue of the \"Krasnaya Zvezda\" that announced Zhukov's return also reported that he had been relieved of his duties. According to many researchers, Soviet politicians\u2014including Khrushchev himself\u2014had a deep-seated fear of \"powerful people\".\nLater life.\nRetirement.\nAfter being forced out of the government, Zhukov stayed away from politics. Many people\u2014including former subordinates\u2014frequently paid him visits, joined him on hunting excursions, and exchanged reminiscences. In September 1959, while visiting the United States, Khrushchev told President Eisenhower that the retired Marshal Zhukov \"liked fishing\". Zhukov was actually a keen aquarist. In response, Eisenhower sent Zhukov a set of fishing tackle. Zhukov respected this gift so much that he is said to have exclusively used Eisenhower's fishing tackle for the remainder of his life, referring to Soviet fishing tackle as \"substandard\".\nAfter Khrushchev was deposed in October 1964, Brezhnev restored Zhukov to favor\u2014though not to power\u2014in a move to use Zhukov's popularity to strengthen his political position. Zhukov's name was put in the public eye yet again when Brezhnev lionised Zhukov in a speech commemorating the Great Patriotic War. On 9 May 1965, Zhukov was invited to sit on the tribune of the Lenin Mausoleum and have the honour of reviewing the parade of military forces in Red Square.\nZhukov had begun writing his memoirs, \"Memories and Recollections\", in 1958. He now worked intensively on them which, together with steadily deteriorating health, served to worsen his heart disease. It would take another decade until publication after Zhukov clashed constantly with Mikhail Suslov, the Communist Party's Chief Ideologue and Second in Command in charge of Censorship, who demanded many revisions and removals, particularly his criticisms of Stalin, Voroshilov, Budyonny and Molotov. After Brezhnev came to power, Suslov made further demands to exaggerate Colonel Brezhnev's role in WWII by glorifying the little known and strategically unimportant Battles of Malaya Zemlya and Novorossiysk as a decisive turning point in the Eastern Front, both of which Zhukov refused to do. In December 1967, Zhukov had a serious stroke. He was hospitalised until June 1968, and continued to receive medical and rehabilitative treatment at home under the care of his second wife, Galina Semyonova, a former officer in the Medical Corps. The stroke left him paralysed on his left side, his speech became slurred and he could only walk with assistance.\nHis memoirs were published in 1969 and became a best-seller. Within several months of the date of publication of his memoirs, Zhukov had received more than 10,000 letters from readers that offered comments, expressed gratitude, gave advice, or lavished praise. Supposedly, the Communist Party invited Zhukov to participate in the 24th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1971, but the invitation was rescinded.\nDeath.\nZhukov died in Moscow, Russian SFSR on 18 June 1974 at age 77 after suffering a stroke. His body was cremated and his ashes were buried at the Kremlin Wall Necropolis alongside fellow generals and marshals of the Soviet Union during his funeral.\nIn 1995, an equestrian statue of Zhukov was erected in front of the State Historical Museum.\n Konstantin Artemyevich Zhukov (1851\u20131921); a shoemaker\n Ustinina Artemievna Zhukova (1866\u20131944); farmer from a poor family\n 1. Maria Konstantinovna Zhukova (1894\u20131954)\n 2. Alexei Konstantinovich Zhukov (born 1901); died prematurely\n 1. Alexandra Dievna Zuikova (1900\u20131967); common-law wife since 1920; married in 1953; divorced in 1965; died after a stroke\n 2. Galina Alexandrovna Semyonova (1926\u20131973); married in 1965; medical corps officer, at Burdenko hospital; specialized in therapeutics; died of breast cancer\n 1. Era Zhukova (born 1928); by Alexandra Dievna Zukova\n 2. Margarita Zhukova (1929\u20132010); by Maria Nikolaevna Volokhova (1897\u20131983)\n 3. Ella Zhukova (1937\u20132010); by Alexandra Dievna Zukova\n 4. Maria Zhukova (born 1957); by Galina Alexandrovna Semyonova\nLegacy.\nThe first monument to Georgy Zhukov was erected in Mongolia, in memory of the Battle of Khalkin Gol. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, this monument was one of the few that did not suffer from anti-Soviet backlash in former Communist states. There is a statue of Zhukov on horseback as he appeared at the 1945 victory parade on Manezhnaya Square at the entrance of the Kremlin in Moscow. Another statue of Zhukov in Moscow is located on Prospekt Marshala Zhukova. A statue of Zhukov is located in the town of Irbit, in the Sverdlovsk Oblast. Other statues of Zhukov are found in Omsk, Irkutsk and Yekaterinburg.\nA minor planet, 2132 Zhukov, discovered in 1975, by Soviet astronomer Lyudmila Chernykh, is named in his honour. In 1996, Russia adopted the Order of Zhukov and the Zhukov Medal to commemorate the 100th anniversary of his birthday.\nNobel laureate Joseph Brodsky's poem \"On the Death of Zhukov\" (\"Na smert' Zhukova\", 1974) is regarded by critics as one of the best poems on the war written by an author of the post-war generation. The poem is a stylization of \"The Bullfinch\", Derzhavin's elegy on the death of Generalissimo Suvorov in 1800. Brodsky draws a parallel between the careers of these two famous commanders. Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn re-interpreted Zhukov's memoirs in the short story \"Times of Crisis\".\nIn his book of recollections, Zhukov was critical of the role the Soviet leadership played during the war. The first edition of was published during Leonid Brezhnev's premiership only on the conditions that criticism of Stalin was removed, and that Zhukov add a (fictional) episode of a visit to Brezhnev, \"politruk\" on the Southern Front, to consult on military strategy.\nIn 1989, parts of previously unpublished and censored chapters from Zhukov's memoir were published by \"Pravda\", which his daughter said had been hidden in a safe until they could be published. The excerpts included criticism of the 1937\u20131939 purges for annihilating \"[M]any thousands of outstanding party workers\" and stated that Stalin had played no role in directing the war effort, although he often issued orders devised by the general staff as if they were his own.\nAppraisals of Zhukov's career vary. For example, historian Konstantin Zaleski claimed that Zhukov exaggerated his own role in World War II. Marshal Konstantin Rokossovsky said that the planning and decisions for the Battle of Kursk were made without Zhukov, that he only arrived just before the battle, made no decisions and left soon after.\nZhukov also received many positive comments, mostly from his Army companions, from the modern Russian Army, and from his Allied contemporaries. General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower stated that, because of Zhukov's achievements fighting the Nazis, the United Nations owed him much more than any other military leader in the world. \"The war in Europe ended with victory and nobody could have done that better than Marshal Zhukov\u2014we owed him that credit. He is a modest person, and so we can't undervalue his position in our mind. When we can come back to our Motherland, there must be another type of Order in Russia, an Order named after Zhukov, which is awarded to everybody who can learn the bravery, the far vision, and the decisiveness of this soldier.\"\nMarshal of the Soviet Union Aleksandr Vasilevsky commented that Zhukov is one of the most outstanding and brilliant military commanders of the Soviet military forces. Major General Sir Francis de Guingand, chief of staff of Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery, described Zhukov as a friendly person. John Gunther, who met Zhukov many times after the war, said that Zhukov was more friendly and honest than any of the other Soviet leaders.\nJohn Eisenhower\u2014son of Dwight Eisenhower\u2014claimed that Zhukov was really ebullient and was a friend of his. Albert Axell in his work \"Marshal Zhukov, the one who beat Hitler\" claimed that Zhukov was a military genius like Alexander the Great and Napoleon. Axell also commented that Zhukov was a loyal communist and a patriot. At the end of his work about Zhukov, Otto Chaney concluded: \"But Zhukov belongs to all of us. In the darkest period of World War II his fortitude and determination eventually triumphed. For Russians and people everywhere he remains an enduring symbol of victory on the battlefield.\"\nIn Russia, Zhukov is often credited with having said to Konstantin Rokossovsky in Berlin in 1945: \"We have liberated them, and they will never forgive us for that.\"\nIn popular culture.\nZhukov has been portrayed by the following actors:\n\"\" producers named an \"Ambassador\"-class starship after Zhukov, which was mentioned or made an appearance on several episodes of the series.\nDecorations.\nZhukov was the recipient of many decorations. Most notably he was awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union four times. The medals of the only other four-time recipient, Leonid Brezhnev, were the result of self-awarding as birthday gifts.\nZhukov was one of only three recipients to receive the Order of Victory twice. He was also awarded high honours from many other countries. A partial listing is presented below.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n |last = Mellenthin\n |first = F. W. von\n |author-link= Friedrich von Mellenthin\n |title = Panzer Battles: A Study of the Employment of Armor in the Second World War\n |others = Translated by H. Betzler. Edited by L. C. F. Turner\n |place = New York\n |publisher = Ballantine Books\n |lang = en\n |date = 1971\n |orig-date = 1956\n |url = https://archive.org/details/panzerbattlesstu0000mell_l8y2/\n |last=Roberts\n |first=Geoffrey\n |title=Stalin's General: The Life of Georgy Zhukov\n |publisher=Random House\n |year=2012\n |location=New York\n |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=EKznAgIoIZIC&amp;q=shtern+&amp;pg=PA80\n |last = Shtemenko\n |first = S. M.\n |author-link = Sergei Shtemenko\n |date = 1989\n |title = General Staff during the War\n |language = ru\n |location = Moscow\n |publisher = Voenizdat\n |isbn = 978-5203004918\n |last = Spahr\n |first = W. J.\n |author-link = William J. Spahr\n |date = 1993\n |title = Zhukov: The Rise and Fall of a Great Captain\n |location = Novato\n |publisher = Presidio Press\n |isbn = 978-0891414698\n |last = Uldricks\n |first = T. J.\n |date = 1999\n |title = The Icebreaker Controversy\n |journal = Slavic Review\n |volume = 58\n |issue = 3\n |pages = 626\u2013643\n |doi = 10.2307/2697571\n |jstor = 2697571\n |last = Vasilevsky\n |first = A. M.\n |author-link = Aleksandr Vasilevsky\n |date = 1973\n |title = A Lifelong Cause\n |language = ru\n |location = Moscow\n |publisher = Progress Publishers\n |oclc = 988160134\n |last = Zhukov\n |first = G. \u041a.\n |date = 1973\n |title = The Memoirs of Marshal Zhukov\n |location = London\n |publisher = Jonathan Cape\n |isbn = 978-0224619240\n |last = Zhukov\n |first = G. K.\n |date = 2002\n |title = Memories and Reflections\n |language = ru\n |volume = 1\n |location = Moscow\n |publisher = Olma Press\n |isbn = 978-5224031955\n |last = Zhukov\n |first = G. K.\n |date = 2003\n |title = Memories and Reflections\n |language = ru\n |volume = 2\n |location = Moscow\n |publisher = Olma Press\n |isbn = 978-5224031979\nFurther reading.\n |last = Goldman\n |first = S. D.\n |date = 2013\n |title = Nomonhan, 1939: the Red Army's victory that shaped World War II\n |location = Annapolis\n |publisher = NIP\n |isbn = 978-1591143390\n |last = Hill\n |first = A.\n |date = 2017\n |title = The Red Army and the Second World War\n |location = Cambridge\n |publisher = CUP\n |isbn = 978-1107020795\n |last= Zhukov\n |first=Georgi K.\n |title = Reminiscences and Reflections\n |trans-title=\u0412\u043e\u0441\u043f\u043e\u043c\u0438\u043d\u0430\u043d\u0438\u044f \u0438 \u0440\u0430\u0437\u043c\u044b\u0448\u043b\u0435\u043d\u0438\u044f\n |lang=en\n |orig-date = 1974\n |date = 1985\n |place = Moscow\n |publisher=Progress Publishers\n |others=Translated by Vic Schneierson (vol. 1) and others\n}}\u00a0https:// \u2022 https://"}
{"id": "38889", "revid": "47120006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38889", "title": "Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "King of Hungary from 1387 to 1437 and Holy Roman Emperor from 1433 to 1437\nSigismund of Luxembourg (15 February 1368 \u2013 9 December 1437) was Holy Roman Emperor from 1433 until his death in 1437. As the husband of Mary, Queen of Hungary, he was King of Hungary and Croatia (\"jure uxoris\") from 1387. He was elected King of Germany (King of the Romans) in 1410, and was also King of Bohemia from 1419, as well as prince-elector of Brandenburg (1378\u20131388 and 1411\u20131415). He was the last male member of the House of Luxembourg.\nSigismund was the son of Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor and his fourth wife Elizabeth of Pomerania. He married Mary, Queen of Hungary in 1385 and was crowned King of Hungary soon after. He fought to restore and maintain authority to the throne. Mary died in 1395, leaving Sigismund the sole ruler of Hungary.\nIn 1396, Sigismund led the Crusade of Nicopolis but was decisively defeated by the Ottoman Empire. Afterwards, he founded the Order of the Dragon to fight the Turks and secured the thrones of Croatia, Germany and Bohemia. Sigismund was one of the driving forces behind the Council of Constance (1414\u20131418) that ended the Papal Schism, but which also led to the Hussite Wars that dominated the later period of his life. In 1433, Sigismund was crowned Holy Roman Emperor and ruled until his death in 1437.\nHistorian Thomas Brady Jr. remarks that Sigismund \"possessed a breadth of vision and a sense of grandeur unseen in a German monarch since the thirteenth century\". He realized the need to carry out reforms of the empire and the Church at the same time. However external difficulties, self-inflicted mistakes and the extinction of the Luxembourg male line made this vision unfulfilled. Later, the Habsburgs would inherit this mission and imperial reform was carried out successfully under the reigns of Frederick III and especially his son Maximilian I, although perhaps at the expense of the reform of the Church, partly because Maximilian was not particularly focused on the matter.\nIn recent years, scholarly interest (especially from East-Central Europe) has grown greatly in the person and reign of Sigismund\u2014the ruler who had gained and led an imperial association almost reaching the size of the later Habsburg Empire\u2014as well as cultural developments associated with his era. The setbacks which have been seen as his major failures (like dealing with the Hussite movement) are now generally considered by most scholars to be the results of the lack of financial resources and other heavy constraints, rather than personal failings.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Nuremberg or Prague, Sigismund was the son of Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor and his fourth and final wife, Elizabeth of Pomerania, who was the granddaughter of King Casimir III of Poland and the great-granddaughter of Gediminas, a Grand Duke of Lithuania. He was named after Saint Sigismund of Burgundy, the favourite saint of Sigismund's father. From Sigismund's childhood, he was nicknamed the \"ginger fox\" (\"li\u0161ka ry\u0161av\u00e1\") in the Bohemian Crown lands on account of his hair colour.\nKing Louis the Great of Hungary and Poland always had a good and close relationship with Emperor Charles IV, and Sigismund was betrothed to Louis' eldest daughter, Mary, in 1374, when he was six years old and Mary but an infant. The marital project aimed to augment the lands held by the House of Luxembourg. Upon his father's death in 1378, young Sigismund became Margrave of Brandenburg and was sent to the Hungarian court, where he soon learned the Hungarian language and way of life, and became entirely devoted to his adopted country. King Louis named him as his heir and appointed him his successor as King of Hungary.\nIn 1381, the then 13-year-old Sigismund was sent to Krak\u00f3w by his eldest half-brother and guardian Wenceslaus, King of Germany and Bohemia, to learn Polish and to become acquainted with the land and its people. King Wenceslaus also gave him Neumark to facilitate communication between Brandenburg and Poland.\nWhile Mary was accepted as monarch of Hungary, Sigismund vied for the crown of Poland as well. However, the Poles were unwilling to submit to a German sovereign, nor did they want to be tied to Hungary. The disagreement between Polish landlords of Lesser Poland on one side and landlords of Greater Poland on the other, regarding the choice of the future monarch of Poland, finally ended in choosing the Lithuanian side. The support of the lords of Greater Poland was however not enough to give Prince Sigismund the Polish crown. Instead, the landlords of Lesser Poland gave it to Mary's younger sister Jadwiga, who married Jogaila of Lithuania.\nKing of Hungary.\nOn the death of her father in 1382, his betrothed, Mary, became queen of Hungary and Sigismund married her in 1385 in Z\u00f3lyom (today Zvolen). The next year, he was accepted as Mary's future co-ruler by the Treaty of Gy\u0151r. However, Mary was captured, together with her mother, Elizabeth of Bosnia, who had acted as regent, in 1387 by the rebellious House of Horvat, Bishop Paul Horvat of Ma\u010dva, his brother John Horvat and younger brother Ladislav. Sigismund's mother-in-law was strangled, while Mary was liberated.\nHaving secured the support of the nobility, Sigismund was crowned King of Hungary at Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r on 31 March 1387. Having raised money by pledging Brandenburg to his cousin Jobst, Margrave of Moravia (1388), he was engaged for the next nine years in a ceaseless struggle for the possession of this unstable throne. The central power was finally weakened to such an extent that only Sigismund's alliance with the powerful Czillei-Garai League could ensure his position on the throne. It was not for entirely selfless reasons that one of the leagues of barons helped him to power: Sigismund had to pay for the support of the lords by transferring a sizeable part of the royal properties. (For some years, the baron's council governed the country in the name of the Holy Crown). The restoration of the authority of the central administration took decades of work. The bulk of the nation headed by the House of Garai was with him; but in the southern provinces between the Sava and the Drava, the Horvathys with the support of King Tvrtko I of Bosnia, Mary's maternal uncle, proclaimed as their king Ladislaus of Naples, son of the murdered Charles II of Hungary. Not until 1395 did Nicholas II Garai succeed in suppressing them. Mary died heavily pregnant in 1395.\nTo ease the pressure from Hungarian nobles, Sigismund tried to employ foreign advisors, which was not popular, and he had to promise not to give land and nominations to anyone other than Hungarian nobles. However, this was not applied to Stibor of Stiboricz, who was Sigismund's closest friend and advisor. On a number of occasions, Sigismund was imprisoned by nobles, but with the help of the armies of Garai and Stibor of Stiboricz, he was able to regain power.\nCrusade of Nicopolis.\nIn 1396, Sigismund led the combined armies of Christendom against the Turks, who had taken advantage of the temporary helplessness of Hungary to extend their dominion to the banks of the Danube. This crusade, preached by Pope Boniface IX, was very popular in Hungary. The nobles flocked in their thousands to the royal standard and were reinforced by volunteers from nearly every part of Europe, the most important contingent being that of the French led by John the Fearless, son of Philip II, Duke of Burgundy. Sigismund set out with 15,000 men and a flotilla of 70 galleys. After capturing Vidin, he camped with his Hungarian armies before the fortress of Nicopolis. Sultan Bayezid I raised the siege of Constantinople and, at the head of 10,000 men, completely defeated the Christian forces in the Battle of Nicopolis fought between the 25 and 28 September 1396. Sigismund returned by sea and through the realm of Zeta, where he ordained the local Montenegrin lord \u0110ura\u0111 II with the islands of Hvar and Kor\u010dula for resistance against the Turks; the islands were returned to Sigismund after \u0110ura\u0111's death in April 1403.The disaster at Nicopolis angered several Hungarian lords, leading to instability in the kingdom. Deprived of his authority in Hungary, Sigismund then turned his attention to securing the succession in Germany and Bohemia, and was recognized by his childless half-brother Wenceslaus IV as Vicar-General of the whole empire. However, he was unable to support Wenceslaus when he was deposed in 1400, and Rupert of Germany, Elector Palatine, was elected German king in his stead.\nReturn to Hungary.\nOn his return to Hungary in 1401, Sigismund was imprisoned once and deposed twice. That year, he aided an uprising against Wenceslaus IV, during the course of which the Bohemian king was taken prisoner, and Sigismund ruled Bohemia for nineteen months. He released Wenceslaus in 1403. In the meantime, a group of Hungarian noblemen swore loyalty to the last Anjou monarch, Ladislaus of Naples, putting their hands on the relic of Saint Ladislas of Hungary in Nagyv\u00e1rad (today Oradea). Ladislaus was the son of the murdered Charles II of Hungary, and thus a distant relative of the long-dead King Louis I of Hungary. Ladislaus captured Zara (today Zadar) in 1403, but soon stopped any military advance. This struggle in turn led to a war with the Republic of Venice, as Ladislaus had sold the Dalmatian cities to the Venetians for 100,000 ducats before leaving for his own land. In the following years, Sigismund acted indirectly to thwart Ladislaus' attempts to conquer central Italy, by allying with the Italian cities resisting him and by applying diplomatic pressure on him.\nDue to his frequent absences attending to business in the other countries over which he ruled, he was obliged to consult Diets in Hungary with more frequency than his predecessors and institute the office of Palatine as chief administrator while he was away. In 1404, Sigismund introduced the \"Placetum Regium\". According to this decree, Papal bulls could not be pronounced in Hungary without the consent of the king. During his long reign, the royal Buda Castle became probably the largest Gothic palace of the Late Middle Ages.\nCrusade against Bosnia.\nIn about 1406, Sigismund married Mary's cousin Barbara of Celje, daughter of Count Hermann II of Celje. Hermann's mother Catherine (of the House of Kotromanic) and Mary's mother Queen Elisabeth of Bosnia were sisters, or at least cousins who were adoptive sisters.\nSigismund managed to establish control in Slavonia. He did not hesitate to use violent methods (see Bloody Sabor of Kri\u017eevci), but from the River Sava to the south his control was weak. Sigismund personally led an army of almost 50,000 \"crusaders\" against the Bosnians, culminating with the Battle of Dobor in 1408, a massacre of about 200 members of various Bosnian noble families. However, although the campaign militarily looked like a success, it ultimately failed politically and Hungarians retreated, while the Bosnian crown slowly but surely slipped away out of the reach for Sigismund and Hungarians.\nPossessions in Serbia.\nThreatened by Ottoman expansion, King Sigismund managed to strengthen the security of southern Hungarian borders by entering into a defensive alliance with Despot Stefan Lazarevi\u0107 of Serbia. In 1403, Hungarian possessions in northwestern regions of Serbia (the city of Belgrade and the Banate of Macs\u00f3), were given to Despot Stefan, who pledged his allegiance to King Sigismund, remaining the king's loyal vassal until death in 1427. Stefan's successor George Brankovi\u0107 of Serbia also pledged his allegiance to Sigismund, returning Belgrade to the king. By maintaining close relations with Serbian rulers, Sigismund succeeded in securing the southern borders of his realm.\nOrder of the Dragon.\nSigismund founded his personal order of knights, the Order of the Dragon, after the victory at Dobor. The main goal of the order was fighting the Ottoman Empire. Members of the order were mostly his political allies and supporters. The main members of the order were Sigismund's close allies Stefan Lazarevi\u0107, Nicholas II Garay, Hermann II of Celje, Stibor of Stiboricz, and Pippo Spano. The most important European monarchs became members of the order. He encouraged international trade by abolishing internal duties, regulating tariffs on foreign goods and standardizing weights and measures throughout the country.\nKing of the Romans.\nAfter the death of King Rupert of Germany in 1410, Sigismund\u2014ignoring the claims of his half-brother Wenceslaus\u2014was elected as successor by three of the electors on 20 September 1410, but he was opposed by his cousin Jobst of Moravia, who was elected by four electors in a different election on 1 October. Jobst's death on 18 January 1411 removed this conflict and Sigismund was again elected king on 21 July 1411. His coronation was deferred until 8 November 1414, when it took place at Aachen.\nAnti-Polish alliances.\nOn a number of occasions, and in 1410 in particular, Sigismund allied himself with the Teutonic Knights against W\u0142adys\u0142aw II of Poland. In return for 300,000 ducats he would attack Poland from the south after the truce on St. John's Day, 24 June expired. Sigismund ordered his most loyal friend Stibor of Stiboricz to set up the attack on Poland. Stibor of Stiboricz was of Polish origin and from the main line of the powerful Clan of Ostoja that had also been against choosing Jogaila as King of Poland. With the support of Sigismund, Stibor became one of the most influential men in late medieval Europe, holding titles as Duke of Transylvania and owning about 25% of modern-day Slovakia, including 31 castles of which 15 were situated around the 406\u00a0km long V\u00e1h river with surrounding land that was given to him by Sigismund. In the diplomatic struggle to prevent war between Poland-Lithuania, which was supported by the Muscovites, and the Teutonic Knights, Sigismund used Stibor's fine diplomacy to gain financially. The Polish side appointed several negotiators and most of them were also from the Clan of Ostoja, distant relations of the Stibors. However, those \"family meetings\" could not prevent the war and an alliance of twenty-two western states formed an army against Poland in the Battle of Grunwald in July 1410. Stibor attacked then Nowy S\u0105cz and burned it to the ground, but after that, he returned with his army back to the Beckov Castle. After the Polish-Lithuanian victory in the Battle of Grunwald, the Teutonic Knights had to pay a huge sum of silver to Poland as reparation and again, through the diplomacy of his friend Stibor, Sigismund was able to borrow all this silver from King W\u0142adys\u0142aw II of Poland on good conditions. In the light of facts about the diplomatic work of Stibor and the Clan of Ostoja that was following the politics of King Sigismund, one can question whether Sigismund actually joined the anti-Polish alliance.\nConference in Buda.\nIn 1412, a Knights Tournament was held in Buda, Hungary, this was also a conference between Hungarian King Sigismund, Polish King Wladyslaw II (Jogaila) and Bosnian King Tvrtko II. 2000 knights were present from all over Europe, even England. There were very many princes, lords, knights and servants at the court of Buda in Hungary. Three kings and three other monarchs, a Serbian despot, 13 herzogs and/or dukes, 21 counts, 2000 knights, 1 cardinal, 1 legate, 3 archbishops, 11 other bishops, 86 players and trumpeters, 17 messengers, and 40,000 horses. There were people from 17 countries and languages. A presumably contemporary list of the participants of the meeting has also survived. Besides the host, Sigismund, and his main guest, W\u0142adys\u0142aw II, this text mentions W\u0142adys\u0142aw's cousin Vytautas, Grand Duke of Lithuania, and the king of Bosnia, usually identified as Tvrtko II. Some argue convincingly that it was not Tvrtko II but Stjepan Ostoja who visited Buda at that time. Besides the king, Hrvoje Vuk\u010di\u0107 Hrvatini\u0107, Sandalj Hrani\u0107 Kosa\u010da and Pavle Radinovi\u0107 also came from Bosnia, and from Serbia, the Despot Stefan Lazarevi\u0107, bringing two thousand horses. From Austria, dukes Ernest (the Iron) and Albert II, later successor of Sigismund, also took part in the Buda meeting. Also Heinrich von Plauen. the Grand Master of the Teutonic Order, Stibor of Stiboricz, Nikola II Gorjanski, Hermann II, Count of Celje and his son Frederick II, count of Krbava\u2014Karlo Kurjakovi\u0107, Ivan Morovi\u0107-ban of Machva. D\u0142ugosz reports the arrival in Buda of the envoys of the Jalal al-Din, khan of the Golden Horde and son of Tokhtamysh, who wanted to meet W\u0142adys\u0142aw II of Poland. Jalal al-Din was an ally of the Polish and Lithuanian rulers in their fight against the Teutonic Order, and according to some reconstructions of the events, Sigismund also wanted to rely on the Tatars against the Ottoman threat. A narrative source from L\u00fcbeck also mentions the proceedings in Buda in 1412. Detmar's L\u00fcbeckische Chronik continued from 1400 to 1413. The continuation also gives a detailed description of the participants at the Buda meeting. The royal meeting was accompanied by festivities and various entertainments. At the tournament, a knight from Silesia named Nemsche and a page from Austria won the joust. A Polish priest and chronicler Jan D\u0142ugosz says in his \"Annales seu cronici incliti regni Poloniae\" that in the tournament there were also knights from Bulgaria, probably from the court of prince Fruzhin, Sigismund's vasal who also was at the conference.\nCouncil of Constance.\nFrom 1412 to 1423, Sigismund campaigned against the Republic of Venice in Italy. The king took advantage of the difficulties of Antipope John XXIII to obtain a promise that a council should be called in Constance in 1414 to settle the Western Schism. He took a leading part in the deliberations of this assembly, and during the sittings travelled to France, England, and Burgundy in a vain attempt to secure the abdication of the three rival popes. The council ended in 1418, having resolved the Schism and\u2014of great consequence to Sigismund's future career\u2014having the Czech religious reformer, Jan Hus, burned at the stake for heresy in July 1415. The complicity of Sigismund in the death of Hus is a matter of controversy. He had granted Hus a safe conduct and protested against his imprisonment, and Hus was burned during Sigismund's absence.\nWhen at one point during the council a cardinal corrected Sigismund's Latin, Sigismund replied \"Ego sum rex Romanus et super grammaticam\" (\"I am king of the Romans and above grammar\"). Thomas Carlyle nicknamed Sigismund \"Super Grammaticam\".\nHis main acts during these years were an alliance with England against France, and a failed attempt, owing to the hostility of the princes, to secure peace in Germany by a league of the towns. Also, Sigismund awarded Brandenburg (which he had recovered after Jobst's death) to Frederick of Hohenzollern, burgrave of Nuremberg, in 1415. This step made the House of Hohenzollern one of the most important in Germany.\nSigismund began to shift his alliance from France to England after the French defeat at the Battle of Agincourt, which he was also controversially absent from due to hosting a pseudo-council in Perpignan with Antipope Benedict XIII and King Ferdinand I of Aragon. The signing of the Treaty of Canterbury on 15 August 1416 culminated diplomatic efforts between Henry V of England and Sigismund and resulted in a defensive and offensive alliance against France. This, in turn, led the way to the resolution of the papal schism. The close relationship that developed between Henry V and Sigismund resulted in him being inducted into the Order of the Garter.\nHussite Wars.\nIn 1419, the death of Wenceslaus IV left Sigismund titular King of Bohemia, but he had to wait for seventeen years before the Czech Estates would acknowledge him. Although the two dignities of king of the Romans and king of Bohemia added considerably to his importance, and indeed made him the nominal temporal head of Christendom, they conferred no increase of power and financially embarrassed him. It was only as King of Hungary that he had succeeded in establishing his authority and in doing anything for the order and good government of the land. Entrusting the government of Bohemia to Sofia of Bavaria, the widow of Wenceslaus, he hastened into Hungary.\nThe Bohemians, who distrusted him as the betrayer of Hus, were soon in arms; and the flame was fanned when Sigismund declared his intention of prosecuting the war against heretics. Three campaigns against the Hussites ended in disaster although the army of his most loyal ally Stibor of Stiboricz and later his son Stibor of Beckov could hold the Hussite side away from the borders of the kingdom. The Turks took advantage of the internal disorder and soon began attacking Hungary again at this time.\nAt the 1422 Diet of Nuremberg, Sigismund and German territorial princes collaborated to organize two armies against the Hussite rebels. The first army was sent to relieve Karl\u0161tejn, which was under a Hussite siege; the second army was ordered to destroy the Hussite field army. But Jan \u017di\u017eka defeated the Imperial force at the Battle of Kutn\u00e1 Hora and then at the Battle of N\u011bmeck\u00fd Brod. These two unexpected defeats at the hands of the Hussites \"ended the first Imperial and Catholic attempt to crush the Bohemian 'heretic rebellion'.\"\nThe alliance against the Hussites continued to develop though, joined by Upper German princes and cities, even from \"the regions furthest from Bohemia\". In January 1424, the associative activity of the German electors led to the Union ('einunge') of Bingen, \"within which the Rhenish princes were joined by the elector of Saxony and Sigismund's loyal partner Margrave Frederick of Brandenburg, and mutual assistance, adjudication, and cooperation in the face of the Hussite threat were stipulated.\"\nGermany.\nSigismund's rule in Germany and in the empire in general was hampered by his complete lack of \"Hausmacht\" (domestic power) within the Kingdom of Germany.\nHis rule relied on key allies and the culture of associative political mechanisms in Germany. Duncan Hardy remarks that \"both the local and the trans-regional dimensions of the political activity displayed by the sources from throughout Sigismund's reign demonstrate that power at every level in the empire was exercised and mediated through the customary institutions and mechanisms of associative political culture. If Sigismund enjoyed considerable successes at certain junctures, it was not in spite of or independently from these institutions and mechanisms, but precisely because he devoted considerable energy to harnessing associative interactions and building strategic relationships with leading actors within elite networks. Even during his prolonged absences from the empire's core lands, Sigismund was able to make use of these partnerships, and could reasonably expect that the associative activity of princes, nobles, and towns would yield results\u2014as indeed they did, in the form of large-scale collective activity against Duke Frederick IV of Austria\u2014Tyrol in the 1410 and the Hussites in the 1420. Not all of Sigismund's projects came to fruition, and he could not always control the longer-term outcomes of his policies, but the notion that there were phases of an 'empire without a king' during his reign clearly does not stand up to the abundant evidence of his interactions with regional clients and associations. At the same time, the somewhat adulatory view that has developed in recent years of Sigismund as a masterly politician can be tempered by the evidence that it was often felicitous alliances as much as personal skill which made his successes possible.\"\nThe alliance between Sigismund and his two key allies in Germany, namely Frederick I, Elector of Brandenburg and Albert of Austria (who became his son-in-law and heir through the marriage with Sigismund's only daughter Elizabeth of Luxembourg), started the rise of the Hohenzollerns and reboosted the Habsburgs (who returned to the German throne and also inherited the connection with Hungary, Croatia and Bohemia from Sigismund).\nFinal years.\nIn 1428, Sigismund led another campaign against the Turks, but again with few results. In 1431, he went to Milan where on 25 November he received the Iron Crown as King of Italy; after which he remained for some time at Siena, negotiating for his coronation as emperor and for the recognition of the Council of Basel by Pope Eugenius IV. He was crowned emperor in Rome on 31 May 1433, and after obtaining his demands from the pope returned to Bohemia, where he was recognized as king in 1436, though his power was little more than nominal. Shortly after he was crowned, Pope Eugenius began attempts to create a new anti-Ottoman alliance. This was sparked by an Albanian revolt against the Ottomans, which had begun in 1432. In 1435, Sigismund sent Fruzhin, a Bulgarian nobleman, to negotiate an alliance with the Albanians. He also sent Daud, a pretender to the Ottoman throne, in early 1436. However, following the defeat of the rebels in 1436, plans for an anti-Ottoman alliance ended. Sigismund died on 9 December 1437 at Znojmo (), Moravia (now Czech Republic), and as ordered in life, he was buried at Nagyv\u00e1rad, Hungary (today Oradea, Romania), next to the tomb of the King Saint Ladislaus I of Hungary, who was the ideal of the perfect monarch, warrior and Christian for that time and was deeply venerated by Sigismund. By his second wife, Barbara of Celje, he left an only daughter, Elisabeth of Luxembourg, who was married to Albert V, duke of Austria (later German king as Albert II) whom Sigismund named as his successor. As he left no sons, his line of the House of Luxembourg became extinct on his death.\nFamily and issue.\nSigismund married twice but had little luck in securing the succession to his crowns. Each of his two marriages resulted in the birth of one child. His firstborn child, probably a son, was born prematurely as a result of a horse riding accident suffered by Queen Mary of Hungary when she was well advanced in pregnancy. Mother and child both died shortly after the birth in the hills of Buda on 17 May 1395. This caused a deep succession crisis because Sigismund ruled over Hungary by right of his wife, and although he managed to keep his power, the crisis lasted until his second marriage to Barbara of Celje. Barbara's only child, born in the purple on 7 October 1409, probably in the castle of Visegr\u00e1d, was Elisabeth of Luxembourg, the future queen consort of Hungary, Germany, and Bohemia. Queen Barbara was unable to give birth to any further issue. Elizabeth of Luxembourg was thus the only surviving legitimate offspring of Sigismund.\nHungarian affiliations.\nSigismund was known to speak fluent Hungarian, wore Hungarian-style royal clothes, and even grew his beard in the Hungarian fashion. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Emperor Sigismund, in terms of the quality of his face and the greatness of his stature, was a fairly great man, the world's chief creator blessed him with a beautiful face, curly, bluish hair, and a gentle look. He wore a long beard out of his attraction to the Hungarians because they also wore long beards once upon a time.\"\u2014\u200aHe also spent huge amounts of money during his reign to rebuild the Gothic castles of Buda and Visegr\u00e1d in the Kingdom of Hungary, ordering the transportation of materials from Austria and Bohemia.\nHis many affairs with women led to the birth of several legends, as the one that existed decades later during the reign of the King Matthias Corvinus of Hungary. According to this, John Hunyadi was Sigismund's illegitimate son. Sigismund gave a ring to the boy's mother when he was born, but one day in the forest a raven stole it from her, and the ring was only recovered after the bird was hunted down. It is said that this incident inspired the coat of arms of the Hunyadis, and later also appeared in the coat of arms of Matthias \"Corvinus\".\nSigismund adopted the Hungarian reverence for Saint Ladislaus I of Hungary, who was considered to be an ideal Christian knight at that time. He went on pilgrimage several times to his tomb in Nagyv\u00e1rad. Before Sigismund died, in Znaim, Moravia, he ordered to be buried next to the king saint.\nThrough his father, Sigismund was a grandnephew of Wenceslaus III of Bohemia, one of a short-reigning monarch of Hungary between the Hungarian \u00c1rp\u00e1d dynasty and Angevin dynasty. In addition, the bloodline of Sigismund connects through three princesses to the \u00c1rp\u00e1d. \nReformatio Sigismundi.\nThe Reformatio Sigismundi appeared in connection with efforts to reform the Holy Roman Empire during the reign of Emperor Sigismund (1410\u20131437). It was presented in 1439 at the Council of Basel, published by an anonymous author, and referred to the injustice of the German rulers. It included a vision of Sigismund's about the appearance of a priest-king, Frederick, as well as plans for a wide reform of the monarchy and emperorship and the German empire.\nIn popular culture.\nFilms.\nKing Sigismund is portrayed by Czech actor Jan Pivec in Czechoslovak movie series Hussite Revolutionary Trilogy directed by Otakar V\u00e1vra\nKing Sigismund is portrayed by British actor Matthew Goode in the 2022 film \"Jan \u017di\u017eka\" by director Petr J\u00e1kl.\nKing and Emperor Sigismund is portrayed by Hungarian actor L\u00e1szl\u00f3 G\u00e1lffi in the 2025 historical television series \"Rise of the Raven\".\nVideo games.\nKing Sigismund is a briefly seen antagonist in the 2018 Warhorse Studios action role-playing game '. The main character becomes involved in a plot which opposes Sigismund and aims to restore Wenceslaus to the Bohemian throne. Sigismund returned in ', where he was portrayed by Ond\u0159ej Vetch\u00fd.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38890", "revid": "50468286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38890", "title": "Natural science", "text": "Branch of science about the natural world\nNatural science or empirical science is a branch of science concerned with the description, understanding, and prediction of natural phenomena, based on empirical evidence from observation and experimentation. Mechanisms such as peer review and reproducibility of findings are used to try to ensure the validity of scientific advances.\nNatural science can be divided into two main branches: life science and physical science. Life science is alternatively known as biology. Physical science is subdivided into physics, astronomy, Earth science, and chemistry. These branches of natural science may be further divided into more specialized branches, also known as fields. As empirical sciences, natural sciences use tools from the formal sciences, such as mathematics and logic, converting information about nature into measurements that can be explained as clear statements of the \"laws of nature\".\nModern natural science succeeded more classical approaches to natural philosophy. Galileo Galilei, Johannes Kepler, Ren\u00e9 Descartes, Francis Bacon, and Isaac Newton debated the benefits of a more mathematical as against a more experimental method in investigating nature. Still, philosophical perspectives, conjectures, and presuppositions, often overlooked, remain necessary in natural science. Systematic data collection, including discovery science, succeeded natural history, which emerged in the 16th century by describing and classifying plants, animals, minerals, and so on. Today, \"natural history\" suggests observational descriptions aimed at popular audiences.\nCriteria.\nPhilosophers of science have suggested several criteria, including Karl Popper's controversial falsifiability criterion, to help them differentiate scientific endeavors from non-scientific ones. Validity, accuracy, and quality control, such as peer review and reproducibility of findings, are amongst the most respected criteria in today's global scientific community.\nIn natural science, impossibility assertions come to be widely accepted as overwhelmingly probable rather than considered proven to the point of being unchallengeable. The basis for this strong acceptance is a combination of extensive evidence of something not occurring, combined with an underlying theory, very successful in making predictions, whose assumptions lead logically to the conclusion that something is impossible. While an impossibility assertion in natural science can never be proved, it could be refuted by the observation of a single counterexample. Such a counterexample would require that the assumptions underlying the theory that implied the impossibility be re-examined.\nBranches of natural science.\nBiology.\nThis field encompasses a diverse set of disciplines that examine phenomena related to living organisms. The scale of study can range from sub-component biophysics up to complex ecologies. Biology is concerned with the characteristics, classification and behaviors of organisms, as well as how species were formed and their interactions with each other and the environment.\nThe biological fields of botany, zoology, and medicine date back to early periods of civilization, while microbiology was introduced in the 17th century with the invention of the microscope. However, it was not until the 19th century that biology became a unified science. Once scientists discovered commonalities between all living things, it was decided they were best studied as a whole.\nSome key developments in biology were the discovery of genetics, evolution through natural selection, the germ theory of disease, and the application of the techniques of chemistry and physics at the level of the cell or organic molecule.\nModern biology is divided into subdisciplines by the type of organism and by the scale being studied. Molecular biology is the study of the fundamental chemistry of life, while cellular biology is the examination of the cell; the basic building block of all life. At a higher level, anatomy and physiology look at the internal structures, and their functions, of an organism, while ecology looks at how various organisms interrelate.\nEarth science.\nEarth science (also known as geoscience) is an all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth, including geology, geography, geophysics, geochemistry, climatology, glaciology, hydrology, meteorology and oceanography.\nAlthough mining and precious stones have been human interests throughout the history of civilization, the development of the related sciences of economic geology and mineralogy did not occur until the 18th century. The study of the earth, particularly paleontology, blossomed in the 19th century. The growth of other disciplines, such as geophysics, in the 20th century led to the development of the theory of plate tectonics in the 1960s, which has had a similar effect on the Earth sciences as the theory of evolution had on biology. Earth sciences today are closely linked to petroleum and mineral resources, climate research, and to environmental assessment and remediation.\nAtmospheric sciences.\nAlthough sometimes considered in conjunction with the earth sciences, due to the independent development of its concepts, techniques, and practices and also the fact of it having a wide range of sub-disciplines under its wing, atmospheric science is also considered a separate branch of natural science. This field studies the characteristics of different layers of the atmosphere from ground level to the edge of the space. The timescale of the study also varies from day to century. Sometimes, the field also includes the study of climatic patterns on planets other than Earth.\nOceanography.\nThe serious study of oceans began in the early- to mid-20th century. As a field of natural science, it is relatively young, but stand-alone programs offer specializations in the subject. Though some controversies remain as to the categorization of the field under earth sciences, interdisciplinary sciences, or as a separate field in its own right, most modern workers in the field agree that it has matured to a state that it has its own paradigms and practices.\nPlanetary science.\nPlanetary science or planetology, is the scientific study of planets, which include terrestrial planets like the Earth, and other types of planets, such as gas giants and ice giants. Planetary science also concerns other celestial bodies, such as dwarf planets moons, asteroids, and comets. This largely includes the Solar System, but recently has started to expand to exoplanets, particularly terrestrial exoplanets. It explores various objects, spanning from micrometeoroids to gas giants, to establish their composition, movements, genesis, interrelation, and past. Planetary science is an interdisciplinary domain, having originated from astronomy and Earth science, and currently encompassing a multitude of areas, such as planetary geology, cosmochemistry, atmospheric science, physics, oceanography, hydrology, theoretical planetology, glaciology, and exoplanetology. Related fields encompass space physics, which delves into the impact of the Sun on the bodies in the Solar System, and astrobiology.\nPlanetary science comprises interconnected observational and theoretical branches. Observational research entails a combination of space exploration, primarily through robotic spacecraft missions utilizing remote sensing, and comparative experimental work conducted in Earth-based laboratories. The theoretical aspect involves extensive mathematical modelling and computer simulation.\nTypically, planetary scientists are situated within astronomy and physics or Earth sciences departments in universities or research centers. However, there are also dedicated planetary science institutes worldwide. Generally, individuals pursuing a career in planetary science undergo graduate-level studies in one of the Earth sciences, astronomy, astrophysics, geophysics, or physics. They then focus their research within the discipline of planetary science. Major conferences are held annually, and numerous peer reviewed journals cater to the diverse research interests in planetary science. Some planetary scientists are employed by private research centers and frequently engage in collaborative research initiatives.\nChemistry.\nConstituting the scientific study of matter at the atomic and molecular scale, chemistry deals primarily with collections of atoms, such as gases, molecules, crystals, and metals. The composition, statistical properties, transformations, and reactions of these materials are studied. Chemistry also involves understanding the properties and interactions of individual atoms and molecules for use in larger-scale applications.\nMost chemical processes can be studied directly in a laboratory, using a series of (often well-tested) techniques for manipulating materials, as well as an understanding of the underlying processes. Chemistry is often called \"the central science\" because of its role in connecting the other natural sciences.\nEarly experiments in chemistry had their roots in the system of alchemy, a set of beliefs combining mysticism with physical experiments. The science of chemistry began to develop with the work of Robert Boyle, the discoverer of gases, and Antoine Lavoisier, who developed the theory of the conservation of mass.\nThe discovery of the chemical elements and atomic theory began to systematize this science, and researchers developed a fundamental understanding of states of matter, ions, chemical bonds and chemical reactions. The success of this science led to a complementary chemical industry that now plays a significant role in the world economy.\nPhysics.\nPhysics embodies the study of the fundamental constituents of the universe, the forces and interactions they exert on one another, and the results produced by these interactions. Physics is generally regarded as foundational because all other natural sciences use and obey the field's principles and laws. Physics relies heavily on mathematics as the logical framework for formulating and quantifying principles.\nThe study of the principles of the universe has a long history and largely derives from direct observation and experimentation. The formulation of theories about the governing laws of the universe has been central to the study of physics from very early on, with philosophy gradually yielding to systematic, quantitative experimental testing and observation as the source of verification. Key historical developments in physics include Isaac Newton's theory of universal gravitation and classical mechanics, an understanding of electricity and its relation to magnetism, Einstein's theories of special and general relativity, the development of thermodynamics, and the quantum mechanical model of atomic and subatomic physics.\nThe field of physics is vast and can include such diverse studies as quantum mechanics and theoretical physics, applied physics and optics. Modern physics is becoming increasingly specialized, where researchers tend to focus on a particular area rather than being \"universalists\" like Isaac Newton, Albert Einstein, and Lev Landau, who worked in multiple areas.\nAstronomy.\nAstronomy is a natural science that studies celestial objects and phenomena. Objects of interest include planets, moons, stars, nebulae, galaxies, and comets. Astronomy is the study of everything in the universe beyond Earth's atmosphere, including objects we can see with our naked eyes. It is one of the oldest sciences.\nAstronomers of early civilizations performed methodical observations of the night sky, and astronomical artifacts have been found from much earlier periods. There are two types of astronomy: observational astronomy and theoretical astronomy. Observational astronomy is focused on acquiring and analyzing data, mainly using basic principles of physics. In contrast, Theoretical astronomy is oriented towards developing computer or analytical models to describe astronomical objects and phenomena.\nThis discipline is the science of celestial objects and phenomena that originate outside the Earth's atmosphere. It is concerned with the evolution, physics, chemistry, meteorology, geology, and motion of celestial objects, as well as the formation and development of the universe.\nAstronomy includes examining, studying, and modeling stars, planets, and comets. Most of the information used by astronomers is gathered by remote observation. However, some laboratory reproduction of celestial phenomena has been performed (such as the molecular chemistry of the interstellar medium). There is considerable overlap with physics and in some areas of earth science. There are also interdisciplinary fields such as astrophysics, planetary sciences, and cosmology, along with allied disciplines such as space physics and astrochemistry.\nWhile the study of celestial features and phenomena can be traced back to antiquity, the scientific methodology of this field began to develop in the middle of the 17th century. A key factor was Galileo's introduction of the telescope to examine the night sky in more detail.\nThe mathematical treatment of astronomy began with Newton's development of celestial mechanics and the laws of gravitation. However, it was triggered by earlier work of astronomers such as Kepler. By the 19th century, astronomy had developed into formal science, with the introduction of instruments such as the spectroscope and photography, along with much-improved telescopes and the creation of professional observatories.\nInterdisciplinary studies.\nThe distinctions between the natural science disciplines are not always sharp, and they share many cross-discipline fields. Physics plays a significant role in the other natural sciences, as represented by astrophysics, geophysics, chemical physics and biophysics. Likewise chemistry is represented by such fields as biochemistry, physical chemistry, geochemistry and astrochemistry.\nA particular example of a scientific discipline that draws upon multiple natural sciences is environmental science. This field studies the interactions of physical, chemical, geological, and biological components of the environment, with particular regard to the effect of human activities and the impact on biodiversity and sustainability. This science also draws upon expertise from other fields, such as economics, law, and social sciences.\nA comparable discipline is oceanography, as it draws upon a similar breadth of scientific disciplines. Oceanography is sub-categorized into more specialized cross-disciplines, such as physical oceanography and marine biology. As the marine ecosystem is vast and diverse, marine biology is further divided into many subfields, including specializations in particular species.\nThere is also a subset of cross-disciplinary fields with strong currents that run counter to specialization by the nature of the problems they address. Put another way: In some fields of integrative application, specialists in more than one field are a key part of most scientific discourse. Such integrative fields, for example, include nanoscience, astrobiology, and complex system informatics.\nMaterials science.\nMaterials science is a relatively new, interdisciplinary field that deals with the study of matter and its properties and the discovery and design of new materials. Originally developed through the field of metallurgy, the study of the properties of materials and solids has now expanded into all materials. The field covers the chemistry, physics, and engineering applications of materials, including metals, ceramics, artificial polymers, and many others. The field's core deals with relating the structure of materials with their properties.\nMaterials science is at the forefront of research in science and engineering. It is an essential part of forensic engineering (the investigation of materials, products, structures, or components that fail or do not operate or function as intended, causing personal injury or damage to property) and failure analysis, the latter being the key to understanding, for example, the cause of various aviation accidents. Many of the most pressing scientific problems that are faced today are due to the limitations of the materials that are available, and, as a result, breakthroughs in this field are likely to have a significant impact on the future of technology.\nThe basis of materials science involves studying the structure of materials and relating them to their properties. Understanding this structure-property correlation, material scientists can then go on to study the relative performance of a material in a particular application. The major determinants of the structure of a material and, thus, of its properties are its constituent chemical elements and how it has been processed into its final form. These characteristics, taken together and related through the laws of thermodynamics and kinetics, govern a material's microstructure and thus its properties.\nHistory.\nSome scholars trace the origins of natural science as far back as pre-literate human societies, where understanding the natural world was necessary for survival. People observed and built up knowledge about the behavior of animals and the usefulness of plants as food and medicine, which was passed down from generation to generation. These primitive understandings gave way to more formalized inquiry around 3500 to 3000 BC in the Mesopotamian and Ancient Egyptian cultures, which produced the first known written evidence of natural philosophy, the precursor of natural science. While the writings show an interest in astronomy, mathematics, and other aspects of the physical world, the ultimate aim of inquiry about nature's workings was, in all cases, religious or mythological, not scientific.\nA tradition of scientific inquiry also emerged in Ancient China, where Taoist alchemists and philosophers experimented with elixirs to extend life and cure ailments. They focused on the yin and yang, or contrasting elements in nature; the yin was associated with femininity and coldness, while yang was associated with masculinity and warmth. The five phases \u2013 fire, earth, metal, wood, and water \u2013 described a cycle of transformations in nature. The water turned into wood, which turned into the fire when it burned. The ashes left by fire were earth. Using these principles, Chinese philosophers and doctors explored human anatomy, characterizing organs as predominantly yin or yang, and understood the relationship between the pulse, the heart, and the flow of blood in the body centuries before it became accepted in the West.\nLittle evidence survives of how Ancient Indian cultures around the Indus River understood nature, but some of their perspectives may be reflected in the Vedas, a set of sacred Hindu texts. They reveal a conception of the universe as ever-expanding and constantly being recycled and reformed. Surgeons in the Ayurvedic tradition saw health and illness as a combination of three humors: wind, bile and phlegm. A healthy life resulted from a balance among these humors. In Ayurvedic thought, the body consisted of five elements: earth, water, fire, wind, and space. Ayurvedic surgeons performed complex surgeries and developed a detailed understanding of human anatomy.\nPre-Socratic philosophers in Ancient Greek culture brought natural philosophy a step closer to direct inquiry about cause and effect in nature between 600 and 400 BC. However, an element of magic and mythology remained. Natural phenomena such as earthquakes and eclipses were explained increasingly in the context of nature itself instead of being attributed to angry gods. Thales of Miletus, an early philosopher who lived from 625 to 546 BC, explained earthquakes by theorizing that the world floated on water and that water was the fundamental element in nature. In the 5th century BC, Leucippus was an early exponent of atomism, the idea that the world is made up of fundamental indivisible particles. Pythagoras applied Greek innovations in mathematics to astronomy and suggested that the earth was spherical.\nAristotelian natural philosophy (400 BC\u20131100 AD).\nLater Socratic and Platonic thought focused on ethics, morals, and art and did not attempt an investigation of the physical world; Plato criticized pre-Socratic thinkers as materialists and anti-religionists. Aristotle, however, a student of Plato who lived from 384 to 322 BC, paid closer attention to the natural world in his philosophy. In his \"History of Animals\", he described the inner workings of 110 species, including the stingray, catfish and bee. He investigated chick embryos by breaking open eggs and observing them at various stages of development. Aristotle's works were influential through the 16th century, and he is considered to be the father of biology for his pioneering work in that science. He also presented philosophies about physics, nature, and astronomy using inductive reasoning in his works \"Physics\" and \"Meteorology\".\nWhile Aristotle considered natural philosophy more seriously than his predecessors, he approached it as a theoretical branch of science. Still, inspired by his work, Ancient Roman philosophers of the early 1st century AD, including Lucretius, Seneca and Pliny the Elder, wrote treatises that dealt with the rules of the natural world in varying degrees of depth. Many Ancient Roman Neoplatonists of the 3rd to the 6th centuries also adapted Aristotle's teachings on the physical world to a philosophy that emphasized spiritualism. Early medieval philosophers including Macrobius, Calcidius and Martianus Capella also examined the physical world, largely from a cosmological and cosmographical perspective, putting forth theories on the arrangement of celestial bodies and the heavens, which were posited as being composed of aether.\nAristotle's works on natural philosophy continued to be translated and studied amid the rise of the Byzantine Empire and Abbasid Caliphate.\nIn the Byzantine Empire, John Philoponus, an Alexandrian Aristotelian commentator and Christian theologian, was the first to question Aristotle's physics teaching. Unlike Aristotle, who based his physics on verbal argument, Philoponus instead relied on observation and argued for observation rather than resorting to a verbal argument. He introduced the theory of impetus. John Philoponus' criticism of Aristotelian principles of physics served as inspiration for Galileo Galilei during the Scientific Revolution.\nA revival in mathematics and science took place during the time of the Abbasid Caliphate from the 9th century onward, when Muslim scholars expanded upon Greek and Indian natural philosophy. The words \"alcohol\", \"algebra\" and \"zenith\" all have Arabic roots.\nMedieval natural philosophy (1100\u20131600).\nAristotle's works and other Greek natural philosophy did not reach the West until about the middle of the 12th century, when works were translated from Greek and Arabic into Latin. The development of European civilization later in the Middle Ages brought with it further advances in natural philosophy. European inventions such as the horseshoe, horse collar and crop rotation allowed for rapid population growth, eventually giving way to urbanization and the foundation of schools connected to monasteries and cathedrals in modern-day France and England. Aided by the schools, an approach to Christian theology developed that sought to answer questions about nature and other subjects using logic. This approach, however, was seen by some detractors as heresy. \nBy the 12th century, Western European scholars and philosophers came into contact with a body of knowledge of which they had previously been ignorant: a large corpus of works in Greek and Arabic that were preserved by Islamic scholars. Through translation into Latin, Western Europe was introduced to Aristotle and his natural philosophy. These works were taught at new universities in Paris and Oxford by the early 13th century, although the practice was frowned upon by the Catholic church. A 1210 decree from the Synod of Paris ordered that \"no lectures are to be held in Paris either publicly or privately using Aristotle's books on natural philosophy or the commentaries, and we forbid all this under pain of ex-communication.\"\nIn the late Middle Ages, Spanish philosopher Dominicus Gundissalinus translated a treatise by the earlier Persian scholar Al-Farabi called \"On the Sciences\" into Latin, calling the study of the mechanics of nature \"Scientia naturalis\", or natural science. Gundissalinus also proposed his classification of the natural sciences in his 1150 work \"On the Division of Philosophy\". This was the first detailed classification of the sciences based on Greek and Arab philosophy to reach Western Europe. Gundissalinus defined natural science as \"the science considering only things unabstracted and with motion,\" as opposed to mathematics and sciences that rely on mathematics. Following Al-Farabi, he separated the sciences into eight parts, including: physics, cosmology, meteorology, minerals science, and plant and animal science.\nLater, philosophers made their own classifications of the natural sciences. Robert Kilwardby wrote \"On the Order of the Sciences\" in the 13th century that classed medicine as a mechanical science, along with agriculture, hunting, and theater, while defining natural science as the science that deals with bodies in motion. Roger Bacon, an English friar and philosopher, wrote that natural science dealt with \"a principle of motion and rest, as in the parts of the elements of fire, air, earth, and water, and in all inanimate things made from them.\" These sciences also covered plants, animals and celestial bodies. \nLater in the 13th century, a Catholic priest and theologian Thomas Aquinas defined natural science as dealing with \"mobile beings\" and \"things which depend on a matter not only for their existence but also for their definition.\" There was broad agreement among scholars in medieval times that natural science was about bodies in motion. However, there was division about including fields such as medicine, music, and perspective. Philosophers pondered questions including the existence of a vacuum, whether motion could produce heat, the colors of rainbows, the motion of the earth, whether elemental chemicals exist, and where in the atmosphere rain is formed.\nIn the centuries up through the end of the Middle Ages, natural science was often mingled with philosophies about magic and the occult. Natural philosophy appeared in various forms, from treatises to encyclopedias to commentaries on Aristotle. The interaction between natural philosophy and Christianity was complex during this period; some early theologians, including Tatian and Eusebius, considered natural philosophy an outcropping of pagan Greek science and were suspicious of it. Although some later Christian philosophers, including Aquinas, came to see natural science as a means of interpreting scripture, this suspicion persisted until the 12th and 13th centuries. The Condemnation of 1277, which forbade setting philosophy on a level equal with theology and the debate of religious constructs in a scientific context, showed the persistence with which Catholic leaders resisted the development of natural philosophy even from a theological perspective. Aquinas and Albertus Magnus, another Catholic theologian of the era, sought to distance theology from science in their works. \"I don't see what one's interpretation of Aristotle has to do with the teaching of the faith,\" he wrote in 1271.\nNewton and the Scientific Revolution (1600\u20131800).\nBy the 16th and 17th centuries, natural philosophy evolved beyond commentary on Aristotle as more early Greek philosophy was uncovered and translated. The invention of the printing press in the 15th century, the invention of the microscope and telescope, and the Protestant Reformation fundamentally altered the social context in which scientific inquiry evolved in the West. Christopher Columbus's discovery of a new world changed perceptions about the physical makeup of the world, while observations by Copernicus, Tyco Brahe and Galileo brought a more accurate picture of the solar system as heliocentric and proved many of Aristotle's theories about the heavenly bodies false. Several 17th-century philosophers, including Ren\u00e9 Descartes, Pierre Gassendi, Marin Mersenne, Nicolas Malebranche, Thomas Hobbes, John Locke and Francis Bacon, made a break from the past by rejecting Aristotle and his medieval followers outright, calling their approach to natural philosophy superficial.\nThe titles of Galileo's work \"Two New Sciences\" and Johannes Kepler's \"New Astronomy\" underscored the atmosphere of change that took hold in the 17th century as Aristotle was dismissed in favor of novel methods of inquiry into the natural world. Bacon was instrumental in popularizing this change; he argued that people should use the arts and sciences to gain dominion over nature. To achieve this, he wrote that \"human life [must] be endowed with discoveries and powers.\" He defined natural philosophy as \"the knowledge of Causes and secret motions of things; and enlarging the bounds of Human Empire, to the effecting of all things possible.\" Bacon proposed that scientific inquiry be supported by the state and fed by the collaborative research of scientists, a vision that was unprecedented in its scope, ambition, and forms at the time. \nNatural philosophers came to view nature increasingly as a mechanism that could be taken apart and understood, much like a complex clock. Natural philosophers including Isaac Newton, Evangelista Torricelli and Francesco Redi, Edme Mariotte, Jean-Baptiste Denis and Jacques Rohault conducted experiments focusing on the flow of water, measuring atmospheric pressure using a barometer and disproving spontaneous generation. Scientific societies and scientific journals emerged and were spread widely through the printing press, touching off the Scientific Revolution. Newton in 1687 published his \"The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy\", or \"Principia Mathematica\", which set the groundwork for physical laws that remained current until the 19th century.\nSome modern scholars, including Andrew Cunningham, Perry Williams, and Floris Cohen, argue that natural philosophy is not properly called science and that genuine scientific inquiry began only with the scientific revolution. According to Cohen, \"the emancipation of science from an overarching entity called 'natural philosophy is one defining characteristic of the Scientific Revolution.\" Other historians of science, including Edward Grant, contend that the scientific revolution that blossomed in the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries occurred when principles learned in the exact sciences of optics, mechanics, and astronomy began to be applied to questions raised by natural philosophy. Grant argues that Newton attempted to expose the mathematical basis of nature \u2013 the immutable rules it obeyed \u2013 and, in doing so, joined natural philosophy and mathematics for the first time, producing an early work of modern physics.\nThe Scientific Revolution, which began to take hold in the 17th century, represented a sharp break from Aristotelian modes of inquiry. One of its principal advances was the use of the scientific method to investigate nature. Data was collected, and repeatable measurements were made in experiments. Scientists then formed hypotheses to explain the results of these experiments. The hypothesis was then tested using the principle of falsifiability to prove or disprove its accuracy. The natural sciences continued to be called natural philosophy, but the adoption of the scientific method took science beyond the realm of philosophical conjecture and introduced a more structured way of examining nature.\nNewton, an English mathematician and physicist, was a seminal figure in the Scientific Revolution. Drawing on advances made in astronomy by Copernicus, Brahe, and Kepler, Newton derived the universal law of gravitation and laws of motion. These laws applied both on Earth and in outer space, uniting two spheres of the physical world previously thought to function independently, according to separate physical rules. Newton, for example, showed that the tides were caused by the gravitational pull of the Moon. Another of Newton's advances was to make mathematics a powerful explanatory tool for natural phenomena. While natural philosophers had long used mathematics as a means of measurement and analysis, its principles were not used as a means of understanding cause and effect in nature until Newton.\nIn the 18th century and 19th century, scientists including Charles-Augustin de Coulomb, Alessandro Volta, and Michael Faraday built upon Newtonian mechanics by exploring electromagnetism, or the interplay of forces with positive and negative charges on electrically charged particles. Faraday proposed that forces in nature operated in \"fields\" that filled space. The idea of fields contrasted with the Newtonian construct of gravitation as simply \"action at a distance\", or the attraction of objects with nothing in the space between them to intervene. James Clerk Maxwell in the 19th century unified these discoveries in a coherent theory of electrodynamics. Using mathematical equations and experimentation, Maxwell discovered that space was filled with charged particles that could act upon each other and were a medium for transmitting charged waves.\nSignificant advances in chemistry also took place during the Scientific Revolution. Antoine Lavoisier, a French chemist, refuted the phlogiston theory, which posited that things burned by releasing \"phlogiston\" into the air. Joseph Priestley had discovered oxygen in the 18th century, but Lavoisier discovered that combustion was the result of oxidation. He also constructed a table of 33 elements and invented modern chemical nomenclature. Formal biological science remained in its infancy in the 18th century, when the focus lay upon the classification and categorization of natural life. This growth in natural history was led by Carl Linnaeus, whose 1735 taxonomy of the natural world is still in use. Linnaeus, in the 1750s, introduced scientific names for all his species.\n19th-century developments (1800\u20131900).\nBy the 19th century, the study of science had come into the purview of professionals and institutions. In so doing, it gradually acquired the more modern name of \"natural science.\" The term \"scientist\" was coined by William Whewell in an 1834 review of Mary Somerville's \"On the Connexion of the Sciences\". But the word did not enter general use until nearly the end of the same century.\nModern natural science (1900\u2013present).\nAccording to a famous 1923 textbook, \"Thermodynamics and the Free Energy of Chemical Substances\", by the American chemist Gilbert N. Lewis and the American physical chemist Merle Randall, the natural sciences contain three great branches:\nAside from the logical and mathematical sciences, there are three great branches of \"natural science\" which stand apart by reason of the variety of far reaching deductions drawn from a small number of primary postulates \u2014 they are mechanics, electrodynamics, and thermodynamics.\nToday, natural sciences are more commonly divided into life sciences, such as botany and zoology, and physical sciences, which include physics, chemistry, astronomy, and Earth sciences.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38892", "revid": "6289403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38892", "title": "Chat room", "text": "Any form of synchronous conferencing\nA chat room, chatroom, or group chat (GC), is an online technology of synchronous conferencing, and occasionally even asynchronous conferencing. Chat rooms comprise technology ranging from real-time online chat and online interaction with strangers (e.g., online forums) to fully immersive graphical social environments. The ability to converse with multiple people in the same conversation differentiates chat rooms from instant messaging programs.\nThe first chat system was developed by Murray Turoff and for its first by the US government in 1971. Talkomatic, the first public online chat system, was created in 1973 on the PLATO System. Chat rooms gained mainstream popularity with AOL, and many peer-to-peer clients were created to host chat rooms. Further innovations include visual chat rooms, which add graphics to the chat experience.\nDescription.\nThe terms \"chat room\", or \"chatroom\" (and sometimes \"group chat\"; abbreviated as \"GC\"), are primarily used to describe any form of synchronous conferencing, occasionally even asynchronous conferencing. The term can thus span technology ranging from real-time online chat and online interaction with strangers (e.g., online forums) to fully immersive graphical social environments. The primary use of a chat room is to share information via text with a group of other users.\nGenerally speaking, the ability to converse with multiple people in the same conversation differentiates chat rooms from instant messaging programs, which are more typically designed for one-to-one communication. The users in a particular chat room are generally connected via a shared internet or other similar connection, and chat rooms exist catering for a wide range of subjects. New technology has enabled the use of file sharing and webcams.\nHistory.\nThe first chat system was used by the U.S. government in 1971. It was developed by Murray Turoff, a young PhD graduate from Berkeley, and its first use was during President Nixon's wage-price freeze under Project Delphi. The system was called EMISARI and would allow 10 regional offices to link together in a real-time online chat known as the party line. It was in use up until 1986.\nThe first public online chat system was called Talkomatic, created by Doug Brown and David R. Woolley in 1973 on the PLATO System at the University of Illinois. It offered several channels, each of which could accommodate up to five people, with messages appearing on all users' screens character-by-character as they were typed. Talkomatic was very popular among PLATO users into the mid-1980s. In 2014, Brown and Woolley released a web-based version of Talkomatic.\nThe first dedicated online chat service that was widely available to the public was the CompuServe CB Simulator in 1980, created by CompuServe executive Alexander \"Sandy\" Trevor in Columbus, Ohio. Chat rooms gained mainstream popularity with AOL.\nJarkko Oikarinen created Internet Relay Chat (IRC) in 1988. Many peer-to-peer clients have chat rooms, e.g., Ares Galaxy, eMule, Filetopia, Retroshare, Vuze, WASTE, WinMX, etc. Many popular social media platforms are now used as chat rooms, such as WhatsApp, Facebook, Twitter, Discord, Snapchat, Instagram, TikTok, and many more.\nGraphical multi-user environments.\nVisual chat rooms add graphics to the chat experience, in either 2D or 3D (employing virtual reality technology). These are characterized by using a graphic representation of the user, an avatar virtual elements such as games (in particular massively multiplayer online games) and educational material most often developed by individual site owners, who in general are simply more advanced users of the systems. The most popular environments, such as The Palace, also allow users to create/build their own spaces. Some of the most popular 3D chat experiences are IMVU and \"Second Life\" (though they extend far beyond just chat). Many such implementations generate profit by selling virtual goods to users at a high margin.\nSome online chat rooms also incorporate audio and video communications, so that users may actually see and hear each other.\nGames.\nGames are also often played in chat rooms. These are typically implemented by an external process such as an IRC bot joining the room to conduct the game. Trivia question &amp; answer games are most prevalent. A historic example is \"Hunt the Wumpus\". Chatroom-based implementations of the party game \"Mafia\" also exist. A similar, but more complex style of text-based gaming are MUDs, in which players interact within a textual, interactive fiction\u2013like environment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38893", "revid": "12530063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38893", "title": "Border Gateway Protocol", "text": "Protocol for communicating routing information on the Internet\nBorder Gateway Protocol (BGP) is a standardized exterior gateway protocol designed to exchange routing and reachability information among autonomous systems (AS) on the Internet. BGP is classified as a path-vector routing protocol, and it makes routing decisions based on paths, network policies, or rule-sets configured by a network administrator.\nBGP used for routing within an autonomous system is called Interior Border Gateway Protocol (iBGP). In contrast, the Internet application of the protocol is called Exterior Border Gateway Protocol (EBGP).\nHistory.\nThe genesis of BGP was in 1989 when Kirk Lougheed, Len Bosack and Yakov Rekhter were sharing a meal at an IETF conference. They famously sketched the outline of their new routing protocol on the back of some napkins, hence often referenced to as the \u201cTwo Napkin Protocol\u201d.\nIt was first described in 1989 in RFC 1105, and has been in use on the Internet since 1994. IPv6 BGP was first defined in in 1994, and it was improved to in 1998.\nThe current version of BGP is version 4 (BGP4), which was first published as in 1994, subsequently updated by in 1995 and in 2006. RFC 4271 corrected errors, clarified ambiguities and updated the specification with common industry practices. The major enhancement of BGP4 was the support for Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) and use of route aggregation to decrease the size of routing tables. allows BGP4 to carry a wide range of IPv4 and IPv6 \"address families\". It is also called the Multiprotocol Extensions which is Multiprotocol BGP (MP-BGP).\nOperation.\nBGP neighbors, called peers, are established by manual configuration among routers to create a TCP session on port 179. A BGP speaker sends 19-byte keep-alive messages every 30 seconds (protocol default value, tunable) to maintain the connection. Among routing protocols, BGP is unique in using TCP as its transport protocol.\nWhen BGP runs between two peers in the same autonomous system (AS), it is referred to as \"Internal BGP\" (\"iBGP\" or \"Interior Border Gateway Protocol\"). When it runs between different autonomous systems, it is called \"External BGP\" (\"eBGP\" or \"Exterior Border Gateway Protocol\"). Routers on the boundary of one AS exchanging information with another AS are called \"border\" or \"edge routers\" or simply \"eBGP peers\" and are typically connected directly, while \"iBGP peers\" can be interconnected through other intermediate routers. Other deployment topologies are also possible, such as running eBGP peering inside a VPN tunnel, allowing two remote sites to exchange routing information in a secure and isolated manner.\nThe main difference between iBGP and eBGP peering is in the way routes that were received from one peer are typically propagated by default to other peers:\nThese route-propagation rules effectively require that all iBGP peers inside an AS are interconnected in a full mesh with iBGP sessions.\nHow routes are propagated can be controlled in detail via the \"route-maps\" mechanism. This mechanism consists of a set of rules. Each rule describes, for routes matching some given criteria, what action should be taken. The action could be to drop the route, or it could be to modify some attributes of the route before inserting it in the routing table.\nExtensions negotiation.\nDuring the peering handshake, when OPEN messages are exchanged, BGP speakers can negotiate optional capabilities of the session, including multiprotocol extensions and various recovery modes. If the multiprotocol extensions to BGP are negotiated at the time of creation, the BGP speaker can prefix the Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI) it advertises with an address family prefix. These families include the IPv4 (default), IPv6, IPv4/IPv6 Virtual Private Networks and multicast BGP. Increasingly, BGP is used as a generalized signaling protocol to carry information about routes that may not be part of the global Internet, such as VPNs.\nIn order to make decisions in its operations with peers, a BGP peer uses a simple finite-state machine (FSM) that consists of six states: Idle; Connect; Active; OpenSent; OpenConfirm; and Established. For each peer-to-peer session, a BGP implementation maintains a state variable that tracks which of these six states the session is in. The BGP defines the messages that each peer should exchange in order to change the session from one state to another.\nThe first state is the Idle state. In the Idle state, BGP initializes all resources, refuses all inbound BGP connection attempts and initiates a TCP connection to the peer. The second state is Connect. In the Connect state, the router waits for the TCP connection to complete and transitions to the OpenSent state if successful. If unsuccessful, it starts the ConnectRetry timer and transitions to the Active state upon expiration. In the Active state, the router resets the ConnectRetry timer to zero and returns to the Connect state. In the OpenSent state, the router sends an Open message and waits for one in return in order to transition to the OpenConfirm state. Keepalive messages are exchanged and, upon successful receipt, the router is placed into the Established state. In the Established state, the router can send and receive: Keepalive; Update; and Notification messages to and from its peer.\nRouter connectivity and learning routes.\nIn the simplest arrangement, all routers within a single AS and participating in BGP routing must be configured in a full mesh: each router must be configured as a peer to every other router. This causes scaling problems, since the number of required connections grows quadratically with the number of routers involved. To alleviate the problem, BGP implements two options: route reflectors (RFC 4456) and BGP confederations (RFC 5065). The following discussion of basic update processing assumes a full iBGP mesh.\nA given BGP router may accept network-layer reachability information (NLRI) updates from multiple neighbors and advertise NLRI to the same, or a different set, of neighbors. The BGP process maintains several routing information bases:\nThe physical storage and structure of these conceptual tables are decided by the implementer of the BGP code. Their structure is not visible to other BGP routers, although they usually can be interrogated with management commands on the local router. It is quite common, for example, to store the codice_3, codice_4 and the codice_2 together in the same data structure, with additional information attached to the RIB entries. The additional information tells the BGP process such things as whether individual entries belong in the codice_8 for specific neighbors, whether the peer-neighbor route selection process made received policies eligible for the codice_2, and whether codice_2 entries are eligible to be submitted to the local router's routing table management process.\nBGP submits the routes that it considers best to the main routing table process. Depending on the implementation of that process, the BGP route is not necessarily selected. For example, a directly connected prefix, learned from the router's own hardware, is usually most preferred. As long as that directly connected route's interface is active, the BGP route to the destination will not be put into the routing table. Once the interface goes down, and there are no more preferred routes, the Loc-RIB route would be installed in the main routing table.\nBGP carries the information with which rules inside BGP-speaking routers can make policy decisions. Some of the information carried that is explicitly intended to be used in policy decisions are:\nRoute selection process.\nThe BGP standard specifies a number of decision factors, more than the ones that are used by any other common routing process, for selecting NLRI to go into the Loc-RIB. The first decision point for evaluating NLRI is that its next-hop attribute must be reachable (or resolvable). Another way of saying the next-hop must be reachable is that there must be an active route, already in the main routing table of the router, to the prefix in which the next-hop address is reachable.\nNext, for each neighbor, the BGP process applies various standard and implementation-dependent criteria to decide which routes conceptually should go into the Adj-RIB-In. The neighbor could send several possible routes to a destination, but the first level of preference is at the neighbor level. Only one route to each destination will be installed in the conceptual Adj-RIB-In. This process will also delete, from the Adj-RIB-In, any routes that are withdrawn by the neighbor.\nWhenever a conceptual Adj-RIB-In changes, the main BGP process decides if any of the neighbor's new routes are preferred to routes already in the Loc-RIB. If so, it replaces them. If a given route is withdrawn by a neighbor, and there is no other route to that destination, the route is removed from the Loc-RIB and no longer sent by BGP to the main routing table manager. If the router does not have a route to that destination from any non-BGP source, the withdrawn route will be removed from the main routing table.\nAs long as there is a tie, the route selection process moves to the next step.\nThe local preference, weight, and other criteria can be manipulated by local configuration and software capabilities. Such manipulation, although commonly used, is outside the scope of the standard. For example, the \"community\" attribute (see below) is not directly used by the BGP selection process. The BGP neighbor process can have a rule to set local preference or another factor based on a manually programmed rule to set the attribute if the community value matches some pattern-matching criterion. If the route was learned from an external peer the per-neighbor BGP process computes a local preference value from local policy rules and then compares the local preference of all routes from the neighbor.\nCommunities.\nBGP communities are attribute tags that can be applied to incoming or outgoing prefixes to achieve some common goal. While it is common to say that BGP allows an administrator to set policies on how prefixes are handled by ISPs, this is generally not possible, strictly speaking. For instance, BGP natively has no concept to allow one AS to tell another AS to restrict advertisement of a prefix to only North American peering customers. Instead, an ISP generally publishes a list of well-known or proprietary communities with a description for each one, which essentially becomes an agreement of how prefixes are to be treated.\nExamples of common communities include:\nAn ISP might state that any routes received from customers with following examples:\nThe customer simply adjusts their configuration to include the correct community or communities for each route, and the ISP is responsible for controlling who the prefix is advertised to. The end user has no technical ability to enforce correct actions being taken by the ISP, though problems in this area are generally rare and accidental.\nIt is a common tactic for end customers to use BGP communities (usually ASN:70,80,90,100) to control the local preference the ISP assigns to advertised routes instead of using MED (the effect is similar). The community attribute is transitive, but communities applied by the customer very rarely propagated outside the next-hop AS. Not all ISPs give out their communities to the public.\nBGP Extended Community Attribute.\nThe BGP Extended Community Attribute was added in 2006, in order to extend the range of such attributes and to provide a community attribute structuring by means of a type field. The extended format consists of one or two octets for the type field followed by seven or six octets for the respective community attribute content. The definition of this Extended Community Attribute is documented in RFC 4360. The IANA administers the registry for BGP Extended Communities Types. The Extended Communities Attribute itself is a transitive optional BGP attribute. A bit in the type field within the attribute decides whether the encoded extended community is of a transitive or non-transitive nature. The IANA registry therefore provides different number ranges for the attribute types. Due to the extended attribute range, its usage can be manifold. RFC 4360 exemplarily defines the \"Two-Octet AS Specific Extended Community\", the \"IPv4 Address Specific Extended Community\", the \"Opaque Extended Community\", the \"Route Target Community\", and the \"Route Origin Community\". A number of BGP QoS drafts also use this Extended Community Attribute structure for inter-domain QoS signalling.\nWith the introduction of 32-bit AS numbers, some issues were immediately obvious with the community attribute that only defines a 16-bit ASN field, which prevents the matching between this field and the real ASN value. Since RFC 7153, extended communities are compatible with 32-bit ASNs. RFC 8092 and RFC 8195 introduce a Large Community attribute of 12 bytes, divided in three field of 4 bytes each (AS:function:parameter).\nMulti-exit discriminators.\nMEDs, defined in the main BGP standard, were originally intended to show to another neighbor AS the advertising AS's preference as to which of several links are preferred for inbound traffic. Another application of MEDs is to advertise the value, typically based on delay, of multiple ASs that have a presence at an IXP, that they impose to send traffic to some destination.\nSome routers (like Juniper) will use the Metric from OSPF to set MED.\nExamples of MED used with BGP when exported to BGP on Juniper SRX\nTopology default Route Table:\nPrefix Path Route NH Metric NextHop Nexthop \n Type Type Type Interface Address/LSP\n10.32.37.0/24 Inter Discard IP 16777215\n10.32.37.0/26 Intra Network IP 101 ge-0/0/1.0 10.32.37.241\n10.32.37.64/26 Intra Network IP 102 ge-0/0/1.0 10.32.37.241\n10.32.37.128/26 Intra Network IP 101 ge-0/0/1.0 10.32.37.241\n Prefix Nexthop MED Lclpref AS path\nPacket format.\nMessage header format.\nnote: \"Marker\" and \"Length\" is omitted from the examples.\n Optional Parameters Length (8 bits): total length of the Optional parameters field.\nOpen Packet.\nExample of Open Message\n Type: Open Message (1)\n Version: 4\n My AS: 64496\n Hold Time: 90\n BGP Identifier: \n Optional Parameters Length: 16\n Optional Parameters:\n Capability: Multiprotocol extensions capability (1)\n Capability: Route refresh capability (2)\n Capability: Route refresh capability (Cisco) (128)\nUpdate Packet.\nOnly changes are sent, after initial exchange, only difference (add/change/removed) are sent.\nExample of UPDATE Message\n Type: UPDATE Message (2)\n Withdrawn Routes Length: 0\n Total Path Attribute Length: 25\n Path attributes\n ORIGIN: IGP\n AS_PATH: 64500\n NEXT_HOP: 192.0.2.254\n MULTI_EXIT_DISC: 0\n Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI)\n \nNotification.\nIf there is an error it is because one of the fields in the OPEN or UPDATE message does not match between the peers, e.g., BGP version mismatch, the peering router expects a different My AS, etc. The router then sends a Notification message to the peer indicating why the error occurred.\nExample of NOTIFICATION Message\n Type: NOTIFICATION Message (3)\n Major error Code: OPEN Message Error (2)\n Minor error Code (Open Message): Bad Peer AS (2)\n Bad Peer AS: 65200\nKeepAlive.\nKeepAlive messages are sent periodically, to verify that remote peer is still alive.\nkeepalives should be sent at intervals of one third the codice_11.\nExample of KEEPALIVE Message\n Type: KEEPALIVE Message (4)\nRoute-Refresh.\nDefined in RFC.\nAllows for soft updating of codice_12, without resetting connection.\nExample of ROUTE-REFRESH Message\n Type: ROUTE-REFRESH Message (5)\n Address family identifier (AFI): IPv4 (1)\n Subtype: Normal route refresh request [RFC2918] with/without ORF [RFC5291] (0)\n Subsequent address family identifier (SAFI): Unicast (1)\nInternal scalability.\nBGP is \"the most scalable of all routing protocols.\"\nAn autonomous system with internal BGP (iBGP) must have all of its iBGP peers connect to each other in a full mesh (where everyone speaks to everyone directly). This full-mesh configuration requires that each router maintain a session with every other router. In large networks, this number of sessions may degrade the performance of routers, due to either a lack of memory, or high CPU process requirements.\nRoute reflectors.\nRoute reflectors (RRs) reduce the number of connections required in an AS. A single router (or two for redundancy) can be made an RR: other routers in the AS need only be configured as peers to them. An RR offers an alternative to the logical full-mesh requirement of iBGP. The purpose of the RR is concentration. Multiple BGP routers can peer with a central point, the RR\u00a0\u2013 acting as an RR server\u00a0\u2013 rather than peer with every other router in a full mesh. All the other iBGP routers become RR clients.\nThis approach, similar to OSPF's DR/BDR feature, provides large networks with added iBGP scalability. In a fully meshed iBGP network of 10 routers, 90 individual CLI statements (spread throughout all routers in the topology) are needed just to define the remote-AS of each peer: this quickly becomes a headache to manage. An RR topology can cut these 90 statements down to 18, offering a viable solution for the larger networks administered by ISPs.\nAn RR is a single point of failure, therefore at least a second RR may be configured in order to provide redundancy. As it is an additional peer for the other 10 routers, it approximately doubles the number of CLI statements, requiring an additional 11 \u00d7 2 \u2212 2 = 20 statements in this case. In a BGP multipath environment the additional RR also can benefit the network by adding local routing throughput if the RRs are acting as traditional routers instead of just a dedicated RR server role.\nRRs and confederations both reduce the number of iBGP peers to each router and thus reduce processing overhead. RRs are a pure performance-enhancing technique, while confederations also can be used to implement more fine-grained policy.\nRules.\nRR servers propagate routes inside the AS based on the following rules:\nCluster.\nAn RR and its clients form a \"cluster\". The \"cluster ID\" is then attached to every route advertised by the RR to its client or nonclient peers. A cluster ID is a cumulative, non-transitive BGP attribute, and every RR must prepend the local cluster ID to the cluster list to avoid routing loops.\nConfederation.\nConfederations are sets of autonomous systems. In common practice, only one of the confederation AS numbers is seen by the Internet as a whole. Confederations are used in very large networks where a large AS can be configured to encompass smaller more manageable internal ASs.\nThe confederated AS is composed of multiple ASs. Each confederated AS alone has iBGP fully meshed and has connections to other ASs inside the confederation. Even though these ASs have eBGP peers to ASs within the confederation, the ASs exchange routing as if they used iBGP. In this way, the confederation preserves next hop, metric, and local preference information. To the outside world, the confederation appears to be a single AS. With this solution, iBGP transit AS problems can be resolved as iBGP requires a full mesh between all BGP routers: large number of TCP sessions and unnecessary duplication of routing traffic.\nConfederations can be used in conjunction with route reflectors. Both confederations and route reflectors can be subject to persistent oscillation unless specific design rules, affecting both BGP and the interior routing protocol, are followed.\nThese alternatives can introduce problems of their own, including the following:\nAdditionally, route reflectors and BGP confederations were not designed to ease BGP router configuration. Nevertheless, these are common tools for experienced BGP network architects. These tools may be combined, for example, as a hierarchy of route reflectors.\nStability.\nThe routing tables managed by a BGP implementation are adjusted continually to reflect actual changes in the network, such as links or routers going down and coming back up. In the network as a whole, it is normal for these changes to happen almost continuously, but for any particular router or link, changes are expected to be relatively infrequent. If a router is misconfigured or mismanaged then it may get into a rapid cycle between down and up states. This pattern of repeated withdrawal and re-announcement known as route flapping can cause excessive activity in all the other routers that know about the cycling entity, as the same route is continually injected and withdrawn from the routing tables. The BGP design is such that delivery of traffic may not function while routes are being updated. On the Internet, a BGP routing change may cause outages for several minutes.\nA feature known as \"route flap damping\" () is built into many BGP implementations in an attempt to mitigate the effects of route flapping. Without damping, the excessive activity can cause a heavy processing load on routers, which may in turn delay updates on other routes, and so affect overall routing stability. With damping, a route's flapping is exponentially decayed. At the first instance when a route becomes unavailable and quickly reappears, damping does not take effect, so as to maintain the normal fail-over times of BGP. At the second occurrence, BGP shuns that prefix for a certain length of time; subsequent occurrences are ignored exponentially longer. After the abnormalities have ceased and a suitable length of time has passed for the offending route, prefixes can be reinstated with a clean slate. Damping can also mitigate denial-of-service attacks.\nIt is also suggested in RFC 2439 that route flap damping is a feature more desirable if implemented to Exterior Border Gateway Protocol Sessions (eBGP sessions or simply called exterior peers) and not on Interior Border Gateway Protocol Sessions (iBGP sessions or simply called internal peers). With this approach when a route flaps inside an autonomous system, it is not propagated to the external ASs\u00a0\u2013 flapping a route to an eBGP will cause a chain of flapping for the particular route throughout the backbone. This method also successfully avoids the overhead of route flap damping for iBGP sessions.\nSubsequent research has shown that flap damping can actually lengthen convergence times in some cases, and can cause interruptions in connectivity even when links are not flapping. Moreover, as backbone links and router processors have become faster, some network architects have suggested that flap damping may not be as important as it used to be, since changes to the routing table can be handled much faster by routers. This has led the RIPE Routing Working Group to write, \"With the current implementations of BGP flap damping, the application of flap damping in ISP networks is NOT recommended. ... If flap damping is implemented, the ISP operating that network will cause side-effects to their customers and the Internet users of their customers' content and services ... . These side-effects would quite likely be worse than the impact caused by simply not running flap damping at all.\" Improving stability without the problems of flap damping is the subject of current research.\nRouting table growth.\nOne of the largest problems faced by BGP, and indeed the Internet infrastructure as a whole, is the growth of the Internet routing table. If the global routing table grows to the point where some older, less capable routers cannot cope with the memory requirements or the CPU load of maintaining the table, these routers will cease to be effective gateways between the parts of the Internet they connect. In addition, and perhaps even more importantly, larger routing tables take longer to stabilize after a major connectivity change, leaving network service unreliable, or even unavailable, in the interim.\nUntil late 2001, the global routing table was growing exponentially, threatening an eventual widespread breakdown of connectivity. In an attempt to prevent this, ISPs cooperated in keeping the global routing table as small as possible, by using Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) and route aggregation. While this slowed the growth of the routing table to a linear process for several years, with the expanded demand for multihoming by end-user networks the growth was once again superlinear by the middle of 2004.\n512k day.\nA Y2K-like overflow triggered in 2014 for those models that were not appropriately updated.\nWhile a full IPv4 BGP table as of August 2014[ [update]] (512k day) was in excess of 512,000 prefixes, many older routers had a limit of 512k (512,000\u2013524,288) routing table entries. On August 12, 2014, outages resulting from full tables hit eBay, LastPass and Microsoft Azure among others. A number of Cisco routers commonly in use had TCAM, a form of high-speed content-addressable memory, for storing BGP advertised routes. On impacted routers, the TCAM was by default allocated as 512k IPv4 routes and 256k IPv6 routes. While the reported number of IPv6 advertised routes was only about 20k, the number of advertised IPv4 routes reached the default limit, causing a spillover effect as routers attempted to compensate for the issue by using slow software routing (as opposed to fast hardware routing via TCAM). The main method for dealing with this issue involves operators changing the TCAM allocation to allow more IPv4 entries, by reallocating some of the TCAM reserved for IPv6 routes, which requires a reboot on most routers. The 512k problem was predicted by a number of IT professionals.\nThe actual allocations which pushed the number of routes above 512k was the announcement of about 15,000 new routes in short order, starting at 07:48 UTC. Almost all of these routes were to Verizon Autonomous Systems 701 and 705, created as a result of deaggregation of larger blocks, introducing thousands of new routes, and making the routing table reach 515,000 entries. The new routes appear to have been reaggregated within 5 minutes, but instability across the Internet apparently continued for a number of hours. Even if Verizon had not caused the routing table to exceed 512k entries in the short spike, it would have soon happened through natural growth.\nRoute summarization is often used to improve aggregation of the BGP global routing table, thereby reducing the necessary table size in routers of an AS. Consider AS1 has been allocated the big address space of , this would be counted as one route in the table, but due to customer requirements or traffic engineering purposes, AS1 wants to announce smaller, more specific routes of , , and . The prefix does not have any hosts so AS1 does not announce a specific route . This all counts as AS1 announcing four routes.\nAS2 will see the four routes from AS1 (, , , and ) and it is up to the routing policy of AS2 to decide whether or not to take a copy of the four routes or, as overlaps all the other specific routes, to just store the summary, .\nIf AS2 wants to send data to prefix , it will be sent to the routers of AS1 on route . At AS1, it will either be dropped or a destination unreachable ICMP message will be sent back, depending on the configuration of AS1's routers.\nIf AS1 later decides to drop the route , leaving , , and , the number of routes AS1 announces drops to three. Depending on the routing policy of AS2, it will store a copy of the three routes, or aggregate and to , thereby reducing the number of routes AS2 stores to two ( and ).\nIf AS2 now wants to send data to prefix , it will be dropped or a destination unreachable ICMP message will be sent back at the routers of AS2 (not AS1 as before), because is not in the routing table.\nAS number depletion and 32-bit ASNs.\nThe RFC 1771 BGP-4 specification coded AS numbers on 16 bits, for 64,510 possible public AS numbers. In 2011, only 15,000 AS numbers were still available, and projections were envisioning a complete depletion of available AS numbers in September 2013.\nRFC 6793 extends AS coding from 16 to 32 bits, which now allows up to 4 billion available AS. An additional private AS range is also defined in RFC 6996. To allow the traversal of router groups not able to manage those new ASNs, the new attribute AS4_PATH (optional transitive) and the special 16-bit ASN AS_TRANS (AS23456) is used. 32-bit ASN assignments started in 2007.\nLoad balancing.\nAnother factor contributing to the growth of the routing table is the need for load balancing of multi-homed networks. It is not a trivial task to balance the inbound traffic to a multi-homed network across its multiple inbound paths, due to limitation of the BGP route selection process. For a multi-homed network, if it announces the same network blocks across all of its BGP peers, the result may be that one or several of its inbound links become congested while the other links remain under-utilized, because external networks all picked that set of congested paths as optimal. Like most other routing protocols, BGP does not detect congestion.\nTo work around this problem, BGP administrators of that multihomed network may divide a large contiguous IP address block into smaller blocks and tweak the route announcement to make different blocks look optimal on different paths, so that external networks will choose a different path to reach different blocks of that multi-homed network. Such cases will increase the number of routes as seen on the global BGP table.\nOne method to address the routing table issue associated with load balancing is to deploy Locator/Identifier Separation Protocol (BGP/LISP) gateways within an Internet exchange point to allow ingress traffic engineering across multiple links. This technique does not increase the number of routes seen on the global BGP table.\nSecurity.\nBy design, routers running BGP accept advertised routes from other BGP routers by default. This allows for automatic and decentralized routing of traffic across the Internet, but it also leaves the Internet potentially vulnerable to accidental or malicious disruption, known as BGP hijacking. Due to the extent to which BGP is embedded in the core systems of the Internet, and the number of different networks operated by many different organizations which collectively make up the Internet, correcting this vulnerability (such as by introducing the use of cryptographic keys to verify the identity of BGP routers) is a technically and economically challenging problem.\nExtensions.\nMultiprotocol Extensions for BGP (MBGP), sometimes referred to as Multiprotocol BGP or Multicast BGP and defined in , is an extension to BGP that allows different types of addresses (known as address families) to be distributed in parallel. Whereas standard BGP supports only IPv4 unicast addresses, Multiprotocol BGP supports IPv4 and IPv6 addresses and it supports unicast and multicast variants of each. Multiprotocol BGP allows information about the topology of IP multicast-capable routers to be exchanged separately from the topology of normal IPv4 unicast routers. Thus, it allows a multicast routing topology different from the unicast routing topology. Although MBGP enables the exchange of inter-domain multicast routing information, other protocols such as the Protocol Independent Multicast family are needed to build trees and forward multicast traffic.\nMultiprotocol BGP is also widely deployed in case of MPLS L3 VPN, to exchange VPN labels learned for the routes from the customer sites over the MPLS network, in order to distinguish between different customer sites when the traffic from the other customer sites comes to the provider edge router for routing.\nAnother extension to BGP is multipath routing. This typically requires identical MED, weight, origin, and AS-path although some implementations provide the ability to relax the AS-path checking to only expect an equal path length rather than the actual AS numbers in the path being expected to match too. This can then be extended further with features like Cisco's dmzlink-bw which enables a ratio of traffic sharing based on bandwidth values configured on individual links.\nBy default, BGP only supports the advertisement of a single locally selected best path to its neighbors, through its Update messages. defines the ADD-PATH extension, which allows a BGP speaker to advertise multiple paths for the same destination to peers. One application for this is when using route reflectors (RRs), because then the RR can advertise all known route paths to its clients, instead of sending only a single route it selected based on its local decision process, which is likely not the best path for all of its clients.\nUses.\nBGP4 is standard for Internet routing and required of most Internet service providers (ISPs) to establish routing between one another. Very large private IP networks use BGP internally. An example use case is the joining of a number of large Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) networks when OSPF by itself does not scale to the size required. Another reason to use BGP is multihoming a network for better redundancy, either to multiple access points to a single ISP or to multiple ISPs.\nImplementations.\nRouters, especially small ones intended for small office/home office (SOHO) use, may not include BGP capability. Other commercial routers may need a specific software executable image that supports BGP, or a license that enables it. Devices marketed as layer-3 switches are less likely to support BGP than devices marketed as routers, but many high-end layer-3 switches can run BGP.\nProducts marketed as switches may have a size limitation on BGP tables that is far smaller than a full Internet table plus internal routes. These devices may be perfectly reasonable and useful when used for BGP routing of some smaller part of the network, such as a confederation-AS representing one of several smaller enterprises that are linked, by a BGP backbone of backbones, or a small enterprise that announces routes to an ISP but only accepts a default route and perhaps a small number of aggregated routes.\nA BGP router used only for a network with a single point of entry to the Internet may have a much smaller routing table size (and hence RAM and CPU requirement) than a multihomed network. Even simple multihoming can have modest routing table size. The actual amount of memory required in a BGP router depends on the amount of BGP information exchanged with other BGP speakers and the way in which the particular router stores BGP information. The router may have to keep more than one copy of a route, so it can manage different policies for route advertising and acceptance to a specific neighboring AS. The term \"view\" is often used for these different policy relationships on a running router.\nIf one router implementation takes more memory per route than another implementation, this may be a legitimate design choice, trading processing speed against memory. A full IPv4 BGP table as of August 2015[ [update]] is in excess of 590,000 prefixes. Large ISPs may add another 50% for internal and customer routes. Again depending on implementation, separate tables may be kept for each view of a different peer AS.\nNotable free and open-source implementations of BGP include:\nSystems for testing BGP conformance, load or stress performance come from vendors such as:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38894", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38894", "title": "Abolitionism", "text": "Movement to end slavery\nAbolitionism, or the abolitionist movement, is the political movement to end slavery and liberate enslaved individuals around the world. It gained momentum in the western world in the late 18th and 19th centuries.\nThe first country to fully outlaw slavery was France in 1315, but it was later used in its colonies. The first country to abolish and punish slavery for indigenous people was Spain with the New Laws in 1542.\nUnder the actions of Toyotomi Hideyoshi, chattel slavery has been abolished across Japan since 1590, though other forms of forced labour were used during World War II. The first and only country to self-liberate from slavery was a former French colony, Haiti, as a result of the Revolution of 1791\u20131804. The British abolitionist movement began in the late 18th century, and the 1772 Somersett case established that slavery did not exist in English law. In 1807, the slave trade was made illegal throughout the British Empire, though existing slaves in British colonies were not liberated until the Slavery Abolition Act 1833. In the United States, Pennsylvania and Vermont were the first states to abolish slavery, Vermont in 1777 and Pennsylvania in 1780 (Vermont did not join the Union until 1791). By 1804, the rest of the northern states had abolished slavery, but it remained legal in southern states. By 1808, the United States outlawed the importation of slaves and in 1865 outlawed slavery except as a punishment.\nIn Eastern Europe, groups organized to abolish the enslavement of the Roma in Wallachia and Moldavia between 1843 and 1855, and to emancipate the serfs in Russia in 1861. The United States would pass the 13th Amendment in December 1865 after having just fought a bloody Civil War, ending slavery \"except as a punishment for crime\". In 1888, Brazil became the last country in the Americas to outlaw slavery. As the Empire of Japan annexed Asian countries, from the late 19th century onwards, archaic institutions including slavery were abolished in those countries.\nDuring the 20th century, the League of Nations founded a number of commissions, Temporary Slavery Commission (1924\u20131926), Committee of Experts on Slavery (1932) and the Advisory Committee of Experts on Slavery (1934\u20131939), which conducted international investigations of the institution of slavery and created international treaties, such as the 1926 Slavery Convention, to eradicate the institution worldwide.\nIn 1948, slavery was declared illegal in the United Nations' Universal Declaration of Human Rights. By this time, the Arab world was the only region in the world where institutional chattel slavery was still legal. Slavery in Saudi Arabia, slavery in Yemen and slavery in Dubai were abolished in 1962\u20131963, with slavery in Oman following in 1970.\nMauritania is the latest country to officially abolish slavery, with a presidential decree in 1981. Today, child and adult slavery and forced labour are illegal in almost all countries, as well as being against international law, but human trafficking for labour and for sexual bondage continues to affect tens of millions of adults and children.\nFrance.\nEarly abolition in metropolitan France.\nBalthild of Chelles, herself a former slave, queen consort of Neustria and Burgundy by marriage to Clovis II, became regent in 657 since the king, her son Chlothar III, was only five years old. At some unknown date during her rule, she abolished the trade of slaves, although not slavery. Moreover, her (and contemporaneous Saint Eligius') favorite charity was to buy and free slaves, especially children. Slavery started to dwindle and would be superseded by serfdom.\nIn 1315, Louis X, king of France, published a decree proclaiming that \"France signifies freedom\" and that any slave setting foot on French soil should be freed. This prompted subsequent governments to circumscribe slavery in the overseas colonies.\nSome cases of African slaves freed by setting foot on French soil were recorded such as the example of a Norman slave merchant who tried to sell slaves in Bordeaux in 1571. He was arrested and his slaves were freed according to a declaration of the Parlement of Guyenne which stated that slavery was intolerable in France, although it is a misconception that there were 'no slaves in France'; thousands of African slaves were present in France during the 18th century. Born into slavery in Saint Domingue, Thomas-Alexandre Dumas became free when his father brought him to France in 1776.\n\"Code Noir\" and Age of Enlightenment.\nAs in other New World colonies, the French relied on the Atlantic slave trade for labour for their sugar cane plantations in their Caribbean colonies; the French West Indies. In addition, French colonists in \"Louisiane\" in North America held slaves, particularly in the South around New Orleans, where they established sugarcane plantations.\nLouis XIV's \"Code Noir\" regulated the slave trade and institution in the colonies. It gave unparalleled rights to slaves. It included the right to marry, gather publicly or take Sundays off. Although the \"Code Noir\" authorized and codified cruel corporal punishment against slaves under certain conditions, it forbade slave owners to torture them or to separate families. It also demanded enslaved Africans receive instruction in the Catholic faith, implying that Africans were human beings endowed with a soul, a fact French law did not admit until then. It resulted in a far higher percentage of Black people being free in 1830 (13.2% in Louisiana compared to 0.8% in Mississippi). They were on average exceptionally literate, with a significant number of them owning businesses, properties, and even slaves. Other free people of colour, such as Julien Raimond, spoke out against slavery.\nThe \"Code Noir\" also forbade interracial marriages, but it was often ignored in French colonial society and the mulattoes became an intermediate caste between whites and blacks, while in the British colonies mulattoes and blacks were considered equal and discriminated against equally.\nDuring the Age of Enlightenment, many philosophers wrote pamphlets against slavery and its moral and economical justifications, including Montesquieu in \"The Spirit of the Laws\" (1748) and Denis Diderot in the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\". In 1788, Jacques Pierre Brissot founded the Society of the Friends of the Blacks (\"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Amis des Noirs\") to work for the abolition of slavery. After the Revolution, on 4 April 1792, France granted free people of colour full citizenship.\nThe slave revolt, in the largest Caribbean French colony of Saint-Domingue in 1791, was the beginning of what became the Haitian Revolution led by formerly enslaved people like Georges Biassou, Toussaint L'Ouverture, and Jean-Jacques Dessalines. The rebellion swept through the north of the colony, and with it came freedom to thousands of enslaved blacks, but also violence and death. In 1793, French Civil Commissioners in St. Domingue and abolitionists, L\u00e9ger-F\u00e9licit\u00e9 Sonthonax and \u00c9tienne Polverel, issued the first emancipation proclamation of the modern world (Decree of 16 Pluvi\u00f4se An II). The Convention sent them to safeguard the allegiance of the population to revolutionary France. The proclamation resulted in crucial military strategy as it gradually brought most of the black troops into the French fold and kept the colony under the French flag for most of the conflict. The connection with France lasted until blacks and free people of colour formed L'arm\u00e9e indig\u00e8ne in 1802 to resist Napoleon's Exp\u00e9dition de Saint-Domingue. Victory over the French in the decisive Battle of Verti\u00e8res finally led to independence and the creation of present Haiti in 1804.\nFirst general abolition of slavery (1794).\nThe convention, the first elected Assembly of the First Republic (1792\u20131804), on 4 February 1794, under the leadership of Maximilien Robespierre, abolished slavery in law in France and its colonies. Abb\u00e9 Gr\u00e9goire and the Society of the Friends of the Blacks were part of the abolitionist movement, which had laid important groundwork in building anti-slavery sentiment in the metropole. The first article of the law stated that \"Slavery was abolished\" in the French colonies, while the second article stated that \"slave-owners would be indemnified\" with financial compensation for the value of their slaves. The French constitution passed in 1795 included in the declaration of the Rights of Man that slavery was abolished.\nRe-establishment of slavery in the colonies (1802).\nDuring the French Revolutionary Wars, French slave-owners joined the counter-revolution en masse and, through the Whitehall Accord, they threatened to move the French Caribbean colonies under British control, as Great Britain still allowed slavery. Fearing secession from these islands, successfully lobbied by planters and concerned about revenues from the West Indies, and influenced by the slaveholder family of his wife, Napoleon Bonaparte decided to re-establish slavery after becoming First Consul. He promulgated the law of 20 May 1802 and sent military governors and troops to the colonies to impose it.\nOn 10 May 1802, Colonel Delgr\u00e8s launched a rebellion in Guadeloupe against Napoleon's representative, General Richepanse. The rebellion was repressed, and slavery was re-established.\nAbolition of slavery in Haiti (1804).\nThe news of the Law of 4 February 1794 that abolished slavery in France and its colonies and the revolution led by Colonel Delgr\u00e8s sparked another wave of rebellion in Saint-Domingue. From 1802 Napoleon sent more than 20,000 troops to the island, two-thirds died, mostly from yellow fever.\nSeeing the failure of the Saint-Domingue expedition, in 1803 Napoleon decided to sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States.\nThe French governments initially refused to recognize Ha\u00efti. It forced the nation to pay a substantial amount of reparations (which it could ill afford) for losses during the revolution and did not recognize its government until 1825.\nFrance was a signatory to the first multilateral treaty for the suppression of the slave trade, the Treaty for the Suppression of the African Slave Trade (1841), but the king, Louis Philippe I, declined to ratify it.\nSecond abolition (1848).\nOn 27 April 1848, under the Second Republic (1848\u20131852), the decree-law written by Victor Sch\u0153lcher abolished slavery in the remaining colonies. The state bought the slaves from the \"colons\" (white colonists; \"B\u00e9k\u00e9s\" in Creole), and then freed them.\nFinal abolition (1903) and subsequent events.\nAt about the same time, France started colonizing Africa and had gained possession of much of West Africa by 1900. In 1905, the French abolished slavery in most of French West Africa. The French also attempted to abolish Tuareg slavery following the Kaocen Revolt. In the region of the Sahel, slavery has long persisted.\nThe abolition wasn't strictly put in place. Several french territories kept practising slavery until 1904 as was the case in Senegal or 1894 in Soudan. The abolition was not strictly enforced.\nPassed on 10 May 2001, the Taubira law officially acknowledges slavery and the Atlantic slave trade as a crime against humanity. 10 May was chosen as the day dedicated to recognition of the crime of slavery.\nGreat Britain.\nOverview.\nJames Oglethorpe was among the first to articulate the Enlightenment case against slavery, banning it in the Province of Georgia on humanitarian grounds, and arguing against it in Parliament. Soon after Oglethorpe's death in 1785, Sharp and More united with William Wilberforce and others in forming the Clapham Sect.\nThe Somersett case in 1772, in which a fugitive slave was freed with the judgement that slavery did not exist under English common law, helped launch the British movement to abolish slavery. Though anti-slavery sentiments were widespread by the late 18th century, many colonies and emerging nations continued to use slave labour: Dutch, French, British, Spanish, and Portuguese territories in the West Indies, South America, and the Southern United States. After the American Revolution established the United States, many Loyalists who fled the Northern United States immigrated to the British province of Quebec, bringing an English majority population as well as many slaves, leading the province to ban the institution in 1793 (see Slavery in Canada). In the U.S., Northern states, beginning with Pennsylvania in 1780, passed legislation during the next two decades abolishing slavery, sometimes by gradual emancipation. Vermont, which was excluded from the thirteen colonies, existed as an independent state from 1777 to 1791. Vermont abolished adult slavery in 1777. In other states, such as Virginia, similar declarations of rights were interpreted by the courts as not applicable to Africans and African Americans. During the following decades, the abolitionist movement grew in northern states, and Congress heavily regulated the expansion of Slave or Free States in new territories admitted to the union (see Missouri compromise).\nIn 1787, the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade was formed in London. Revolutionary France abolished slavery throughout its empire through the Law of 4 February 1794, but Napoleon restored it in 1802 as part of a program to ensure sovereignty over its colonies. On March 16, 1792, Denmark became the first country to issue a decree to abolish their transatlantic slave trade from the start of 1803. However, Denmark would not abolish slavery in the Danish West Indies until 1848. Haiti (then Saint-Domingue) formally declared independence from France in 1804 and became the first nation in the Western Hemisphere to permanently eliminate slavery in the modern era, following the 1804 Haitian revolution. The northern states in the U.S. all abolished slavery by 1804. The trade of slaves was made illegal throughout the British Empire by 1937, with Nigeria and Bahrain being the last British territories to abolish slavery.\nDevelopment.\nThe last known form of enforced servitude of adults (villeinage) had disappeared in England by the beginning of the 17th century. In 1569 a court considered the case of Cartwright, who had bought a slave from Russia. The court ruled English law could not recognize slavery, as it was never established officially. This ruling was overshadowed by later developments; it was upheld in 1700 by the Lord Chief Justice John Holt when he ruled that a slave became free as soon as he arrived in England. During the English Civil Wars of the mid-seventeenth century, sectarian radicals challenged slavery and other threats to personal freedom. Their ideas influenced many antislavery thinkers in the eighteenth century.\nIn addition to English colonists importing slaves to the North American colonies, by the 18th century, traders began to import slaves from Africa, India and East Asia (where they were trading) to London and Edinburgh to work as personal servants. Men who migrated to the North American colonies often took their East Indian slaves or servants with them, as East Indians have been documented in colonial records.\nSome of the first freedom suits, court cases in the British Isles to challenge the legality of slavery, took place in Scotland in 1755 and 1769. The cases were \"Montgomery v. Sheddan\" (1755) and \"Spens v. Dalrymple\" (1769). Each of the slaves had been baptized in Scotland and challenged the legality of slavery. They set the precedent of legal procedure in British courts that would later lead to successful outcomes for the plaintiffs. In these cases, deaths of the plaintiff and defendant, respectively, brought an end before court decisions.\nAfrican slaves were not bought or sold in London but were brought by masters from other areas. Together with people from other nations, especially non-Christian, Africans were considered foreigners, not able to be English subjects. At the time, England had no naturalization procedure. The African slaves' legal status was unclear until 1772 and Somersett's Case, when the fugitive slave James Somersett forced a decision by the courts. Somersett had escaped, and his master, Charles Steuart, had him captured and imprisoned on board a ship, intending to ship him to Jamaica to be resold into slavery. While in London, Somersett had been baptized; three godparents issued a writ of \"habeas corpus\". As a result, Lord Mansfield, Chief Justice of the Court of the King's Bench, had to judge whether Somersett's abduction was lawful or not under English common law. No legislation had ever been passed to establish slavery in England. The case received national attention, and five advocates supported the action on behalf of Somersett.\nIn his judgment of 22 June 1772, Mansfield declared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The state of slavery is of such a nature that it is incapable of being introduced on any reasons, moral or political, but only by positive law, which preserves its force long after the reasons, occasions, and time itself from whence it was created, is erased from memory. It is so odious, that nothing can be suffered to support it, but positive law. Whatever inconveniences, therefore, may follow from a decision, I cannot say this case is allowed or approved by the law of England; and therefore the black must be discharged.\nAlthough the exact legal implications of the judgement are unclear when analysed by lawyers, the judgement was generally taken at the time to have determined that slavery did not exist under English common law and was thus prohibited in England. The decision did not apply to the British overseas territories; by then, for example, the American colonies had established slavery by positive laws. Somersett's case became a significant part of the common law of slavery in the English-speaking world and it helped launch the movement to abolish slavery.\nAfter reading about Somersett's Case, Joseph Knight, an enslaved African who had been purchased by his master John Wedderburn in Jamaica and brought to Scotland, left him. Married and with a child, he filed a freedom suit, on the grounds that he could not be held as a slave in Great Britain. In the case of \"Knight v. Wedderburn\" (1778), Wedderburn said that Knight owed him \"perpetual servitude\". The Court of Session of Scotland ruled against him, saying that chattel slavery was not recognized under the law of Scotland, and slaves could seek court protection to leave a master or avoid being forcibly removed from Scotland to be returned to slavery in the colonies.\nBut at the same time, legally mandated, hereditary slavery of Scots persons in Scotland had existed from 1606 and continued until 1799, when colliers and salters were emancipated by an act of the Parliament of Great Britain (39 Geo. 3 c. 56). Skilled workers, they were restricted to a place and could be sold with the works. A prior law enacted in 1775 (15 Geo. 3 c. 28) was intended to end what the act referred to as \"a state of slavery and bondage\", but that was ineffective, necessitating the 1799 act.\nIn the 1776 book \"The Wealth of Nations\", Adam Smith argued for the abolition of slavery on economic grounds. Smith pointed out that slavery incurred security, housing, and food costs that the use of free labour would not, and opined that free workers would be more productive because they would have personal economic incentives to work harder. The death rate (and thus repurchase cost) of slaves was also high, and people are less productive when not allowed to choose the type of work they prefer, are illiterate, and are forced to live and work in miserable and unhealthy conditions. The free labour markets and international free trade that Smith preferred would also result in different prices and allocations that Smith believed would be more efficient and productive for consumers.\nBritish Empire.\nPrior to the American Revolution, there were few significant initiatives in the American colonies that led to the abolitionist movement. Some Quakers were active. Benjamin Kent was the lawyer who took on most of the cases of slaves suing their masters for personal illegal enslavement. He was the first lawyer to successfully establish a slave's freedom. In addition, Brigadier General Samuel Birch created the \"Book of Negroes\", to establish which slaves were free after the war.\nIn 1783, an anti-slavery movement began among the British public to end slavery throughout the British Empire.\nAfter the formation of the Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade in 1787, William Wilberforce led the cause of abolition through the parliamentary campaign. Thomas Clarkson became the group's most prominent researcher, gathering vast amounts of data on the trade. One aspect of abolitionism during this period was the effective use of images such as the famous Josiah Wedgwood \"Am I Not A Man and a Brother?\" anti-slavery medallion of 1787. Clarkson described the medallion as \"promoting the cause of justice, humanity and freedom\". The 1792 Slave Trade Bill passed the House of Commons mangled and mutilated by the modifications and amendments of Pitt, it lay for years, in the House of Lords. Biographer William Hague considers the unfinished abolition of the slave trade to be Pitt's greatest failure. The Slave Trade Act 1807 was passed by the British Parliament on 25 March 1807, making the slave trade illegal throughout the British Empire. Britain used its influence to coerce other countries to agree to treaties to end their slave trade and allow the Royal Navy to seize their slave ships. Britain enforced the abolition of the trade because the act made trading slaves within British territories illegal. However, the act repealed the Amelioration Act 1798 which attempted to improve conditions for slaves. The end of the slave trade did not end slavery as a whole. Slavery was still a common practice.\nIn the 1820s, the abolitionist movement revived to campaign against the institution of slavery itself. In 1823 the first Anti-Slavery Society, the Society for the Mitigation and Gradual Abolition of Slavery Throughout the British Dominions, was founded. Many of its members had previously campaigned against the slave trade. On 28 August 1833, the Slavery Abolition Act 1833 was passed. It purchased the slaves from their masters and paved the way for the abolition of slavery throughout the British Empire by 1838, after which the first Anti-Slavery Society was wound up.\nIn 1839, the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society was formed by Joseph Sturge, which attempted to outlaw slavery worldwide and also to pressure the government to help enforce the suppression of the slave trade by declaring slave traders to be pirates. The world's oldest international human rights organization, it continues today as Anti-Slavery International. Thomas Clarkson was the key speaker at the World Anti-Slavery Convention it held in London in 1840.\nThe trade of slaves was made illegal throughout the British Empire by 1937, with Nigeria and Bahrain being the last British territories to abolish slavery.\nMoldavia and Wallachia.\nIn the principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia, the government held slavery of the Roma (often referred to as Gypsies) as legal at the beginning of the 19th century. The progressive pro-European and anti-Ottoman movement, which gradually gained power in the two principalities, also worked to abolish that slavery. Between 1843 and 1855, the principalities emancipated all of the 250,000 enslaved Roma people.\nIn the Americas.\nBartolom\u00e9 de las Casas was a 16th-century Spanish Dominican priest, the first resident Bishop of Chiapas (Central America, today Mexico). As a settler in the New World he witnessed and opposed the poor treatment and virtual slavery of the Native Americans by the Spanish colonists, under the encomienda system. He advocated before King Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor on behalf of rights for the natives.\nLas Casas for 20 years worked to get African slaves imported to replace natives; African slavery was everywhere and no one talked of ridding the New World of it, though France had abolished slavery in France itself and there was talk in other countries about doing the same. However, Las Casas had a late change of heart, and became an advocate for the Africans in the colonies.\nHis book, \"A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies\", contributed to Spanish passage of colonial legislation known as the New Laws of 1542, which abolished native slavery for the first time in European colonial history. It ultimately led to the Valladolid debate, the first European debate about the rights of colonized people.\nThe Hispanic model of identity and representation has been historically characterized by its multi-faceted nature, which transcends strict racial categorizations. Numerous figures exemplify this complexity, including Mart\u00edn de Porres, Beatriz de Palacios, Spanish conquistador Juan Garrido that established the first commercial wheat farm in the Americas, Estevanico, Francisco Menendez, Juan de Villanueva, Juan Valiente, Juan Beltr\u00e1n de Maga\u00f1a, Pedro Fulupo, Juan Bardales, Antonio P\u00e9rez, G\u00f3mez de Le\u00f3n, Leonor Galiano, Teresa Juliana de Santo Domingo and Juan Garc\u00eda. Additionally, Juan Latino stands out as a significant figure in this discourse; he is recognized as the first black African to attend a European university, ultimately achieving the status of professor.\nAbolitionism in the Spanish empire is directly related to the difference in the treatment given to the citizens compared to the racial categories applied in the British or French Empire. While the Spanish empire considered all the individuals as citizens and applied a social stratification based mainly in several categories as fortune, origin and prestige, the British and French Empire were more based on the pigment of the skin and the origin of their citizens placing the lightest pigmented individuals with European origin in the top of the social stratification giving them the category of citizens while the darker pigmented individuals were not considered as citizens. The fact that the Spanish Empire gave their black populations the citizen consideration and offering them the possibility to grow socially and economically inside the empire as it is the case of Francisco Menendez in Spanish Florida where the British slaves escaped to, created a different context to abolitionism.\nThis highlights the notion that the Hispanic identity is not monolithic and is instead enriched by diverse contributions across racial and ethnic lines. Such examples serve to challenge simplistic perceptions of race within the historical narrative of Hispanic culture.\nLatin America.\nDuring the early 19th century, slavery expanded rapidly in Brazil, Cuba, and the United States, while at the same time the new republics of mainland Spanish America became committed to the gradual abolition of slavery. During the Spanish American wars for independence (1810\u20131826), slavery was abolished in most of Latin America, though it continued until 1873 in Puerto Rico, 1886 in Cuba, and 1888 in Brazil (where it was abolished by the \"Lei \u00c1urea\", the \"Golden Law\"). Chile declared freedom of wombs in 1811, followed by the United Provinces of the River Plate in 1813, Colombia and Venezuela in 1821, but without abolishing slavery completely. While Chile abolished slavery in 1823, Argentina did so with the signing of the Argentine Constitution of 1853. Peru abolished slavery in 1854. Colombia abolished slavery in 1851. Slavery was abolished in Uruguay during the \"Guerra Grande\", by both the government of Fructuoso Rivera and the government in exile of Manuel Oribe.\nCanada.\nThroughout the growth of slavery in the American South, Nova Scotia became a destination for black refugees leaving Southern Colonies and United States. While many blacks who arrived in Nova Scotia during the American Revolution were free, others were not. Black slaves also arrived in Nova Scotia as the property of White American Loyalists. In 1772, prior to the American Revolution, Britain determined that slavery could not exist in the British Isles followed by the \"Knight v. Wedderburn\" decision in Scotland in 1778. This decision, in turn, influenced the colony of Nova Scotia. In 1788, abolitionist James Drummond MacGregor from Pictou published the first anti-slavery literature in Canada and began purchasing slaves' freedom and chastising his colleagues in the Presbyterian church who owned slaves. In 1790 John Burbidge freed his slaves. Led by Richard John Uniacke, in 1787, 1789 and again on 11 January 1808, the Nova Scotian legislature refused to legalize slavery. Two chief justices, Thomas Andrew Lumisden Strange (1790\u20131796) and Sampson Salter Blowers (1797\u20131832) were instrumental in freeing slaves from their owners in Nova Scotia. They were held in high regard in the colony. By the end of the War of 1812 and the arrival of the Black Refugees, there were few slaves left in Nova Scotia. The Slave Trade Act 1807 outlawed the slave trade in the British Empire and the Slavery Abolition Act 1833 outlawed slavery altogether.\nWith slaves escaping to New York and New England, legislation for gradual emancipation was passed in Upper Canada (1793) and Lower Canada (1803). In Upper Canada, the Act Against Slavery of 1793 was passed by the Assembly under the auspices of John Graves Simcoe. It was the first legislation against slavery in the British Empire. Under its provisions no new slaves could be imported, slaves already in the province would remain enslaved until death, and children born to female slaves would be slaves but must be freed at the age of 25. The last slaves in Canada gained their freedom when slavery was abolished in the entire British Empire by the Slavery Abolition Act 1833.\nUnited States.\nIn his book \"The Struggle For Equality\", historian James M. McPherson defines an abolitionist \"as one who before the Civil War had agitated for the immediate, unconditional, and total abolition of slavery in the United States\". He does not include antislavery activists such as Abraham Lincoln or the Republican Party, which called for the gradual ending of slavery.\nBenjamin Franklin, a slaveholder for much of his life, became a leading member of the Pennsylvania Society for the Abolition of Slavery, the first recognized organization for abolitionists in the United States. Following the American Revolutionary War, Northern states abolished slavery, beginning with the 1777 Constitution of Vermont, followed by Pennsylvania's gradual emancipation act in 1780. Other states with more of an economic interest in slaves, such as New York and New Jersey, also passed gradual emancipation laws, and by 1804, all the Northern states had abolished it, although this did not mean that already enslaved people were freed. Some had to work without wages as \"indentured servants\" for two more decades, although they could no longer be sold.\nThe 1836\u20131837 campaign to end free speech in Alton, Illinois, culminated in the 7 November 1837 mob murder of abolitionist newspaper editor Elijah Parish Lovejoy, which was covered in newspapers nationwide, causing a rise in membership in abolitionist societies. By 1840 more than 15,000 people were members of abolitionist societies in the United States. The formation of Christian denominations that heralded abolitionism as a moral issue occurred, such as the organization of Wesleyan Methodist Connection by Orange Scott in 1843, and the formation of the Free Methodist Church by Benjamin Titus Roberts in 1860 (which is reflected in the name of Church).\nIn the 1850s in the fifteen states constituting the American South, slavery was legally established. While it was fading away in the cities as well as in the border states, it remained strong in plantation areas that grew cotton for export, or sugar, tobacco, or hemp. According to the 1860 United States census, the slave population in the United States had grown to four million. American abolitionism was based in the North, although there were anti-abolitionist riots in several cities. In the South abolitionism was illegal, and abolitionist publications, like The Liberator, could not be sent to Southern post offices. Amos Dresser, a white alumnus of Lane Theological Seminary, was publicly whipped in Nashville, Tennessee, for possessing abolitionist publications. In addition, laws were passed to further repress slaves. These laws included anti-literacy laws and anti-gathering laws. The anti-gathering laws were applied to religious gatherings of free blacks and slaves. These laws, passed around the 1820\u20131850 period, were blamed in the South on Northern abolitionists. As one slaveowner wrote, \"I can tell you. It was the abolition agitation. If the slave is not allowed to read his bible, the sin rests upon the abolitionists; for they stand prepared to furnish him with a key to it, which would make it, not a book of hope, and love, and peace, but of despair, hatred and blood; which would convert the reader, not into a Christian, but a demon. [...] Allow our slaves to read your writings, stimulating them to cut our throats! Can you believe us to be such unspeakable fools?\"\nAbolitionism in the United States became a popular expression of moralism, operating in tandem with other social reform efforts, such as the temperance movement, and much more problematically, the women's suffrage movement.\nThe white abolitionist movement in the North was led by social reformers, especially William Lloyd Garrison (founder of the American Anti-Slavery Society) and writers Wendell Phillips, John Greenleaf Whittier, and Harriet Beecher Stowe. Black activists included former slaves such as Frederick Douglass and free blacks such as the brothers Charles Henry Langston and John Mercer Langston, who helped found the Ohio Anti-Slavery Society. Some abolitionists said that slavery was criminal and a sin; they also criticized slave owners of using black women as concubines and taking sexual advantage of them.\nThe Republican Party wanted to achieve the gradual extinction of slavery by market forces, because its members believed that free labour was superior to slave labour. White southern leaders said that the Republican policy of blocking the expansion of slavery into the West made them second-class citizens, and they also said it challenged their autonomy. With the 1860 presidential victory of Abraham Lincoln, seven Deep South states whose economy was based on cotton and the labour of enslaved people decided to secede and form a new nation. The American Civil War broke out in April 1861 with the firing on Fort Sumter in South Carolina. When Lincoln called for troops to suppress the rebellion, four more slave states seceded. Meanwhile, four slave states, known as the border states (Maryland, Missouri, Delaware, and Kentucky), chose to remain in the Union.\nCivil War and final emancipation.\nOn 16 April 1862, Abraham Lincoln signed the District of Columbia Compensated Emancipation Act, abolishing slavery in Washington D. C. Meanwhile, the Union suddenly found itself dealing with a steady stream of escaped slaves from the South rushing to Union lines. In response, Congress passed the Confiscation Acts, which essentially declared escaped slaves from the South to be confiscated war property, called contrabands, so that they would not be returned to their masters in the Confederacy. Although the initial act did not mention emancipation, the second Confiscation Act, passed on 17 July 1862, stated that escaped or liberated slaves belonging to anyone who participated in or supported the rebellion \"shall be deemed captives of war, and shall be forever free of their servitude, and not again held as slaves\". On 1 January 1863, Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which was an executive order of the U.S. government that changed the legal status of 3\u00a0million slaves in the Confederacy from \"slave\" to \"henceforward ... free\". Though slaves were legally freed by the Proclamation, they became actually free by escaping to federal lines, or by advances of federal troops. Even before the Emancipation Proclamation, many former slaves served the federal army as teamsters, cooks, laundresses, and laborers, as well as scouts, spies, and guides. Confederate General Robert Lee once said, \"The chief source of information to the enemy is through our negroes.\" The Emancipation Proclamation, however, provided that people it declared to be free who were \"of suitable condition, will be received into the armed service of the United States\", and the United States Colored Troops were formed.\nPlantation owners sometimes moved the Black people they claimed to own as far as possible out of reach of the Union army. By \"Juneteenth\" (19 June 1865, in Texas), the Union Army controlled all of the Confederacy and liberated all its slaves. The owners were never compensated; nor were freed slaves compensated by former owners.\nThe border states were exempt from the Emancipation Proclamation, but they too (except Delaware) began their own emancipation programs. As the war dragged on, both the federal government and Union states continued to take measures against slavery. In June 1864, the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, which required free states to aid in returning escaped slaves to slave states, was repealed. The state of Maryland abolished slavery on 13 October 1864. Missouri abolished slavery on 11 January 1865. West Virginia, which had been admitted to the Union in 1863 as a slave state, but on the condition of gradual emancipation, fully abolished slavery on 3 February 1865. The 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution took effect in December 1865, seven months after the end of the war, and finally ended slavery for non-criminals throughout the United States. It also abolished slavery among the Indian tribes, including the Alaska tribes that became part of the U.S. in 1867.\nCuba and Brazil.\nBrazil and Cuba abolished slavery in the 1880s, with Cuba ending it in 1886 and Brazil in 1888. While actors like Gertrudis G\u00f3mez de Avellaneda in Brazil and Adelina Charuteira in Cuba worked to end slavery, it was enslaved people themselves who worked daily to chip away at enslavers' local authority. These actions have at times been dismissed because they were small actions, but historian Adriana Chira argues that while \"These freedoms were patchwork, often incomplete when measured against liberal \u2013 abolitionist yardsticks, precarious and even reversible\" the action \" ... were very concrete, and in the long term, they served to corrode the legal structures of plantation slavery locally.\" These actions included marronage and maroon societies that undermined the authority of enslavers in Brazil and legal challenges relying on the legal history of Spain in Cuba. These practices are regionally specific based on the legal customs of the region that enslaved people knew well from centuries of interactions with Iberian slave laws. A key avenue for these legal arguments was the prominence of \"lo extrajudicial\", a field of legal interactions adjacent to a lawsuit explained by historian Bianca Premo as consisting of out-of-court settlements, public revelations, and face-to-face encounters.\nWomen and abolitionism.\nThe suffering of women in slavery was a common trope consistently used in abolitionists' rhetoric on both sides of the Atlantic. This was especially true as it relates to the image of suffering mothers and their children. Towards the end of the nineteenth century as slavery was coming to an end throughout the Atlantic world, images appearing in abolitionist publications routinely included images of families being torn apart and pregnant women being forced to do hard labor. As countries imposed \"free womb laws\" to soften the image of slavery and bring about gradual emancipation, for many it raised the question of the justice of women being used to carry out emancipation without benefiting from it themselves. Speeches given on the topic at the time focused on mothers and compared them to \"all other mothers\", using motherhood to level the subjects and objects of their speech.\nWomen were also often on the forefront of the abolition movement. Authors such as Harriet Beecher Stowe (United States) and Gertrudis G\u00f3mez de Avellaneda (Brazil) used their novels to call into question the humanity of slavery. Women such as the Grimk\u00e9 Sisters, Abigail Adams, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and others used their connections to political movements to advocate for the abolition of slavery. Enslaved women such as Phillis Wheatley and Harriet Tubman took matters into their own hands by challenging the institution of slavery through their writing and their actions. In countries like Cuba and Brazil, where many enslaved women in urban areas were close to the governmental apparatuses needed to challenge slavery, they often used this proximity to pay for their and their families freedom and argued before colonial courts for their freedom with increasing success as the nineteenth century progressed. Enslaved women like Adelina Charuteira used their mobility as street vendors and as much access as they had to literacy to spread information about abolition between freedom-seeking people and local abolitionist networks.\nNotable abolitionists.\nWhite and black opponents of slavery, who played a considerable role in the movement. This list includes some escaped slaves, who were traditionally called abolitionists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational abolitionism.\nThe first international attempt to address the abolition of slavery was the World Anti-Slavery Convention, organised by the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society at Exeter Hall in London, on 12\u201323 June 1840. This was however an attempt made by NGOs, not by state and governments. In the late 19th century, the issue was addressed on an international level by states and governments. The Brussels Anti-Slavery Conference 1889\u201390 addressed slavery on a semi-global level via the representatives of the colonial powers. It had concluded with the Brussels Conference Act of 1890. The 1890 Act was revised by the Convention of Saint-Germain-en-Laye 1919.\nDuring the 20th century the issue of slavery was addressed by the League of Nations, which founded commissions to investigate and eradicate the institution of slavery and slave trade worldwide. The Temporary Slavery Commission (TSC), which was founded in 1924, conducted a global investigation and filed a report, and a convention was drawn up to hasten the total abolition of slavery and the slave trade.\nThe 1926 Slavery Convention, which was founded upon the investigation of the TSC of the League of Nations, was a turning point in banning global slavery.\nIn 1932, the League formed the Committee of Experts on Slavery (CES) to review the result and enforcement of the 1926 Slavery Convention, which resulted in a new international investigation under the first permanent slavery committee, the Advisory Committee of Experts on Slavery (ACE).\nThe ACE conducted a major international investigation on slavery and slave trade, inspecting all the colonial empires and the territories under their control between 1934 and 1939.\nArticle 4 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted in 1948 by the UN General Assembly, explicitly banned slavery.\nAfter World War II, chattel slavery was formally abolished by law in almost the entire world, with the exception of the Arabian Peninsula and some parts of Africa. Chattel slavery was still legal in Saudi Arabia, in Yemen, in the Trucial States and in Oman, and slaves were supplied to the Arabian Peninsula via the Red Sea slave trade.\nWhen the League of Nations was succeeded by the United Nations (UN) after World War II, Charles Wilton Wood Greenidge of the Anti-Slavery International worked for the UN to continue the investigation of global slavery conducted by the ACE of the League, and in February 1950 the Ad Hoc Committee on Slavery of the United Nations was inaugurated, which ultimately resulted in the introduction of the Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery.\nThe United Nations 1956 Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery was convened to outlaw and ban slavery worldwide, including child slavery.\nIn November 1962, Faisal of Saudi Arabia finally prohibited the owning of slaves in Saudi Arabia, followed by the abolition of slavery in Yemen in 1962, slavery in Dubai 1963 and slavery in Oman in 1970.\nIn December 1966, the UN General Assembly adopted the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which was developed from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Article 4 of this international treaty bans slavery. The treaty came into force in March 1976 after it had been ratified by 35 nations.\nAs of November 2003, 104 nations had ratified the treaty. However, illegal forced labour involves millions of people in the 21st century, 43% for sexual exploitation and 32% for economic exploitation.\nIn May 2004, the 22 members of the Arab League adopted the Arab Charter on Human Rights, which incorporated the 1990 Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam, which states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Human beings are born free, and no one has the right to enslave, humiliate, oppress or exploit them, and there can be no subjugation but to God the Most-High.\u2014\u200a\nCurrently, the Anti-trafficking Coordination Team Initiative (ACT Team Initiative), a coordinated effort between the U.S. Departments of Justice, Homeland Security, and Labor, addresses human trafficking. The International Labour Organization estimates that there are 20.9 million victims of human trafficking globally, including 5.5 million children, of which 55% are women and girls.\nAfter abolition.\nIn societies with large proportions of the population working in conditions of slavery or serfdom, stroke-of-the-pen laws declaring abolition can have thorough-going social, economic and political consequences. Issues of compensation/redemption, land-redistribution and citizenship can prove intractable. For example:\nCommemoration.\nPeople in modern times have commemorated abolitionist movements and the abolition of slavery in different ways around the world. The United Nations General Assembly declared 2004 the International Year to Commemorate the Struggle against Slavery and its Abolition. This proclamation marked the bicentenary of the proclamation of the first modern slavery-free state, Haiti. Numerous exhibitions, events and research programmes became associated with the initiative.\n2007 witnessed major exhibitions in British museums and galleries to mark the anniversary of the 1807 abolition act \u2013 1807 Commemorated 2008 marked the 201st anniversary of the Abolition of the Slave Trade in the British Empire. It also marked the 175th anniversary of the abolition of slavery in the British Empire.\nThe Faculty of Law at the University of Ottawa held a major international conference entitled, \"Routes to Freedom: Reflections on the Bicentenary of the Abolition of the Slave Trade\", from 14 to 16 March 2008.\nAmerican abolitionist constitutionalism.\nAbolitionist constitutionalism is a line of thinking which invokes the historical view of the Constitution of the United States as an abolitionist document. It calls for an appeal to constitutionalism and progressive constitutionalism. This vision is interdisciplinary and finds its roots in the anti-slavery movement in the United States of America and is largely based on the tenet that current state institutions, particularly the carceral system, is rooted in the transatlantic slave trade. Some constitutional abolitionists critique the claim that the Constitution was pro-slavery.\nRadical abolitionist constitutionalism calls for the idea of dignity and the use of jurisprudence to address social inequalities.\nWhereas the original U.S. Constitution was pro-slavery, the Reconstruction Amendments can be seen as a compromise for freedom, without allowing for the full abolition. Criminal punishment was a major way that Southern states maintained the exploitation of black labour and effectively nullified the Reconstruction Amendments. This was done namely through Black Codes, harsh vagrancy laws, apprenticeship laws and extreme punishment for black people. The Reconstruction Amendments in their aim to promote citizenship and emancipation are believed by these thinkers to still be guiding principles in the fight for freedom and abolition.\nThere are suggestions that a broad reading of the Thirteenth Amendment can convey an abolitionist vision of the freedom advocated for by black people in the public sphere beyond emancipation.\nSection one of the Fourteenth Amendment was used by many abolitionist lawyers and activists throughout the North to advance the case against slavery.\nProponents of abolitionist constitutionalism believe the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments can be used today to extend the abolitionist logics to the various current barriers to injustices that are faced by marginalized peoples.\nJust like abolitionism more generally, abolitionist constitutionalism seeks to provide a vision which will lead to the abolition of many different neoliberal state institutions, such as the prison industrial complex, the wage system, and policing. This is tied to a belief that white supremacy is woven into the fabric of legal state institutions.\nRadical abolitionists are often marginalized. There is a belief that constitutionalism as a main tenet of radical abolitionism can change and appeal to the popular opinion more. Historically, slavery abolitionists have had to use the public meaning of Constitutional terms in order in their fight against slavery. Constitutional abolitionists are generally in favour of incremental changes that follow the principles of the Reconstructive Amendments.\nThere are debates among abolitionists, where some claim that the Constitution ought not to be treated as an abolitionist text, as it is rather used as a legal tool by the state to deny freedoms to marginalized communities; and that contemporary abolitionist work cannot be done by relying on the constitutional texts. Some argue that the narrative and scholarly literature around Reconstruction Amendments is not coherent regarding their original aims.\nContemporary abolitionism.\nOn 10 December 1948, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Article 4 states:\nNo one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.\nAlthough outlawed in most countries, slavery is nonetheless practised secretly in many parts of the world. Enslavement still takes place in the United States, Europe, and Latin America, as well as parts of Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia. Modern slavery keeps around 50 million people from exercising their freedom. In Mauritania alone, estimates are that up to 600,000 men, women and children, or 20% of the population, are enslaved. Many of them are used as bonded labour.\nModern-day abolitionists have emerged over the last several years, as awareness of slavery around the world has grown, with groups such as Anti-Slavery International, the American Anti-Slavery Group, International Justice Mission, and Free the Slaves working to rid the world of slavery.\nIn the United States, The Action Group to End Human Trafficking and Modern-Day Slavery is a coalition of NGOs, foundations and corporations working to develop a policy agenda for abolishing slavery and human trafficking. Since 1997, the United States Department of Justice has, through work with the Coalition of Immokalee Workers, prosecuted six individuals in Florida on charges of slavery in the agricultural industry. These prosecutions have led to freedom for over 1000 enslaved workers in the tomato and orange fields of South Florida. This is only one example of the contemporary fight against slavery worldwide. Slavery exists most widely in agricultural labour, apparel and sex industries, and service jobs in some regions.\nIn 2000, the United States passed the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act (TVPA) \"to combat trafficking in persons, especially into the sex trade, slavery, and involuntary servitude\". The TVPA also \"created new law enforcement tools to strengthen the prosecution and punishment of traffickers, making human trafficking a Federal crime with severe penalties.\"\nIn 2014, for the first time in history major Anglican, Catholic, and Orthodox Christian leaders, as well as Jewish, Muslim, Hindu, and Buddhist leaders, met to sign a shared commitment against modern-day slavery; the declaration they signed calls for the elimination of slavery and human trafficking by 2020.\nThe United States Department of State publishes the annual Trafficking in Persons Report, identifying countries as either Tier 1, Tier 2, Tier 2 Watch List or Tier 3, depending upon three factors: \"(1) The extent to which the country is a country of origin, transit, or destination for severe forms of trafficking; (2) The extent to which the government of the country does not comply with the TVPA's minimum standards including, in particular, the extent of the government's trafficking-related corruption; and (3) The resources and capabilities of the government to address and eliminate severe forms of trafficking in persons.\"\nThe 13th amendment abolished slavery in the United States \"except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted\". In 2018, Colorado became the first state to remove similar language in its state constitution by a legislatively referred ballot referendum. Other states have followed suit, but implementation has relied on court rulings.\nReferences and notes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38895", "revid": "47120006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38895", "title": "Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 1355 to 1378\nCharles IV (; ; ; 14 May 1316 \u2013 29 November 1378), also known as Charles of Luxembourg (; ; ; ), born Wenceslaus (, ), was Holy Roman Emperor from 1355 until his death in 1378. He was elected King of Germany (King of the Romans) in 1346 and became King of Bohemia (as Charles I) that same year. He was a member of the House of Luxembourg from his father's side and the Bohemian House of P\u0159emyslid from his mother's side; he emphasized the latter due to his lifelong affinity for the Bohemian side of his inheritance, and also because his direct ancestors in the P\u0159emyslid line included two saints.\nHe was the eldest son and heir of John of Bohemia, King of Bohemia and Count of Luxembourg, who died at the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy on 26\u00a0August 1346. His mother, Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia, was the sister of Wenceslaus III, King of Bohemia and Poland, the last of the male P\u0159emyslid rulers of Bohemia. Charles inherited the County of Luxembourg from his father and was elected king of the Kingdom of Bohemia. On 2\u00a0September 1347, Charles was crowned King of Bohemia.\nOn 11 July 1346, the prince-electors chose him as King of the Romans (\"rex Romanorum\") in opposition to Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor. Charles was crowned on 26\u00a0November 1346 in Bonn. After his opponent died, he was re-elected in 1349 and crowned King of the Romans. In 1355, he was crowned King of Italy and Holy Roman Emperor. With his coronation as King of Burgundy at Arles in 1365, he became the crowned ruler of all the kingdoms of the Holy Roman Empire. Having played a key part in the political and cultural history of the Kingdom of Bohemia, he remains a popular historical figure in the Czech Republic.\nThe Golden Bull of 1356 marked a structural change in the politics of the Holy Roman Empire. Several aspects of his legacy remain contentious, however. The image of Charles as a wise, pious, peace-loving king (partly constructed by Charles himself) has proved influential until this day, supported by several artistic or scholarly projects produced during Charles's reign or afterwards.\nLife.\nBirth and childhood.\nCharles was born to John of Bohemia of the Luxembourg dynasty and Queen Elizabeth of Bohemia of the Bohemian P\u0159emyslid dynasty in Prague. His maternal grandfather was the Bohemian King Wenceslaus II. He chose the name Charles at his confirmation in honor of his uncle, King Charles IV of France, at whose court he resided for seven years.\nCharles received French education and was literate and fluent in five languages: Latin, Czech, German, French, and Italian.\nItaly and Moravia.\nIn 1331, Charles gained some experience of warfare with his father in Italy. At the beginning of 1333, he went to Lucca, Tuscany, to consolidate his rule there. To strengthen the city's defences, Charles founded the nearby fortress and the town of Montecarlo (\"Mount Charles\").\nFrom 1333, he administered the lands of the Bohemian Crown due to his father's frequent absence and deteriorating eyesight. In 1334, Charles was named Margrave of Moravia, the traditional title of heirs to the throne. Two years later, he assumed the government of Tyrol on behalf of his brother, John Henry, and was soon actively involved in a struggle for the possession of that county.\nKing of the Romans.\nOn 11 July 1346, in consequence of an alliance between his father and Pope Clement VI, a relentless enemy of the emperor Louis IV, Charles was elected Roman king in opposition to Louis by some of the prince-electors at Rhens. Having previously promised to be subservient to Clement, he made extensive concessions to the pope in 1347. Confirming the papacy in the possession of vast territories, he promised to annul the acts of Louis against Clement, to take no part in Italian affairs, and to defend and protect the church.\nCharles IV was in a very weak position in Germany. Because of the terms of his election, he was derisively referred to as a \"Priests' King\" (\"Pfaffenk\u00f6nig\"). Many bishops and nearly all of the Imperial cities remained loyal to Louis the Bavarian. Worse still, Charles backed the wrong side in the Hundred Years' War and lost his father and many of his best knights at the Battle of Cr\u00e9cy in August 1346, where he escaped from the field wounded.\nCivil war in Germany was prevented, however, when Louis IV died on 11 October 1347, after suffering a stroke during a bear hunt. In January 1349, partisans from the House of Wittelsbach attempted to have G\u00fcnther von Schwarzburg elected king, but he attracted few supporters and was defeated by Charles at the siege of Eltville in May. After this, Charles's claim to the Imperial throne faced no direct threat.\nCharles initially worked to secure his power base. Bohemia had remained untouched by the plague. Prague became his capital, and he rebuilt the city on the model of Paris, establishing the New Town (\"Nov\u00e9 M\u011bsto\"). In 1348, he founded the university of Prague, which was the first university in Central Europe and later named after him. The university trained administrators and lawyers, and Prague soon emerged as the intellectual and cultural center of Central Europe.\nHaving exploited the difficulties of his opponents, Charles was again elected in Frankfurt on 17 June 1349 and re-crowned at Aachen on 25 July 1349. He was soon the undisputed ruler of the Empire. Gifts or promises had won the support of the Rhenish and Swabian towns; a marriage alliance secured the friendship of the Habsburgs; and an alliance with Rudolf II of Bavaria, Count Palatine of the Rhine, was obtained when Charles, who had become a widower in 1348, married Rudolph's daughter Anna.\nIn 1350, the king was visited at Prague by the Roman tribune Cola di Rienzo, who urged him to go to Italy, where the poet Petrarch and the citizens of Florence also implored his presence. Turning a deaf ear to these entreaties, Charles kept Cola in prison for a year, and then handed him as a prisoner to Clement at Avignon.\nOutside Prague, Charles attempted to expand the Bohemian crown lands, using his imperial authority to acquire fiefs in Silesia, the Upper Palatinate, and Franconia. The latter regions comprised \"New Bohemia\", a string of possessions intended to link Bohemia with the Luxemburg territories in the Rhineland. The Bohemian estates, however, were not willing to support Charles in these ventures. When Charles sought to codify Bohemian law in the Maiestas Carolina of 1355, he met with sharp resistance. After that point, Charles found it expedient to scale back his efforts at centralization.\nHoly Roman Emperor.\nIn 1354, Charles crossed the Alps without an army, received the Lombard crown in St. Ambrose Basilica, Milan, on 6\u00a0January\u00a01355, and was crowned emperor at Rome by a cardinal on April 5 of the same year. His sole object appears to have been to obtain the Imperial crown in peace, in accordance with a promise previously made to Pope Clement. He only remained in the city for a few hours, in spite of the expressed wishes of the Roman people. Having virtually abandoned all the Imperial rights in Italy, the emperor re-crossed the Alps, pursued by the scornful words of Petrarch, but laden with considerable wealth. On his return, Charles was occupied with the administration of the Empire, then just recovering from the Black Death, and in 1356, he promulgated the famous Golden Bull to regulate the election of the king.\nHaving given Moravia to one brother, John Henry, and erected the county of Luxembourg into a duchy for another, Wenceslaus, he was unremitting in his efforts to secure other territories as compensation and to strengthen the Bohemian monarchy. To this end he purchased part of the Upper Palatinate in\u00a01353, and in 1367 annexed Lower Lusatia to Bohemia and bought numerous estates in various parts of Germany. On the death of Meinhard, Duke of Upper Bavaria and Count of Tyrol, in 1363, Upper Bavaria was claimed by the sons of the emperor Louis\u00a0IV, and Tyrol by Rudolf\u00a0IV, Duke of Austria. Both claims were admitted by Charles on the understanding that if these families died out both territories should pass to the House of Luxembourg. At about the same time, he was promised the succession to the Margravate of Brandenburg, which he actually obtained for his son Wenceslaus in\u00a01373.\nBesides Germany and Italy, Charles IV also held sovereignty over the old Kingdom of Burgundy (Arles), that was divided in several feudal domains, one of them being the Dauphin\u00e9 of Viennois, that was acquired in 1349 by the French royal House of Valois, as a domain within the Holy Roman Empire. Thus in 1356, the young French prince Charles, who was the ruling Dauphin of Viennois, made an homage to the emperor at Metz, and received imperial confirmation, also being appointed as the imperial vicar in Dauphin\u00e9. \nIn the spring of 1365, the emperor appointed count Amadeus VI of Savoy as imperial vicar over central regions of the Arlesian realm, from Lausanne and Geneva, to Lyon and Grenoble, and on 4 June 1365, Charles IV was solemnly crowned as king at Arles, by cardinal Guillaume de La Garde, the Archbishop of Arles, in the presence of high representatives of various regions, including Provence, Dauphin\u00e9 and Savoy, thus becoming the last emperor who received the royal crown of the old Kingdom of Burgundy (Arles). Already in 1366, Charles IV decided to relieve count Amadeus VI of his duties as imperial vicar in the region, and in 1378, the emperor appointed dauphin Charles of Viennois as the imperial vicar of Burgundy (Arles), but only for his lifetime.\nCasimir III of Poland and Louis I of Hungary entered a conspiracy against Charles and managed to persuade Otto V of Bavaria to join. After the repeal of the estate contract by margrave Otto, in early July 1371, Charles IV declared hostilities and invaded Margraviate of Brandenburg; after two years of conflict, in 1373 Brandenburg became part of the Czech lands. This was when he gave the order to measure his new territory, its villages, people, and income. This was recorded in the , which was finished in 1375. Many villages were mentioned for the first time in this book, so it can provide information on how old they are. He also gained a considerable portion of Silesian territory, partly by inheritance through his third wife, Anna von Schweidnitz, daughter of Henry II, Duke of \u015awidnica and Catherine of Hungary. In 1365, Charles visited Pope Urban\u00a0V at Avignon and undertook to escort him to Rome; on the same occasion he was crowned King of Burgundy at Arles.\nHis second journey to Italy took place in 1368 when he had a meeting with Pope Urban\u00a0V at Viterbo, was besieged in his palace at Siena, and left the country before the end of 1369. During his later years, the emperor took little part in German affairs beyond securing the election of his son Wenceslaus as king of the Romans in\u00a01376, and negotiating a peace between the Swabian League of Cities and some nobles in\u00a01378. After dividing his lands between his three sons and his nephews, he died in November 1378 at Prague, where he was buried, and where a statue was erected to his memory in\u00a01848.\nCharles IV suffered from gout (metabolic arthritis), a painful disease quite common in that time.\nLegacy.\nEvaluation.\nThe reign of Charles IV was characterized by a transformation in the nature of the Empire and is remembered as the Golden Age of Bohemia. He promulgated the Golden Bull of 1356 whereby the succession to the imperial title was laid down, which held for the next four centuries.\nHe also organized the states of the empire into peace-keeping confederations. In these, the Imperial cities figured prominently. The Swabian Landfriede confederation of 1370 was made up almost entirely of Imperial Cities. At the same time, the leagues were organized and led by the crown and its agents. As with the electors, the cities that served in these leagues were given privileges to aid in their efforts to keep the peace.\nHe assured his dominance over the eastern borders of the Empire through succession treaties with the Habsburgs and the purchase of Brandenburg. He also claimed imperial lordship over the crusader states of Prussia and Livonia.\nIn 2005 Charles IV ranked the first in the TV show \"Nejv\u011bt\u0161\u00ed \u010cech\", the Czech spin-off of the BBC \"Greatest Britons\" show.\nPatronage of culture and the arts.\nPrague became the capital of the Holy Roman Empire during the reign of Charles IV. The name of the royal founder and patron remains on many monuments and institutions, for example Charles University, Charles Bridge, Charles Square. High Gothic Prague Castle and part of the cathedral of Saint Vitus by Peter Parler were also built under his patronage. Finally, the first flowering of manuscript painting in Prague dates from Charles's reign. In the present Czech Republic, he is still regarded as \"Pater Patriae\" (father of the country or \"otec vlasti\"), a title first applied to him by Adalbertus Ranconis de Ericinio at his funeral.\nCharles also had strong ties to Nuremberg, staying within its city walls 52 times and thereby strengthening its reputation amongst German cities. Charles was the patron of the Nuremberg Frauenkirche, built between 1352 and 1362 (the architect was likely Peter Parler), where the imperial court worshipped during its stays in Nuremberg.\nCharles's imperial policy was focused on the dynastic sphere and abandoned the lofty ideal of the Empire as a universal monarchy of Christendom. In 1353, he granted the Duchy of Luxembourg to his half-brother, Wenceslaus. He concentrated his energies chiefly on the economic and intellectual development of Bohemia, where he founded the university in 1348 and encouraged the early humanists. He corresponded with Petrarch and invited him to visit the royal residence in Prague, whilst the Italian hoped \u2013 to no avail \u2013 to see Charles move his residence to Rome and reawaken the tradition of the Roman Empire.\nCharles's sister Bona married the eldest son of Philip\u00a0VI of France, the future John\u00a0II of France, in 1335. Thus, Charles was the maternal uncle of Charles\u00a0V of France, who solicited his relative's advice at Metz in 1356 during the Parisian Revolt. This family connection was celebrated publicly when Charles made a solemn visit to his nephew in 1378, just months before his death. A detailed account of the occasion, enriched by many splendid miniatures, can be found in Charles V's copy of the \"Grandes Chroniques de France\".\nCastles.\nCastles built or established by Charles IV:\nFamily.\nGenealogy.\nFictive genealogy.\nImperial genealogists invented early House of Luxembourg forefathers for Charles IV, extending back to Noah via Jupiter and Saturn.\nMarriages and children.\nCharles was married four times. His first wife was Blanche of Valois (1316\u20131348), daughter of Charles, Count of Valois, and a half-sister of King Philip\u00a0VI of France. They had three children:\nHe secondly married Anna of Bavaria, (1329\u20131353), daughter of Rudolf II, Count Palatine of the Rhine; they had one son:\nHis third wife was Anna von Schweidnitz, (1339\u20131362), daughter of Henry\u00a0II, Duke of \u015awidnica and Katharina of Anjou (daughter of Charles\u00a0I Robert, King of Hungary), by whom he had three children:\nHis fourth wife was Elizabeth of Pomerania, (1345 or 1347 \u2013 1393), daughter of Bogislaw\u00a0V, Duke of Pomerania and Elisabeth of Poland who was the daughter of King Casimir\u00a0III of Poland. They had six children:\nCharles had one illegitimate son, William, born in 1362 to an unknown woman. He was raised in Brabant and seems to have joined his father at the time of the latter's trip to France in 1377. He was acknowledged by his father, who sought a papal dispensation for him to marry within the fourth degree. It is unknown if he ever married. He served his Bohemian relatives as a diplomat, but his ultimate fate is unknown.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLiterature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38896", "revid": "43301693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38896", "title": "La Ruffiana", "text": "La Ruffiana is an older female character of the \"Commedia dell'Arte\" with a shady past or who used to be a prostitute. She is used most often in relationship to the vecchi of which group she is a nominal member. Ruffiana is most often romantically involved with Pantalone, though his love may easily be unrequited if it suits the plot. She is generally described as being talkative/gossipy, sneaky, and mischievous, but deep down is actually kind. She has been described as an \"outsider\" that always mixes things up and causes trouble for the rest of the characters. \"Her quips reek of garlic\" (Pierre Louis Duchartre, \"The Italian Comedy\" p.\u00a0285) \nRoles in scenarios.\nTypically la Ruffiana is a former prostitute. While she is long retired, she still knows everything there is to know about the business. Because of this sometimes she is a counsel to some of the younger characters when it comes to romance. As a retired older character, she can fill the role of other shady characters in scenarios, such as a peasant or a woman who pursues younger men. When performed in the northern parts of Italy, specifically around Venice, she is portrayed as the gossipy townsperson. Whereas when we venture down south around Naples, she makes appearances as a midwife, or the older herb woman.\nAnother common role for la Ruffiana is a mysterious magical woman or gypsy. Most of the other characters in Commedia are not trusting or scared of sorceresses and gypsies because they are typically mischievous thieves. La Ruffiana is known to have spells, potions, and a vast amount of knowledge. She is also found to use her powers to see the future and to meddle in the younger characters love lives. While she is good at heart, she is still known to be a thief and should not be messed with.\nEtymology.\nLa Ruffiana gets her name from the earlier Italian word \"ruffiano\", from which, via French, the English word \"ruffian\" also comes. A \"ruffian\" (first recorded in English in 1525) is \"a boisterous, brutal fellow, one ready to commit any crime\". In Italian \"ruffiano\" means \"a pander, pimp\". La Ruffiana is therefore also related to the procurer/old woman/pimp characters of ancient Latin comedy. \nCostume.\nLa Ruffiana has been seen in various clothing options and styles depending on the direction that the character is being taken. Traditionally, she is seen in Neapolitan peasant clothing. She is also often seen in a cloak and a mask, which makes her one of the only woman Commedia dell'Arte characters to be played in a mask. She is also occasionally seen with a staff of some variety.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38897", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38897", "title": "Innamorati", "text": "Stock characters within the theatre style known as Commedia dell'arte\n (; lit.\u2009'lovers') were stock characters within the theatre style known as commedia dell'arte, who appeared in 16th-century Italy. In the plays, everything revolved around the lovers in some regard. These dramatic and posh characters were present within plays for the sole purpose of being in love with one another, and moreover, with themselves. These characters move elegantly and smoothly, and their young faces are unmasked unlike other commedia dell'arte characters. Despite facing many obstacles, the lovers were always united by the end.\nOrigins.\nThe name is the Italian word for 'lovers'. The dramatists of the Italian Renaissance borrowed ideas from early Roman playwrights, such as Plautus and Terence, whom the theater style known as was inspired by. The lovers are the first actor, first actress, second actor, and second actress.\nCharacteristics and dramatic function.\nThe comedy of the lovers is that they are ridiculous and over the top about everything, but they are completely sincere in their emotions. The main function of the lovers within the play is to be in love; and in doing so, they come upon obstacles that keep them from pursuing their relationship. These obstacles stemmed from varied causes. For instance, the financial or personal interests of a lover's parent may have prevented the lovers' relationship from progressing. The pair always involves other characters, such as Zanni characters, to try to figure out how they can be together. This is necessary, because due to their conceited stupidity, and lack of experience with all of the mysteries of love, and the sensations and emotions that come with it, they cannot figure it out on their own.\nThe lovers tend to be overly dramatic in whatever emotion they express. Separation from their lover leads them to strongly lament and moan their state, although, once they finally meet, they are at a loss of words. In order to express what they truly want to say, they always need the help of a servant to act as a go-between. The lovers often act in a childlike and immature way. When not getting their way, they become completely devastated, they pout, and even cry and whine if things do not go according to their wishes. Very selfish and self-centered, the lovers are in their own worlds where they are each the most important subjects. Along with loving themselves, they are in love with the very idea of love and what it pertains to.\nPhysical appearance and attributes.\nThe lovers are always young in age, possessing courteousness and gallantry. They are very educated, but lack life experiences that would have prepared them for the real world. They are very attractive and elegant in their appearance overall.\nThe women's dresses were of the finest silks and they wear showy jewelry characteristic of Renaissance style. The males wear soldier-like attire, while both genders wear extravagant wigs and also change clothes numerous times throughout the length of the production. The costumes of the lovers were the fashion of the day, and the extravagance of the lovers costumes often represented the status of the commedia dell'arte company.\nThe lovers never wear the masks, which is characteristic of most of the other stock characters in the commedia dell'arte. They do, however, wear a large amount of makeup and apply beauty marks to their faces.\nTheir speech is very eloquent Tuscan, as they are of high social status. When commedia dell'arte is played in England, the lovers often speak in Received Pronunciation. They are well-read in poetry and often recite it at length from memory, and even tend to sing quite often. Their language is full of flamboyant and lofty rhetoric so that most of what they say is not taken too seriously, by either the audience or the other characters. Although their dramatics were laughable, their struggle as a romantic couple added a cultural layer to the show, adding tone of seriousness to the show.\nPhysicality.\nThe lovers do everything perfectly and strive for perfection. Their movements are elegant and are not to be aimed towards parody. They occasionally do courtly dances using two dance movements called \"pas\" and \"swivel\".\nThe posture that the lovers take on is that of strong pride. They point their toes while standing and puff up their chests. Overall, they lack contact with the ground and seem to float across the ground rather than take steps. Their hand movements and gestures are also very characteristic of the buoyant movements that their feet take on. The physicality of the lovers should not be done in a way that makes fun of them.\nRelationships.\nFollowing that, they do love each other, but are more consumed with the idea of being in love. They never outwardly communicate with their lover even when they are in close contact, due to nerves, and, therefore, never really outwardly express affection toward their beloved. The lovers commonly fight or bicker. Despite the bitter interactions, the lovers mostly reconcile their differences by the end of the play and end up happily together and/or married. The lovers are usually the children of either il Dottore or Pantalone. The lovers are aware of the audience's presence. They use the audience as a means to show themselves off and also to express their plight at not being able to obtain their love. In other ways, they may also call on an audience member for help or advice, or even flirt with one.\nRhetorical conceits used.\nSource:\nEntering and exiting.\nThe lovers use ('exits') and ('endings') sometimes when entering and exiting. These are rhyming couplets that are said before exiting and entering a scene.\nVariations on names.\nSince the lovers are stock characters, the names of both the male and female lovers are used over and over again:\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38898", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38898", "title": "Slapstick", "text": "Style of comedy\nSlapstick is a style of humor involving exaggerated physical activity that exceeds the boundaries of normal physical comedy. Slapstick may involve both intentional violence and violence by mishap, often resulting from physical abuse and/or inept use of props such as saws and ladders. \nThe term arises from a device developed for use in the broad, physical comedy style known as \"commedia dell'arte\" in 16th-century Italy. The \"slap stick\" consists of two thin slats of wood, which makes a \"slap\" when striking another actor, with little force needed to make a loud\u2014and comical\u2014sound. The physical slap stick remains a key component of the plot in the traditional and popular Punch and Judy puppet show. More contemporary examples of slapstick humor include \"The Three Stooges\", \"The Naked Gun\" and \"Mr. Bean\".\nOrigins.\nThe name \"slapstick\" originates from the Italian \"batacchio\" or \"bataccio\"\u2014called the \"slap stick\" in English\u2014a club-like object composed of two wooden slats used in \"commedia dell'arte\". When struck, the Batacchio produces a loud smacking noise, though it is only a little force that is transferred from the object to the person being struck. Actors may thus hit one another repeatedly with great audible effect while causing no damage and only very minor, if any, pain. Along with the inflatable bladder (of which the whoopee cushion is a modern variant), it was among the earliest special effects.\nEarly uses.\nSlapstick comedy's history is measured in centuries. Shakespeare incorporated many chase scenes and beatings into his comedies, such as in his play \"The Comedy of Errors\". In early 19th-century England, pantomime acquired its present form which includes slapstick comedy: its most famous performer, Joseph Grimaldi\u2014the father of modern clowning\u2014\"was a master of physical comedy\". Comedy routines also featured heavily in British music hall theatre which became popular in the 1850s. \nIn Punch and Judy shows, which first appeared in England on 9 May 1662, a large slapstick is wielded by Punch against the other characters.\nFred Karno and music hall.\nBritish comedians who honed their skills at pantomime and music hall sketches include Charlie Chaplin, Stan Laurel, George Formby and Dan Leno. The English music hall comedian and theatre impresario Fred Karno developed a form of sketch comedy without dialogue in the 1890s, and Chaplin and Laurel were among the young comedians who worked for him as part of \"Fred Karno's London Comedians\". Chaplin's fifteen-year music hall career inspired the comedy in all his later film work, especially as pantomimicry. In 1904, Karno's Komics produced a new sketch for the Hackney Empire in London called \"Mumming Birds\", which included the \"pie in the face\" gag, in which one person hits another with a pie, among other new innovations. Immensely popular, it became the longest-running sketch the music halls produced. Chaplin and Laurel were among the music hall comedians who partook in the sketch, while Charlie's older brother Sydney was the first of the brothers to perform it for Karno.\nIn a biography of Karno, Laurel stated: \"Fred Karno didn't teach Charlie [Chaplin] and me all we know about comedy. He just taught us most of it\". American film producer Hal Roach described Karno as \"not only a genius, he is the man who originated slapstick comedy. We in Hollywood owe much to him.\"\nIn film and television.\nBuilding on its later popularity in the 19th and early 20th-century routines of music hall in Britain and the American vaudeville house, the style was explored extensively during the \"golden era\" of black and white movies directed by Hal Roach and Mack Sennett that featured such notables as Charlie Chaplin, Mabel Normand, Abbott and Costello, Laurel and Hardy, the Three Stooges, and Larry Semon. The pie in the face gag was used extensively in this era. Chaplin's 1915 film \"A Night in the Show\", which includes the pie in the face gag, brings one of the classic music hall comedy sketches, \"Mumming Birds\", known as \"A Night in an English Music Hall\" when Chaplin performed it on tour, into his film work. Silent slapstick comedy was also popular in early French films and included films by Max Linder, Charles Prince, and Sarah Duhamel. \nSlapstick also became a common element in animated cartoons starting in the 1930s and 1940s; examples include Disney's Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck shorts, Walter Lantz's Woody Woodpecker, the Beary Family, MGM's \"Tom and Jerry\", the unrelated Tom and Jerry cartoons of Van Beuren Studios, Warner Bros. \"Looney Tunes/Merrie Melodies\", MGM's \"Barney Bear\", and Tex Avery's \"Screwy Squirrel\". Slapstick was later used in Japanese Tokusatsu TV \"Kamen Rider Den O, Kamen Rider Gaim,\" \"Kamen Rider Drive\", by Benny Hill in \"The Benny Hill Show\" in the UK, and in the US used in the three 1960s TV series, \"Gilligan's Island\", \"Batman\", \"The Flying Nun\" and \"I Love Lucy\". Hill, whose comedy sketches first appeared on British television in the early 1950s, was described by writer Anthony Burgess as \"a comic genius steeped in the British music hall tradition\". In the 1970s, the sitcom \"Three's Company\" featured slapstick infused scenes in most episodes. In 1990, \"Mr. Bean\", starring Rowan Atkinson, debuted on British television, and, like Benny Hill, cartoons and other comedians whose \"visual humour transcended language barriers\" (description of Hill by the BFI), the show would be exported around the world.\n20th century fad.\nExamples of the use of the slapstick in public places as a fad in the early 20th century include:\nDuring the 1911 Veiled Prophet Parade in St. Louis, according to the \"St. Louis Post-Dispatch\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The slapstick, so long indispensable to low comedy, found a new use among the crowds\u00a0... they used the slapstick to the extreme embarrassment of many women. The carnival spirit, for the most part tempered by high good humor, at times verged on rowdyism. Girls used a stick ripped with feathers to tickle the faces of young men, and they retaliated vigorously with the slapstick.\nAn editorial in the \"Asbury Park Press\", New Jersey, said in 1914:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Slapsticks are the latest \"fun-making\" fad for masque fetes\u00a0... Orders to stop the slapstick nuisance should be issued by the police and the Asbury Park carnival commissioners. Any device that cannot be operated or used without inflicting unmerited pain and injury should be excluded\u00a0...\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38899", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38899", "title": "Mattachine Society", "text": "American gay male advocacy group\nThe Mattachine Society (), founded in 1950, was an early national gay rights organization in the United States, preceded by several covert and open organizations, such as Chicago's Society for Human Rights. Communist and labor activist Harry Hay formed the group with a collection of male friends in Los Angeles to protect and improve the rights of gay men. Branches formed in other cities, and by 1961 the Society had splintered into regional groups.\nAt the beginning of gay rights protest, news on Cuban prison work camps for homosexuals inspired Mattachine Society to organize protests at the United Nations and the White House in 1965.\nName.\nThe Mattachine Society was named by Harry Hay at the suggestion of James Gruber, inspired by a French medieval and renaissance masque group he had studied while preparing a course on the history of popular music for a workers' education project. In a 1976 interview with Jonathan Ned Katz, Hay was asked the origin of the name Mattachine. He mentioned the medieval-Renaissance French \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9s Joyeuses\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One masque group was known as the \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Mattachine.\" These societies, lifelong secret fraternities of unmarried townsmen who never performed in public unmasked, were dedicated to going out into the countryside and conducting dances and rituals during the Feast of Fools, at the Vernal Equinox. Sometimes these dance rituals, or masques, were peasant protests against oppression\u2014with the maskers, in the people's name, receiving the brunt of a given lord's vicious retaliation. So we took the name Mattachine because we felt that we 1950s Gays were also a masked people, unknown and anonymous, who might become engaged in morale building and helping ourselves and others, through struggle, to move toward total redress and change.\u2014\u200a\nThis French group was named in turn after Mattaccino (or the Anglicized Mattachino), a character in Italian theater. Mattaccino was a kind of court jester, who would speak the truth to the king when nobody else would. The \"mattachin\" (from Arabic , \"mask-wearers\") were originally Moorish (Hispano-Arab) sword-dancers who wore elaborate, colorful costumes and masks.\nThe Mattachine Society used so-called harlequin diamonds as their emblem. The design consisted of four diamonds arranged in a pattern to form a larger diamond.\nFoundation.\nHarry Hay conceived the idea of a gay activist group in 1948. After signing a petition for Progressive Party presidential candidate Henry A. Wallace, Hay spoke with other gay men at a party about forming a gay support organization for him called \"Bachelors for Wallace\". Encouraged by the response he received, Hay wrote the organizing principles that night, a document he referred to as \"The Call\". However, the men who had been interested at the party were less than enthusiastic the following morning.\nOver the next two years, Hay refined his idea, finally conceiving of an \"international... fraternal order\" to serve as \"a service and welfare organization devoted to the protection and improvement of Society's Androgynous Minority\". He planned to call this organization \"Bachelors Anonymous\" and envisioned it serving a similar function and purpose as Alcoholics Anonymous. Hay met Rudi Gernreich in July 1950. The two became partners, and Hay showed Gernreich The Call. Gernreich, declaring the document \"the most dangerous thing [he had] ever read\", became an enthusiastic financial supporter of the venture, although he did not lend his name to it (going instead by the initial \"R\"). Finally on November 11, 1950, Hay, along with Gernreich and friends Dale Jennings and partners Bob Hull and Chuck Rowland, held the first meeting of the Mattachine Society in Los Angeles, under the name Society of Fools. James Gruber and Konrad Stevens joined the Society in April 1951 and they are generally considered to be original members. Also that month the group changed its name to \"Mattachine Society\", a name suggested by Gruber and chosen by Hay, after Medieval French secret societies of masked men who, through their anonymity, were empowered to criticize ruling monarchs with impunity.\nAs Hay became more involved in his Mattachine work, he correspondingly became more concerned that his orientation would negatively affect the Communist Party USA, of which he was an ardent member. The CPUSA was - like most other organizations in the US at the time - officially anti-homosexual: barring gays and lesbians from membership and declaring that \"homosexuality was a result of the degeneracy of a decadent capitalist system\". Hay himself approached party leaders and recommended his own expulsion. The party decided to expel him as a \"security risk\", but declared him a \"Lifelong Friend of the People\" in recognition of his previous work for the party.\nMattachine was originally organized in similar structure to the Communist Party, with cells, oaths of secrecy and five different levels of membership, each of which required greater levels of involvement and commitment. As the organization grew, the levels were expected to subdivide into new cells, creating both the potential for horizontal and vertical growth. The founding members constituted the so-called \"Fifth Order\" and from the outset remained anonymous. The primary goals of the society were to\nMattachine's membership grew slowly at first but received a major boost in February 1952 when founder Jennings was arrested in a Los Angeles park and charged with lewd behavior. Often, men in Jennings' situation would simply plead guilty to the charge and hope to quietly rebuild their lives. Jennings and the rest of the Fifth Order saw the charges as a means to address the issue of police entrapment of homosexual men. The group began publicizing the case (under the name \"Citizens Committee to Outlaw Entrapment\") and the publicity it generated brought in financial support and volunteers. Jennings admitted during his trial to being a homosexual but insisted he was not guilty of the specific charge. The jury deadlocked and Mattachine declared victory.\nAffiliations.\nMost of the Mattachine founders were communists. As the Red Scare progressed, the association with communism concerned some members as well as supporters and Hay, a dedicated member of the CPUSA for 15 years, stepped down as the Society's leader. Others were similarly ousted, and the leadership structure became influenced less by communism, replaced by a moderate ideology similar to that espoused by the liberal reformist civil rights organizations that existed for African Americans.\nThe Mattachine Society existed as a single national organization headquartered first in Los Angeles and then, beginning around 1956, in San Francisco. Outside of Los Angeles and San Francisco, chapters were established in New York; Washington, D.C.; Chicago; and other locales. Due to internal disagreements, the national organization disbanded in 1961. The San Francisco national chapter retained the name \"Mattachine Society\", while the New York chapter became \"Mattachine Society of New York, Inc\" and was commonly known by its acronym MSNY. Other independent groups using the name Mattachine were formed in Washington, D.C. (Mattachine Society of Washington, 1961), in Chicago (Mattachine Midwest, 1965), and in Buffalo (Mattachine Society of the Niagara Frontier, 1970). In 1963 Congressman John Dowdy introduced a bill which resulted in congressional hearings to revoke the license for solicitation of funds of the Mattachine Society of Washington; the license was not revoked.\nA largely amicable split within the national Society in 1952 resulted in a new organization called ONE, Inc. ONE admitted women and, together with Mattachine, provided help to the Daughters of Bilitis in the launching of that group's magazine, \"The Ladder\", in 1956. The Daughters of Bilitis were an independent lesbian organization who occasionally worked with the predominantly male Mattachine Society.\nThe Janus Society grew out of lesbian and gay activists meeting regularly, beginning in 1961, in hopes of forming a Mattachine Society chapter. The group was not officially recognized as such a chapter, however, and so instead named itself the Janus Society of Delaware Valley. In 1964 they renamed themselves the Janus Society of America due to their increasing national visibility.\nIn January 1962 East Coast Homophile Organizations (ECHO) was established, with its formative membership including the Mattachine Society chapters in New York and Washington D.C., the Janus Society, and the Daughters of Bilitis chapter in New York. ECHO was meant to facilitate cooperation between homophile organizations and outside administrations. In 1964, ECHO secured a $500 settlement from the Manger Hamilton hotel, following the abrupt cancellation of ECHO's conference at the hotel. This out-of-court resolution was presented by Frank Kameny as a clear message to the homophile community \u2013 a demonstration that they would not tolerate interference, and any infringements on their rights would be addressed through legal means.\nOn the eve of January 1, 1965, several homophile organizations in San Francisco, California - including Mattachine, the Daughters of Bilitis, the Council on Religion and the Homosexual, and the Society for Individual Rights - held a fund-raising ball for their mutual benefit at California Hall on Polk Street. San Francisco police had agreed not to interfere; however, on the evening of the ball, the police surrounded the building and focused numerous Klieg lights on its entrance. As each of the 600 plus persons entering the ball approached the entrance, the police took their photographs. Police vans were parked in plain view near the entrance to the ball. Evander Smith, a (gay) lawyer for the groups organizing the ball, and gay lawyer Herb Donaldson tried to stop the police from conducting the fourth \"inspection\" of the evening; both were arrested, along with two heterosexual lawyers - Elliott Leighton and Nancy May - who were supporting the rights of the participants to gather at the ball. But twenty-five of the most prominent lawyers in San Francisco joined the defense team for the four lawyers, and the judge directed the jury to find the four not-guilty before the defense had even had a chance to begin their argumentation when the case came to court. This event has been called \"San Francisco's Stonewall\" by some historians; the participation of such prominent litigators in the defense of Smith, Donaldson and the other two lawyers marked a turning point in gay rights on the West Coast of the United States.\nPolitical shift.\nFollowing the Jennings trial, the group expanded rapidly, with founders estimating membership in California by May 1953 at over 2,000 with as many as 100 people joining a typical discussion group. Membership diversified, with more women and people from a broader political spectrum becoming involved. With that growth came concern about the radical left slant of the organization. In particular, Hal Call and others out of San Francisco along with Ken Burns from Los Angeles wanted Mattachine to amend its constitution to clarify its opposition to so-called \"subversive elements\" and to affirm that members were loyal to the United States and its laws (which declared homosexuality illegal). In an effort to preserve their vision of the organization, the Fifth Order members revealed their identities and resigned their leadership positions at Mattachine's May 1953 convention. With the founders gone, Call, Burns and other like-minded individuals stepped into the leadership void, and Mattachine officially adopted non-confrontation as an organizational policy. Some historians argue that these changes reduced the effectiveness of this newly organized Mattachine and led to a precipitous drop in membership and participation. Other historians contend that the Mattachine Society between 1953 and 1966 was enormously effective as it published a magazine, developed relationships with allies in the fight for homosexual equality, and influenced public opinion on the topic too.\n\"Mattachine Review\".\nThe \"Mattachine Review\" was a magazine published by the Mattachine Society from 1955 to 1966. Hall was the founder and editor of the \"Review\". In contrast to the anonymity of the Fifth Order, Call centered publishing and media outreach when leading the Mattachine Society. Indeed, the \"Mattachine Review\" would achieve a nation-wide base of readers, well in excess of the contemporary membership numbers of the Mattachine Society itself. It reached its historic peak of circulation in 1960, with 3,000 copies sold that year.\nThe various regional branches of the Mattachine Society also published regional newsletters and periodicals, separate from the \"Mattachine Review\".\nDecline.\nDuring the 1960s, the various unaffiliated Mattachine Societies, especially the Mattachine Society in San Francisco and MSNY, were among the foremost gay rights groups in the United States, but beginning in the middle 1960s and, especially, following the Stonewall riots of 1969, they began increasingly to be seen as too traditional, and not willing enough to be confrontational. Like the divide that occurred within the Civil Rights Movement, the late 1960s and the 1970s brought a new generation of activists, many of whom felt that the gay rights movement needed to endorse a larger and more radical agenda to address other forms of oppression, the Vietnam War, and the sexual revolution. Several unaffiliated entities that went under the name Mattachine eventually lost support or fell prey to internal division.\nIn 1967 the Mattachine Society \"functionally ceased to exist\".\nIn 1973 Hal Call opened the Cinemattachine, a venue showing both Mattachine newsreels and pornographic movies. The Cinemattachine was an extension of the Mattachine Society's Sex Education Film Series and branded as being presented by both The Mattachine Society and The Seven Committee. In 1976 a venue with the name \"Cinemattachine Los Angeles at the ONE\" opened. The same screenings as the San Francisco establishment were shown there. Mattachine co-founder Chuck Rowland indicated that he did not feel that Call associating this venue with The Mattachine Society was appropriate.\nLegacy.\nIn the \"Quantum Leap\" comic book titled \"Up Against a Stonewall\" (1992), the Mattachine Society and the Daughters of Bilitis are mentioned as two groups campaigning for LGBT rights prior to the Stonewall riots.\nThe 1995 film \"Stonewall\" included members of the Mattachine Society of New York among its characters. Mattachine members are seen leafleting, attending meetings and participating in the Annual Reminder picket in Philadelphia. However, the film sets the Reminder earlier in the summer than it really was, predating the June 28 Stonewall riots.\nIn 2002 Mattachine Midwest was inducted into the Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame.\nIn 2009 the Mattachine Society and its founders became the subjects of the play \"The Temperamentals\" by Jon Marans. After workshop performances in 2009, the play opened Off-Broadway at New World Stages in early 2010. \"The Temperamentals\" received a Drama Desk Award for Best Ensemble Cast. Michael Urie, who originated the role of Rudi Gernreich, received a Lucille Lortel Award for Outstanding Lead Actor.\nA new Mattachine Society of Washington, D.C. was formed in 2011 and is dedicated to original archival research of LGBT political history.\n\"The Playboy Club\", a 2011 television series on NBC, includes a lesbian Playboy Bunny in a lavender marriage with a gay man. The two are members of the Chicago Mattachine chapter.\nThe Mattachine Steps, also known as the Cove Avenue stairway, is an outdoor staircase in Silver Lake, Los Angeles, dedicated to the Mattachine Society in 2012 in memory of its founder Harry Hay.\nIn 2015, a gay bar called Bar Mattachine opened in downtown Los Angeles. The podcast \"Making Gay History\" (season 1, episode 7) is about Mattachine co-founder Chuck Rowland, and another episode is about Mattachine co-founder Harry Hay (season 4, episode 3).\nJulius\u2019 bar in Manhattan has held a monthly party called \"Mattachine\" honoring the early gay rights pioneers.\nThe 2018 TV series \"\", episodes 4 and 5, mention the Mattachine Society as part of the story about corrupt police, drug dealers, and gay men using secret codes in newspaper advertisements to communicate meeting places and times.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38900", "revid": "40330219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38900", "title": "Scenario", "text": "Synoptical collage of an event or series of actions and events\nIn the performing arts, a scenario (, ; ; from Italian , \"that which is pinned to the scenery\") is a synoptical collage of an event or series of actions and events. In the \"commedia dell'arte\", it was an outline of entrances, exits, and action describing the plot of a play, and was literally pinned to the back of the scenery. It is also known as \"canovaccio\" or \"that which is pinned to the canvas\" of which the scenery was constructed.\nSurviving scenarios from the Renaissance contain little other than character names, brief descriptions of action, and references to specific \"lazzi\" with no further explanation. It is believed that a scenario formed the basis for a fully improvisational performance, though it is also likely that they were simple reminders of the plot for those members of the cast who were literate. Modern commedia troupes most often make use of a script with varying degrees of additional improvisation.\nIn the creation of an opera or ballet, a scenario is often developed initially to indicate how the original source, if any, is to be adapted and to summarize the aspects of character, staging, plot, etc. that can be expanded later in a fully developed libretto, or script. This sketch can be helpful in \"pitching\" the idea to a prospective producer, director or composer.\nIn the filmmaking of the early 20th century, film scenarios (also called \"treatments\" or \"synopses\") were short written scripts to provide narrative coherence that had previously been improvised. They could consist of a simple list of scene headings or scene headings with a detailed explication of the action in each scene. At this time in the silent era, scripts had yet to include individual shots or dialogue. These scenario scripts evolved into lengthier continuity scripts, which listed a number of shots within each scene, thus providing continuity to streamline the filmmaking process.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38901", "revid": "31737083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38901", "title": "Lazzi", "text": "Stock comedic routines\nLazzi (; from the Italian \"lazzo\", a joke or witticism) are stock comedic routines that are associated with \"commedia dell'arte\". Performers, especially those playing the masked Arlecchino, had many examples of this in their repertoire, and would use improvisatory skills to weave them into the plot of dozens of different \"commedia\" scenarios. These largely physical sequences could be improvised or preplanned within the performance and were often used to enliven the audience when a scene was dragging, to cover a dropped line or cue, or to delight an expectant audience with the troupe's specialized \"lazzi\".\n\"Lazzi\" could be completed by a single player (e.g. the \"Lazzo of the School of Humanity\" wherein a Zanni character would announce that his sister was running a \"school of humanity\" from their home because she was a prostitute), a few individuals (e.g. the Lazzo of the Straw wherein a stock character of higher status would pour wine as his servant emptied it through a straw), or the entire troupe (e.g. the Lazzo of Nightfall wherein the entire troupe would stumble onto stage to enact hapless physical sequences as though the room was pitch black). While its placement in the plot was usually fixed during rehearsals, it was acceptable for an actor to unexpectedly utter a predetermined line of dialogue that instructed fellow performers to enact \"lazzi\" at any time during the performance. Sometimes \"lazzi\" could take place in dances or songs accompanied by onstage stringed musical instruments.\nHistory.\n17th and 18th century Italy.\nEvidence of \"lazzi\"'s conventionalization within the Italian \"commedia dell'arte\" includes visual iconography, paintings, fragmented writings, and personal manuscripts from prominent 16th and 17th century dramatists and actors. One of the earliest accounts can be found in the work of Flaminio Scala, who listed 30 instances of \"lazzi\", though the word \"lazzi\" was not yet used. Nearly a century later, Andrea Petrucci described \"lazzi\" as a fixture of \"commedia\" in \"The Art of The Rehearsal Performance and Improvisation.\" In \"Selva over zibaldone di concetti comic raccolti dal P.D. Placidio\", Adriani di Lucca provides a list of \"lazzi\" from a manuscript that is one of the few extant and intact accounts of \"lazzi\" from 17th and 18th century Italy. The manuscript is currently held at the Library in Perugia. Most recently, Mel Gordon compiled a comprehensive collection of \"lazzi\" performed by \"commedia\" troupes between 1550 and 1750, and organized the descriptions into twelve categories that include 'acrobatic and mimic' as well as 'violence/sadistic behavior' \"lazzi\".\nIn addition, visual iconography from the 17th and 18th century depicts elements of \"lazzi\" that often portray what would have been considered vulgar physical acts (i.e. a doctor administering an enema as seen in the image), though few of the written accounts describe such content. It has been proposed that the marked lack of documentation may be, in part, an attempt to evade rising censorship by authorities, especially in the case of Parisian Com\u00e9die-Italienne under the rule of Louis XIV, who threatened troupes with the revocation of royal subsidies should their material be deemed subversive. In some cases, his censorship resulted in a troupe's expulsion from the country. Others theorize that \"lazzi\" often went undocumented so that it could not be imitated by competing troupes, as routines could not be patented. Also, it has been suggested that because of the oral and physical nature of the training, as well as the inbred legacy of performers within the troupe, there was less of a need to have written explanations of \"lazzi\".\nElizabethan and Jacobean England.\nWhile the direct influence of Italy's \"commedia dell'arte\" on the England's Elizabethan and Jacobean theatre is subject to much debate, verbal and visual \"lazzi\" were present in the plays of William Shakespeare. Shakespeare's work implies a familiarity with Italian literature and theatrical practices, though it is not certain that he ever experienced a \"commedia\" performance firsthand. It is as likely that Richard Tarlton served as the inspiration for Shakespeare's plays, as well as the \"lazzi\" of Italian \"commedia\". Verbal \"lazzi\" were used in the form of puns, proverbs, and malapropisms, while instances of physical \"lazzi\" were abundant, especially in the work of Shakespeare's clowns, whose improvisations during performances often vexed the playwright.\n1920s and modern \"lazzi\".\nMore recent appropriations of \"lazzi\" include the 1920s silent films of Charlie Chaplin, the silent/sound films and stage productions of Laurel and Hardy, and Punch and Judy puppet shows. While many similarities exist, a few parallels can be drawn in the use of pratfalls, fright jumps, and physical settings that enable the use of objects to perform the comedy. One popular comparison is Charlie Chaplin's cane to Arlecchino, or the Harlequin's stick when used as a comedic device.\nExamples.\nThe following list contains a few examples of 17th and 18th century \"lazzi\" that were found in the notes and manuscripts of actors and dramatists. The term \"lazzo\" refers to \"lazzi\" in the singular:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38902", "revid": "29095513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38902", "title": "Brown", "text": "Color\nBrown is a color. It can be thought as a darker, and usually desaturated, shade of orange. In the CMYK color model used in printing and painting, brown is usually made by combining yellow, magenta, and black inks (these two last in a lesser amount).\nIn the RGB color model used to project colors onto television screens and computer monitors, brown is the result of combining red light at low intensity, and green light at an even lower intensity, with blue light also being present in most shades of the color. The color brown is seen widely in nature, wood, soil, human hair color, eye color and skin pigmentation. Brown is the color of dark wood or rich soil.\nIn the RYB color model, brown is made by mixing the three primary colors, red, yellow, and blue.\nAccording to public opinion surveys in Europe and the United States, brown is the least favorite color of the public; it is often associated with fecal matter, plainness, the rustic, although it does also have positive associations, including baking, warmth, wildlife, the autumn and music.\nEtymology.\nThe term is from Old English , in origin for any dusky or dark shade of color. The first recorded use of \"brown\" as a color name in English was in 1000.\nThe Common Germanic adjectives \"*br\u00fbnoz and *br\u00fbn\u00e2\" meant both dark colors and a glistening or shining quality, whence \"burnish\". The current meaning developed in Middle English from the 14th century.\nWords for the color brown around the world often come from foods or beverages; in the eastern Mediterranean, the word for brown often comes from the color of coffee: in Turkish, the word for brown is ; in Greek, .\nIn Portuguese, Spanish and French, the word for brown or for a specific shade of brown is derived from the word for chestnut (\"castanea\" in Latin). In Southeast Asia, the color name for brown often comes from the word for chocolate: in Malay and in Filipino. In Japan, the word means the color of tea.\nHistory and art.\nAncient history.\nBrown has been used in art since prehistoric times. Paintings using umber, a natural clay pigment composed of iron oxide and manganese oxide, have been dated to 40,000 BC. Paintings of brown horses and other animals have been found on the walls of the Lascaux cave dating back about 17,300 years. The female figures in ancient Egyptian tomb paintings have brown skin, painted with umber. Light tan was often used on painted Greek amphorae and vases, either as a background for black figures, or the reverse.\nThe Ancient Greeks and Romans produced a fine reddish-brown ink, of a color called sepia, made from the ink of a variety of cuttlefish. This ink was used by Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael and other artists during the Renaissance, and by artists up until the present time.\nIn Ancient Rome, brown clothing was associated with the lower classes or barbarians. The term for the plebeians, or urban poor, was \"pullati\", which meant literally \"those dressed in brown\".\nPost-classical history.\nIn the Middle Ages brown robes were worn by monks of the Franciscan order, as a sign of their humility and poverty. Each social class was expected to wear a color suitable to their station; and grey and brown were the colors of the poor. Russet was a coarse homespun cloth made of wool and dyed with woad and madder to give it a subdued grey or brown shade. By the statute of 1363, poor English people were required to wear russet. The medieval poem \"Piers Plowman\" describes the virtuous Christian: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And is gladde of a goune of a graye russetAs of a tunicle of Tarse or of trye scarlet.\nIn the Middle Ages, dark brown pigments were rarely used in art; painters and book illuminators artists of that period preferred bright, distinct colors such as red, blue and green rather than dark colors. The umbers were not widely used in Europe before the end of the fifteenth century; The Renaissance painter and writer Giorgio Vasari (1511\u20131574) described them as being rather new in his time.\nArtists began using far greater use of browns when oil painting arrived in the late fifteenth century. During the Renaissance, artists generally used four different browns; raw umber, the dark brown clay mined from the earth around Umbria, in Italy; raw sienna, a reddish-brown earth mined near Siena, in Tuscany; burnt umber, the Umbrian clay heated until it turned a darker shade, and burnt sienna, heated until it turned a dark reddish brown. In Northern Europe, Jan van Eyck featured rich earth browns in his portraits to set off the brighter colors.\nModern history.\n17th and 18th century.\nThe 17th and 18th century saw the greatest use of brown. Caravaggio and Rembrandt Van Rijn used browns to create chiaroscuro effects, where the subject appeared out of the darkness. Rembrandt also added umber to the ground layers of his paintings because it promoted faster drying. Rembrandt also began to use new brown pigment, called Cassel earth or Cologne earth. This was a natural earth color composed of over ninety percent organic matter, such as soil and peat. It was used by Rubens and Anthony van Dyck, and later became commonly known as Van Dyck brown.\n19th and 20th century.\nBrown was generally hated by the French impressionists, who preferred bright, pure colors. The exception among French 19th-century artists was Paul Gauguin, who created luminous brown portraits of the people and landscapes of French Polynesia.\nIn the late 20th century, brown became a common symbol in western culture for simple, inexpensive, natural and healthy. Bag lunches were carried in plain brown paper bags; packages were wrapped in plain brown paper. Brown bread and brown sugar were viewed as more natural and healthy than white bread and white sugar.\nBrown in science and nature.\nOptics.\nBrown is a dark orange color. It can be thought of as dark orange, but it can also be made in other ways. In the RGB color model, which uses red, green and blue light in various combinations to make all the colors on computer and television screens, it is made by mixing red and green light.\nIn terms of the visible spectrum, \"brown\" refers to long wavelength hues, yellow, orange, or red, in combination with low luminance or saturation.\nSince \"brown\" may cover a wide range of the visible spectrum, composite adjectives are used such as red brown, yellowish brown, dark brown or light brown.\nAs a color of low intensity, brown is a tertiary color: a mix of the three subtractive primary colors is brown if the cyan content is low. Brown exists as a color perception only in the presence of a brighter color contrast. Yellow, orange, red, or rose objects are still perceived as such if the general illumination level is low, despite reflecting the same amount of red or orange light as a brown object would in normal lighting conditions.\nBrown eyes.\nWith few exceptions, all mammals have brown or darkly-pigmented irises. In humans, brown eyes result from a relatively high concentration of melanin in the stroma of the iris, which causes light of both shorter and longer wavelengths to be absorbed and in many parts of the world, it is nearly the only iris color present. Dark pigment of brown eyes is most common in East Asia, Central Asia, Southeast Asia, South Asia, West Asia, Oceania, Africa, Americas, etc. as well as parts of Eastern Europe and Southern Europe. The majority of people in the world overall have dark brown eyes. Brown irises range from highly pigmented, dark brown (almost black) eyes, to very light, almost amber or hazel irises composed partially of lipochrome. of Light or medium-pigmented brown eyes are common in Europe, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Northern India, as well as some parts of the Middle East, and can also be found in populations in East Asia and Southeast Asia, but are proportionally rare. (See eye color).\nBrown hair.\nBrown is the second most common color of human hair, after black. It is caused by higher levels of the natural dark pigment eumelanin, and lower levels of the pale pigment pheomelanin. Brown eumelanin is more common among Europeans, while black eumelanin is more often found in the hair on non-Europeans. A small amount of black eumelanin, in the absence of other pigments, results in grey hair. A small amount of brown eumelanin in the absence of other pigments results in blond hair.\nBrown skin.\nA majority of people in the world have skin that is a shade of brown, from a very light honey brown or a golden brown, to a copper or bronze color, to a coffee color or a dark chocolate brown. Skin color and race are not the same; many people classified as \"white\" or \"black\" actually have skin that is a shade of brown. Brown skin is caused by melanin, a natural pigment which is produced within the skin in cells called melanocytes. Skin pigmentation in humans evolved to primarily regulate the amount of ultraviolet radiation penetrating the skin, controlling its biochemical effects.\nNatural skin color can darken as a result of tanning due to exposure to sunlight. The leading theory is that skin color adapts to intense sunlight irradiation to provide partial protection against the ultraviolet fraction that produces damage and thus mutations in the DNA of the skin cells. There is a correlation between the geographic distribution of ultraviolet radiation (UVR) and the distribution of indigenous skin pigmentation around the world. Darker-skinned populations are found in the regions with the most ultraviolet, closer to the equator, while lighter skinned populations live closer to the poles, with less UVR, though immigration has changed these patterns.\nWhile \"white \"and\" black\" are commonly used to describe racial groups, \"brown\" is rarely used, because it crosses all racial lines.\nIn Brazil, the Portuguese word \"pardo\", which can mean different shades of brown, is used to refer to multiracial people. The Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) asks people to identify themselves as \"branco\" (white), \"pardo\" (brown), \"negro\" (black), or \"amarelo\" (yellow). In 2008 43.8 percent of the population identified themselves as pardo. (See human skin color).\nSoil.\nThe thin top layer of the Earth's crust on land is largely made up of soil colored different shades of brown. Good soil is composed of about forty-five percent minerals, twenty-five percent water, twenty-five percent air, and five percent organic material, living and dead. Half the color of soil comes from minerals it contains; soils containing iron turn yellowish or reddish as the iron oxidizes. Manganese, nitrogen and sulfur turn brownish or blackish as they decay naturally.\nRich and fertile soils tend to be darker in color; the deeper brown color of fertile soil comes from the decomposing of the organic matter. Dead leaves and roots become black or brown as they decay. Poorer soils are usually paler brown in color, and contain less water or organic matter.\nMammals and birds.\nA large number of mammals and predatory birds have a brown coloration. This sometimes changes seasonally, and sometimes remains the same year-round. This color is likely related to camouflage, since the backdrop of some environments, such as the forest floor, is often brown, and especially in the spring and summertime when animals like the snowshoe hare get brown fur. Most mammals are dichromats and so do not easily distinguish brown fur from green grass.\nBrown in culture.\nSurveys in Europe and the United States showed that brown was the least popular color among respondents. It was the favorite color of only one percent of respondents and the least favorite color of twenty percent of people.\nBrown uniforms.\nBrown has been a popular color for military uniforms since the late 18th century, largely because of its wide availability and low visibility. When the Continental Army was established in 1775 at the outbreak of the American Revolution, the first Continental Congress declared that the official uniform color would be brown, but this was not popular with many militias, whose officers were already wearing blue. In 1778 the Congress asked George Washington to design a new uniform, and in 1779 Washington made the official color of all uniforms blue and buff.\nIn 1846 the Indian soldiers of the Corps of Guides in British India began to wear a yellowish shade of tan, which became known as khaki from the Urdu word for dust-colored, taken from an earlier Persian word for soil. The color made an excellent natural camouflage, and was adopted by the British Army for their Abyssian Campaign in 1867\u20131868, and later in the Boer War. It was adopted by the United States Army during the Spanish\u2013American War (1896), and afterwards by the United States Navy and United States Marine Corps.\nIn the 1920s, brown became the uniform color of the Nazi Party in Germany. The Nazi paramilitary organization the \"Sturmabteilung\" (SA) wore brown uniforms and were known as the brownshirts. The color brown was used to represent the Nazi vote on maps of electoral districts in Germany. If someone voted for the Nazis, they were said to be \"voting brown\". The national headquarters of the Nazi party, in Munich, was called the \"Brown House\". The Nazi seizure of power in 1933 was called the \"Brown Revolution\". At Adolf Hitler's Obersalzberg home, the Berghof, he slept in a \"bed which was usually covered by a brown quilt embroidered with a huge swastika.\nThe swastika also appeared on Hitler's brown satin pajamas, embroidered in black against a red background on the pocket. He had a matching brown silk robe.\" Brown had originally been chosen as a Party color largely for convenience; large numbers of war-surplus brown uniforms from Germany's former colonial forces in Africa were cheaply available in the 1920s. It also suited the working-class and military images that the Party wished to convey.\nFrom the 1930s onwards, the Party's brown uniforms were mass-produced by German clothing firms such as Hugo Boss.\nBusiness.\n\" &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Pullman Brown\" is the color of the United Parcel Service (UPS) delivery company with their trademark brown trucks and uniforms; it was earlier the color of Pullman rail cars of the Pullman Company, and was adopted by UPS both because brown is easy to keep clean, and due to favorable associations of luxury that Pullman brown evoked. UPS has filed two trademarks on the color brown to prevent other shipping companies (and possibly other companies in general) from using the color if it creates \"market confusion\". In its advertising, UPS refers to itself as \"Brown\" (\"What can Brown do for you?\"). Labrecque, et al. (2012) have hypothesized that brown would be related to competence when used in advertising, as the color is typically associated with reliability and support. However, they did not find a link between brown and competence.\nNotes and citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38905", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38905", "title": "Innamorato", "text": ""}
{"id": "38907", "revid": "6", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38907", "title": "Prosperpina", "text": ""}
{"id": "38908", "revid": "1318288522", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38908", "title": "Proserpina", "text": "Ancient Roman goddess\nProserpina ( ; ) or Proserpine ( ) is an ancient Roman goddess whose iconography, functions and myths are virtually identical to those of the Greek Persephone. Proserpina replaced or was combined with the ancient Roman fertility goddess Libera, whose principal cult was housed in a temple atop Rome's Aventine Hill, which she shared with the grain-goddess Ceres and the wine god Liber (Liber Pater).\nEach of these three deities occupied their own \"cella\" at the temple, their cults served or supervised by a male public priesthood. Ceres was by far the senior of the three, one of the \"Dii Consentes\", Rome's approximate equivalent to the Greek Twelve Olympians, Ceres being identified with the Greek Demeter and Liber with Dionysus. Libera is sometimes described as a female version of Liber Pater, concerned with female fertility. Otherwise she is given no clear identity or mythology by Roman sources, and no Greek equivalent. Nothing is known of her native iconography: her name translates as a feminine form of Liber, \"the free one\". Proserpina's name is a Latinization of \"Persephone\", perhaps influenced by the Latin \"proserpere\" (\"to emerge, to creep forth\"), with reference to the growing of grain.\nProserpina was imported from southern Italy as part of an official religious strategy, towards the end of the Second Punic War, when antagonism between Rome's lower and upper social classes, crop failures and intermittent famine were thought to be signs of divine wrath, provoked by Roman impiety. The new cult was installed around 205 BC at Ceres' Aventine temple. Ethnically Greek priestesses were recruited to serve Ceres and Proserpina as \"Mother and Maiden\". This innovation might represent an attempt by Rome's ruling class to please the gods and the plebeian class; the latter shared strong cultural ties with \"Magna Graecia\", the collection of Greek colonial settlements in southern Italy such were first established in the 8th century BC. The reformed cult was based on the Greek, women-only Thesmophoria, and was promoted as morally desirable for respectable Roman women, both as followers and priestesses. It was almost certainly supervised by Rome's \"Flamen Cerealis\", a male priesthood usually reserved to plebeians. The new cult might have partly subsumed the Aventine temple's older, native cults to Ceres, Liber and Libera, but it also functioned alongside them. Liber played no part in the reformed cult. Ceres, Proserpina/Libera and Liber are known to have received cult in their own right, at their Aventine temple and elsewhere, though details are lacking.\nThe Roman cult of Mother and Maiden named Proserpina as queen of the underworld, spouse to Rome's king of the underworld, Dis Pater, and daughter to Ceres. The cult's functions, framework of myths and roles involved the agricultural cycle, seasonal death and rebirth, dutiful daughterhood and motherly care. They included secret initiations and nocturnal torchlit processions, and cult objects concealed from non-initiates. Proserpina's forcible abduction by the god of the underworld, her mother's search for her, and her eventual but temporary restoration to the world above are the subject of works in Roman and later art and literature. In particular, her seizure by the god of the Underworld \u2013 usually described as the Rape of Proserpina, or of Persephone \u2013 has offered dramatic subject matter for Renaissance and later sculptors and painters.\nEtymology.\nProserpina ( or ) is an Italic modification of \"Persephone\" (through metathesis of the form , \"Porseph\u00f3n\u0113\"), perhaps influenced by the Latin word \"proserpere\" meaning \"to creep forth\".\nCult and myths.\nOrigin of Libera.\nIn early Roman religion, Libera was the female equivalent of Liber Pater, protector of plebeian rights, the god of wine, male fertility and liberty, equivalent to the Greek Dionysus. Libera was originally an Italic goddess, paired with Liber as an \"etymological duality\" at some time during Rome's Regal or very early Republican eras. She enters Roman history as part of a so-called Triadic cult alongside Ceres and Liber, in a temple established around 493 BC on the Aventine Hill at state expense, promised by Rome's governing class to the plebs (Rome's citizen-commoners), who had threatened secession. Collectively, these three deities were divine patrons and protectors of Rome's commoner-citizens, and guardians of Rome's senatorial records and written laws, housed at the temple soon after its foundation. Libera might have been offered cult on March 17 during Liber's festival, Liberalia, or at some time during the seven days of Cerealia, held in mid-to-late April; in the latter festival, she would have been subordinate to Ceres; the names of both Liber and Libera were a later addition to Ceres's festival. Otherwise, Libera's functional relationship to her Aventine cult partners is uncertain. She has no known native iconography or mythology.\nLibera and Proserpina.\nLibera was officially identified as Proserpina from 205 BC, when she and Ceres acquired a Romanized form of Greek mystery rite, the \"ritus graecia cereris\". This was part of Rome's religious recruitment of deities to serve as divine allies against Carthage, towards the end of the Second Punic War. In the late Republican era, Cicero described Liber and Libera as Ceres' children. At around the same time, Hyginus equated Libera with the Greek Ariadne. The older and newer forms of her names, cult, and rites, and their diverse associations, persisted well into the late Imperial era. St. Augustine (354\u2013430 AD) wrote that Libera was a goddess of female fertility, just as Liber was a god of male fertility.\nProserpina.\nProserpina was officially introduced to Rome as the daughter of Ceres in the newly Romanized cult of \"Mother and Daughter\". The cult's origins lay in southern Italy, which was politically allied to Rome but culturally a part of Magna Graecia. The cult was based on the women-only Greek Thesmophoria, which was a part public and part mystery cult to Demeter and Persephone as \"Mother and Maiden\". It arrived in Rome along with its Greek priestesses, who were granted Roman citizenship so that they could pray to the gods \"with a foreign and external knowledge, but with a domestic and civil intention\". In his commentary on Virgil, Servius writes that Proserpina's heavenly name is Luna, and her earthly name is Diana. \nThe exclusively female initiates and priestesses of the new \"Greek-style\" mysteries of Ceres and Proserpina were expected to uphold Rome's traditional, patrician-dominated social hierarchy and traditional morality. Unmarried girls were expected to emulate the chastity of Proserpina, the maiden; married women were expected to seek to emulate Ceres, the devoted and fruitful Mother. Their rites were intended to secure a good harvest, and increase the fertility of those who partook in the mysteries. Each of the Aventine triad's deities continued to receive cult in their own right. Liber's open, gender-mixed cult and festivals continued, though likely caught up in the suppression of the Bacchanalia some twenty years on. Proserpina's individual cult, and her joint cult with Ceres became widespread throughout the Republic and Empire. A Temple of Proserpina was located in a suburb of Melite, in modern Mtarfa, Malta. The temple's ruins were quarried away between the 17th and 18th centuries; only a few fragments survive.\nMyths.\n \nThe best-known myth surrounding Proserpina is of her abduction by the god of the Underworld, her mother Ceres' frantic search for her, and her eventual but temporary restitution to the world above. In Latin literature, several versions are known, all similar in most respects to the myths of Persephone's abduction by Hades, named variously in Latin sources as Dis or Pluto. \"Hades\" can mean both the hidden Underworld and its king ('the hidden one'), who in early Greek versions of the myth is a dark, unsympathetic figure; Persephone is \"Kore\" ('the maiden'), taken against her will; in the Greek Eleusinian Mysteries, she and Hades form a divine couple who rule the underworld together, and receive Eleusinian initiates into some form of better afterlife. Renamed Pluto, the king of the underworld is distanced from his violent abduction of his consort. In 27 BC Vergil presented his own version of the myth in his \"Georgics\". In the early 1st century AD, Ovid gives two poetic versions: one in Book 5 of his \"Metamorphoses\" and another in Book 4 of his \"Fasti\". An early 5th-century AD Latin version of the same myth is Claudian's \"De raptu Proserpinae\"; in most cases, these Latin works identify Proserpina's underworld abductor and later consort as Dis.\nIn Claudian's version, the unprepossessing Dis yearns for the joys of married love and fatherhood, and threatens to make war on the other gods if he remains alone in Erebus. The Fates (Parcae), who determine the destinies of all, arrange a future marriage for Dis, to prevent the outbreak of war. Jupiter orders Venus to bring love to Dis, in fulfillment of the prophecy. Ceres has already sought to conceal the innocent Proserpina by sending her to safety in Sicily, Ceres' earthly home and sanctuary; but Dis comes out from the volcano at Mount Etna in his chariot, seizes Proserpina at the Pergusa Lake near Enna, and takes her down into the underworld. The poem ends at this point.\nProserpina's mother, Ceres, seeks her daughter across the world, but in vain. The sun sinks and darkness falls as Ceres walks the earth, stopping the growth of crops and creating a desert with each step. Jupiter sends Mercury to order Dis to free Proserpina; but Proserpina has melted Dis' hard heart, and eats \"several\" of the pomegranate seeds he offers her; those who have eaten the food of the dead cannot return to the world of the living. Pluto insists that she had willingly eaten his pomegranate seeds and in return she must stay with him for half the year. Virgil asserts that Proserpina agrees to this, and is reluctant to ascend from the underworld and re-unite with her mother. When Ceres greets her daughter's return to the world of the living, the crops grow, flowers blossom, and in summer all growing crops flourish, to be harvested in autumn. During the time that Proserpina resides with Pluto, the world goes through winter, when the earth yields no crops. The earth can only be fertile when she is above.\nOrpheus and Eurydice.\nThe most extensive myth of Proserpina in Latin is Claudian's (4th century AD). It is closely connected with that of Orpheus and Eurydice. In Virgil's \"Georgics\", Orpheus' beloved wife, Eurydice, died from a snake-bite; Proserpina allowed Orpheus into Hades without losing his life; charmed by his music, she allowed him to lead his wife back to the land of the living, as long as he did not look back during the journey. But Orpheus could not resist a backward glance, so Eurydice was forever lost to him.\nIn artwork.\nProserpina's figure inspired many artistic compositions, eminently in sculpture (Bernini, see \"The Rape of Proserpina\") in painting (D.G.Rossetti, a fresco by Pomarancio, J. Heintz, Rubens, A. D\u00fcrer, Dell'Abbate, Parrish) and in literature (Goethe's \"Proserpina\" and Swinburne's \"Hymn to Proserpine\" and \"The Garden of Proserpine\"). The statue of the Rape of Prosepina by Pluto that stands in the Great Garden of Dresden, Germany is also referred to as \"Time Ravages Beauty\". Kate McGarrigle's song about the legend was one of the last things she wrote prior to her death, and received its only performance at her last concert at Royal Albert Hall in December 2009.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... \"Diti patri dedicata est, qui dives ut apud Graecos Plouton, quia et recidunt omnia in terras et oriuntur e terris, Cui Proserpinam (quod Graecorum nomen est, ea enim est quae Persefone Graece nominatur) \u2014 quam frugum semen esse volunt absconditamque quaeri a matre fingunt\"."}
{"id": "38909", "revid": "49601551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38909", "title": "CRC32", "text": ""}
{"id": "38910", "revid": "698799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38910", "title": "Juan Garc\u00eda Esquivel", "text": "Mexican composer (1918\u20132002)\nJuan Garc\u00eda Esquivel (January 20, 1918 \u2013 January 3, 2002), often known mononymously as Esquivel!, was a Mexican band leader, pianist, and composer for television and films. He is recognized today as one of the foremost exponents of a sophisticated style of largely instrumental music that combines elements of lounge music and jazz with Latin flavors. Esquivel is sometimes called \"The King of Space Age Pop\" and \"The Busby Berkeley of Cocktail Music\", and is considered one of the foremost exponents of a style of late 1950s-early 1960s quirky instrumental pop that became known (in retrospect) as \"Space Age Bachelor Pad Music\".\nEarly life.\nHe was born in 1918, in Tampico, Tamaulipas, and his family moved to Mexico City in 1928 where he became a self-taught musician from an early age. In interviews, Esquivel's family members have stated that the young boy started playing piano when he was around six years old, to the amazement of older musicians who would gather around him in disbelief and to his own delight exhibiting his musical gifts. They have also stated that Esquivel continued to eschew formal musical training as he grew older, preferring to learn from books and by listening to and playing music instead.\nMusic.\nEsquivel played a style of late 1950s-early 1960s quirky instrumental pop known today as lounge music. Esquivel's musical style was highly idiosyncratic, and although elements sound like his contemporaries, many stylistic traits distinguished his music and made it instantly recognizable. These included exotic percussion, wordless vocals, virtuoso piano runs, and exaggerated dynamic shifts. He used many jazz-like elements; however, other than his piano solos, there is no improvisation, and the works are meticulously arranged by Esquivel himself, who considered himself a perfectionist as a composer, performer, and recording artist.\nHis orchestration employed novel instrumental combinations, such as Chinese bells, mariachi bands, whistling, and numerous percussion instruments, blended with orchestra, mixed chorus, and his own heavily ornamented piano style. Vocal groups were often utilized to sing only nonsense syllables, most famously \"zu-zu\" and \"pow!\" A survey of Esquivel's recordings reveals a fondness for glissando, sometimes on a half-valved trumpet, sometimes on a kettle drum, but most frequently on pitched percussion instruments and steel guitars.\nEsquivel's use of stereo recording was notable, and he occasionally employed two bands recording simultaneously in separate studios, such as on his album \"Latin-esque\" (1962). That album's song \"Mucha Muchacha\" makes unusual use of stereo separation, with the chorus and brass rapidly alternating in the left and right audio channels.\nHe arranged many traditional Mexican songs like \"B\u00e9same Mucho\", \"La Bamba\", \"El Manisero\" (Cuban/Mexican) and \"La Bikina\"; covered Brazilian songs like \"Aquarela do Brasil\" (also known simply as \"Brazil\") by Ary Barroso, \"Surfboard\" and \"Agua de Beber\" by Tom Jobim, and composed spicy lounge-like novelties such as \"Mini Skirt\", \"Yeyo\", \"Latin-esque\", \"Mucha Muchacha\" and \"Whatchamacallit\". He was commissioned to compose the music of a Mexican children's TV show \"Odisea Burbujas\". His 1958 album \"Four Corners of the World\" featured a fusion of \"Latin American music combined with the wonderful melodies of European classical music.\"\nHis concerts featured elaborate light shows years before such effects became popular in live music. He performed in Las Vegas on several occasions, often as the opening act for Frank Sinatra. He frequently performed at the Stardust casino lounge circa 1964.\nSeveral compilations of Esquivel's music were issued on compact disc starting with \"Space Age Bachelor Pad Music\" in 1994. The first reissues were compiled by Irwin Chusid (who also produced the first CD compilation of Raymond Scott recordings and the premiere release of The Langley Schools Music Project). The success of these releases led to reissues of several of Esquivel's original 1950s-1960s albums.\nThe last recording on which Esquivel worked was \"Merry Xmas from the Space-Age Bachelor Pad\" in 1996, for which he recorded voiceovers on two tracks by the band Combustible Edison; his voiceovers were recorded at home in Mexico by the band's keyboardist Brother Cleve, who also mixed the tracks. This album was a re-release of the six Esquivel recordings that originally appeared on the 1959 RCA Victor LP \"The Merriest of Christmas Pops\", along with four more Esquivel recordings from the late 1950s and 1960s and two new Combustible Edison tracks featuring Esquivel's holiday-themed voiceovers.\nThe last CD released during his lifetime, \"See It In Sound\" (1998), was recorded in 1960 for RCA, but was not released at the time because RCA believed it would not be commercially successful. The album's concept was that Esquivel's music would be combined with sound effects and edited in a way that suggested a visual work such as a film, though without dialog or an explicitly stated narrative. For example, the album includes a version of \"Brazil\" with an arrangement that makes extensive use of editing and sound effects to suggest a person going in and out of several bars, each bar featuring a band playing a unique arrangement of \"Brazil\".\nEsquivel also worked as composer for Revue Productions/Universal Television. There he scored the TV western series \"The Tall Man\", and co-wrote, with Stanley Wilson, the Revue/Universal TV logo fanfare.\nMusic in recent media.\nHis recording of his composition \"Mucha Muchacha\" was used in the films \"Confessions of a Dangerous Mind\", \"The Big Lebowski\", \"The Notorious Bettie Page\", \"Stuart Saves His Family\", \"Nacho Libre\" and \"Beavis and Butt-Head Do America\".\n\"Mini Skirt\" was used as the opening theme for the BBC documentary series \"Louis Theroux's Weird Weekends\" and \"When Louis Met...\".\nHis recording of his composition \"Whatchamacallit\" was used in the 2002 film \"Secretary\".\nEsquivel's recording of \"Boulevard of Broken Dreams\" was used \"Better Call Saul\" Episode 2 \"Mijo\" (2015).\nEsquivel's recording of \"My Blue Heaven\" was used in the trailer for the 2021 film \"Malibu Road\".\nIn 2022, Esquivel's 1959 recording of \"Fantasy\" was used by Apple in its \"Data Auction\" global TV ad campaign, to promote privacy on its iPhone product.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38915", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38915", "title": "Music/incubus", "text": ""}
{"id": "38918", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38918", "title": "Nij\u014d", "text": "Nij\u014d can refer to:\nPeople.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38919", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38919", "title": "1165", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1165 (MCLXV) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38920", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38920", "title": "Rokuj\u014d", "text": " literally means \"sixth street\" in Japanese. It can refer to:\nPlaces.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38921", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38921", "title": "1176", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1176 (MCLXXVI) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar, the 1176th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 176th year of the 2nd millennium, the 76th year of 12th century, and the 7th year of the 1170s decade.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38922", "revid": "35930533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38922", "title": "Takakura", "text": "Takakura (jap. \u9ad8\u5009, lit. \"tall storehouse\") may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38923", "revid": "15934552", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38923", "title": "Sacher-Masoch", "text": ""}
{"id": "38924", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38924", "title": "1161", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1161 (MCLXI) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38925", "revid": "1907991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38925", "title": "1181", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1181 (MCLXXXI) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38927", "revid": "42444049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38927", "title": "Kronborg", "text": "Medieval castle in Helsing\u00f8r, Denmark\nKronborg () is a castle and historical stronghold in the town of Helsing\u00f8r, Denmark. Immortalised as Elsinore in William Shakespeare's play \"Hamlet\", Kronborg is one of the most important Renaissance castles in Northern Europe. It was inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 2000.\nThe castle is situated on the extreme northeastern tip of the island of Zealand at the narrowest point of the \u00d8resund, the sound between present Denmark and the provinces of present Sweden. The latter were under Danish control at the time the castle was built. In this part, the sound is only wide, hence the strategic importance of maintaining a coastal fortification at this location commanding one of the few outlets of the Baltic Sea.\nThe castle's story dates back to a stronghold, \"Krogen\", built by King Eric VII in the 1420s. Along with the fortress K\u00e4rnan in Helsingborg, on the opposite coast of \u00d8resund, it controlled the entrance to the Baltic Sea. From 1574 to 1585, King Frederick II had the medieval fortress radically transformed into a magnificent Renaissance castle. The main architects were the Flemings Hans Hendrik van Paesschen and Anthonis van Obbergen. The sculptural work was coordinated by Gert van Groningen.\nIn 1629, a fire destroyed much of the castle, but King Christian IV subsequently had it rebuilt. The castle has a church within its walls. In 1658, Kronborg was besieged and captured by the Swedes, who took many of its valuable art treasures as war booty. \nIn 1785 the castle ceased to be a royal residence and was converted into barracks for the Army. The Army left the castle in 1923. After a thorough renovation, the complex was opened to the public.\nHistory.\nKrogen.\nThe castle's history dates to a fortress, \"Krogen\" (lit. 'the Hook'), built in the early 15th century by the Danish king, Eric of Pomerania. The king insisted on payment of sound dues by all ships wishing to enter or leave the Baltic Sea through the \u00d8resund; to help enforce his demands, he built a powerful fortress at the narrowest point in the Sound. At the time, the Kingdom of Denmark extended across both sides of the Sound. On the eastern shore the Helsingborg Castle had been operating since the Middle Ages. With the two castles and guard ship, Denmark could control all navigation through the Sound.\nThe castle was built on \"\u00d8rekrog\", a sandy tongue of land stretching into the sea from the coast of Zealand toward the coast of Scania. The castle consisted of a square curtain wall with a number of stone buildings inside. The stone building in the northeastern corner contained the king's residence. The building in the southwestern corner contained a large arched banquet hall. The building in the southeastern corner possibly served as the chapel. Large portions of the walls of Krogen are contained within the present-day Kronborg Castle.\nKing Christian III had the corners of the curtain wall supplemented with bastions in 1558\u20131559.\nFrederick II's Kronborg.\nAs a consequence of developments in the military technique of the era and the improved striking power of the artillery, it became clear that it was necessary to modernize the fortifications of Krogen. After the conclusion of the Northern Seven Years' War in 1570, King Frederick II initiated an extension of the advanced bastions to relieve the medieval curtain wall. The main architect was the Flemish architect Hans Hendrik van Paesschen and the fortification works were completed in 1577. After this, the castle acquired its current name of \"Kronborg\" (lit.\u2009'Crown Castle').\nThe castle itself was rebuilt from 1574 to 1585, with the separated buildings of Krogen being extended to three coherent wings. The north wing was equipped with chambers for the king, queen and her ladies-in-waiting as well as for the chancellery. In the south wing, the medieval building in the southeast corner was refitted as a modern chapel with the vaulted windows facing the chapel being retained. Frederick was a keen patron of theatre and players performed at the castle when he held court there in 1579.\nInitially, the castle was reconstructed only to a height of two storeys. In 1578, however, the Flemish architect Anthonis van Obbergen was engaged as new master builder and work was undertaken to make Kronborg even larger and more magnificent. The sculptural work was coordinated by Gert van Groningen. As a sign of the new ambitions, the south wing was heightened by one storey and a new, gigantic ball room placed over the chapel. Soon after the west and north wings were also heightened by one storey. Finally, the east wing was also heightened with a passageway, \"The Queen's Gallery\", allowing the Queen comfortable passage from her chambers in the north wing to the ball room in the south wing. The exterior walls were clad with sandstone from Scania, and the new castle was given a roof with copper sheeting.\nJames VI of Scotland stayed in the castle in 1590 after his marriage to Anne of Denmark. James gave 2,000 Danish dalers in gold coins to the officers and servants in the castle as a reward.\nFire of 1629.\nIn 1629, a moment's carelessness by two workmen caused much of the castle to go up in flames in the night between the 24 and 25 September. Only the chapel was spared by the strength of its arches. King Christian IV put great efforts into restoring the castle. Already in 1631, the work was underway, led by the architect Hans van Steenwinckel the Younger. By 1639, the exterior\u00a0\u2014 which in keeping with the king's wish was reconstructed without major changes\u00a0\u2014 was once again magnificent, but the interior never fully regained its former glory. Furthermore, certain modernizations were made, and portals, chimneypieces, ceiling paintings and other decorations were renewed in Baroque style.\nSwedish conquest of 1658.\nDuring the Dano-Swedish war of 1658\u20131660, Kronborg was besieged, attacked and conquered by a Swedish army commanded by Carl Gustaf Wrangel. During the Swedish occupation, the queen of Sweden, Hedvig Eleonora of Holstein-Gottorp and the Swedish king's sister Maria Eufrosyne of Pfalz lived at Kronborg, where they were visited by Charles X of Sweden during the campaign and entertained the foreign ambassadors.\nAs a result of the Swedish occupation, Kronborg was deprived of many of its most precious art works, including the richly decorated fountain in the castle courtyard, Frederick II's canopy and a number of the large ceiling paintings commissioned by Christian IV for the ballroom.\nGarrison fortress.\nThe Swedish conquest of Kronborg in 1658 demonstrated that the castle was far from impregnable. Afterwards, the defences were strengthened significantly. From 1688 to 1690, an advanced line of defence was added called the Crownwork. Shortly afterwards, a new series of ramparts were built around it. After their completion, Kronborg was considered the strongest fortress in Europe.\nFrom 1739 until the 20th century, Kronborg was used as a prison. The inmates were guarded by the soldiers billeted in the castle. The convicts had been sentenced to work on the castle's fortifications. The convicts were divided into two categories: those with minor sentences were categorised as \"honest\" and were allowed to work outside the castle walls; those serving sentences for violence, murder, arson or the like were categorised as \"dishonest\" and had to serve the full sentence doing hard physical labour inside the castle ramparts. Otherwise, they served their time under the same conditions: they all had to wear chains and spend nights in cold and damp dungeons. From January 17, 1772, to April 30, 1772, Kronborg was the place of imprisonment of Queen Caroline Mathilde, sister of King George III, following the scandal of her affair with Johann Friedrich Struensee.\nAs Kronborg's importance as a royal castle diminished, the armed forces came to play a greater role. From 1785 to 1922, the castle was completely under military administration. During this period, a number of renovations were completed.\nSound Dues and recent history.\nThe captain of every ship sailing through the strait had to state the value of ship's cargo. Money that had to be paid to the King of Denmark, called Sound Dues, was then calculated depending on the value of the cargo. The king had the right to buy the cargo for the price the ship's captain stated. This policy prevented captains from stating prices that were too low. The Royal Danish Army left the castle in 1923, and after a thorough renovation it was opened to the public in 1938.\nKronborg today.\nKronborg Castle is located on the extreme northeastern tip of the island of Zealand, to the northeast of the historic centre of the town of Helsing\u00f8r. It is situated at an elevation of 12 metres, on a small foreland jutting out into the narrowest point of the \u00d8resund, the sound between the Danish island of Zealand and the Swedish province of Scania, that was also Danish until 1658. The approach from the town is to the east, with a series of moats and gates protecting the route from the town to the castle itself.\nRoyal apartments.\nThe royal apartments are located on the first floor of the north wing. The apartments were originally furnished by Frederick II around 1576, but after the fire in 1629, Christian IV had the apartments refurnished and richly decorated with ceiling paintings, stone portals and chimneypieces. The original floors were tiled in black and white which were replaced with wooden floorboards in 1760\u201361, and the walls were clad in gilt-leather. Today the chambers are furnished with Netherlandish furniture from the 17th century.\nThe King's Chamber has a bay window, located right above the castle's main portal, from which the king could keep an eye on guests arriving at the castle, whereas the Queen's Chamber has access to a vaulted tower chamber overlooking the Flag Bastion.\nBallroom.\nMeasuring 62 x 12 metres, the Ballroom was the largest hall in Northern Europe when it was completed in 1582. The walls are hung with a series of large paintings which were originally made from 1618 to 1631 for the Great Hall of Rosenborg Castle in Copenhagen. The paintings in the Ballroom include: \"Children off to School\" by Francis Cleyn, \"Feminine Pursuits\" by Reinhold Timm, \"Riding at the Ring\" by Reinhold Timm, \"A Boys School\" by Francis Cleyn, \"A Wedding in a Church\" by Francis Cleyn, \"An Academy for Noblemen\" by Reinhold Timm, \"A Banquet\" (1622) by Isaac Isaacsz.\nThe present floor and the fireplaces are from the rebuilding in 1924\u201338.\nLittle Hall.\nThe walls of the Little Hall are furnished with seven tapestries originally from a series of forty tapestries portraying one hundred Danish kings. The masterpieces include \"\" (1376\u20131387) and \"Tapestry depicting Knud VI\" (1182\u20131202). The tapestries were commissioned by Frederick II around 1580. Seven more tapestries are at the National Museum of Denmark, while the rest have been lost.\nChapel.\nThe chapel is located in the ground floor of the south wing and was inaugurated in 1582. In 1785, as the castle was being fitted for use as army barracks, the chapel was fitted out as a gymnasium and fencing hall and the furniture stored away. The chapel was refurnished with the original furniture in 1838 and reinaugurated in 1843.\nCultural significance.\n\"Hamlet\".\nRendered as \"Elsinore,\" actually the anglicised name of the surrounding town of Helsing\u00f8r, Kronborg serves as the setting of William Shakespeare's tragedy \"Hamlet, Prince of Denmark\". The play has been performed at the castle several times.\n\"Hamlet\" was first staged at Kronborg in 1816, in commemoration of the 200th anniversary of Shakespeare's death; it was performed by soldiers from the castle garrison, and staged in the telegraph tower in the castle's southwest corner. The play has since been performed several times in the courtyard and at various locations on the fortifications. Later performers to play Hamlet at the castle include Laurence Olivier, John Gielgud, Christopher Plummer, Derek Jacobi, David Tennant, and in 2009 Jude Law. In 2017, Hamletscenen presented a production of \"Hamlet\" at Kronborg, directed by Lars Romann Engel; the role of Hamlet was played by Cyron Melville and music for the production was composed by Mike Sheridan.\nOgier the Dane.\nAccording to a legend linked to Arthurian myth, a Danish king known as Ogier the Dane (Danish: \"Holger Danske\"), was taken to Avalon by the enchantress Morgan le Fay. Ogier returned to rescue France from danger, then travelled to Kronborg castle, where he sleeps until he is needed to save his homeland. His beard has grown to extend along the ground. A statue of the sleeping Ogier (right) has been placed in the castle casemates.\nCulture Harbour Kronborg.\nKulturhavn Kronborg is an initiative of 2013 to offer a variety of culture experiences to residents and visitors to Helsing\u00f8r. Kulturhavn Kronborg is a joint initiative by Kronborg Castle, Danish Maritime Museum, Kulturv\u00e6rftet and Helsing\u00f8r harbour.\nOther.\nThe castle was the setting of the televised holiday series \"Jul p\u00e5 Kronborg\" (), which featured both Hamlet and Holger the Dane. 'Elsinore Beer' is named for the castle in the 1983 comedy \"Strange Brew\", starring Rick Moranis and Dave Thomas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38928", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38928", "title": "Gaia Hypothesis", "text": ""}
