{"id": "42228", "revid": "23950057", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42228", "title": "Everleigh Club", "text": "Brothel which operated in Chicago\nThe Everleigh Club was a high-class brothel which operated in Chicago, Illinois, from February 1900 until October 1911. It was owned and operated by Ada and Minna Everleigh.\nOpening.\nAda Everleigh, the elder, was born in Greene County, Virginia, on February 15, 1864, and died in Charlottesville, Virginia, on January 5, 1960. Minna was born in Greene County on July 13, 1866 and died in New York City on September 16, 1948.\nInitially born with the surname Simms, the sisters took the name Everleigh, which was inspired by their grandmother's tradition to sign her letters, \"Everly yours.\" According to the sisters, after two unsuccessful marriages (of which there is no record), the Everleigh sisters left the small town where they were raised in Kentucky (another story concocted by the sisters) for Omaha, Nebraska. It was there where Minna and Ada established their first brothel using money they invested from their $35,000 estate inheritance. In only two years, the women doubled their investment in addition to earning a considerable profit. Minna and Ada closed the brothel, and with their recent earnings, sought more lucrative investment opportunities.\nBefore relocating to Chicago, the Everleigh sisters toured brothels in many cities, trying to find a location which had \"plenty of wealthy men but no superior houses.\" They were directed to Chicago by Cleo Maitland, a madam in Washington, D.C., who suggested they contact Effie Hankins in Chicago. After buying Hankins's brothel at 2131\u20132133 South Dearborn Street, they\nfired all the women and completely redecorated the entire building with the most luxurious appointments available. Silk curtains, damask easy chairs, oriental rugs, mahogany tables, gold rimmed china and silver dinner ware, perfumed fountains in every room, a $15,000 gold-leafed piano for the Music Room, mirrored ceilings, a library filled with finely bound volumes, an art gallery featuring nudes in gold frames\u2014no expense was spared. While the heavyweight boxer Jack Johnson thought the $57 gold spittoons in his caf\u00e9 were worth boasting about, the patrons of the Everleigh Club were obliged to expectorate in $650 gold cuspidors.\nThe Everleigh Club was described by Chicago's Vice Commission as \"probably the most famous and luxurious house of prostitution in the country\".\nBefore the opening of the Everleigh Club, Ada was responsible for recruiting staff for the club. She started by contacting her former employees in Omaha and spreading the word through brothels across the country. She conducted face-to-face interviews with all the applicants. The brothel opened on February 1, 1900, with little fanfare, and turned away many of the clients who initially appeared because the Everleigh Sisters did not deem them to be the suitably upscale clientele they were seeking. Once the club was open, Ada, who was quieter and more reserved than her sister, took on the responsibility of making sure the club was kept up to standard. She oversaw cleaning and renovations.\nExpenses.\nAfter the club was closed, Minna Everleigh claimed in testimony that she \"always entertained state legislators free in the club.\"\nThe sisters' separate responsibilities.\nThe Everleigh sisters Minna and Ada\u2014the madams of the Everleigh Club\u2014 carried out very different duties in the operation of the club. Ada, the soft-spoken sister, mainly focused on the business transactions, which included managing the books and allocating finances. She took care of the logistics of running the club and was responsible for hiring new girls. Minna, the outgoing sister, was responsible for teaching new girls charm and culture, as well as any duties that required personal interaction. Her personality lent her the ability to effortlessly interact with guests. Often Minna was seen socializing with guests near the parlors or welcoming them with a friendly greeting into the club.\nInterior layout.\nThe Everleigh quickly gained a reputation as an upscale gentlemen's club, so much so that the Everleigh sisters were forced to turn away prospective clients even on opening day on February 1, 1900. The club's extensive popularity afforded Minna and Ada the opportunity to select their clientele. Only those men deemed suitable by Minna and Ada gained admittance into the Everleigh Club. The Everleigh sisters deemed a prospective client \"worthy\" to be admitted into the club if: the prospective client provided a letter of recommendation from an existing member, an engraved card, or through a formal introduction by Minna or Ada. These standards made the club extremely exclusive, indulging the desires of only the wealthy and influential men. Author Karen Abbott wrote, \"The cachet of being able to go there, just because they turned down so many people. It became an exclusive badge of honor just to be admitted.\"\nOn March 3, 1902, Prince Henry of Prussia visited the club while in the United States to collect a ship built for his brother, German Kaiser Wilhelm II. Although the city had sponsored numerous events for Henry, his main interest was a visit to the club. The sisters planned a bacchanalia for the visiting prince, including dancing, dining and a recreation of the dismemberment of Zeus's son. During one of the dances, a prostitute's slipper came off and spilled champagne. When one of the prince's entourage drank the champagne, he started the trend of drinking champagne from a woman's shoe.\nThe club employed 15 to 25 cooks and maids.\nScandals.\nOn November 22, 1905, Marshall Field Jr., son of department store founder Marshall Field, suffered a gunshot to the abdomen; he died of complications several days later. Although newspapers reported it was an accident and occurred at his home, there is some evidence that he was shot by a prostitute at the Everleigh Club. A rival madam maliciously accused the Everleigh sisters of murdering Field.\nOn January 9, 1910, Nathaniel Moore died of natural causes in the Chez Shaw brothel in Chicago's Levee district after spending much of the previous night at the Everleigh Club.\nClosing.\nThe Everleigh sisters operated their brothel as a place of luxury, made available only to wealthier and more prominent clients. This made it more difficult when it came time for reform. Other brothels during this time period simply were raided by the police and shut down, but because the Everleigh Club in particular had such a reputation for its high standards and exclusivity, officials were not able to dismantle the club so easily.\nThe Chicago Vice Commission sought to close the Everleigh Club and the entire red-light district of Chicago in an attempt to rehabilitate prostitutes, curb the spread of venereal disease, and cease the crime and violence that often were associated with prostitution (not necessarily within the Everleigh Club). Because of the Everleigh sisters and their lavish club, prostitution during this time period became a glamorized activity, which made it harder to eradicate. Local politics played a large role in deciding how and when the club would be shut down. The Everleigh sisters were known for their tendency to bribe local aldermen to look the other way when it came to legal manners. Following a 1910 Vice Commission report that noted there were nearly 600 brothels in Chicago, Mayor Carter Harrison Jr. ordered the Everleigh Club to be closed on October 24, 1911. The sisters retired with an estimated $1 million in cash and traveled in Europe, then eventually changed their name back to Lester and settled in New York City. When their brothel business closed, Ada was 45 years old and Minna was 47 years old.\nMinna, always the more outspoken of the two, responded philosophically, stating \"If the Mayor says we must close, that settles it...I'll close up shop and walk out with a smile on my face.\" And so they did. She later stated \"If it weren't for married men, we couldn't have carried on at all, and if it weren't for cheating married women, we could have made another million.\"\nShortly after the brothel was closed, Minna Everleigh testified against Chicago aldermen \"Bathhouse\" John Coughlin and \"Hinky Dink\" Kenna. Although Everleigh announced she would make her testimony public, threats by \"Big Jim\" Colosimo to kill Minna and her sister if the testimony were made public kept her silent. Nevertheless, Chief Justice Harry Olson of Chicago's Municipal Court released her testimony that outlined the schedule of graft due to the aldermen in return for allowing operations to continue in the Levee District.\nThe building that housed the Everleigh Club eventually was razed in July 1933. Today, the Chicago Housing Authority's Hilliard Homes, designed by Bertrand Goldberg, stand on the site.\nIn popular fiction.\nThe novel \"The Golden Room\" by Irving Wallace (1989) gives a fictionalized account of the events surrounding the visit of Prince Henry of Prussia to the Everleigh Club, taking great liberties with dates and historical characters.\nThe fictional novel \u201cThe Race - An Issac Bell Adventure\u201c by [Clive Cussler &amp; Justin Scott](2011) includes a reference in Chapter 26 to the Everleigh Club.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42229", "revid": "12366037", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42229", "title": "Purushottam Laxman Deshpande", "text": "Indian writer and humorist (1919\u20132000)\nPurushottam Laxman Deshpande (alternatively written as Pu La Deshpande; 8 November 1919 \u2013 12 June 2000), popularly known by his initials (\"Pu. La.\") or as P. L. Deshpande, was a Marathi writer and humorist from Maharashtra. He was also an accomplished film and stage actor, script writer, author, composer, musician, singer and orator. He was often referred to as \"Maharashtra's beloved personality\".\nDeshpande's works have been translated into several languages including English and Kannada.\nEarly life.\nPurushottam Laxman Deshpande was born in Gamdevi Street, Chowpati, Mumbai in a Gaud Saraswat Brahmin (GSB) family to Laxman Trimbak Deshpande and Laxmibai Laxman Deshpande. His maternal grandfather, Vaman Mangesh Dubhashi, was a Marathi poet and writer. He had translated Rabindranath Tagore's Gitanjali into Marathi, with the title, \"Abhang Gitanjali\".\nThe family used to stay at Kenway House, Procter Road in the Grant Road locality in Mumbai. His family then moved to Jogeshwari. His first 8 years at the newly formed Saraswati Baug Colony are described in the story titled 'Balpanicha Kaal Sukhacha' or \"B\u0101lpa\u1e47ic\u0101 K\u0101\u1e37 Sukh\u0101c\u0101\" (translation: the happy days of childhood) in his book \"Purchundi\". The family then moved to Vile Parle.\nEducation.\nDeshpande studied at Parle Tilak Vidyalaya. He attended Ismail Yusuf College after high school and then Fergusson College in Pune for BA. Later, he attended Government Law College, Mumbai for LLB. He completed Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree in 1950 and then a Master of Arts (MA) degree from Willingdon College, Sangli. He also took lessons in playing the harmonium from Dattopant Rajopadhye of \"Bhaskar Sangitalaya\".\nPersonal life.\nHis first wife, Sundar Divadkar, died soon after their wedding. On 12 June 1946, Deshpande married his colleague, Sunita Thakur. She (Sunita Deshpande) was to go on to become an accomplished writer in her own right. The couple did not have any children of their own. They raised Sunitabai's nephew, Dinesh Thakur as their own son. Pu La wrote on Dinesh in his book Gangot.\nProfessional life.\nBooks.\n1.\"Vyakti Ani Valli\" (\u0935\u094d\u092f\u0915\u094d\u0924\u0940 \u0906\u0923\u093f \u0935\u0932\u094d\u0932\u0940):\nThis book is a collection of character sketches, portraying various eccentric personalities from Deshpande's life. Each character is brought to life with humor and wit, reflecting the diverse and colorful spectrum of human nature.\n2.\"Batatyachi Chaal\" (\u092c\u091f\u093e\u091f\u094d\u092f\u093e\u091a\u0940 \u091a\u093e\u0933):\nA humorous depiction of life in a chawl (a type of communal housing) in Mumbai, the book captures the quirky and endearing lives of its inhabitants, illustrating their daily struggles and camaraderie with a comedic touch.\n3.\"Apoorvai\" (\u0905\u092a\u0942\u0930\u094d\u0935\u093e\u0907):\nThis is a travelogue recounting Deshpande's experiences in Europe. Written with his characteristic humor, the book offers insightful and amusing observations about European culture and lifestyle.\n4.\"Asa Mi Asami\" (\u0905\u0938\u093e \u092e\u0940 \u0905\u0938\u093e\u092e\u0940):\nA satirical autobiography, this novel presents the life of a common man through a series of humorous episodes, highlighting the absurdities and ironies of middle-class existence in India.\n5.\"Ti Phulrani\" (\u0924\u0940 \u092b\u0941\u0932\u0930\u093e\u0923\u0940):\nAn adaptation of George Bernard Shaw's play \"Pygmalion,\" this Marathi play tells the story of a flower girl who is transformed into a refined lady under the guidance of a professor. It retains the original's critique of social class distinctions while adding Deshpande's unique comedic flair.\n6.\"Jave Tyanchya Desha\" (\u091c\u093e\u0935\u0947 \u0924\u094d\u092f\u093e\u0902\u091a\u094d\u092f\u093e \u0926\u0947\u0936\u093e):\nAnother travelogue, this book describes Deshpande's visit to various countries, filled with humorous anecdotes and reflections on the cultural differences he encounters.\n7.\"Guna Gaiin Awadi\" (\u0917\u0941\u0923 \u0917\u093e\u0908\u0928 \u0906\u0935\u0921\u0940):\nA collection of essays that blend humor with philosophical insights, showcasing Deshpande's ability to find comedy in everyday situations while pondering deeper meanings.\nEducator.\nBoth Deshpande and his wife served as teachers in Orient High School, Mumbai. He also worked for some years as a college professor in Rani Parvati Devi College, Belgaum in Karnataka and Kirti College in Mumbai.\nTelevision.\nHe also worked for Doordarshan, the state-owned TV channel. He was the first person to interview the then Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, on Indian television. He was seconded to the BBC for a year-long training. After this, he spent some time in France and West Germany. It was this specific period and stays in these countries that his later travelogue \"Apoorvai\" was to be based upon. His other travelogues are \"Poorvaranga\" and \"Jave Tyanchya Desha\".\nFilm and music.\nDeshpande was a man of many talents. Apart from writing, the talents he used in filmmaking included writing screenplays, directing, acting, composing music, and singing. He was instrumental in establishing the iconic Bal Gandharva Ranga Mandir in Pune. He was a proficient in Hindustani classical music.He composed music for many marathi films of 1940s and '50s including 'Amaldar', 'Gulacha Ganapati', 'Ghardhani', 'Chokhamela', 'Dudhbhat', 'Dev Pavla', 'Devbappa', 'Navrabayako', 'Nave Birhad', 'Manache Paan' and 'Mothi Manase'. He was also the composer for many popular non-film songs in the \n\"bhavegeet\" genre sung by singers such as Jyotsna Bhole, Manik Varma and Asha Bhosale.\nDeath.\nDeshpande died in Pune, Maharashtra, on 12 June 2000, due to complications from Parkinson's disease. He was aged 80. He died on the couple's 54th wedding anniversary.\nBibliography.\nMost of Deshpande's literary contributions are in the Marathi language. Although he wrote across several genres, he was particularly well known for his works of humor. He also adapted prominent works from other languages into screenplays - scripts - for films in the Marathi. Prominent examples include:\nThe Marathi book eka koliyane ( \u090f\u0915\u093e \u0915\u094b\u0933\u0940\u092f\u093e\u0928\u0947\u0902 ) is a translation ( \u092d\u093e\u0935\u093e\u0928\u0941\u0935\u093e\u0926 ) of earnest Hemingway's book old man and the sea.\nHe referred to his adaptations as \u092d\u093e\u0935\u093e\u0928\u0941\u0935\u093e\u0926 (\"Bhawanuwad\" or paraphrasing) instead of as conventional \"translation\"s or \"adaptation\"s .\nSocial work.\nPu La Deshpande donated and participated in several social and philanthropic causes.\nPu. La. Deshpande's wife, Sunita Deshpande, donated Rs.25 lakhs to IUCAA towards Muktangan Vidnyan Shodhika, a building aptly named as \"PULASTYA\" (a name of a star and memory of PULA.) After the demise of Sunita deshpande, the copyrights of most of Pu. La's books were given to IUCAA and the royalties received from Pu La's works is used to spread Science awareness among young kids by IUCAA.\nIn popular culture.\nDocumentaries.\nDocumentary on Pu. La. Deshpande: This is a Govt. of India Films Division documentary, in which Pu La himself reveals his life journey. It was filmed on the occasion of his 60th birthday. There are two other documentaries made on Pu La:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42230", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42230", "title": "Hotel Chelsea", "text": "Historic hotel in Manhattan, New York\nThe Hotel Chelsea (also known as the Chelsea Hotel and the Chelsea) is a hotel at 222 West 23rd Street in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan in New York City. Built between 1883 and 1884, the hotel was designed by Philip Hubert in a style described variously as Queen Anne Revival and Victorian Gothic. The 12-story Chelsea, originally a housing cooperative, has been the home of numerous writers, musicians, artists, and entertainers, some of whom still lived there in the 21st century. As of 2022[ [update]], most of the Chelsea is a luxury hotel. The building is a New York City designated landmark and on the National Register of Historic Places.\nThe front facade of the Hotel Chelsea is 11 stories high, while the rear of the hotel rises 12 stories. The facade is divided vertically into five sections and is made of brick, with some flower-ornamented iron balconies; the hotel is capped by a high mansard roof. The Hotel Chelsea has thick load-bearing walls made of masonry, as well as wrought iron floor beams and large, column-free spaces. When the hotel opened, the ground floor was divided into an entrance hall, four storefronts, and a restaurant; this has been rearranged over the years, with a bar and the El Quijote restaurant occupying part of the ground floor. The Chelsea was among the first buildings in the city with duplex and penthouse apartments, and there is also a rooftop terrace. The hotel originally had no more than 100 apartments; it was subdivided into 400 units during the 20th century and has 155 units as of 2022.\nThe idea for the Chelsea arose after Hubert &amp; Pirsson had developed several housing cooperatives in New York City. Developed by the Chelsea Association, the structure quickly attracted authors and artists after opening. Several factors, including financial hardships and tenant relocations, prompted the Chelsea's conversion into an apartment hotel in 1905. Knott Hotels took over the hotel in 1921 and managed it until about 1942, when David Bard bought it out of bankruptcy. Julius Krauss and Joseph Gross joined Bard as owners in 1947. After David Bard died in 1964, his son Stanley operated it for 43 years, forming close relationships with many tenants. The hotel underwent numerous minor changes in the late 20th century after falling into a state of disrepair. The Krauss and Gross families took over the hotel in 2007 and were involved in numerous tenant disputes before the Chelsea closed for a major renovation in 2011. The hotel changed ownership twice in the 2010s before BD Hotels took over in 2016, and the Chelsea reopened in 2022.\nThe Chelsea has become known for its many notable guests. Residents have included Mark Twain, Dylan Thomas, Arthur Miller, Bob Dylan, Edie Sedgwick, Janis Joplin, Leonard Cohen, Arthur C. Clarke, Patti Smith, Robert Mapplethorpe, Milo\u0161 Forman, and Virgil Thomson. The Chelsea received much commentary for the creative culture that Bard helped create within the hotel. Critics also appraised the hotel's interior\u2014which was reputed for its uncleanliness in the mid- and late 20th century\u2014and the quality of the hotel rooms themselves. The Chelsea has been the setting or inspiration for many works of popular media, and it has been used as an event venue and filming location.\nSite.\nThe Hotel Chelsea is at 222 West 23rd Street in the Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan in New York City, on the south side of the street between Eighth Avenue and Seventh Avenue. The rectangular land lot covers approximately , with a frontage of on 23rd Street to the north and a depth of . Seven land lots were combined to make way for the hotel, which was 175\u00a0feet wide and deep. Before what became the Hotel Chelsea was developed, a furniture store had stood on the site; it burned down in 1878, and the site remained vacant for four years afterward. The furniture store and the land had belonged to James Ingersoll, who was affiliated with the Tammany Hall political ring in the 1870s. When the Chelsea was finished in 1884, there was a church on either side of the lot.\nArchitecture.\nThe Hotel Chelsea was designed by Philip Hubert of the firm of Hubert, Pirrson &amp; Company. The style has been described variously as Queen Anne Revival, Victorian Gothic, or a mixture of the two. It was one of the first Victorian Gothic buildings to be erected in New York City. At the time of its completion, it was the city's tallest apartment building and one of the tallest structures in Manhattan, at approximately tall. According to the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, the Chelsea's design was evocative of the demolished Spanish Flats on Central Park South.\nFacade.\nThe front facade of the hotel, on 23rd Street, is 11 stories high and is divided vertically into 25 bays. The rear of the hotel rises to a height of 12 stories. The 23rd Street facade is made of red brick. It is grouped into five sections, with projecting pavilions at the western end, center, and eastern end of the facade. These pavilions flank two groups of recessed bays. The main entrance within the central pavilion remains largely intact, although the storefronts on either side have been modified over the years. There are several brass plaques next to the main entrance, commemorating notable residents, and another plaque mentioning that the building is on the National Register of Historic Places.\nOn the upper floors, the brick is interspersed with white stone bands. The hotel has flower-ornamented iron balconies on its second through eighth stories, which were constructed by J.B. and J.M. Cornell. These balconies were intended as \"light balconies, after the Paris fashion\"; according to author Sherill Tippins, the balconies were meant to \"add charm to the lower floors\". The balconies were also intended to indicate that the interiors were ornately decorated. French doors lead from some apartments to the balconies.\nThe building is topped by a high mansard roof. The central pavilion has a pyramidal slate roof. There are brick chimneys on either side of the pyramidal-roofed pavilion. In addition, the pavilions on either end of the facade are topped by brick gables with large arched windows. The remainder of the roof features dormer windows and additional brick chimneys. Atop the roof was a brick-floored space, which could be adapted into a roof garden or promenade. The center of the roof was interspersed with hip roofs, beneath which were duplex apartments; residents of these duplexes had direct access to the roof.\nStructural and mechanical features.\nThe Hotel Chelsea has thick load-bearing walls made of masonry, which measure thick at their bottoms and taper to at their tops. This allowed the superstructure to support the weight of two additional stories if the building were expanded. The walls support floor beams made of wrought iron; these floor beams are not supported by intermediate columns, creating large column-free spaces. The floor beams were covered with plaster to prevent fire from spreading. As another fireproofing measure, the hotel used as little wood as possible. Ceilings measured high.\nThe basement measured up to deep and housed the kitchen, laundry, refrigerators, coal rooms, engines, and machinery for gas-powered and electric light. As planned, the hotel had three passenger elevators and two steam-powered freight lifts. When it was completed in 1884, the hotel had speaking tubes; pressurized steam; a telephone in each room, connecting to the hotel manager's office; and 1,800 lights powered by either gas or electricity. The hotel contained then-innovative features such as electricity, steam heating, and hot and cold water. Dumbwaiters transported food from the basement kitchen to each floor.\nPublic areas.\nWhen the hotel opened in 1884, the ground floor was divided into an entrance hall, four storefronts, and a restaurant for tenants who did not have their own kitchen. The lobby was originally furnished with a marble floor and mahogany wainscoting. On the left wall of the lobby was an elaborate fireplace mantel, which remained intact in the late 20th century. To the right of the lobby was a reception room decorated in white maple, a plush-and-velvet carpet, and old-gold surfaces. Three interconnected dining rooms, reserved for residents, were placed behind the lobby. These rooms had decorations such as stained glass, carved gargoyles, and fleurs-de-lis. Next to the lobby was a manager's office, whose ceiling had gold trimmings and a mural with clouds and angels. There was also a barbershop, as well as a restaurant, cafe, laundry room, billiards room, bakery, fish-and-meat shop, and grocery on the ground floor and basement. Hotel staff lived in another building behind the main hotel, connected to it by a tunnel.\nAs of 2022, the hotel's lobby is decorated with inlaid ceilings and mosaic-tile floors. The lobby contains furniture in various colors, while the front desk is clad with purple marble. In addition, various paintings by residents are hung on the beige-pink walls, and the lobby's ceiling is decorated with frescoes, roses, and garlands. Adjacent to the lobby is the Lobby Bar, which contains mosaic-tile floors, a marble bar, art from former residents, and old chandeliers. This bar, formerly storage space, has several pieces of mid-century modern furniture and vintage furnishings such as lamps. Other decorative elements include skylights, floor tiles, brick walls, and trellises covered with vegetation.\nNext to the lobby is the El Quijote restaurant, which has occupied the hotel since 1955. The restaurant is decorated with a marble terrazzo floor, a rough-hewn ceiling, red-vinyl dining booths, and chandeliers. Among the decorations are a series of murals depicting scenes from the book \"Don Quixote\", as well as oil paintings. El Quijote contains a private bar next to its main dining room. Prior to 2018, the restaurant sat 220 people; the Dulcinea and Cervantes rooms at the rear comprised nearly half of the restaurant's seating capacity. These rooms were removed in a 2022 renovation, which also reduced the restaurant's capacity to 45 or 65. Since 2023, the hotel has also contained the Caf\u00e9 Chelsea bistro, located within three rooms. The bistro includes vintage decorations, some taken from the Lord &amp; Taylor Building.\nAlso at ground level is a mom-and-pop store named Chelsea Guitars and a private event space known as the Bard Room. The main staircase, at the center of the hotel, is illuminated by a rooftop skylight and is only accessible to guests. The walls of the staircase were once lined with photos created by residents. The staircase originally had iron railings and marble treads. The center of the building is surmounted by a pyramid accessed by a narrow wooden staircase. There was also an elevator cage, decorated with rosettes that matched the exterior decorations. The upper stories include a gym and a rooftop spa.\nGuestrooms and apartments.\nOriginal units.\nThe Chelsea was among the first buildings in the city with duplex apartments and penthouse apartments. Above the ground floor, there were originally either 90, 97, or 100 apartments in total. There were ten apartments on each story, ranging from . Each floor had a mixture of small and large apartments, so residents of different socioeconomic classes could reside on the same story. Sources disagree on whether the largest apartments had eight, ten, or twelve rooms. Old floor plans show that the apartments were arranged along a single west\u2013east corridor on each floor; these corridors measured up to wide. The largest apartments occupied either end of the hotel and had at least four bedrooms, while mid-sized two- and three-bedroom units were placed next to these. The smallest units, targeted at unmarried men and women, were arranged near the stairs and elevators at the center of the building.\nA variety of styles and materials were used in the apartments to fit each tenant's taste. Originally, the interiors were ornately decorated. The dadoes and some of the floors were made of marble, and there was also hardwood floors and doors. In addition, the fireplace mantels were made of onyx, and the fireplaces contained andirons with rosettes.\nEvery apartment had its own bathroom, and many units also had servants' bedrooms. Only the largest apartments had kitchens; everyone else received meals from the restaurants or a caterer. There were 67 apartments with kitchens, each of which had a refrigerator as well as a stove powered by coal, gas, or steam. One of the larger apartments, suite 920, belonged to the hotel's manager and consisted of three rooms with high ceilings. The apartments on the tenth and eleventh floors were intended for artists, taking advantage of sunlight from the north. These apartments were arranged as duplexes, with artists' studios on the upper level and bedrooms on the lower level, and were in high demand when the Chelsea opened. The twelfth floor contained a space accessible only from the rooftop promenade; this was intended as a clinic. Tenants could also use a ballroom under the roof.\nSubsequent changes.\nBy the 1980s, the hotel had been subdivided into 400 rooms, many of which retained their original thick walls and fireplaces. This was reduced by the 2000s to about 240 or 250 units (some with multiple rooms). All of the units had a unique layout. The rooms were accessed via wide marble corridors and varied significantly in decorative motif.\nFollowing a renovation that was completed in 2022, some decorative features, such as entry halls and doorknobs, were redesigned with monograms containing the hotel's name. There are approximately 155 rooms, divided into 125 single-room units and 30 suites; the largest units are two-bedroom apartments with en-suite kitchens. As an allusion to the Chelsea's artistic clientele, the rooms are decorated with artworks collected between the 1970s and the 1990s, in addition to headboards with splattered-paint patterns. Some rooms retain original fireplaces and stained glass windows. The guestrooms also have design features such as wooden nightstands, closets with wallpaper, and marble-clad bathrooms. Five of the former artists' residences are retained in the modern-day hotel, and some of the rooms have wheelchair-accessible features such as shelves and bathrooms.\nHistory.\nDuring the early 19th century, apartment developments in the city were generally associated with the working class, but by the late 19th century, apartments were also becoming desirable among the middle and upper classes. Between 1880 and 1885, more than ninety apartment buildings were developed in the city. The architect Philip Hubert and his partner James W. Pirrson had created a \"Hubert Home Club\" in 1880 for the Rembrandt, a six-story building on 57th Street that had been built as housing for artists. This early cooperative building had rental units to help defray costs, and it also provided servants as part of the building staff. The success of this model led to other \"Hubert Home Clubs\", including the Chelsea. Hubert believed that such clubs could help entice middle- and upper-class New Yorkers to live in apartment buildings.\nDevelopment.\nAfter constructing several more Home Clubs in the 1880s, Hubert decided to construct a structure in Chelsea. In contrast to previous clubs, where residents were selected according to their beliefs and socioeconomic status, Hubert wanted the new building to house as diverse a group of residents as possible. Hubert planned a structure as a self-contained, purpose-built artists' community, based on a concept by the philosopher Charles Fourier. The structure, later known as the Chelsea Hotel, was originally known as the Chelsea Association Building and was to be developed by the Chelsea Association. It is unknown who specifically devised the idea for the building. A construction materials dealer named George M. Smith applied for the hotel's building permit; he was one of several members of the Chelsea Association's building committee. By contrast, a contemporary \"New-York Tribune\" article described \"some 50 people of means\" as having been responsible for development.\nHubert identified a vacant site on 23rd Street between Eighth and Seventh Avenues, which had been occupied by James Ingersoll's furniture store, as well as an adjoining townhouse on 22nd Street. Hubert paid Ingersoll $175,000 () for the plots and promised Ingersoll an apartment in the new building, as well as membership in the Chelsea Association. Hubert, Pirsson &amp; Co. filed plans in early 1883 for a \"cooperative club apartment house\" on the site at an estimated cost of $350,000 (). In August 1883, the Chelsea Association obtained a $200,000 mortgage loan for the building () from the Equitable Life Assurance Society. The same bank placed a $300,000 mortgage loan on the hotel that December (). By March 1884, the Chelsea Association Building was nearly complete. One account in \"The New York Times\" described the Chelsea as \"the most profitable and popular of [Hubert and Pirsson's] enterprises\".\nEarly years and hotel conversion.\nThe Chelsea began accepting residents in 1884 and was structured as a housing cooperative. Two-thirds of the original apartments were owned by Chelsea Association stockholders, and the other third were rented out. Almost from the outset, the Chelsea was one of the most popular of Hubert's Home Clubs, and there were more prospective tenants than available apartments. Tippins wrote that, \"from the beginning, the Chelsea was a home for eccentrics and the artists were there by design\". The Chelsea was located in what was then the center of New York City's theater district, with venues such as the Booth's Theatre and the Grand Opera House nearby.\nIts early residents represented a wide variety of groups, from unmarried professionals to large families. Many of the hotel's early guests were authors and artists. According to the \"Real Estate Record and Guide\", many construction suppliers and workers moved into the apartments rather than accept monetary compensation. The building also attracted wealthy widows, government officials, and a variety of other middle- and upper-class professionals, though Hubert refused to disclose residents' names for the social registers. These residents largely moved from other apartment buildings. There were also 30 servants, mostly immigrants from Germany and Ireland.\nIn 1898, \"Lippincott's Monthly Magazine\" described the Chelsea as one of Manhattan's \"literary shrines\", in part because of the presence of residents such as Edward Eggleston and Jane Cunningham Croly. Other early residents included painter Rufus Fairchild Zogbaum, poet Henry Abbey, and actress Annie Russell. By the end of the 19th century, the co-op was in decline due to the suspicions of New York City's middle class about apartment living, the development of houses further north in Manhattan, and the relocation of the city's theater district. The 1893 economic crash, and the lasting effects of another crash in the 1900s, further strained the Chelsea Association's finances. During the 1890s, many of the Chelsea Association's original stockholders either died, moved away, or had become involved in legal and financial controversies. By the 1900s, the Chelsea was accepting a larger number of short-term visitors. A \"Chicago Tribune\" reporter wrote in the late 20th century that the co-op had never \"had a heyday\", as many wealthy residents were already moving uptown after the hotel was completed.\nThe building was officially converted to an apartment hotel in 1905. At the time of the conversion, the Chelsea was divided into 125 units. Small studios that had been converted from maids' quarters were available for as little as $1.50 per night (), while units that had one or two bedrooms cost up to $4\u20135 per night (equivalent to between $ and $ in 2024). In the first two decades of the 20th century, the hotel hosted events such a merchandise sales; meetings of local groups, like the Chelsea Society of New York and Syracuse University Club of New York; and educational lectures. Following the sinking of the RMS \"Titanic\" in 1912, several guests from the \"Titanic\" were also given rooms at the hotel. The managers sometimes removed guests' corpses from the hotel. The opening of the New York City Subway's Broadway\u2013Seventh Avenue Line in the late 1910s had spurred development in the surrounding area, although the Hotel Chelsea remained in use as an apartment hotel. One of the ground-level stores was leased to the Greater Engineering Company in 1920.\nKnott operation.\nKnott Hotels, a family-owned firm that operated numerous budget hotels in New York City, leased the hotel in March 1921, establishing the 222 West Twenty-third Street Hotel Corporation to operate the Chelsea. The lease initially ran until 1942. By then, half of the Chelsea Association's original stockholders remained, and many parts of the hotel needed to be repaired or upgraded. Shortly after taking over, the Knotts split up some of the apartments, added a reception desk at the bottom of the Chelsea's grand staircase, closed the dining room, and added kitchenettes to existing apartments. In addition, the hotel's American floor numbering system was changed to a European floor numbering system; for instance, the second story, directly above ground level, was renumbered as floor 1. The Knott family extended their lease by another 43 years in 1922, agreeing to pay a total of $6,196,000 () through the lease's projected expiration in 1985.\nThe Hotel Chelsea continued to serve as a \"headquarters for painters and writers\", as described by the \"New York Herald Tribune\". The Hotel Carteret was erected to the east in 1927, blocking eastward views from the Chelsea. To attract more tenants, the Knotts decreased prices for rooms at the eastern end of the hotel. In addition, the Knott family transferred the hotel's ownership to the Knott Corporation, a Delaware company, in September 1927. By the end of the 1920s, the Chelsea had been further subdivided into more than 300 rooms. The Knotts had replaced the lobby's paintings with wallpaper, and they had moved the original lobby furniture to make way for a heater on a banquette. Most of the hotel's bellhops and waiters were African-American by this time. Switchboard operators and desk clerks called residents by their nicknames. The \"Asbury Park Press\" called the Chelsea one of the \"last ornate landmarks of a Little Old New York locality\".\nBatchelder's Restaurant leased the Chelsea's restaurant space in early 1930. During that decade, the Chelsea Hotel remained popular among artists and writers because of the low rents, the friendly atmosphere, and the fact that the residences provided large amounts of privacy. Because many of the old apartments had been subdivided, each floor had various winding corridors leading to the different rooms. The low rents in particular attracted artists like John Sloan and Edgar Lee Masters. There was controversy in late 1934 when then-manager Jerry Gagin commissioned a series of satirical paintings from John McKiernan, depicting three politicians. Knott Hotels president William Knott ordered Gagin to remove the murals, but Gagin refused, and the murals were instead covered up.\nBard, Gross, and Krauss operation.\nThe last member of the Chelsea Association died around 1941, and the hotel went bankrupt around the same time. The New York Bank for Savings repossessed the building at an auction in approximately July 1942. That October, the Bank for Savings sold the hotel, along with the adjacent brownstone house at 229 West 22nd Street, to the Chelsea Hotel Company at an assessed value of $561,500 (). The buyers took over a $220,000 mortgage () that had been placed on the hotel. At the time, the hotel had seven stores, 319 guestrooms, and 176 bathrooms. Following the sale to the Chelsea Hotel Company, the hotel was operated by a syndicate of Hungarian immigrants represented by David Bard and Frank Amigo. The new operators were tasked with updating the hotel, which had outdated plumbing and electrical wiring; dilapidated elevators; and dirty walls. In addition, Bard had to dispel rumors circulating among existing tenants, who believed that Bard had won the hotel in a poker game and wanted to raze it.\nThe United States Shipping Board leased the ground and second floors in late 1942, and members of the United States Maritime Service used the space as the U.S. Maritime Service Graduate Station. In 1944, architect Morris Whinston filed plans for $5,000 () worth of alterations to the hotel. The Chelsea started to become associated with bohemianism during the 1940s and 1950s, and many original design details were removed during that era. A 1946 article in the \"Troy Record\" noted that artists lived in 25 of the Chelsea's 300 units and that the hotel no longer served traditional celebrities. The structure also hosted office tenants such as the World Congress of the Partisans of Peace on the ground floor. Bard had grown exasperated of the tenants' complaints by 1947, when he sold most of his shares to desk clerk Julius Krauss and plumber Joseph Gross, retaining five percent of his shares in the building. During this era, the hotel often served as a gathering place for left-wing and socialist activists; for instance, one of the ground-floor spaces was occupied by left-wing organizers who supported the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine.\nBard again became involved in the hotel's operations by the early 1950s. By then, additional apartments had been subdivided, and the interiors had been significantly modified. The floors had been covered with linoleum; the walls had been painted over; and the skylight above the Chelsea's main staircase had been sealed. Bard, Gross, and Krauss jointly operated the hotel through the rest of this decade. The El Quijote restaurant, operated by a group of Spanish immigrants, moved to the Hotel Chelsea in 1955. The next year, inspectors found that the hotel had accumulated sixteen violations of city building codes. By the late 1950s, the Chelsea had begun to accept black residents, starting with the printmaker Robert Blackburn, and European artists were increasingly moving in. David Bard had sold all of his remaining hotels and spent large amounts of his time talking to the artists and authors who resided there. His son Stanley, who would later manage the hotel himself, recalled being jealous of the hotel because David spent all of his time there.\nBy the beginning of the 1960s, the Chelsea Hotel was known as the \"Dowager of 23rd Street\", and the surrounding area was populated with what Tippins referred to as \"tawdry bars and low-rent offices\". Nearly all of the entertainment venues in the area had been replaced with stores and apartments. Most of the hotel's occupants were long-term residents, who rarely moved away due to the low rental rates. Nouveaux Realistes artists also began to frequent the hotel in the 1960s, and pop artists often collaborated there by 1962. The New York Community Trust installed a plaque outside the building in 1962, detailing the hotel's history. Other plaques honoring specific residents were installed in the mid-1960s, including those for the author Thomas Wolfe and the playwright and poet Brendan Behan.\nStanley Bard operation.\nStanley Bard became manager in 1964 after his father died. Stanley, who had been a plumber's assistant at the hotel since 1957 or 1958, was already familiar with many of the hotel's artistic residents when he assumed the managerial role. He began trying to attract artists who had been rejected from other hotels. Bard did not run advertisements, instead attracting new residents via word of mouth. The remaining co-owners, Joseph Gross and Julius Krauss, continued to work under Stanley Bard.\nStanley Bard was less strict than his predecessors, allowing residents to combine apartments on the basis of a handshake deal. Residents could install their own art, and pets might be allowed based on Stanley's whims. Actor Ethan Hawke, a onetime resident, recalled that Stanley charged residents different rates based on whether he liked them; a headline in \"The Wall Street Journal\" proclaimed that \"If Stanley Bard likes your wife you'll get a room at the Chelsea\". Bard generally had a lax attitude toward unpaid rent; he sometimes accepted paintings created by residents who were unable to pay rent, and he started displaying these works in the lobby. Another resident who could not afford rent was hired as a bellhop. Despite Bard's cavalier attitude toward guests' activities, he closely monitored all aspects of the hotel and sometimes refused to rent rooms to people who were disruptive or those that he disliked.\nAlthough Bard sometimes did not pay attention to maintenance (leading one resident to say that \"the place was held together with Scotch tape\"), he helped curate the artistic community there, providing artists with materials and looking after their children. The hotel also came to be known as a place where creative and eccentric figures stayed. Bard stated in 1975 that he had friendships with tenants, not \"tenant\u2013landlord\" relationships, and residents were free to walk into his office and talk with him. Bard had a bookcase in his office, with books written by residents. Tippins writes that Bard's inobtrusive management approach, along with the \"self-directing population ... and members' willingness to live in the moment\", created a strong artistic culture at the hotel.\n1960s and 1970s.\nBy the mid-1960s, the hotel began to attract artists who frequented Andy Warhol's Factory studio, as well as rock musicians (who were not allowed in many other hotels). The \"Austin American\" described the hotel as having \"400 rooms, 150 kitchens, and 150 fireplaces\". The hotel was physically decaying during that time, though the facade was cleaned. The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission (LPC) designated the Hotel Chelsea as a city landmark in March 1966, a decision ratified by the New York City Board of Estimate that June, despite opposition from a local planning board, which called the Chelsea a \"shabby institution\". The hotel, which was recognized for both architectural and historical significance, thus became one of the city's first official landmarks. Later the same year, Bard decided to redecorate the lobby after the release of Warhol's film \"Chelsea Girls\" drew attention to the hotel. The staircase was also cleaned in phases from top to bottom.\nThe popularity of \"Chelsea Girls\"\u2014along with that of the album \"Blonde on Blonde\", written by Chelsea Hotel resident Bob Dylan\u2014attracted many aspiring artists and actors to the hotel during the late 1960s, in spite of its rundown condition. About half of the rooms were occupied by permanent residents by the early 1970s; although new residents had to pay at least $400 () per month, older residents were protected by rent regulation and paid as little as $155 a month (). \"Variety\" magazine wrote that the Chelsea was \"the only landmark building still doing business\" from the time when the neighborhood was a major theatrical hub. The hotel's residents included many stage and film stars, artists, and \"less conventional celebrities\", who stayed despite the lack of modern amenities and the presence of pests. The cheapest units tended to have more issues. For many residents, however, there was \"no life outside the Hotel\", so they did not feel compelled to move. By the early 1970s, residents were increasingly unable to pay rent because of a general economic downturn, and Bard was forced to evict some residents to reduce expenses.\nThe hotel was in decline by the mid-1970s, with graffitied walls and a cockroach infestation. Residents removed some of the stained-glass windows and iron grates for scrap. It was common to see drug users in bathrooms and drug dealers in the hallways, and a brothel also operated openly within the hotel. Resident suicides and fires were frequent, as were robberies. Robbers held several residents hostage in a 1974 robbery, and the Chelsea was damaged in a 1978 fire that killed one resident. The death of Nancy Spungen at the hotel in 1978, and the death of her boyfriend\u2014Sid Vicious, who had been charged with her murder\u2014the next year, brought further negative attention to the hotel. Nonetheless, the Chelsea's reputation as an artists' and authors' haven remained intact. Although there were frequent remarks about the \"downright creepy\" atmosphere, many residents remained in spite of the decline in both the hotel and the surrounding neighborhood. Bard dispelled concerns by saying that any major crime at the hotel was covered by the media due to the Chelsea's bohemian nature. According to Laurie Johnston of \"The New York Times\", the hotel had \"some glittery (and, to some old-liners, scary) clientele among rock musicians and such\". The hotel was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1977.\n1980s to 2000s.\nBard and the Chelsea's residents had planned a centennial celebration in November 1983, though the celebration was delayed by a year. Bard said at the time that he wanted \"to keep the atmosphere kooky but nice, eccentric but beautiful\", rather than updating the hotel to keep up with the surrounding neighborhood's gentrification. He accommodated residents' creativity and maintained close relationships with tenants, to the point that residents spoke with staff \"as they were family\" and walked behind Bard's desk to get their own mail. The hotel also attracted many tourists who wanted to experience its \"eccentric\" nature, although the staff mainly catered to long-term residents. The Chelsea was still cheap; nightly room rates were about one-third that of more upscale hotels uptown, and studios there were less expensive than others in the neighborhood. By the mid-1980s, the hotel largely catered to the punk subculture, and it was 80 percent residential by the late 1980s. The hotel building itself remained in a state of disrepair: for instance, a balcony fell off the facade in 1986, injuring two passersby. The balcony's collapse prompted a subsequent renovation of the building.\nAfter Bard's children David and Michele became involved in the hotel's operation during the 1990s, they completed a $500,000 renovation of the facade in 1990 and renovated one of the sixth-floor rooms. David Bard upgraded the lobby's equipment, and the family subdivided the ground-level ladies' reception room into a set of offices, but they left the ceiling murals intact. The reception desk had been relocated to a niche off the main lobby. The Chelsea's reputation for \"wildness\" receded in the 1990s, though the hotel continued to attract artistic tenants under Bard's management. Long-term residents paid up to $3,000 a month in rent, while short-term guestrooms cost up to $295. Short-term guests also traveled to the hotel for a variety of reasons. Some wished to stay in rooms occupied by particular residents, while others traveled there because of their cheap rates. The guestrooms lacked modern amenities such as minibars, room service, and cable TV.\nIn spite of Stanley Bard's unorthodox approach to rent collection, the hotel's finances remained stable in the 1990s. The Bards continued to renovate selected rooms as part of a wide-ranging rehabilitation, and they also renovated the lobby. By the end of the 20th century, three-fourths of the hotel was occupied by long-term residents, and monthly rents ranged from $2,000 to $5,000. Bard wished to maintain the hotel's character, showing preference to artists over other potential tenants. There was also an art gallery and a basement bar named Serena.\nUnfounded rumors of a potential sale were circulating by the end of the 20th century. Marlene Krauss, the daughter of Julius Krauss, told Bard to stop renewing long-term residents' leases in 2005. Meanwhile, longtime resident David Elder (the grandson of Joseph Gross and the son of playwright and screenwriter Lonne Elder III) filed a lawsuit in 2005 to have Bard removed as the hotel's manager. At the time, three-fifths of the hotel's 240\u2013250 rooms were occupied by permanent residents. Temporary guestrooms and permanent residents' rooms were interspersed. As a result of rising expenses, there were fewer penurious artists living in the Chelsea compared to the mid- and late 20th century. A nightclub called the Star Lounge opened in the Chelsea's basement in early 2007.\nConversion to luxury hotel.\nKrauss\u2013Elder operation.\nIn 2007, an arbitrator ruled that Bard's family owned 58 percent of the hotel's value but that his partners had a majority stake in the operation. In addition, Bard was ordered to pay back $1 million and gave Marlene Krauss and David Elder control over the hotel for ten years. The hotel's board of directors ousted Bard in June 2007, after Krauss and Elder claimed that Bard had allowed tenants to stay even if they had fallen far behind on their rent. Krauss and Elder hired BD Hotels to manage the Chelsea. BD Hotels attempted to correct several violations of city building codes and obtain documentation on tenants who were not registered with the city government. The new operators also opened a basement lounge and restored the ballroom. Krauss wished to increase the number of short-term guests and renovate the retail space.\nThe hotel stopped leasing apartments in 2007; filmmaker Sam Bassett became the last long-term resident to sign a lease at the hotel. Many hotel residents feared that the plans would change the character of the hotel, one of the few remaining non-gentrified places in Chelsea, and they expressed concerns that the new manager was not accommodating toward them. At the time, Krauss and Elder were evicting tenants and were planning a renovation of the hotel. Elder denied that tenants were being targeted, saying that all of the evicted tenants had failed to pay rent; according to BD Hotels officials, some tenants owed more than $10,000. BD Hotels was fired in April 2008 and subsequently filed a wrongful dismissal lawsuit against the hotel's operators. Andrew Tilley was hired to manage the hotel in June 2008 and continued to serve eviction notices to tenants. The hotel was involved in other controversies such as a disagreement over the demolition of an apartment once occupied by Bob Dylan. Tilley resigned after seven months, citing tenant harassment.\nElder took over direct management of the hotel in 2009. Under Elder's management, the hotel phased out long-term leases in favor of 25-day leases. By 2010, ninety long-term residents remained; another forty had moved out during the previous three years. A nightclub known as the Chelsea Room opened in the basement that October, after the former Star Lounge's space had been gutted. The Chelsea's 15 shareholders put the hotel up for sale in October 2010, when there were 125 short-term guestrooms and 100 apartments. Real-estate experts estimated that a buyer would have to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars to renovate each room, overcoming tenant opposition and restrictions posed by the hotel's city-landmark status. Stanley Bard's son David made a bid to buy the Chelsea, as did developer Aby Rosen and hoteliers Ian Schrager and Andr\u00e9 Balazs. A Doughnut Plant shop opened at the hotel in early 2011.\nChetrit and Scheetz operation.\nReal estate developer Joseph Chetrit announced in May 2011 that he had bought the hotel for $80 million. Chetrit stopped taking reservations for new guests that July and officially took title to the hotel the next month. Gene Kaufman was hired to design a renovation of the Chelsea, which was funded by an $85 million loan from Natixis. Kaufman intended to change the room layouts and renovate vacant retail space in the basement and ground floor. Residents protected by state rent regulation laws were allowed to remain, but the staff were fired. Chetrit also moved to evict a tattoo parlor and some of the non-rent-regulated residents. That September, resident Zoe Pappas formed the Chelsea Tenants Association, which about half of the remaining residents joined. The Chelsea's managers ordered that all artwork be placed into storage in November, prompting more tenant complaints; a rooftop garden tended by residents was also destroyed.\nFrom 2011 to 2013, residents filed a large number of lawsuits against Chetrit. Tenants complained that the project was creating health hazards, although the city's Building Department found no major violations of building codes. Following a lawsuit in December 2011, a state court ordered Chetrit to clean the air in the hotel. King &amp; Grove Hotels was hired in January 2012 to operate the hotel, and Chetrit proposed a rooftop addition shortly afterward, which the LPC approved despite concerns from residents. Chetrit was ordered to fix additional building violations in May 2012 after tenants alleged that the renovation created toxic dust and allowed mold and rust to spread. Other tenant lawsuits included a dispute over a deceased tenant's artwork and a complaint over disrupted gas, heat, and hot water service. In addition, Chetrit sued Bard in early 2013, claiming that Bard had overrepresented the hotel's value.\nChetrit, David Bistricer and King &amp; Grove Hotels CEO, Ed Scheetz co-owned the hotel until August 2013, when Scheetz took over the Chelsea Hotel. King &amp; Grove and existing residents agreed on a rent settlement the next month, in which residents could stay in upgraded apartments. Scheetz continued to evict other tenants who had fallen behind on rent. At the time, there were 65 remaining apartments and 170 guestrooms. Chetrit canceled all of the work permits for the Chelsea's renovation at the end of 2013, and all work was temporarily stopped until King &amp; Grove applied for new permits. Scheetz also hired Marvel Architects to modify Kaufman's designs, prompting a lawsuit from Kaufman.\nAfter rebranding King &amp; Grove as Chelsea Hotels in 2014, Scheetz bought the El Quijote restaurant that year. The Chelsea Hotel Storefront Gallery also opened at ground level in 2014. Following a campaign led by residents, Scheetz agreed to preserve a first-floor suite once occupied by the poet Dylan Thomas. Scheetz also wished to renovate 52 remaining apartments, which were occupied by 83 tenants. Accordingly, he offered to buy out their apartments, move them to the lower stories, or move them temporarily to the Martha Washington Hotel. By mid-2015, Scheetz and his partners Bill Ackman, Joseph Steinberg, and Wheelock Street Capital had spent $185 million on renovations, which were not expected to be completed for two years. Scheetz had withdrawn from the Chelsea Hotel project entirely by March 2016, after a series of budget overruns and delays, although his partners retained a stake in the project.\nBD Hotels takeover.\nBD Hotels took over the hotel's operation that July and began working to renovate 120 of the hotel rooms, as well as restoring or preserving the apartments of 51 existing tenants. At the time, the renovation was planned to be completed in 2018. SIR Chelsea LLC, led by Sean MacPherson, Ira Drukier, and Richard Born, bought the Chelsea Hotel in October 2016 for $250 million. MacPherson led additional renovations at the hotel, including restoration of artwork and design features, as well as new public areas like a bar and spa on the roof. To convince mayor Bill de Blasio to approve further changes, Drukier and Born sent tens of thousands of dollars to various funds for de Blasio. Bard's collection of paintings was sold off in 2017 after he died, and work was again halted that year when the city found high concentrations of lead in the dust. By then, two single room occupancy apartments remained in the Chelsea, and many tenants had temporarily relocated. Some of the hotel's original doors were removed and sold at auction in 2018.\nEl Quijote was closed temporarily in March 2018 for renovations. The next year, several holdout tenants filed a lawsuit to retain control of their apartments. The renovation project was halted, and the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development mandated that the hotel's owners obtain a certificate of no harassment. Work on the renovation had mostly stalled by early 2020 due to a harassment lawsuit against the owners, though a state judge dismissed that suit. The city government also contended that the owners had harassed the tenants, and further lawsuits were filed throughout that year. Other residents, who wanted the hotel's renovation to be completed quickly, sided with the owners. Work resumed in early 2021, after the city government said that January that it would not pursue a tenant-harassment investigation against the owners. The hotel's owners sued the city in May 2021, claiming that the construction delays had cost them $100 million.\nEl Quijote reopened in February 2022, and the Hotel Chelsea soft-reopened to transient guests the next month. Initially, the rooms were rented at a discount while work continued. The Bard Room opened at ground level in June 2022, and the hotel fully reopened in mid-2022. At the time, there were still 40 permanent residents, and the cheapest suite cost $700 per night. Disputes continued over the preservation of Dylan Thomas's apartment, and the hotel's owners still had an open lawsuit against the city. Caf\u00e9 Chelsea, a French bistro, opened within the hotel in July 2023. The hotel's neon sign and stained-glass windows, which had been removed during the 2020s renovation, were auctioned off in late 2024. A Japanese restaurant, Teruko, opened at the hotel in March 2025.\nNotable residents.\nOver the years, the Chelsea has become particularly well-known for its residents, who have come from all social classes. \"The New York Times\" described the hotel in 2001 as a \"roof for creative heads\", given the large number of such personalities who have stayed at the Chelsea; the previous year, the same newspaper had characterized the list of tenants as \"living history\". The journalist Pete Hamill characterized the hotel's clientele as \"radicals in the 1930s, British sailors in the 40s, Beats in the 50s, hippies in the 60s, decadent poseurs in the 70s\". Although early tenants were wealthy, the Chelsea attracted less well-off tenants by the mid-20th century, and many writers, musicians, and artists lived at the Hotel Chelsea when they were short on money. Accordingly, the Chelsea's guest list had almost zero overlap with that of the more fashionable Plaza Hotel crosstown.\n\"New York\" magazine wrote that \"people who lived in the hotel slept together as often as they celebrated holidays together\", particularly under Stanley Bard's tenure. Despite the high number of notable people associated with the Chelsea, its residents typically desired privacy and frowned upon those who used their relationships with their neighbors to further their own careers.\nLiterature.\nThe Hotel Chelsea has housed numerous literary figures, some of whom wrote their books there. Arthur C. Clarke wrote \"\" while staying at the Chelsea, calling the hotel his \"spiritual home\" despite its condition. Thomas Wolfe lived in the hotel before his death in 1938, writing several books such as \"You Can't Go Home Again\"; he often walked around the halls to gain inspiration for his writing. William S. Burroughs also lived at the Chelsea. While living at the Chelsea, Edgar Lee Masters wrote 18 poetry books, often wandering the hotel for hours.\nWelsh poet Dylan Thomas (who lived with his wife Caitlin Thomas) was staying in room 205 when he became ill and died in 1953, while American poet Delmore Schwartz spent the last few years of his life in seclusion at the Chelsea before he died in 1966. Irish playwright and poet Brendan Behan, a severe alcoholic who had been ejected from the Algonquin Hotel, lived at the hotel for several months before his death in 1964. Many poets of the Beat poetry movement also lived at the Chelsea before the Beat Hotel in Paris became popular.\nOther authors, writers, and journalists who stayed or lived at the hotel have included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEntertainers.\nThe hotel has been home to actors, film directors, producers, and comedians. The actress Sara Lowndes moved to a room adjoining that of musician Bob Dylan before the two married in 1965. Edie Sedgwick, an actress and Warhol superstar, set her room on fire by accident in 1967, while Viva, another Warhol superstar, lived at the Chelsea with her daughter Gaby Hoffmann. Members of the Squat Theatre Company also stayed in the hotel in the 1970s while performing nearby.\nOther entertainment personalities who lived or stayed at the Chelsea include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMusicians.\nComposer and critic Virgil Thomson, once described by \"The New York Times\" as the hotel's \"most illustrious tenant\", lived at the hotel for nearly five decades before his death in 1989; Thompson persuaded Stanley Bard in 1977 to let composer Gerald Busby stay at the hotel where Busby still lived in 2015. The composer George Kleinsinger lived with his pet animals on the tenth floor. The activist Storm\u00e9 DeLarverie was also a long-term resident, as was the actress Candy Darling.\nThe Chelsea was particularly popular among rock musicians and rock and roll musicians in the 1970s. These included Sid Vicious of the Sex Pistols, who allegedly stabbed his girlfriend Nancy Spungen to death at the hotel in 1978; after Vicious's death, their room was split into two units to prevent the room from being turned into a shrine. Numerous rock bands frequented the Chelsea as well, including the Allman Brothers, the Band, Big Brother and the Holding Company, the Paul Butterfield Blues Band, the Byrds, Country Joe and the Fish, Jefferson Airplane, Lovin' Spoonful, Moby Grape, the Mothers of Invention, Quicksilver Messenger Service, Sly and the Family Stone, and the Stooges. The Kills wrote much of their album \"No Wow\" at the Chelsea prior to its release in 2005. The Grateful Dead once performed on the roof.\nOther prominent musical acts that stayed in the Chelsea include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVisual artists.\nMany visual artists, including painters, sculptors, and photographers, have resided at the Chelsea. The painter John Sloan lived in one of the top-floor duplexes until his death in 1951, painting portraits of both the Chelsea and nearby buildings. Joseph Glasco lived at the Chelsea in 1949 and then lived there on recurring visits and painted \"Chelsea Hotel\" (1992) there. During the 1960s, acolytes of the polymath Harry Everett Smith frequently gathered around his apartment. The painter Alphaeus Philemon Cole lived there for 35 years until his death in 1988 when, at the age of 112, he was the oldest verified man alive. The artist Vali Myers lived at the hotel from 1971 to 2014, while conceptual artist Bettina Grossman lived in the Chelsea from 1970 to her death in 2021. Although Andy Warhol never lived in the hotel, many of his associates did.\nOther artists who have lived at the Chelsea include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther figures.\nOne early resident of the Chelsea, U.S. congressman-elect Andrew J. Campbell, died at his apartment in 1894 before he could be sworn in. The choreographer Katherine Dunham, who rehearsed at the hotel in the 1960s, was one of the few dance\u2013associated figures to stay in the Chelsea. Communist Party USA leader Elizabeth Gurley Flynn lived at the hotel, as did event producer Susanne Bartsch.\nSeveral fashion designers have lived at the Chelsea. Charles James, credited with being America's first couturier who influenced fashion in the 1940s and 1950s, moved into the Chelsea in 1964. The designer Elizabeth Hawes lived in the Chelsea until her death in 1971. Billy Reid used one of the Chelsea's rooms as an office, studio, and showroom starting in 1998. After returning to New York City in 2001, Natalie \"Alabama\" Chanin briefly lived in the Chelsea Hotel.\nImpact.\nCritical reception.\nCultural commentary.\n\"Life\" magazine characterized the hotel in 1964 as \"New York's most illustrious third-rate hotel\"; the same year, \"The New York Times\" described the Chelsea Hotel as having \"long represented the cultural mood that is now spreading through the West 20s\". Another journalist called the hotel in 1965 an \"Ellis Island of the avant-garde\". A \"Boston Globe\" reporter said that, while the hotel was internally known as an artists' residence, \"those on the outside are confused by the names and the rococo facade of stories that have dragged the Chelsea down like an old roue to the bottom of history\". Donna Hilts of \"The Washington Post\" wrote in 1975 that \"the beatnik '50s, the hip '60s, the freaky '70s\u2014each found a way of appreciating the freedom, the tradition and the old rug coziness of the Chelsea\". Paul Goldberger of \"The New York Times\" wrote in 1981 that the Chelsea \"has had a history that is something of a cross between the Algonquin Hotel and a crash pad\", and British reporter Peter Ackroyd wrote in 1983 that the Chelsea was reputed as \"one of the least stuffy hotels in New York\". A \"Chicago Tribune\" reporter said in 1983 that the Chelsea \"has certainly set standards of its own\".\nIn 1993, \"The New York Times\" wrote: \"Stubbornly resistant to change, the Chelsea is\u2014still\u2014hip.\" The same reporter described the hotel as a \"Tower of Babel of creativity and bad behavior\" that nonetheless remained successful. In 1995, \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\" contrasted the hotel with the more upscale Algonquin Hotel in Midtown Manhattan, which was also known for its literary scene. \"The Washington Post\" described the hotel's lax management in 1999 as \"a factor that attracted a stellar crop of artists in its century of operation\", while a \"GQ\" writer said the same year that \"there are two Statues of Liberty on New York\u2014the one for immigrants out by Ellis Island and the one for weirdos at 222 West 23rd Street\". In the 2000s, the \"Irish Times\" said that the Chelsea was \"reputed to be the last Bohemian place on earth\". \"Variety\" described the hotel as having \"long been synonymous with the bohemian scene\", and \"The Advertiser\" of Adelaide wrote that \"The Chelsea exists as a microcosm of New York.\"\n\"The New York Observer\" wrote in 2010 that the Chelsea's \"hulking physicality\" distinguished the hotel from neighboring structures, though \"it's the litany of cultural touchstones in (or formerly in) residence that makes it the Chelsea\". According to \"The Telegraph\", the hotel \"had something that no amount of money or interior decoration could buy: a singular style and a unique legend\". Sherill Tippins said in 2022, \"It's hard to imagine what American culture would be like if we hadn't had the Chelsea. It's an enormous factory of creative thought and ideas.\" \"The New York Times\" compared the Christodora House in the East Village to the Hotel Chelsea, and \"Town and Country\" described the hotel as \"a symbol of New York City's vibrant culture\".\nArchitectural and hotel commentary.\nWhen the hotel was completed, a writer for the \"New-York Tribune\" regarded the hotel's \"finish and appointments\" as a \"very close second\" to that of the Navarro Flats on Central Park South, while the \"Courier Journal\" described the Chelsea as \"the latest triumph of civilization\". According to David Goodman Croly, the building's design signified the fact that New Yorkers had become \"more capable of organization, more sociable, more gregarious than before\". \"The Sun\" wrote that the Chelsea was one of numerous \"living temples of humanity\" that could be used as a model for urban apartment living.\nIn the mid-20th century, the hotel's decor was the subject of negative commentary. Yevgeny Yevtushenko likened the smell of his room to the Dachau concentration camp, and Arthur Miller said the decor was more akin to \"Guatemalan maybe, or outer Queens\" than a \"grand hotel\". Donna Hilts said in 1975 that the hotel's brick facade \"reminds a visitor of a Victorian dowager, down on her luck, cracked and faded, but still trying to keep up appearances\". The Associated Press wrote in 1978 that the hotel's lobby was \"singularly unprepossessing\", with tenants' art juxtaposed with the original fireplace, while a \"Newsday\" reporter described the space as \"a museum of the anarchic monstrosities of the 1960s\". Paul Goldberger praised the architecture but disliked its neon sign, saying that \"the building is so strong as a work of architecture that the sign compromises it not a bit\". Ackroyd said in 1983 that his room was \"not particularly comfortable [but] has a grim splendour of its own\".\nTerry Trucco wrote for \"The New York Times\" in 1991 that her room \"got plenty of light and was oddly cheerful\", though she described the furniture as old and the bathroom as \"ghastly\"; a writer for \"The Boston Globe\" said the same year that the corridors felt like \"an institution in long decline\". A writer for \"The Palm Beach Post\", reviewing the hotel in 1996, said that the rooms were large but \"not especially clean\". \"The New York Times\" wrote in 1998 that the hotel's hallways resembled a street in Venice or Rome and that the apartments were \"furnished in an artistic collision of styles\". \"The Observer\" of London called the Chelsea's lobby \"an overgrown taxidermist's Valhalla\" in 2000. The \"Poughkeepsie Journal\" wrote in 2002 that the Chelsea stood \"in the middle of the block with an air of quiet dignity\", with its balconies being its most prominent feature. A \"New York Times\" reviewer wrote in 2005 that, despite the hotel's worn-down condition, its \"grungy elegance\" was preferable to chain hotels' \"soulless architecture\".\nAfter the hotel reopened in 2022, the \"Financial Times\" wrote, \"Depending on one's nostalgist leanings, the new Hotel Chelsea is either a travesty of history, or instantly on the must-do list.\" A critic for \"Cond\u00e9 Nast Traveler\" wrote, \"The design isn't too flashy, isn't too rock-and-roll, isn't too homey, yet it has a lick of each of these elements.\" The first edition of the Michelin Keys Guide, in 2024, ranked the Hotel Chelsea as a \"one-key\" hotel, the third-highest accolade granted by the guide. The same year, \"Suitcase\" magazine wrote that \"the spirit of Philip Hubert's socialist-leaning vision [was] very much alive\", with many of the original architectural decorations being retained.\nPopular culture.\nThe Chelsea has been the setting or inspiration for many works of popular media. In addition, many art events and photography shoots have taken place at the hotel, and several films have been shot there as well.\nFilms and television.\nThe hotel has been featured in several documentaries. Its history was chronicled in the 2008 documentary \"Chelsea on the Rocks\", directed by Abel Ferrara, and the 2022 documentary \"Dreaming Walls: Inside the Chelsea Hotel\", executive-produced by Martin Scorsese. An episode of the TV series \"An American Family\", aired on PBS in 1973, was mostly filmed at the Chelsea, as was an episode of the documentary series \"Arena\". The 1986 film \"Sid and Nancy\", by Alex Cox, chronicled the lives of residents Sid Vicious and Nancy Spungen and the circumstances leading up to Spungen's murder in the hotel.\nThe Chelsea has also been used as a setting for other films. Andy Warhol and Paul Morrissey directed \"Chelsea Girls\" (1966), a film about Warhol's Factory regulars and their lives at the hotel, and Shirley Clarke's 1967 film \"Portrait of Jason\" also used the hotel as a setting. Parts of Sandy Daley's 1971 short film \"Robert Having His Nipple Pierced\" were filmed at the Chelsea on a budget of less than $2,000. Ethan Hawke directed the 2001 film \"Chelsea Walls\" about a new generation of artists living at the hotel. Other films with scenes shot at the Chelsea include \"Tally Brown, New York\" (1979); \"9\u00bd Weeks\" (1986); \"Anna\" (1987); \"\" (1994); and the horror film \"Hotel Chelsea\" (2009).\nMusic.\nThe hotel was featured in many songs. Joni Mitchell is sometimes cited as having written the song \"Chelsea Morning\" about her room in the hotel. Leonard Cohen and Janis Joplin had an affair there in 1968 (as memorialized in a plaque installed there in 2009), and Cohen later wrote the song \"Chelsea Hotel\", as well as another version titled \"Chelsea Hotel No. 2\", about it. Bob Dylan wrote the songs \"Visions of Johanna\" and \"Sad Eyed Lady of the Lowlands\" there, mentioning this in \"Sara\". Additionally, Nico's \"Chelsea Girls\" is about the hotel and its inhabitants. Jorma Kaukonen wrote the song \"Third Week in the Chelsea\" for Jefferson Airplane's 1971 album \"Bark\" after spending three weeks living in the Chelsea. Other songs featuring the hotel include \"Midnight in Chelsea\" by Bon Jovi, \"Hotel Chelsea Nights\" by Ryan Adams, \"Chelsea Hotel '78\" by Alejandro Escovedo, and \"Bruce Wayne Campbell Interviewed on the Roof of the Chelsea Hotel, 1979\" by Okkervil River, and \"The Tortured Poets Department\" by Taylor Swift.\nPrint media.\nStillman Foster Kneeland wrote a poem in 1914, \"Roofland\", which commemorated the nights that he spent on the Chelsea's roof garden. Similarly, Edgar Lee Masters wrote an ode to the hotel while living there. Arthur Miller wrote a short piece, \"The Chelsea Affect\", describing life at the Chelsea Hotel in the early 1960s. Nicolaia Rips wrote the memoir \"Trying to Float: Coming of Age in the Chelsea Hotel\" in 2016.\nThe hotel has been the subject of several nonfiction accounts and photographical books. Robert Baral's 1965 book \"Turn West on 23rd\" devoted a chapter to the hotel, while Claudio Edinger's 1983 book \"Chelsea Hotel\" consisted of photographs of the hotel and its residents. Florence Turner's 1987 book \"At the Chelsea\" doubled as a memoir and a description of the hotel's occupants. Ed Hamilton, who moved into the Chelsea in 1995, launched the \"Living with Legends\" blog about the hotel in 2005; information from that blog was collated in the 2007 book \"Legends of the Chelsea Hotel\". The hotel was also described in Sherill Tippins's 2013 book \"Inside the Dream Palace\", as well as Victoria Cohen's 2013 coffee table book \"Hotel Chelsea\". In 2019, the photographer Colin Miller published the book \"Hotel Chelsea: Living in the Last Bohemian Haven\", which included pictures of the remaining apartments' interiors.\nSeveral pieces of fiction have been set at the hotel, such as Stuart Cloete's 1947 short story \"The Blast\", describing New York City after a nuclear holocaust. Henry Van Dyke's 1969 book \"Blood of Strawberries\", a black comedy, revolved around a group of fictional bohemians who lived at the hotel. Dee Dee Ramone wrote the book \"Chelsea Horror Hotel\" in 2001, and Fiona Davis used it as a setting in her 2019 novel \"Chelsea Girls\". Joseph O'Neill wrote the novel \"Netherland\" partly based on his experience living at the hotel.\nOther works.\nThe Chelsea hosted a multimedia festival in 1989, \"At the Chelsea\", which celebrated the hotel's history with theatrical shows, music, and performance art. Nicole Burdette's play \"Chelsea Walls\", first performed in 1990, was the basis for the similarly named 2001 film. In 2013, Welsh choreographers Jessica Cohen and Jim Ennis choreographed a dance piece inspired by the Chelsea Hotel; the piece depicts four fictional couples, who are loosely based on real-life hotel residents. The multimedia performance \"Young Artists at the Chelsea\", dramatizing the lives of some of the residents, was presented in a gallery in the hotel in 2015.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42231", "revid": "1951353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42231", "title": "Aristid Lindenmayer", "text": "Hungarian biologist\nAristid Lindenmayer (17 November 1925 \u2013 30 October 1989) was a Hungarian biologist. In 1968 he developed a type of formal language today called L-systems or Lindenmayer systems. Using those systems Lindenmayer modelled the behaviour of cells of plants. L-systems nowadays are also used to model whole plants.\nLindenmayer worked with yeast and filamentous fungi and studied the growth patterns of various types of algae, such as the blue/green bacteria \"Anabaena catenula\". Originally the L-systems were devised to provide a formal description of the development of such simple multicellular organisms, and to illustrate the neighbourhood relationships between plant cells. Later on, this system was extended to describe higher plants and complex branching structures.\nCareer.\nLindenmayer studied chemistry and biology at the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s Lor\u00e1nd University of Budapest from 1943 to 1948. He received his Ph.D. in plant physiology in\n1956 at the University of Michigan. In 1968 he became professor in Philosophy of Life Sciences and Biology at the University of Utrecht, The Netherlands. From 1972 onward he headed the Theoretical Biology Group at Utrecht University.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42232", "revid": "50461621", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42232", "title": "Calliope (instrument)", "text": "Large, steam-powered musical instrument\nA calliope (see below for pronunciation) is an American musical instrument that produces sound by sending a gas, originally steam or, more recently, compressed air, through large whistles\u2014originally locomotive whistles.\nA calliope is typically very loud. Even some small calliopes are audible for miles. There is no way to vary tone or volume. Musically, the only expression possible is the pitch, rhythm, and duration of the notes.\nThe steam calliope is also known as a steam organ ( in Quebec) or steam piano ( in Quebec). The air-driven calliope is sometimes called a calliaphone, the name given to it by Norman Baker, but the \"Calliaphone\" name is registered by the Miner Company for instruments produced under the Tangley name.\nIn the age of steam, the steam calliope was particularly used on riverboats and in circuses. In both cases, a steam supply was readily available for other purposes. Riverboats supplied steam from their propulsion boilers. Circus calliopes were sometimes installed in steam-driven carousels, or supplied with steam from a traction engine. The traction engine could also supply electric power for lighting, and tow the calliope in the circus parade, where it traditionally came last. Other circus calliopes were self-contained, mounted on a carved, painted and gilded wagon pulled by horses, but the presence of other steam boilers in the circus meant that fuel and expertise to run the boiler were readily available. Steam instruments often had keyboards made from brass. This was in part to resist the heat and moisture of the steam, but also for the golden shine of the highly polished keys.\nCalliopes can be played by a player at a keyboard or mechanically. Mechanical operation may be by a drum similar to a music box drum, or by a roll similar to that of a player piano. Some instruments have both a keyboard and a mechanism for automated operation, others only one or the other. Some calliopes can also be played via a MIDI interface.\nThe whistles of a calliope are tuned to a chromatic scale, although this process is difficult and must be repeated often to maintain quality sound. Since the pitch of each note is largely affected by the temperature of the steam, accurate tuning is nearly impossible; however, the off-pitch notes (particularly in the upper register) have become something of a trademark of the steam calliope. A calliope may have anywhere from 25 to 67 whistles, but 32 is traditional for a steam calliope.\nHistory.\nJoshua C. Stoddard of Worcester, Massachusetts patented the calliope on October 9, 1855, though his design echoes previous concepts, such as an 1832 instrument called a \"steam trumpet,\" later known as a train whistle. In 1851, William Hoyt of Dupont, Indiana claimed to have conceived of a device similar to Stoddard's calliope, but he never patented it. Later, an employee of Stoddard's American Music, Arthur S. Denny, attempted to market an \"Improved Kalliope\" in Europe, but it did not catch on. In 1859, he demonstrated this instrument in Crystal Palace, London. Unlike other calliopes before or since, Denny's Improved Kalliope let the player control the steam pressure, and therefore the volume of the music, while playing.\nWhile Stoddard originally intended the calliope to replace bells at churches, it found its way onto riverboats during the paddlewheel era. While only a small number of working steamboats still exist, each has a steam calliope. These boats include the \"Delta Queen\", the \"Belle of Louisville\", and \"President\". Their calliopes are played regularly on river excursions. Many surviving calliopes were built by Thomas J. Nichol, Cincinnati, Ohio, who built calliopes from 1890 until 1932. The Thomas J. Nichol calliopes featured rolled sheet copper (as used in roofing) for the resonant tube (the bell) of the whistle, lending a sweeter tone than cast bronze or brass, which were the usual materials for steam whistles of the day. David Morecraft pioneered a resurgence in the building of authentic steam calliopes of the Thomas J. Nichol style beginning in 1985 in Peru, Indiana. These calliopes are featured in Peru's annual Circus City Parade. Morecraft died on December 5, 2016.\nStoddard's original calliope was attached to a metal roller set with pins in the manner familiar to Stoddard from the contemporary clockwork music box. The pins on the roller opened valves that admitted steam into the whistles. Later, Stoddard replaced the cylinder with a keyboard, so that the calliope could be played like an organ.\nStarting in the 1900s calliopes began using music rolls instead of a live musician. The music roll operated in a manner similar to a piano roll in a player piano, mechanically operating the keys. Many of these mechanical calliopes retained keyboards, allowing a live musician to play them if needed. During this period, compressed air began to replace steam as the vehicle of producing sound.\nMost calliopes disappeared in the mid-20th century, as steam power was replaced with other power sources. Without the demand for technicians that mines and railroads supplied, no support was available to keep boilers running. Only a few calliopes have survived, which, unless converted to a modern power source, are rarely played.\nA relatively recently built calliope is that of Carl Bergman of Aspen, Colorado, which was built in the mid 1970s. The 6 foot tall wood-fired steam boiler was originally used by miners at Independence Pass and requires its owner to maintain a boiler operator's license. The calliope produces 10 notes and takes 8 hours to get ready.\nPronunciation.\nThe pronunciation of the word has long been disputed, and often it is pronounced differently inside and outside the groups that use it. The Greek muse by the same name is pronounced , but the instrument was usually pronounced by people who played it.\n A nineteenth-century magazine, \"Reedy's Mirror\", attempted to settle the dispute by publishing this rhyme:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis, in turn, came from a poem by Vachel Lindsay, called \"The Kallyope [\"sic\"] Yell\",\nin which Lindsay uses both pronunciations.\nIn the song \"Blinded by the Light\", written in 1972, Bruce Springsteen used the four-syllable ( ) pronunciation commonly used in the United States when referring to a fairground organ; this was also used by the British Manfred Mann's Earth Band in their 1976 cover.\nRelated instruments.\nPyrophone.\nThe pyrophone is a calliope-like instrument that uses internal combustion within its whistles to power their notes, rather than the calliope's system of friction from steam going through ducts.\nAt 1998's Burning Man, a pyrophone referred to as \"Satan's Calliope\" was powered by ignition of propane inside resonant cavities.\nCalliaphone.\nThe calliaphone is a compressed-air powered, easily transported instrument developed by early 20th century American inventor Norman Baker.\nLustre chantant.\nThe \"lustre chantant\" (literally \"singing chandelier\") or musical lamp was invented by Frederik Kastner. It was a large chandelier with glass pipes of varying lengths each illuminated and heated by an individual gas jet. A keyboard allowed the player to turn down individual jets; as the glass tube cooled, a note was produced. Kastner installed several such instruments in Paris.\nPopular culture.\nHenry Mancini used the calliope in his 1961 song \"Baby Elephant Walk\" for the film \"Hatari!\" to suggest the fun of a circus.\nA calliope in a travelling circus plays an important role in (1966, episodes 4 and 5, \"Old Man Out\"). Its music serves as background for the diversionary circus stunts central to the episode's mission.\nThe Beatles, in recording \"Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!\" from the 1967 album \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band,\" used tapes of calliope music to create the atmosphere of a circus. Beatles producer George Martin recalled, \"When we first worked on 'Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!' John had said that he wanted to 'smell the sawdust on the floor', wanted to taste the atmosphere of the circus. I said to him, 'What we need is a calliope.' 'A what?' 'Steam whistles, played by a keyboard.'\" Unable to find an authentic calliope, Martin resorted to tapes of calliopes playing Sousa marches. \"[I] chopped the tapes up into small sections and had Geoff Emerick throw them up into the air, re-assembling them at random.\"\nIn the 1972 western film \"The Great Northfield, Minnesota Raid\", which takes place in 1876, a calliope is featured prominently during a scene when Cole Younger (portrayed by Cliff Robertson) and his gang arrive in Northfield, Minnesota. The instrument is referred to by name and Younger shows such interest in it that he attempts to fix it.\nIn the video game \"Team Fortress 2\", the calliope is prominently used as a quasi-bass line in the #11 track \"Haunted Fortress 2\" in the game's soundtrack, used mostly during Halloween or Full Moon-timed events.\nIn the Rusty Quill horror podcast \"The Magnus Archives\", an antique calliope organ is prominently referenced and spoken about in MAG 24: Strange Music. The calliope is referenced as both the former and as a \"calliaphone\", and the pronunciation of the word is discussed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42235", "revid": "38912453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42235", "title": "Obotrites", "text": "Confederation of West Slavic tribes in present-day northern Germany (8th century \u2013 1167)\nThe Obotrites (, \"Abodritorum\", \"Abodritos\") or Obodrites, also spelled Abodrites (), were a confederation of medieval West Slavic tribes within the territory of modern Mecklenburg and Holstein in northern Germany (see Polabian Slavs). For decades, they were allies of Charlemagne in his wars against the Germanic Saxons and the Slavic Veleti. The Obotrites under Prince Thrasco defeated the Saxons in the Battle of Bornh\u00f6ved (798). The still-Pagan Saxons were dispersed by the emperor, and the part of their former land in Holstein north of Elbe was awarded to the Obotrites in 804, as a reward for their victory. This however was soon reverted through an invasion of the Danes. The Obotrite regnal style was abolished in 1167, when Pribislav was restored to power by Duke Henry the Lion, as Prince of Mecklenburg, thereby founding the Germanized House of Mecklenburg.\nEtymology.\nObotrites / Abodrites is widely analysed from the Slavic root *\"bodr\"- \u2018cheerful, lively, brave; vigorous; alert\u2019 (cf. Bulg. \u0431\u043e\u0434\u044a\u0440, Rus. \u0431\u043e\u0434\u0440\u044b\u0439, Pol. \"bodry\" (arch.), OCS \u0431\u043e\u0434\u0440\u044a). As an ethnonym, Bodri\u010di/Obodrity \u2248 \u201cthe spirited/brave ones\u201d or \u201cthe encouraged ones,\u201d with o- as a common Slavic prefix and -it-/-i\u010d- a people-name suffix.\nHistory.\nObotritic confederation.\nThe Bavarian Geographer, an anonymous medieval document compiled in Regensburg in 830, contains a list of the tribes in Central Eastern Europe to the east of the Elbe. The list includes the Nortabtrezi (Obotrites) - with 53 \"civitates\".\nAdam of Bremen referred to them as the Reregi because of their lucrative trade emporium Reric. In common with other Slavic groups, they were often described by Germanic sources as Wends.\nThe main tribes of the Obotritic confederation were:\nOther tribes associated with the confederation include:\nAs allies of the Carolingian kings and the empire of their Ottonian successors, the Obotrites fought from 808 to 1200 against the kings of Denmark, who wished to rule the Baltic region independently of the empire. When opportunities arose, for instance upon the death of an emperor, they would seek to seize power; and in 983 Hamburg was destroyed by the Obotrites under their king, Mstivoj. At times they levied tribute from the Danes and Saxons. Under the leadership of Niklot, they resisted a Christian assault during the Wendish Crusade.\nGerman missionaries such as Vicelinus converted the Obotrites to Christianity. In 1170 they acknowledged the suzerainty of the Holy Roman Empire, leading to Germanisation and assimilation over the following centuries. However, up to the late 15th century most villagers in the Obotritic area were still speaking Slavic dialects (Polabian language), although subsequently their language was displaced by German. The Polabian language survived until the beginning of the 19th century in Hanoverian Wendland, eastern Lower Saxony (bordering modern Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania).\nThe ruling clan of the Obotrites kept its power throughout the Germanisation and ruled their country (except during a short interruption in Thirty Years' War) as House of Mecklenburg until the end of monarchies in Germany in November Revolution 1918. Previously, the Obodrites were dominated by the Naconids; Eastern (Far) Pomerania was ruled by the Pomeranian House (Grifichi).\nList of Obotrite leaders.\nThe rulers of Obotrite lands were later the dukes and grand dukes of Mecklenburg.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Works related to at Wikisource"}
{"id": "42236", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42236", "title": "Lindenmayer System", "text": ""}
{"id": "42238", "revid": "596674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42238", "title": "Gillian Anderson", "text": "American actress (born 1968)\nGillian Leigh Anderson, ( ; born August 9, 1968) is an American actress. Her credits include the roles of FBI Special Agent Dana Scully in the series \"The X-Files\", ill-fated socialite Lily Bart in Terence Davies's film \"The House of Mirth\" (2000), DSU Stella Gibson in the BBC/RT\u00c9 crime drama television series \"The Fall\", sex therapist Jean Milburn in the Netflix comedy-drama \"Sex Education\", and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the fourth season of Netflix drama series \"The Crown\". Among other honors, she has won two Primetime Emmy Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, and four Screen Actors Guild Awards. She has resided in London since 2002, after earlier years divided between the United Kingdom and the United States.\nBorn in Chicago, Anderson grew up in London, UK and Grand Rapids, Michigan. She graduated from The Theatre School at DePaul University in Chicago, then moved to New York City to further her acting career. After beginning her career on stage, she achieved international recognition for her role as FBI Special Agent Dana Scully on the American sci-fi drama series \"The X-Files\". Her film work includes the dramas \"The Mighty Celt\" (2005), \"The Last King of Scotland\" (2006), \"Shadow Dancer\" (2012), \"Viceroy's House\" (2017) and two \"X-Files\" films: \"The X-Files: Fight the Future\" (1998) and \"\" (2008). Other notable television credits include: Lady Dedlock in \"Bleak House\" (2005), Wallis Simpson in \"Any Human Heart\" (2010), Miss Havisham in \"Great Expectations\" (2011), Dr. Bedelia Du Maurier on \"Hannibal\" (2013\u20132015), and Media on \"American Gods\" (2017).\nAside from film and television, Anderson has taken to the stage and received both awards and critical acclaim. Her stage work includes \"Absent Friends\" (1991), for which she won a Theatre World Award for Best Newcomer; \"A Doll's House\" (2009), for which she was nominated for a Laurence Olivier Award, and a portrayal of Blanche DuBois in \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" (2014, 2016), winning the \"Evening Standard\" Theatre Award for Best Actress and receiving a second Laurence Olivier Award nomination for Best Actress. In 2019, she portrayed Margo Channing in the stage production of \"All About Eve\" for which she received her third Laurence Olivier Award nomination.\nAnderson has supported numerous charities and humanitarian organizations. She is an honorary spokesperson for the Neurofibromatosis Network and a co-founder of South African Youth Education for Sustainability (SAYes). She was appointed an honorary Officer of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 2016 for her services to drama.\nEarly life.\nAnderson was born in Chicago, Illinois, the daughter of Rosemary \"Posie\" Alyce (\"n\u00e9e\" Lane), a computer analyst, and later vice president of Neurofibromatosis Inc., the NF support group of West Michigan, and Homer Edward \"Ed\" Anderson III, who owned a film post-production company. She is of English, German, and Irish ancestry. Soon after her birth, her parents moved to Puerto Rico for 15 months, then to London. The family relocated so that her father could attend the London Film School. With her parents, she lived in north London's Crouch End and Haringey. She was a pupil of Coleridge Primary School. When Anderson was 11 years old, her family returned to the United States, settling in Grand Rapids, Michigan. They continued to keep a flat in London and spent their summers there. Anderson later said that she had always intended to return to England. In Grand Rapids, she attended Fountain Elementary and City High-Middle School, a program for gifted students with a strong emphasis on the humanities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe were in a small Republican town. There were only six punks there. We were weird. It's not like London.\n\u2014Anderson on her teenage years in Grand Rapids\nFollowing the move to Grand Rapids, Anderson went through a rebellious stage; taking drugs, dating a much older boyfriend, and cultivating a punk appearance (dyeing her hair various colors, shaving the sides of her head, sporting a nose piercing and an all-black wardrobe). She was put in therapy at the age of 14. Anderson listened to bands such as Dead Kennedys and Skinny Puppy. She was voted by her classmates as \"class clown\", \"most bizarre girl\" and \"most likely to be arrested\". She was arrested on graduation night for breaking and entering into her high school in an attempt to glue the locks of the doors. She later managed to reduce the charges to trespassing.\nAt an early age, Anderson was interested in marine biology, but after becoming interested in theatre during her teenage years, she began acting in high school productions during her first year and later in community theatre. She also served as a student intern at the Grand Rapids Civic Theatre &amp; School of Theatre Arts. After graduating from high school in 1986, she attended The Theatre School at DePaul University in Chicago, where she earned a Bachelor of Fine Arts in 1990. Anderson also participated in the National Theatre of Great Britain's summer program at Cornell University. To support herself financially during her student years, she worked at the Goose Island Brewpub in Chicago. After Anderson became famous, the brewery named one of their beers after her \u2013 a Belgian-style farmhouse ale called \"Gillian\".\nAnderson is the eldest of three siblings. Her brother Aaron \u2013 who was diagnosed with neurofibromatosis \u2013 died in 2011 of a brain tumor, at the age of 30. Aaron was a DJ, a mentor, and a practicing Buddhist. He was in his second year of a PhD program in developmental psychology at Stanford University when he was diagnosed with glioblastoma in 2008. Her sister Zoe is a ceramicist, whom Anderson called \"an exceptional artist\". \nAnderson is bidialectal. With her English accent and background, she was mocked and felt out of place in the American Midwest and soon adopted a Midwestern accent. To this day, she easily shifts between her American and English accents. In May 2013, during an interview with BlogTalkRadio, Anderson addressed the matter of her national identity: \"I've been asked whether I feel more like a Brit than an American and I don't know what the answer to that question is. I know that I feel that London is home and I'm very happy with that as my home. I love London as a city and I feel very comfortable there. In terms of identity, I'm still a bit baffled.\"\nCareer.\n1990s.\nAnderson moved to New York when she was 22 years old, and worked as a waitress to support herself. She began her career in Alan Ayckbourn's play \"Absent Friends\" at the Manhattan Theatre Club alongside Brenda Blethyn; for her role she won the 1990\u201391 Theatre World Award for \"Best Newcomer\". Her next theatrical role was in Christopher Hampton's \"The Philanthropist\" at the Long Wharf Theatre in New Haven, Connecticut.\nAnderson moved to Los Angeles in 1992 and spent a year auditioning. The same year, she appeared in her first feature-length film, \"The Turning\", starring Karen Allen and Tess Harper. The film drama is an adaptation of the play \"Home Fires Burning\".\nAlthough she had once vowed she would never do television work, being out of work for a year changed her mind. Anderson recalled: \"First of all, I swore I'd never move to Los Angeles, and once I did, I swore I'd never do television. It was only after being out of work for almost a year that I began going in [to auditions] on some stuff that I would pray that I wouldn't get because I didn't want to be involved in it.\" She broke into mainstream television in 1993 with a guest appearance on the collegiate drama, \"Class of '96\", on the fledgling Fox Network.\nAs a result of this guest appearance, Anderson was sent the script for \"The X-Files\". She was 24 when she decided to audition because, \"for the first time in a long time, the script involved a strong, independent, intelligent woman as a lead character.\" Producer Chris Carter wanted to hire her, but Fox wanted someone with previous television exposure and greater sex appeal. Fox sent in more actresses, but Carter stood by Anderson, and she was eventually cast as FBI Special Agent Dana Scully. Filmed for the first five seasons in Vancouver, British Columbia, before moving to Los Angeles, California, the series ran for nine seasons. Two related films were also produced, released in 1998 and 2008. During her time on \"The X-Files\", Anderson won numerous awards for her portrayal of Special Agent Scully, including an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series, a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Television Series Drama, two Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series and a Saturn Award for Best Actress on Television. Anderson is the first actress to win an Emmy, a Golden Globe, and a SAG Award in the same year. For the role, she received a total of four Emmy nominations, four Golden Globe nominations and nine SAG nominations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe got a lot of letters all the time, and I was told quite frequently by girls who were going into the medical world or the science world or the FBI world or other worlds that I reigned, that they were pursuing those pursuits because of the character of Scully. And I said, 'Yay!'\n\u2014Anderson on \"The Scully Effect\"\nAnderson was the first woman to write and direct an episode of \"The X-Files\" (\"all things\"). During its run \u2013 between the fifth and sixth seasons \u2013 Anderson co-starred in \"\", a 1998 film that continued \"The X-Files\" storyline. Anderson also provided the voice for a parody of her Scully character in \"The Springfield Files\", an episode of the animated comedy television series \"The Simpsons\". While filming \"The X-Files\", she met assistant art director Clyde Klotz, who became her first husband. Anderson's character on \"The X-Files\" initiated a phenomenon referred to as \"The Scully Effect\"; as the medical doctor and the FBI Special Agent inspired many young women to pursue careers in science, medicine, and law enforcement. It contributed to the increase in the number of women in those fields. \"The Scully Effect\" remains a subject of academic inquiry.\nIn 1996, Anderson narrated the television documentaries \"Spies Above\" and \"Why Planes Go Down\". While hosting the BBC documentary series \"Future Fantastic\", she became impressed by the theme music of the show, by the electronic duo Hal and initiated a collaboration with them. In 1997, Anderson provided spoken word vocals and starred in the music video for their single \"Extremis\", which was frequently aired on MTV. She also helped to assemble an album of electronic music, \"Future: A Journey Through The Electronic Underground\", for Virgin Records, which won praise from European music critics.\nIn 1997, Anderson appeared in the independent film \"Chicago Cab\". In 1998, she starred in the film \"Playing by Heart\". Anderson also had a supporting role in the film \"The Mighty\". In 1999, Anderson had a supporting role in the English-language release of Hayao Miyazaki's \"Princess Mononoke\", where she voiced the character of Moro. Anderson is a fan of Studio Ghibli and Miyazaki's work. She also took part in Eve Ensler's \"The Vagina Monologues\".\n2000s.\nIn 2000, Anderson starred in the film \"The House of Mirth\" with Eric Stoltz \u2013 Terence Davies' adaptation of the Edith Wharton novel of the same name \u2013 for which she won critical acclaim and awards such as the British Independent Film Award for Best Actress, Village Voice Film Poll Best Lead Performance, and a nomination for the National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actress.When \"The X-Files\" ended in 2002, she moved back to London for a change of pace and the opportunity to return to the stage. In 2002, Anderson made her West End debut in Michael Weller's play \"What The Night Is For\" at the Comedy Theatre. In 2004, Anderson starred in the Royal Court Theatre's production of Rebecca Gilman's play \"The Sweetest Swing in Baseball\", as artist Dana Fielding who assumes the personality of the troubled baseball player Darryl Strawberry \u2013 a role for which she earned rave reviews.\nIn 2005, she appeared as Lady Dedlock in the BBC adaptation of Charles Dickens' novel \"Bleak House\". She had a starring role in the Irish film \"The Mighty Celt\", for which she won an IFTA award for Best International Actress. The same year she also appeared in \"A Cock and Bull Story\" with Steve Coogan and Rob Brydon \u2013 a film version of the novel \"Tristram Shandy\". In 2006, Anderson won the Broadcasting Press Guild Television and Radio Award for Best Actress for her role in \"Bleak House\". She was nominated for a British Academy Television Award (BAFTA) for Best Actress, she also received an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Movie, a nomination for a Golden Globe, a Satellite Award nomination, and came in second place in the Best Actress category of the 2005 BBC Drama website poll for her portrayal of Lady Dedlock in the adaptation.\nDuring 2006 and 2007, Anderson appeared in two British films: \"The Last King of Scotland\" (2006) and \"Straightheads\" (2007). In 2008, Anderson hosted \"Masterpiece Theatre\" during the Jane Austen series; she was the first woman to host the series since it began in 1971. The same year, Anderson starred in the second \"The X-Files\" film, \"\" and appeared alongside Simon Pegg in the British comedy film \"How to Lose Friends &amp; Alienate People\". In 2009, she starred in the British comedy film \"Boogie Woogie\" with Alan Cumming, Danny Huston and Stellan Skarsg\u00e5rd.\nShe portrayed Nora in Henrik Ibsen's \"A Doll's House\" at the Donmar Warehouse in London's West End during a limited engagement which ran from May 14, 2009, until July 18, 2009. Anderson received a nomination for the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actress, for productions which opened in the 2009 calendar year, for her portrayal of Nora.\n2010s.\nIn November 2010, Anderson portrayed Wallis, Duchess of Windsor in \"Any Human Heart\" \u2013 a television adaptation of William Boyd's novel of the same name, for which she was nominated for a BAFTA for Best Supporting Actress on Television. In April 2011, she starred in the BBC adaptation \"The Crimson Petal and the White\" as Mrs. Castaway, for which she was nominated for the Broadcasting Press Guild Award for Best Actress. In August 2011, she appeared in the television miniseries \"Moby Dick\" based on Herman Melville's novel \"Moby-Dick\" (1851), as Elisabeth, Ahab's wife. The same year, Anderson appeared as the head of MI7, Pamela Thornton, in the British comedy \"Johnny English Reborn\". She starred as Miss Havisham in a three-part BBC adaptation of \"Great Expectations\" that aired in late December 2011. For her portrayal in the adaptation she won the Artistic Excellence Award, was nominated for the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Actress in a Movie/Miniseries and for the Broadcasting Press Guild Award for Best Actress.\nIn 2012, Anderson appeared in a Swiss drama film, \"Sister\", and in \"Shadow Dancer\" \u2013 a British-Irish drama film based on the novel of the same name, about the Irish republican movement. Anderson voiced the character of Dr. Miki Hokuto in the English-language version of Studio Ghibli's \"From Up on Poppy Hill\", which was released in March 2013. The same year, she starred in the Canadian techno-thriller \"I'll Follow You Down\" and appeared in \"Mr. Morgan's Last Love\" with Michael Caine.In May 2013, Anderson began starring as DSI Stella Gibson in \"The Fall\", a critically acclaimed crime drama series for BBC Two and RT\u00c9 One. Anderson was praised for her portrayal of the cool, self-assured Gibson, and was nominated for several awards. She also became an executive producer for the programme from its second series. Between 2013 and 2015, Anderson played Dr. Bedelia Du Maurier, Hannibal Lecter's psychiatrist, on the NBC series \"Hannibal\". In 2014, Anderson was promoted from a recurring character during the first two seasons, to a series regular for the third season. In 2014, Anderson starred in the British independent science fiction film \"Robot Overlords\" alongside Sir Ben Kingsley. That year, she also appeared in Jeffrey D. Brown's drama \"Sold\", portraying Sophia, a character based on the humanitarian photographer Lisa Kristine. The film presents the issues of child trafficking and sexual slavery in India, and is based on Patricia McCormick's novel of the same name.\nIn July 2014, Anderson gained critical acclaim for her stage performance as Blanche DuBois in \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" by Tennessee Williams at the Young Vic Theatre in London. She won the \"Evening Standard\" Theatre Award for Best Actress and received her second Laurence Olivier Award nomination for Best Actress. The production became the fastest-selling show in the theatre's history, and the run was extended by two weeks due to the demand for tickets. In the first collaboration between the Young Vic Theatre and National Theatre Live, the show was broadcast live to over 1100 venues on September 16, 2014. Thus far, it has been screened in more than 2000 venues. In February 2015, Anderson directed and starred in a short film prequel to \"A Streetcar Named Desire\", titled \"The Departure\", written by novelist Andrew O'Hagan. This is part of the Young Vic's short film series, which is produced in collaboration with \"The Guardian\".\nIn October 2014, Anderson published her first book, \"A Vision of Fire\", co-authored with Jeff Rovin. The book is the first novel of what has developed as \"The Earthend Saga\" trilogy. The publisher describes it as \"a science fiction thriller of epic proportions\". In December 2015, Anderson and Rovin published their second novel of the trilogy, \"A Dream of Ice\". In January 2016, Anderson portrayed Anna Pavlovna Scherer in BBC One's television adaptation \"War &amp; Peace\". The same month, she returned to portray FBI Special Agent Dana Scully in the six-episode tenth season of \"The X-Files\". Anderson has fought and succeeded in securing equal pay with her male co-star on \"The X-Files\" in the '90s and again in 2015, when negotiating her salary with the network. She has always been outspoken about her struggle for equal pay in the role.\nFrom April 23, 2016, through June 4, 2016, Anderson reprised her role of Blanche DuBois in \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" on stage at the new St. Ann's Warehouse in Brooklyn, New York City. On September 13, 2016, Anderson and Rovin published \"The Sound of Seas\"; their third and final novel of \"The EarthEnd Saga\" trilogy. The same month, she returned to portraying DSU Stella Gibson in the third series of \"The Fall\". Anderson is the narrator of the English dub of \"Ronja, the Robber's Daughter\" \u2013 Studio Ghibli's anime, which began streaming on Amazon Prime in January 2017. In February 2017, Anderson portrayed Edwina Mountbatten in Gurinder Chadha's Partition drama film \"Viceroy's House\" (2017).\nOn March 7, 2017, Anderson and the journalist-activist Jennifer Nadel published their self-help guide book for women, titled \"WE: A Manifesto for Women Everywhere\". Anderson stated that the book is a \"call-out to all women around the world \u2013 and by women I include girls, transgender, anyone who identifies themselves as being intrinsically female.\" In April 2017, she played goddess Media in the first season of \"American Gods\" \u2013 a television series adaptation of Neil Gaiman's science fiction novel of the same name. Following the departure as showrunners of the show's creators, Bryan Fuller and Michael Green, Anderson stated she would not return to the show. In October 2017, Anderson appeared alongside Glenn Close and Christina Hendricks in \"Crooked House\" \u2013 a film adaptation of Agatha Christie's novel of the same name. In January 2018, she was back playing FBI Special Agent Dana Scully in the eleventh season of \"The X-Files\". In January 2018, she confirmed that she would be leaving \"The X-Files\" after the end of the season. Anderson is set to portray the role of Captain MacLaren in \"Star Citizen\"'s single-player component \"Squadron 42\". In January 2019, she began playing Jean Milburn in the Netflix dramedy \"Sex Education\".\nFrom February 2, 2019, through May 11, 2019, Anderson portrayed Margo Channing in a stage production of \"All About Eve\" at the No\u00ebl Coward Theatre for which she received her third Laurence Olivier Award nomination. On September 7, 2019, it was announced that she will portray former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the fourth season of the Netflix historical drama series \"The Crown\". Anderson is the second American actress (after Meryl Streep in \"The Iron Lady\") to portray Thatcher in a major production. In a statement Anderson said: \"I am so excited to be joining the cast and crew of \"The Crown\" and to have the opportunity to portray such a complicated and controversial woman, Thatcher was undoubtedly formidable but I am relishing exploring beneath the surface and, dare I say, falling in love with the icon who, whether loved or despised, defined an era.\"\n2020s.\nIn February 2021, Anderson started filming \"White Bird\". It was initially scheduled to be released on September 16, 2022, but after several delays was rescheduled for October 2024. In November 2021, Anderson voiced the cat in \"Robin Robin\", a stop-motion short Christmas film about a bird raised by mice who is questioning where she belongs. \"Robin Robin\" was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film. In December 2021, she played Joanna, mother to Catherine the Great in season two of Hulu's \"The Great\".\nIn February 2022, Anderson launched her first audio show titled \"What Do I Know?!\" on Curio. The fortnightly podcast explores \"deeply human stories of social challenges, sexual liberation, phenomenal women\". In March 2022, it was announced that Anderson had signed a first look deal with Netflix. It is a two-year deal with her company, Fiddlehead Productions. In April of the same year, she portrayed Eleanor Roosevelt in the TV series \"The First Lady\" on Showtime. The series was cancelled after the one season. Released in theatres in December 2022 and on Netflix in 2023, Anderson starred in director Scott Cooper's \"The Pale Blue Eye\" alongside Christian Bale.\nIn February 2023, Anderson announced her \"Dear Gillian\" project with Bloomsbury, where she asked for women to write letters to her personally about sexual fantasies and stories that she will turn into a book. The book, \"Want\" was released in September 2024. On February 7, 2023, Netflix announced that Anderson had been cast as Emily Maitlis in \"Scoop\", a film about Andrew Mountbatten Windsor's 2019 \"Newsnight\" interview. The film was released in April 2024. In April 2023, Anderson launched G Spot Beverages. The beverages are soft drinks with \"life-enhancing adaptogens and nootropics\". On May 16, it was announced that Anderson would star in the film adaptation of Raynor Winn\u2019s bestselling memoir \"The Salt Path\" alongside Jason Isaacs which would be directed by Marianne Elliott. In June 2023, Anderson signed on to \"The Abandons\" on Netflix. Filming was due to take place in late 2023 but was pushed back till 2024 due to the SWG writers' strike and is set for release in 2025.\nIn January 2024, Anderson joined the cast of Disney's \"Tron: Ares\". In August 2024, Anderson signed on to the adaptation of Louise Kennedy\u2019s \"Trespasses\". In an interview with Bustle in October 2024, Anderson announced she would be co-producing the adaptation of \"The Coast Road\" by Alan Murrin.\nIn October 2025, Anderson was announced as part of the voice cast for the upcoming animated fantasy film \"The Turning Door\", alongside Alicia Vikander, Jamie Dornan, Jodie Turner-Smith, and Bill Nighy.\nPersonal life.\nAnderson is an art collector. She used her first paycheck from the \"X-Files\" to purchase a David Blackburn lithograph. Her collection includes work by artists such as Diane Arbus, Helen Levitt, Cindy Sherman, Francesco Clemente, Alexis Rockman and Kiki Smith. Anderson enjoys architecture and interior design; she periodically works on floor and house planning projects. She has also expressed a desire to pursue mixed media ventures in the future.\nAnderson is a committed feminist. In an August 2014 interview with \"Glamour\" magazine, Anderson said: \"I have feminist bones and when I hear things or see people react to women in certain ways I have very little tolerance.\" Anderson has several tattoos; all of them, as she described, are in some way about \"peace of mind, right mind, right action\". She practices meditation daily.\nAnderson is bidialectal and is comfortable switching between both American and British (Received Pronunciation) accents.\nRelationships and children.\nAnderson married her first husband, Clyde Klotz, an \"X-Files\" assistant art director, on New Year's Day 1994, in Hawaii in a Buddhist ceremony. Their daughter, Piper Maru, was born on September 25, 1994. Show-runner Chris Carter, Piper's godfather, named an \"X-Files\" episode after her. Anderson and Klotz divorced in 1997. On December 29, 2004, Anderson married Julian Ozanne, a documentarian, on Lamu Island, off the coast of Kenya. Anderson announced their separation on April 21, 2006. Anderson and former partner, businessman Mark Griffiths, have two children. She ended their relationship in 2012.\nIn March 2012, Anderson told \"Out\" magazine about her long-term relationship with a girl in high school. She then told \"CBS News\" that she had dated other women, though most of her relationships had been with men. In an interview with the \"London Evening Standard\" in December 2014, she stated: \"I am an actively heterosexual woman who celebrates however people want to express their sexuality.\" Anderson also identified as heterosexual in a January 2015 interview. In an interview with \"The Daily Telegraph\" in March 2015, Anderson said she was not closed to the idea of entering another same-sex relationship, adding: \"To me a relationship is about loving another human being; their gender is irrelevant.\" She reiterated this to \"The Times\" in 2018, saying \"I could be with a woman next year.\" She accepted the label bisexual: \u201cIt's just who I am. I have absolutely no issue with it whatsoever, and I don't really care if other people have an issue with it.\"\nAnderson resides with her three children in London, where she has lived since 2002. She has been in a relationship with British screenwriter Peter Morgan since 2016 apart from a short break in 2020.\nActivism and charity work.\nAnderson has been active in supporting numerous charity organizations, global and social causes, as well as running her own humanitarian ventures. She supports The Trevor Project organization, focused on suicide prevention efforts among LGBTQ youth and attended three of the Trevor Project's \"Cracked X-Mas\" events to benefit the organization. In 2013, Anderson was made a patron of the Charles Dickens Statue Fund, and was instrumental in securing the funding for UK's first Dickens statue, located in Portsmouth, Hampshire. In June 2016 she became a patron of the Temple Legal Centre, a London-based organization that assists people through the legal process by providing them free family law advice and support. In June 2016, Anderson expressed her support for the United Kingdom to remain a member of the European Union in the run-up to June's referendum on that issue. In January 2018, Anderson was given a City Lit Lifetime Fellowship Award by the adult education college City Literary Institute.\nNeurofibromatosis.\nAnderson is an honorary spokesperson for the Neurofibromatosis Network. She often holds auctions with the profits benefiting the NF Network. Her brother Aaron died from Neurofibromatosis type I in 2011. In May 1996, Anderson addressed the United States Congress urging for more education and funding for NF research projects. She partners with \"Doodle 4 NF\" \u2013 an annual fundraiser for the NF Network. She also supported the Children with Tumours organization and the Global Genes movement, which is devoted to helping children with NF.\nAfrica and SAYes.\nIn 2008, Anderson co-founded South African Youth Education for Sustainability (SAYes), which helps in empowering marginalised young people in South Africa through youth mentoring. The nonprofit organization provides youth leaving children's homes with guidance that enables them to develop their skills, further their education, and source suitable housing in order to participate in society as independent adults.\nWhile filming \"The Last King of Scotland\" in 2005, Anderson started a crowdfunding venture that benefited the Alinyiikira Junior School in Kampala, Uganda. She ran the philanthropic project until 2011. Anderson is a member of the board of directors for Artists for a New South Africa and a campaigner for . She was a patron of the Friends of Treatment Action Campaign (FoTAC) which worked with the Treatment Action Campaign in South Africa to ensure greater access to treatment to reduce the effects of HIV and prevent new infections. Anderson also supported Buskaid \u2013 a charitable trust aiming to help young black musicians in South Africa.\nWomen's rights.\nAnderson is a supporter of various women's organizations and social movements. She has been a long-time supporter of the Feminist Majority Foundation (FMF). In 1996, Anderson became FMF's spokesperson and participated as a team leader in the FMF's \"Million4Roe\" campaign. In March 1999, she attended an FMF event to stop gender apartheid in Afghanistan and in April 2002, she appeared on \"Hollywood Squares\" to benefit the FMF's campaign to aid Afghan women and girls. Anderson participated in Eve Ensler's \"Vagina Monologues\", including a stage performance on February 14, 1999. Anderson is a supporter of Ensler's V-Day movement aiming to end violence against women and girls.\nAnderson is an advocate for reproductive rights. In 2001, she emceed the Rock for Choice concert fundraiser, featuring musicians Sarah McLachlan, Paula Cole, and Melissa Etheridge as well as actresses Helen Hunt, Ellen DeGeneres, Portia de Rossi, and Kathy Najimy. The concert supported reproductive options for unplanned pregnancies, including the morning-after pill. For International Women's Day 2014, Anderson was one of the artist signatories of Amnesty International's letter to UK Prime Minister David Cameron campaigning for women's rights in Afghanistan. In March 2015, Anderson backed the Women at the Well drop-in centre for vulnerable women in London, which is supported financially by Comic Relief. Anderson supports the Refuge, a United Kingdom charity providing specialist support for women and children experiencing domestic violence. For International Women's Day 2016, Anderson was one of the high-profile women that signed Burma Campaign UK's pledge to end and investigate crimes of sexual violence against girls and women in Myanmar. Anderson is a speaker for Thomson Reuters Foundation's Trust Women Conference.\nChildren's rights.\nAnderson is a patron of Childreach International, a London-based charity that works in partnership with local communities in the developing world to secure children's basic rights; she addressed the problem of child trafficking during the press for the \"Sold\" film that presents the issue. Anderson also supports their \"Taught Not Trafficked\" campaign that was launched in July 2014. In 2015, Anderson became a patron of the International Literacy Centre (ILC) \u2013 European home of Reading Recovery. In January 2016 she helped launch ILC's Reading Recovery Read Aloud campaign. During February and March 2016, Anderson held an internet charity auction benefiting Great Ormond Street Hospital (GOSH) children's hospital in the Bloomsbury area of London. In March 2016, it was reported that Anderson is one of the artists sponsoring an unaccompanied refugee minor in the \"Jungle\" camp in Calais. In July 2017, Anderson was awarded a UCL Honorary Fellowship for her support of the International Literacy Centre's Reading Recovery program.\nIndigenous rights.\nIn late 2010, Anderson and other artists joined a campaign to boycott Botswana diamonds over the government's treatment of the Kalahari San. Anderson supports tribal rights charity Survival International, an organization that champions tribal peoples around the world and in early 2010 she participated in a performance in a London stage fundraiser for its cause. In February 2011, Anderson narrated a short film about recent footage of an uncontacted tribe, in which the Amazon Indians were spotted from the air on the Brazil-Peru border. Anderson has said: \"What comes across powerfully from this amazing footage is how healthy and confident these people appear. I hope they can be left alone \u2013 but that will only happen if the loggers are stopped.\" In June 2011, Anderson became an ambassador for Survival International. In September 2015, Anderson was among the artists who signed a letter calling for a new approach to conservation that would respect tribal peoples' rights.\nAnimals rights and environmental advocacy.\nIn 2012, Anderson joined Greenpeace in standing with the people of Brazil for a zero-deforestation law to save the Amazon. In 2013, she backed the Cheetah Conservation Fund by creating a short film together with the fund, advocating CCF's action to prevent the extinction of the cheetah. In 2013, she joined the \"Fishlove\" campaign, supporting the fight against unsustainable fishing practices that harm the marine ecosystem. In November 2015, Anderson was named a friend and supporter of Positive Luxury, a company that informs consumers on brands' commitment to quality, craftsmanship, service and sustainability.\nAwards and honors.\nIn 2009, Anderson was named as one of 20 most powerful women in British theatre and was dubbed \"The Honorary Brit\" by \"Harper's Bazaar\" and Tiffany &amp; Co.'s list. In 2010, Anderson was named Honorary Associate of The London Film School (LFS).\nIn 2016, Anderson was appointed an honorary Officer of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (OBE) for her services to drama. In 2018, she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42239", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42239", "title": "L-System", "text": ""}
{"id": "42245", "revid": "50591793", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42245", "title": "Sudovian language", "text": "Extinct Western Baltic language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nSudovian (also known as Yotvingian, or Jatvingian) was a West Baltic language of Northeastern Europe. Sudovian was closely related to Old Prussian. It was formerly spoken southwest of the Neman river in what is now Lithuania, east of Galindia and in the north of Yotvingia, and by exiles in East Prussia.\nName.\nThe language is referred to as Yotvingian, Jatvingian or Sudovian. Those names are derived from the southern- and northernmost tribes living in the area. When the Germans learnt the name \"Sudovian\" from the Prussians, they got to know the name of the northernmost tribe only, while Poles in the south met a tribe calling itself Yatvingian. Both Germans and Poles generalized the terms for all the Baltic inhabitants of the area.301\nThe territory they lived in is referred to as Sudovia [Sunderland], Jotva [Jettwen], Dainavia, or Pollexia.\nClassification.\nSudovian was an Indo-European language belonging to the Baltic branch. There are several proposals for the classification of the Sudovian language within the Baltic family.\nHistorical sources state that Sudovian was very similar to and mutually intelligible with the archaic Old Prussian language, e.g. in the introduction to the first Old Prussian Catechism (printed in K\u00f6nigsberg in 1545, the first book in a Baltic language):\n &lt;br&gt;\u2013 \"But the Sudovians, although their speech is somewhat lower, understand this Prussian language, as it is printed in the Catechism, and they express themselves well and understand every word\".\nIn addition to similarities in the scarce material in the Western Baltic languages, this leads most linguists to the conclusion that Sudovian belongs to the Western Baltic branch.300 Sudovian along with Old Prussian was later influenced by Gothic, while most of the East Baltic languages had more contact with Finnic languages.19\nHistory.\nSudovia and neighboring Galindia were two Baltic tribes or nations mentioned by the Greek geographer Ptolemy in the 2nd century AD as \" and \" (, ).29922\nPeter of Dusburg, in his 14th-century \"Chronicon terrae Prussiae\", refers to Sudovia and to its inhabitants as \"Sudovites\", listing them as one of the Prussian tribes.29922 He attests, that between 1,500 and 1,600 Sudavians were forcefully relocated to Sambia in the late 13th century.\nAfter the district was conquered by the Teutonic Knights, the language died out and its speakers were gradually absorbed by German, Lithuanian and Slavic populations.300\nJohn Poliander wrote in 1535 about the Sudovians living near K\u00f6nigsberg, Prussia, that 32 villages used \"Sudini speech\" in a 6\u20137 mile stretch of land of the Samland Corner that bears the name of Sudavia. They spoke a language similar to the Old Prussian language, but they used the term for amber, not the Sambian (Old Prussian) term. From him we learn that the Sudovians lived secluded from the Sambians, that they married within their own tribe, and did not allow intermarriage with the neighbouring Prussian population \"even if begged\". They stubbornly held to their own traditions, and wore finger and ear rings with bronze bells and silver belts. Nothing was imported from abroad, but everything was produced by local craftsmen.\nChristoph Hartknoch reported in 1684 that there were still Sudovians in Sambia.\nPhonology.\nConsonants.\nBased on onomastics, Sudovian is thought to have had the following consonants:\nVowels.\nDiphthongs.\nTwo diphthongs are attested:\nGrammar.\nThe few grammatical features proposed for the Sudovian languages are either based on supposed Sudovian substrate in other languages or based on the Polish-Yotvingian Vocabulary (it is unsure, whether or not it represents Sudovian). Therefore, few can be said with certainty.\nThe language seems to have preserved many archaic features, which have been lost in other Baltic languages. The language from the vocabulary retained the Proto-Baltic singular neuter case endings (as did Prussian), leaving the language with three genders.305\nThe language has six grammatical cases: nominative, vocative (The vocative example is \" form the Sudovian Book), accusative, genitive, dative and locative, and a complex morphology with a variety of moods. It was a frontier dialect of Old Baltic, which preserved many archaic features which had been lost in the Middle Baltic group.\nCorpus of the Sudovian language.\nOnomastics.\nThe Constit. Synod. Evangel. of 1530 contains the following list of deities who were still worshipped by the Sudavians in Samland: \"\"Occopirmus, Sualxtix, Ausschauts, Autrympus, Potrympus, Bardoayts, Piluuytis, Parcunas, Pecols\"...\".\nToponyms from north-eastern Poland, north-western Belarus, and Lithuania also preserve words.302\nEvidence from other languages.\nThe Yotvingian territories were later overrun and populated by Slavs around present-day Bia\u0142ystok and Suwa\u0142ki in north-eastern Poland and nearby Hrodna (formerly Grodno) in Belarus. Some elements of Baltic speech are still retained in the Belarus and Ukraine territory, owing to the sparse indigenous populations and resettlements of refugees from Lithuania. The dialect of Zietela (, , , ) was of particular interest. Kazlauskas suggested that the word \"m\u0117nas\" (\"month\") (dative singular \"m\u00ebnui\") encountered in dialects (Zietela, Lazdijai) and in the writings of Bretk\u016bnas is a remnant of nouns with the stem suffix -s. The dialect of Druskininkai in Lithuania, too, was influenced by the Sudovian language.\nFragmentary texts.\nThere are also some Sudovian language phrases in \"Warhafftige Beschreibung der Sudawen auff Samland sambt ihren Bock heyligen und Ceremonien\" \u2013 True Description of the Sudovians in Samland together with their goat sanctifications and ceremonies \u2013 written in the mid-16th century by Hieronymus Maletius. Most scholars view these texts as representing Old Prussian,437 while Norbertas V\u0117lius regards them as genuine Sudovian.\nPolish-Yotvingian vocabulary.\nUntil the 1970s, Yotvingian was chiefly known from toponyms and medieval Russian sources.96 But in 1978, a monument with Yotvingian writing was discovered by accident. In Belarus, a young man named Via\u010das\u0142a\u016d Zina\u016d, an amateur collector, bought a book of Catholic prayers from an old man from Novy Dvor village in the depths of Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest, which held a small manuscript titled \"Pagan Dialects from Narew\" (). It was written partly in Polish, and partly in an unspecified, \"pagan\" language. However, Zinov's parents threw away the book. But, before the manuscript was destroyed, Zinov had made notes of it which he sent to Vilnius University in 1983. Even though Zinov's notes were riddled with errors, it has been proven beyond doubt that the notes are indeed a copy of an authentic Yotvingian text.97 According to the first person who analyzed the manuscript, Zigmas Zinkevi\u010dius, this short Yotvingian\u2013Polish dictionary (of just 215 words), \"Pagan Dialects from Narew\", appears to have been written by a Catholic priest in order to preach to locals in their mother tongue. Concerning the language, Zinkevi\u010dius put forth three possible versions: \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42248", "revid": "49681265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42248", "title": "Standard American", "text": "Bidding system for the bridge card game\nStandard American is a bidding system for the game of bridge widely used in North America and elsewhere. Owing to the popularization of the game by Charles Goren in the 1940s and 1950s, its early versions were sometimes referred to simply as 'Goren'. With the addition and evolution of various treatments and conventions, it is now more generally referred to as Standard American. It is a bidding system based on five-card majors and a strong notrump; players may add conventions and refine the meanings of bids through partnership agreements summarized in their convention card. One standardised version, SAYC (Standard American Yellow Card), is widely used by casual partnerships and in online bridge.\nRole of bidding systems.\nThe purpose of bidding during the auction phase of each deal is to disclose information which one's partner may employ in order to arrive at an optimal contract while concurrently contending with the opponents' attempts to do likewise. A bidding system is a set of agreements about the meanings of the different bids that the players use. Each bid provides information about the hand's high-card strength and suit distribution based on hand evaluation techniques.\nHistory.\n\"Standard American\" was the label given to the bridge bidding system developed by Charles Goren and his contemporaries in the 1940s. This system employed the 1915 point-count method to evaluate the strength of a bridge hand. Most bids had fairly specific requirements regarding hand strength and suit distribution. This point-count system became so popular that most bridge players, social and tournament players alike, used it. American bridge teams in the late 1930s and 1940s won world championships using Standard American.\nModifications began to appear from the 1950s forward. Before the year 2000, new bidding systems evolved, including \"2/1 Game Forcing\" which are otherwise substantial departures from early Standard American methods. Most tournament pairs now assemble their own system from a variety of new treatments and conventions that have evolved. The nearest thing to a common system in tournament play is the \"Standard American Yellow Card\" (SAYC) promulgated by the American Contract Bridge League. SAYC is widely used in internet bridge play, but only rarely in on-site tournament play.\nMost common elements.\nThe essential common elements of modern Standard American systems are:\nSAYC.\nThe Standard American Yellow Card (SAYC) is a set of partnership agreements summarized in a convention card created by the American Contract Bridge League (ACBL) to be used as the required bidding system in specified events or as a base for a casual or online partnerships. Some of the specific agreements in Standard American Yellow Card (SAYC) that elaborate on or depart from more current Standard American bidding are:"}
{"id": "42252", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42252", "title": "LMAO", "text": ""}
{"id": "42253", "revid": "43131739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42253", "title": "Data mining", "text": "Process of extracting and discovering patterns in large data sets\nData mining is the process of extracting and finding patterns in massive data sets involving methods at the intersection of machine learning, statistics, and database systems. Data mining is an interdisciplinary subfield of computer science and statistics with an overall goal of extracting information (with intelligent methods) from a data set and transforming the information into a comprehensible structure for further use. Data mining is the analysis step of the \"knowledge discovery in databases\" process, or KDD. Aside from the raw analysis step, it also involves database and data management aspects, data pre-processing, model and inference considerations, interestingness metrics, complexity considerations, post-processing of discovered structures, visualization, and online updating.\nThe term \"data mining\" is a misnomer because the goal is the extraction of patterns and knowledge from large amounts of data, not the extraction (\"mining\") of data itself. It also is a buzzword and is frequently applied to any form of large-scale data or information processing (collection, extraction, warehousing, analysis, and statistics) as well as any application of computer decision support systems, including artificial intelligence (e.g., machine learning) and business intelligence. Often the more general terms (\"large scale\") \"data analysis\" and \"analytics\"\u2014or, when referring to actual methods, \"artificial intelligence\" and \"machine learning\"\u2014are more appropriate.\nThe actual data mining task is the semi-automatic or automatic analysis of massive quantities of data to extract previously unknown, interesting patterns such as groups of data records (cluster analysis), unusual records (anomaly detection), and dependencies (association rule mining, sequential pattern mining). This usually involves using database techniques such as spatial indices. These patterns can then be seen as a kind of summary of the input data, and may be used in further analysis or, for example, in machine learning and predictive analytics. For example, the data mining step might identify multiple groups in the data, which can then be used to obtain more accurate prediction results by a decision support system. Neither the data collection, data preparation, nor result interpretation and reporting is part of the data mining step, although they do belong to the overall KDD process as additional steps.\nThe difference between data analysis and data mining is that data analysis is used to test models and hypotheses on the dataset, e.g., analyzing the effectiveness of a marketing campaign, regardless of the amount of data. In contrast, data mining uses machine learning and statistical models to uncover clandestine or hidden patterns in a large volume of data.\nThe related terms \"data dredging\", \"data fishing\", and \"data snooping\" refer to the use of data mining methods to sample parts of a larger population data set that are (or may be) too small for reliable statistical inferences to be made about the validity of any patterns discovered. These methods can, however, be used in creating new hypotheses to test against the larger data populations.\nEtymology.\nIn the 1960s, statisticians and economists used terms like \"data fishing\" or \"data dredging\" to refer to what they considered the bad practice of analyzing data without an a-priori hypothesis. The term \"data mining\" was used in a similarly critical way by economist Michael Lovell in an article published in the \"Review of Economic Studies\" in 1983. Lovell indicates that the practice \"masquerades under a variety of aliases, ranging from \"experimentation\" (positive) to \"fishing\" or \"snooping\" (negative).\nThe term \"data mining\" appeared around 1990 in the database community, with generally positive connotations. For a short time in 1980s, the phrase \"database mining\"\u2122, was used, but since it was trademarked by HNC, a San Diego\u2013based company, to pitch their Database Mining Workstation; researchers consequently turned to \"data mining\". Other terms used include \"data archaeology\", \"information harvesting\", \"information discovery\", \"knowledge extraction\", etc. Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro coined the term \"knowledge discovery in databases\" for the first workshop on the same topic (KDD-1989) and this term became more popular in the AI and machine learning communities. However, the term data mining became more popular in the business and press communities. Currently, the terms \"data mining\" and \"knowledge discovery\" are used interchangeably.\nBackground.\nThe manual extraction of patterns from data has occurred for centuries. Early methods of identifying patterns in data include Bayes' theorem (1700s) and regression analysis (1800s). The proliferation, ubiquity and increasing power of computer technology have dramatically increased data collection, storage, and manipulation ability. As data sets have grown in size and complexity, direct \"hands-on\" data analysis has increasingly been augmented with indirect, automated data processing, aided by other discoveries in computer science, specially in the field of machine learning, such as neural networks, cluster analysis, genetic algorithms (1950s), decision trees and decision rules (1960s), and support vector machines (1990s). Data mining is the process of applying these methods with the intention of uncovering hidden patterns. in large data sets. It bridges the gap from applied statistics and artificial intelligence (which usually provide the mathematical background) to database management by exploiting the way data is stored and indexed in databases to execute the actual learning and discovery algorithms more efficiently, allowing such methods to be applied to ever-larger data sets.\nProcess.\nThe \"knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) process\" is commonly defined with the stages:\nIt exists, however, in many variations on this theme, such as the Cross-industry standard process for data mining (CRISP-DM) which defines six phases:\nor a simplified process such as (1) Pre-processing, (2) Data Mining, and (3) Results Validation.\nPolls conducted in 2002, 2004, 2007 and 2014 show that the CRISP-DM methodology is the leading methodology used by data miners.\nThe only other data mining standard named in these polls was SEMMA. However, 3\u20134 times as many people reported using CRISP-DM. Several teams of researchers have published reviews of data mining process models, and Azevedo and Santos conducted a comparison of CRISP-DM and SEMMA in 2008.\nPre-processing.\nBefore data mining algorithms can be used, a target data set must be assembled. As data mining can only uncover patterns actually present in the data, the target data set must be large enough to contain these patterns while remaining concise enough to be mined within an acceptable time limit. A common source for data is a data mart or data warehouse. Pre-processing is essential to analyze the multivariate data sets before data mining. The target set is then cleaned. Data cleaning removes the observations containing noise and those with missing data.\nData mining.\nData mining involves six common classes of tasks:\nResults validation.\nData mining can unintentionally be misused, producing results that appear to be significant but which do not actually predict future behavior and cannot be reproduced on a new sample of data, therefore bearing little use. This is sometimes caused by investigating too many hypotheses and not performing proper statistical hypothesis testing. A simple version of this problem in machine learning is known as overfitting, but the same problem can arise at different phases of the process and thus a train/test split\u2014when applicable at all\u2014may not be sufficient to prevent this from happening.\nThe final step of knowledge discovery from data is to verify that the patterns produced by the data mining algorithms occur in the wider data set. Not all patterns found by the algorithms are necessarily valid. It is common for data mining algorithms to find patterns in the training set which are not present in the general data set. This is called overfitting. To overcome this, the evaluation uses a test set of data on which the data mining algorithm was not trained. The learned patterns are applied to this test set, and the resulting output is compared to the desired output. For example, a data mining algorithm trying to distinguish \"spam\" from \"legitimate\" e-mails would be trained on a training set of sample e-mails. Once trained, the learned patterns would be applied to the test set of e-mails on which it had \"not\" been trained. The accuracy of the patterns can then be measured from how many e-mails they correctly classify. Several statistical methods may be used to evaluate the algorithm, such as ROC curves.\nIf the learned patterns do not meet the desired standards, it is necessary to re-evaluate and change the pre-processing and data mining steps. If the learned patterns do meet the desired standards, then the final step is to interpret the learned patterns and turn them into knowledge.\nResearch.\nThe premier professional body in the field is the Association for Computing Machinery's (ACM) Special Interest Group (SIG) on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGKDD). Since 1989, this ACM SIG has hosted an annual international conference and published its proceedings, and since 1999 it has published a biannual academic journal titled \"SIGKDD Explorations\".\nComputer science conferences on data mining include:\nData mining topics are also present in many data management/database conferences such as the ICDE Conference, SIGMOD Conference and International Conference on Very Large Data Bases.\nStandards.\nThere have been some efforts to define standards for the data mining process, for example, the 1999 European Cross Industry Standard Process for Data Mining (CRISP-DM 1.0) and the 2004 Java Data Mining standard (JDM 1.0). Development on successors to these processes (CRISP-DM 2.0 and JDM 2.0) was active in 2006 but has stalled since. JDM 2.0 was withdrawn without reaching a final draft.\nFor exchanging the extracted models\u2014in particular for use in predictive analytics\u2014the key standard is the Predictive Model Markup Language (PMML), which is an XML-based language developed by the Data Mining Group (DMG) and supported as exchange format by many data mining applications. As the name suggests, it only covers prediction models, a particular data mining task of high importance to business applications. However, extensions to cover (for example) subspace clustering have been proposed independently of the DMG.\nNotable uses.\nData mining is used wherever there is digital data available. Notable examples of data mining can be found throughout business, medicine, science, finance, construction, and surveillance.\nPrivacy concerns and ethics.\nWhile the term \"data mining\" itself may have no ethical implications, it is often associated with the mining of information in relation to user behavior (ethical and otherwise).\nThe ways in which data mining can be used can in some cases and contexts raise questions regarding privacy, legality, and ethics. In particular, data mining government or commercial data sets for national security or law enforcement purposes, such as in the Total Information Awareness Program or in ADVISE, has raised privacy concerns.\nData mining requires data preparation which uncovers information or patterns which compromise confidentiality and privacy obligations. A common way for this to occur is through data aggregation. Data aggregation involves combining data together (possibly from various sources) in a way that facilitates analysis (but that also might make identification of private, individual-level data deducible or otherwise apparent). The threat to an individual's privacy comes into play when the data, once compiled, cause the data miner, or anyone who has access to the newly compiled data set, to be able to identify specific individuals, especially when the data were originally anonymous.\nData may also be modified so as to \"become\" anonymous, so that individuals may not readily be identified. However, even \"anonymized\" data sets can potentially contain enough information to allow identification of individuals, as occurred when journalists were able to find several individuals based on a set of search histories that were inadvertently released by AOL.\nThe inadvertent revelation of personally identifiable information leading to the provider violates Fair Information Practices. This indiscretion can cause financial,\nemotional, or bodily harm to the indicated individual. In one instance of privacy violation, the patrons of Walgreens filed a lawsuit against the company in 2011 for selling\nprescription information to data mining companies who in turn provided the data\nto pharmaceutical companies.\nSituation in Europe.\nEurope has rather strong privacy laws, and efforts are underway to further strengthen the rights of the consumers. However, the U.S.\u2013E.U. Safe Harbor Principles, developed between 1998 and 2000, currently effectively expose European users to privacy exploitation by U.S. companies. As a consequence of Edward Snowden's global surveillance disclosure, there has been increased discussion to revoke this agreement, as in particular the data will be fully exposed to the National Security Agency, and attempts to reach an agreement with the United States have failed.\nIn the United Kingdom in particular there have been cases of corporations using data mining as a way to target certain groups of customers forcing them to pay unfairly high prices. These groups tend to be people of lower socio-economic status who are not savvy to the ways they can be exploited in digital market places.\nSituation in the United States.\nIn the United States, privacy concerns have been addressed by the US Congress via the passage of regulatory controls such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). The HIPAA requires individuals to give their \"informed consent\" regarding information they provide and its intended present and future uses. According to an article in \"Biotech Business Week\", \"'[i]n practice, HIPAA may not offer any greater protection than the longstanding regulations in the research arena,' says the AAHC. More importantly, the rule's goal of protection through informed consent is approaching a level of incomprehensibility to average individuals.\" This underscores the necessity for data anonymity in data aggregation and mining practices.\nU.S. information privacy legislation such as HIPAA and the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) applies only to the specific areas that each such law addresses. The use of data mining by the majority of businesses in the U.S. is not controlled by any legislation.\nCopyright law.\nSituation in Europe.\nEuropean Union.\nEven if there is no copyright in a dataset, the European Union recognises a Database right, so data mining becomes subject to intellectual property owners' rights that are protected by the Database Directive. Under European copyright database laws, the mining of in-copyright works (such as by web mining) without the permission of the copyright owner is permitted under Articles 3 and 4 of the 2019 Directive on Copyright in the Digital Single Market. A specific TDM exception for scientific research is described in article 3, whereas a more general exception described in article 4 only applies if the copyright holder has not opted out.\nThe European Commission facilitated stakeholder discussion on text and data mining in 2013, under the title of Licences for Europe. The focus on the solution to this legal issue, such as licensing rather than limitations and exceptions, led to representatives of universities, researchers, libraries, civil society groups and open access publishers to leave the stakeholder dialogue in May 2013.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOn the recommendation of the Hargreaves review, this led to the UK government to amend its copyright law in 2014 to allow content mining as a limitation and exception. The UK was the second country in the world to do so after Japan, which introduced an exception in 2009 for data mining. However, due to the restriction of the Information Society Directive (2001), the UK exception only allows content mining for non-commercial purposes. UK copyright law also does not allow this provision to be overridden by contractual terms and conditions.\nSwitzerland.\nSince 2020 also Switzerland has been regulating data mining by allowing it in the research field under certain conditions laid down by art. 24d of the Swiss Copyright Act. This new article entered into force on 1 April 2020.\nSituation in the United States.\nUS copyright law, and in particular its provision for fair use, upholds the legality of content mining in America, and other fair use countries such as Israel, Taiwan and South Korea. As content mining is transformative, that is it does not supplant the original work, it is viewed as being lawful under fair use. For example, as part of the Google Book settlement the presiding judge on the case ruled that Google's digitization project of in-copyright books was lawful, in part because of the transformative uses that the digitization project displayed\u2014one being text and data mining.\nSoftware.\nFree open-source data mining software and applications.\nThe following applications are available under free/open-source licenses. Public access to application source code is also available.\nProprietary data-mining software and applications.\nThe following applications are available under proprietary licenses.\nSee also.\nFor more information about extracting information out of data (as opposed to \"analyzing\" data), see:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42254", "revid": "50512162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42254", "title": "Buick", "text": "Premium division of General Motors\nBuick () is a division of the American automobile manufacturer, General Motors (GM). Started by automotive pioneer David Dunbar Buick in 1899, it was among the first American automobile brands and was the company that established General Motors in 1908. Before the establishment of General Motors, GM founder William C. Durant had served as Buick's general manager and major investor. With the demise of Oldsmobile in 2004, Buick became the oldest surviving American carmaker. Buick is positioned as a premium automobile brand, selling vehicles positioned below the flagship luxury Cadillac division.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nBuick is one of the oldest automobile brands in the world and is currently the oldest in the United States still active today. Autocar, founded in 1897, is the oldest motor vehicle manufacturer in the Western Hemisphere; while originally an automobile maker, Autocar now builds heavy trucks. Oldsmobile, also an early automaker founded in 1897, is now defunct; Studebaker was founded in 1852, but did not begin producing automobiles until 1902; Henry Ford produced his first car in 1896 but did not start the Ford Motor Company until 1903, and during the period in between was involved with other automobile manufacturers such as Cadillac, founded in 1902.\nThe first two Buick automobiles were made in 1899 and 1900 at the \"Buick Auto-Vim and Power Company\" by chief engineer Walter Marr, but company owner David Dunbar Buick was reluctant to begin making automobiles, being satisfied with stationary and marine engine production, so Marr left Buick in 1901 to found his own automobile company under his own name. His replacement was Eugene Richard, who applied for a patent in 1902 for Marr's valve-in-head (overhead valve) engine, which patent, number 771,095, was awarded to Richard in the name of Buick in 1904. In 1903, the third Buick automobile was made, this time by Richard, but in 1904 Buick, whose company was now called \"Buick Motor Company\", moved from Detroit to Flint, Michigan, and Richard stayed behind. Marr was rehired in Flint as chief engineer, to begin making automobiles in production. That year, 37 Buick automobiles were made, production increasing to 750 in 1905, 1,400 in 1906, 4,641 in 1907, and 8,820 in 1908, taking the number one spot away from close competitors Ford, Maxwell and Olds Motor Works. Buick proclaimed themselves the largest car manufacturer in the world this year.\nDavid Buick incorporated his company as the Buick Motor Company on May 19, 1903, in Detroit, Michigan. Buick had been financed by a friend and fellow automobile enthusiast, Benjamin Briscoe, who in September 1903 sold control of the business to James H. Whiting, of Flint Wagon Works, in Flint, Michigan. Whiting moved Buick to Flint, to a location across the street from his factory, with the idea of adding Buick's engines to his wagons. David Buick stayed on as a manager and re-hired Walter Marr as chief engineer. The engine Buick and Marr developed for this automobile was a two-cylinder valve-in-head engine of 159 cubic inches, with each cylinder horizontal and opposed to the other by 180 degrees.\nWhiting built only a few automobiles in 1904, the Model B, before running out of operating capital, causing him to bring in William C. Durant that year as a controlling investor. Durant built a few more model B's in 1904, stepped up production for the model C in 1905, and spent the next four years turning Buick into the biggest-selling automobile brand in the US.\nDuring the 19th century, Durant had made his fortune as co-owner, also in Flint, with Josiah Dallas Dort, of the Durant-Dort Carriage Company, which by 1904 was the largest carriage-making company in the country and one of the largest in the world. Durant moved most Buick production to the former Durant-Dort Imperial Wheel plant in Jackson, Michigan in 1905. Buick continued car production in Jackson through 1907, when Factory #1 was completed in Flint. The Jackson plant continued production with Buick trucks through 1912. David Buick sold his stock upon departure in 1906, making him a wealthy man, but he died in modest circumstances 25 years later. In 1907, Durant agreed to supply motors to R. S. McLaughlin in Canada, an automaker, and in 1908 he founded General Motors.\nBetween 1899 and 1902, two prototype vehicles were built in Detroit, Michigan by Walter Lorenzo Marr. Some documentation exists of the 1901 or 1902 prototype with tiller steering similar to the Oldsmobile Curved Dash.\nIn mid-1904, another prototype was constructed for an endurance run, which convinced Whiting to authorize the production of the first models offered to the public. The architecture of this prototype was the basis for the Model B.\nThe first Buick made for sale, the 1904 horizontally opposed 2-cylinder engine Model B, was built in Flint, Michigan at a re-purposed factory that was known as the Flint Wagon Works. There were 37 Buicks made that year, none of which survive. There are, however, two replicas in existence: the 1904 endurance car, at the Buick Gallery &amp; Research Center in Flint, and a Model B assembled by an enthusiast in California for the division's 100th anniversary. Both of these vehicles use various parts from Buicks of that early era, as well as fabricated parts. These vehicles were each constructed with the two known surviving 1904 engines.\nThe early success of Buick is attributed mainly to what it called the valve-in-head engine, now known as the overhead valve (OHV), engine patented by Eugene Richard and developed by Richard, Buick, and Marr. The Model F had a two-cylinder engine, an 87-inch wheelbase, and weighed 1,800\u00a0lbs. The creation of General Motors is attributed mainly to the success of Buick, so it can be said Marr and Richard's designs directly led to GM. The power train and chassis architecture introduced on the Model B was continued through the 1909 Model F.\nThe Model F was similar to the Model G, a lower-priced two-seat roadster, produced from 1906 until 1909. Both the F and G were powered by a two-cylinder 159 engine producing along with a 2-speed transmission as well as mechanical brakes on the rear wheels.\nThe flat-twin engine is inherently balanced, with torque presented to the chassis in a longitudinal manner. The engine was mounted amidships.\nBilly Durant was a promoter, and Buick soon became the largest carmaker in America. Durant embarked on a series of corporate acquisitions, calling the new firm General Motors. At first, the manufacturers comprising General Motors competed against each other, but Durant ended that. He wanted each General Motors division to target one class of buyers. Buick was positioned below the Cadillac brand. To save on resources, Buick vehicles shared a common platform, called the GM A platform, that was shared with Chevrolet, Oakland, Oldsmobile, and Cadillac.\nAt first, Buick followed the likes of Napier in automobile racing, winning the first-ever race held at Indianapolis Motor Speedway.\nThe first full-size Buick to join the smaller Model B was in 1907, when the Buick Model D was introduced with a four-cylinder T-head engine, installed in the front with rear-wheel drive. This was one of the only cars with side valves that Buick ever made.\n1910s\u20131920s.\nIn 1910, Buick introduced the Model 10 with an OHV four-cylinder engine followed in 1911, with their first closed-body car, the Buick Six, that followed the same bodystyle that first appeared at Cadillac, and four years ahead of Ford. The car was built at the all-new factory in Flint which later became known as Buick City. Buick during the 1920s made various sized vehicles, with series designations for different years, sometimes using numbers, while later years using lettered designations. One of the larger vehicles, with a straight-six, was the Buick Master Six. The Model 10 was phased out during a restructuring initiated by GM's new leadership that assumed position on November 15, 1910.\nIn the 1910s and 1920s, Buick was a prestige brand in the Republic of China with the brand driven by or for high-level politicians and the Emperor. The latter imported two Buick cars in 1924, making it the first automobile to enter China. By 1930, Buick claimed one-sixth of the total number of cars in the country. Buick now sells 80% of its production in the People's Republic of China and is a minor player in Taiwan.\nIn 1929, as part of General Motors' companion make program, Buick Motor Division launched the Marquette sister brand, designed to bridge the price gap between Buick and Oldsmobile. Its styling featured a high peaked hood and radiator shell while its suspension used four, parallel, semi-elliptical springs with Delco-Lovejoy shock absorbers. Marquette was discontinued in 1930. All Buick, Marquette, Viking, and Oldsmobile products shared the newly introduced GM B platform starting in 1926.\n1930s.\nBuick debuted two major achievements for the 1931 model year, the OHV Buick Straight-8 engine and a synchromesh transmission in all models but the Series 50. The Eight was offered in three displacements, the 220 cubic inch (bore 2 7/8 in. stroke 4.25 in.), was available in the Series 50 with 77 brake HP. The Series 60 engine was a 272 cu. in. unit (bore 3 1/16 in., stroke 5 in.) giving 90 brake HP. Cadillac had previously introduced the Cadillac Type 51 with a flathead V8 engine in 1915 which made usage of an eight-cylinder engine a luxury feature.\nThe Series 80 and Series 90 used a 344 cu. in. version (bore 3 5/16 in., stroke 5 in.) for 104 brake HP. Automatic vacuum-operated spark advance was another feature replacing the steering column-mounted spark lever although an emergency lever was now dash mounted. Buick scored another first in 1939 when it became the first company to introduce turn signals, which did not appear on other car brands until almost a decade later. All 1939 models also had a steering column-mounted shift lever.\nIn the mid-1930s McLaughlin-Buicks were purchased by British monarch Edward VIII. He had a preference for the Canadian built McLaughlin-Buick. Buicks were used for royal transport within Canada, including for King George VI and Queen Elizabeth during the 1939 royal tour of Canada.\nIn the 1920s and 1930s Cadillac and Buick vehicles were popular with long-distance passenger service operators e.g. the Nairn Transport Company in the Middle East (Baghdad-Damascus).\nPost World War II years.\n1940s.\n1940 saw the first use of the \"Estate\" designation for Buick on the Super station wagon. World War II stopped automobile production in 1942. Starting that year, Buick produced the M18 Hellcat tank destroyer and supplied radial engines for the B-24 Liberator, Douglas C-47 Skytrain, and Douglas C-54 Skymaster. By the fall of 1945, automobile production resumed. In 1948, the Dynaflow automatic transmission was first offered by Buick. 1949 saw the debut of Buick's VentiPorts.\n1950s.\n1953 marked Buick's 50th anniversary as well as the introductions of the Buick V8 engine and the Roadmaster Skylark. In 1955, Buick overtook Plymouth to become the third largest brand in vehicles sold, its best postwar result, and retained the spot for 1956, it also had its best model year sales to date with 738,814 vehicles sold; a record that would hold until 1977. In 1957, Buick's new 364 cu. in. engine block and ball joint front suspension debuted and Roadmasters now had aluminum finned brake drums. However, with the economic cooldown, in 1957 Buick fell to fourth place again. 1959 saw the introduction of three new models: Electra, Invicta and LeSabre as well as a new 401 cu. in. V8 engine in the Electra and Invicta. An Electra also paced the Indianapolis 500 race that year.\n1960s.\nAn Electra 225 paced the Daytona 500 race in both 1960 and 1963. In 1961, a new Fireball V6 engine was introduced and the Skylark nameplate returned as the top model of the new Special compact car line. The Buick Special was named Motor Trend Car of the Year in 1962. Also in 1962, Wildcat was introduced as a trim level on Invicta and became its own model the following year. In 1963 the Riviera was introduced as its own model. In the mid-1960s Buick started officially selling German-built Opel cars through its North American dealerships. For 1967, radial tires became available as an option on all full-size Buicks.\n1970s.\nThe 1970s saw a number of new models added to the Buick lineup including the Estate Wagon as its own model in 1970, Centurion in 1971, Apollo in 1973, and Skyhawk in 1975. 1975 also saw the first appearance of the \"Park Avenue\" nameplate for Buick as a trim/option package on the Electra 225 Limited. A Buick Century paced the Indianapolis 500 race not once but twice in the mid-1970s. In 1976, Buick began selling rebadged Isuzu Geminis as Opels to replace the Opel Kadett models it had previously marketed. The following year, Electra 225 and LeSabre were redesigned and downsized, and the Buick brand saw its best model year sales to date with 773,313 vehicles sold. 1978 marked Buick's 75th anniversary and welcomed a redesigned Century as well as a redesigned Regal coupe which was now available with a turbocharged V6 engine. Buick model year sales broke another record in 1978 with 795,316 vehicles sold. In 1979, the Riviera was redesigned; Riviera S-Type was named Motor Trend Car of the Year.\n1980s.\nIn the 1980s, Buick's lineup saw several changes including the downsizing of various models. In 1980, Lloyd Reuss was appointed as general manager and further pushed Buick into turbocharging, racing, and performance production cars, building momentum which continued a number of years after his departure in 1984 as he headed toward a brief term as GM president. Also in 1980, the Diesel engine became available on select Buick models and Somerset was introduced as an optional package on the Regal Limited. In 1981, the T-Type performance trim was introduced on the Riviera. Regal was the official pace car of the Indianapolis 500 race in 1981. In 1982, the Grand National high-performance package was first offered on Regal, helping Buick return to its #3 spot after 26 years. A soft-top Riviera helped lead the return of the convertible, which had disappeared from domestic lineups in 1976. The following year, a Riviera convertible with a twin-turbo V6 paced the Indy 500. Also in 1983, Buick had its best model year to date with 810,435 vehicles sold, and remained in #3 place.\nIn 1984, Buick was the official car of the XXIII Olympiad. A reorganization split manufacturing &amp; engineering from sales and marketing. The first pilot Buick is produced at \"Buick City\", a state-of-the-art assembly center built inside the walls of Buick's home plant in Flint. Buick had its best model year sales to date with 906,626 vehicles sold plus Buick's worldwide sales topped one million for the first time. Lloyd Reuss ended his tenure as general manager of the Buick Motor Division in 1984.\nFor the 1985 model year, Buick introduced the downsized sixth-generation Electra, effectively GM's first front-drive, transverse-engine, full-size unibody cars \u2014 initially powered by a carbureted 3.0 liter Buick V6 engine, a fuel-injected 3.8 liter Buick V6 engine, or a 4.3 liter Oldsmobile diesel V6 engine. Each was mated to a 4-speed automatic transmission with a 0.70:1 overdrive gear. The 3.0 liter V6 and 4.3-liter diesel V6 were discontinued after 1985. During the 1985 through 1989 model years, the Electra name also continued to be used on the rear-wheel-drive B-body \"Estate\" station wagon. Also in 1985, Buick introduced the Somerset as its own model. Buick-powered cars won the pole and second position in qualifying for Indianapolis 500. Over the next few years, Buick engines would set a number of stock-block records and twice would power a third or more of the 33-car Indy 500 field (11 in 1990 and 12 in 1992). 1985 would be the final year for the rear-drive LeSabre before another downsizing and conversion to front-wheel-drive for 1986 (sedans and coupes only; the rear-drive LeSabre Estate Wagon would soldier on largely unchanged for a few more years). The top-line LeSabre Limited became the LeSabre Limited Collectors Edition to mark the end of an era for the rear-wheel-drive coupe and sedan; engine offerings included the standard 231 V6 (sedans and coupes) or optional Olds 307 V8 or Oldsmobile 350 diesel V8. 1985 saw Buick's best model year sales to date with 915,336 vehicles sold.\nIn 1986, the LeSabre was introduced on the new front wheel drive H platform, after departing from rear wheel drive on the GM B platform. Joining the LeSabre on the H-body included the Oldsmobile Delta 88. Like the previously introduced Electra, the LeSabre's hood was hinged at the front of the car instead of near the cowl and windshield. Styling and did not include Buick's long-standing ventiports or sweepspear styling cues. In 1986, a LeSabre Grand National model was built to qualify the coupe body style for NASCAR competition. Less than 120 units were made, all finished in black with a gray interior.\nAlso for 1986, the E-body Riviera was converted to unibody construction and further downsized to a wheelbase similar in length to that of the Buick Regal. The V6 was now the only engine, rated initially at SAE and of torque. It used the Turbo-Hydramatic 440-T4 automatic with a 2.84:1 final drive ratio. This generation was noted for advanced electronic instrumentation displayed on a dash-mounted CRT. The CRT controlled the vehicle's climate control system and stereo, and also supplied advanced instrumentation such as a trip computer and maintenance reminder feature. Four-wheel disc brakes were standard. With a choice of three suspension packages available, up to the performance oriented FE3 setting, handling was notably improved. The Riviera placed fourth for \"Motor Trend\"'s 1986 Car of the Year contest. Fuel economy was notably improved for the 1986 Riviera, but the investment in the downsized, transverse engine front-wheel drive platform resulted in a substantial price increase to $19,831 for the base model to $21,577 for the new T-Type. Downsizing also resulted in a dimensional similarity to smaller, less expensive offerings from GM. The smaller dimensions, generic styling, and lack of a V8 led to Riviera sales plummeting to 22,138 for 1986.\nIn 1987, the last of the turbo/intercooled Regal Grand Nationals, often called the quickest American cars, were offered as well as 547 even quicker special edition '87 GNXs. It would also be the last year for the rear-wheel-drive Regal. General manager Ed Mertz promoted the new \"Premium American Motorcars\" theme which focused Buick marketing on the various qualities that made the marque famous.\nIn 1988, Buick was the official car of the U.S. Olympic Team. The Reatta two-seater was introduced, to be followed two years later by a convertible. Also in 1988, Regal was downsized and converted to front-wheel drive. Bobby Allison won the Daytona 500 in a Regal that year. 1988 also saw the debut of the slogan \"The Great American Road Belongs to Buick\".\nIn 1989, a new Electra trim level was offered called the Park Avenue Ultra. The Ultra was an upgrade to the Electra Park Avenue and featured a standard leather-trimmed interior with dual 20-way power front seats (shared with Cadillac's restyled 1989 Fleetwood Sixty Special), lower-body accent exterior paint treatment, distinctive thick-padded vinyl top with limousine-style rear-window surround (available only on Ultra), simulated burled elm trim on the doors and instrument panel, unique aluminum wheels, anti-lock brakes, chromed B-pillar moldings, specific grille and tail lamps, leather-wrapped steering wheel, electronic instrumentation, padded glove-compartment door, unique interior door panel trim, and a variety of otherwise minor changes. With its long list of standard equipment, the Park Avenue Ultra carried a higher base price than Cadillac's Sedan de Ville. The Riviera was also restyled for 1989, adding 11 inches to its overall length. In the late 1980s, the Flint-built LeSabre ranked #1 in North America and #2 in the world in a major independent quality study which eventually led Buick to change its ad slogan from \"The Great American Road Belongs to Buick\" to \"Buick: The New Symbol for Quality in America.\"\n1990s.\nIn 1990, the first Reatta convertible was produced. 1990 was also the last year for the Electra as Park Avenue, previously a trim level on the Electra, became its own model for the 1991 model year. In 1991, Buick led the industry in improvement in sales and market share. A new four-door Regal came to market for 1991, the first Regal sedan since 1984. Buick also introduced a supercharged 3.8-liter V6 in the Park Avenue Ultra. Supercharging became so popular at Buick that by the new millennium, Buick was the leading marketer and industry leader of supercharged cars. 1991 saw the return of the Roadmaster after a 33-year absence. The Roadmaster was first offered as a wagon only and then a sedan was added for 1992.\nFor 1992, the popular LeSabre was redesigned along the same lines as the previous year's Park Avenue. 1992 also saw the introduction of a new, redesigned Skylark. In 1993, a special edition LeSabre was sold to commemorate Buick's 90th anniversary. In addition to Custom trim level standard equipment, included were \"90th Anniversary\" badging, cassette player, cruise control, rear-window defogger, power driver's seat, carpeted floor mats, exterior pinstripes, and choice of wire or aluminum wheel covers.\nIn 1995, after a hiatus in 1994, the Riviera returned with radical styling that departed from the previous generations' more traditional image. A naturally aspirated 3800 V6 was standard, with a supercharged version rated at and available as an option. Rivieras were now assembled in Lake Orion, Michigan, riding the same Cadillac-derived G platform as the 4-door Oldsmobile Aurora.\nIn 1996, both the Roadmaster sedan and wagon were discontinued. In 1998, after 95 years in Flint, Buick's headquarters was moved to Detroit. Bob Coletta, Buick general manager, saw the first Chinese Buick roll off the line at Shanghai before he turned over the top Buick job to Roger Adams. Buick Gallery and Research Center opened at Flint's Sloan Museum. A reorganization of the division split sales from marketing.\nIn 1999, the last of nearly 16 million Buicks were built in Flint's Buick City. The last car, a 1999 LeSabre, rolled off the assembly line on June 29 that year. In a major independent quality study, Buick ranked #2 (and top domestic) among 37 international brands and Buick City shared the top world position among automotive assembly plants. With sales of all coupes declining in the North American market, GM decided to discontinue the Riviera. 1999 was the car's last model year with production ceasing on November 25, 1998. The final 200 cars had special silver paint and trim and were denoted \"Silver Arrow\" models, a designation which hearkened back to several Silver Arrow show cars that had been built off Riviera bodies by Bill Mitchell. The eighth generation Rivieras received the most powerful V6 Buick engine since the Grand Nationals of the 1980s. The supercharged OHV V6 gave impressive torque and acceleration, pushing the car from 0 to in under 7 seconds, and turning the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 mile in 15.5 seconds and achieved MPG fuel efficiency ratings of 18 city/27 highway.\nRecent years.\n2000s.\nIn the 2000s, Buick's lineup was modified with the compact and performance segments being abandoned in favor of the crossover/SUV market which was growing in popularity. In 2000, Buick headed into the new millennium with a redesigned LeSabre (best-selling U.S. full-size car for eight straight years) and a more powerful Century. Since the first Detroit experimental car of 1899\u20131900 and the first Flint production car of 1904, more than 35 million Buicks had been built. The 2000 LeSabre was introduced in March 1999 and was now built on GM's G platform; however, GM chose to continue to refer to it as the H platform. The LeSabre was manufactured at GM's Detroit/Hamtramck Assembly factory in Hamtramck, Michigan and Lake Orion Assembly, in Lake Orion, Michigan. Some of the changes with the redesign included a new grille that did not open with the hood and slightly smaller exterior dimensions. Despite its somewhat smaller exterior size, it still offered similar interior room and more trunk space than the previous model. 2001 saw Buick's first entry into the crossover market with the introduction of the Rendezvous as a 2002 model. In 2003, the Buick Centieme crossover concept car commemorated Buick Motor Division's 100th anniversary. Some of the Centieme's exterior design and interior features would later appear on the 2008 Enclave crossover. In 2004, Buick added the Rainier mid-size SUV, and the new Terraza minivan was added a year later.\nIn the years following, Buick began consolidating its North American lineup and by 2008 had reduced it to just three models: the LaCrosse/Allure, the Lucerne, and the new-for-2008 Enclave. The Super name had also returned after a 50-year absence as a new performance trim level on LaCrosse and Lucerne. The brand's total overall sales slipped in the United States, and, with a reputation for primarily appealing to older buyers, rumors circulated throughout this decade that the Buick marque would be discontinued. The profitability of the model lineup and popularity in China ensured Buick's future within General Motors, with the decision being made to discontinue the Pontiac brand instead.\nSince 2005, GM had gradually consolidated Buick with GMC and former Pontiac dealerships to create the current Buick-GMC network. During General Motors Chapter 11 reorganization and emergence in 2009, the company designated Buick as a \"core brand\", citing the division's success in China. Behind the scenes, GM began to move products originally planned for other brands to Buick. The Opel Insignia was originally intended to become the second-generation Saturn Aura, but instead became the new Buick Regal. In the 2009 J.D. Power and Associates Vehicle Dependability Study, Buick tied with Jaguar as the most dependable brand in the United States.\n2010s.\nThe 2010s included the return of a classic Buick nameplate, the Buick Regal, and several new model names. The decade also saw the brand's first hatchback since 1987, its first factory convertible since 1991, and its first station wagon since 1996. Buick further expanded its presence in the popular crossover/SUV market in the 2010s.\nIn January 2009, Buick unveiled the new 2010 LaCrosse sedan, an all-new styling direction that included traditional Buick cues. The market responded positively to the LaCrosse and reviews favorably compared it to luxury models such as the Lexus ES. In 2010, Buick became the fastest-growing automotive brand in America and attracted a younger customer demographic. A GM company spokesman at the time said that Buick was positioned as a \"premium\" marque (entry-level luxury) to compete with various Acura, Infiniti, Lexus, and Volvo models, while Cadillac was aimed at the \"luxury\" performance segment which includes brands like BMW and Mercedes-Benz.\nAn all-new Regal sedan, a smaller model based on the European Opel Insignia, was re-introduced for the 2011 model year after a seven-year absence. For 2012, the all-new Verano, which was a compact sedan based on the Chevrolet Cruze, joined the lineup. Additionally, the performance-oriented Regal GS officially went on sale and became the first Buick in almost 20 years to be offered with a manual transmission and a turbocharger. Buick also entered the hybrid market with the introduction of eAssist technology on the 2012 LaCrosse and Regal which helped improve fuel economy ratings by as much as 38% over the regular gas-engine versions. Meanwhile, sales of the Enclave crossover remained strong. In January 2012, the all-new Encore mini crossover was unveiled at the North American International Auto Show in Detroit. Also in 2012, a turbocharged version of the Verano was introduced and the Enclave was redesigned for the 2013 model year. In 2013, GM confirmed plans for a \"hybrid global brand\" which includes Opel/Vauxhall and Buick using more synergies between the brands. LaCrosse and Regal were refreshed for the 2014 model year. In 2015, the all-new Cascada subcompact convertible debuted at the North American International Auto Show in Detroit. The all-new 2017 LaCrosse was shown at the 2015 Los Angeles Auto Show in November 2015, as a 2017 model. Buick also confirmed that the Envision compact crossover would be sold in North America starting summer 2016. The Verano compact sedan was dropped from the Buick lineup in North America in 2017. With GM selling off the Opel/Vauxhall division to PSA Group in March 2017, Buick is expected to move away from sharing the Opel model/designs upon the completion of the current generation vehicles.\nFor 2018, Buick replaced the Regal sedan with an all-new model offering hatchback and station wagon body styles. This new Regal was the first hatchback from Buick for the North American market since the 1987 Skyhawk and the first station wagon since the 1996 Roadmaster. A sub-brand was also added in 2018 to accompany Buick, with the Avenir badge being applied to its top-of-the-line level trims, utilizing the same strategy as GMC's successful Denali sub-brand. 2019 would be the last year for the Cascada convertible globally and the LaCrosse sedan for the North American market.\n2020s.\nNew for 2020 was the Encore GX crossover which slotted in between the existing Encore and Envision. The Regal hatchback and station wagon were discontinued for the North American market in 2020.\nIn June 2022, Buick Global Chief Duncan Aldred announced that Buick would transition its entire line-up to electric vehicles by 2030. As part of that plan, all Buick dealers would be given the opportunity to take a buyout rather than switch to all-electric. Aldred explained the move saying that making the transition to electric would require a considerable investment in upgrading dealer facilities and not all dealers would be willing to make the financial commitment. Aldrerd also pointed out that most Buick dealers also sold other GM products, so accepting the buyout would not necessarily result in a dealership closing. Once Buick's top-selling model in North America, the Encore was discontinued in 2022 as more customers favored the larger Encore GX which was introduced for 2020 and became Buick's new top seller. In 2023, the Envista launched for the 2024 model year.\nFor the 2026 model year, Buick's North American lineup consists of the Envista and Encore GX subcompact crossovers, the Envision compact crossover, and the Enclave mid-size crossover.\nProduction models.\nCurrent.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nConcept cars.\nBuick has a long history of creating intriguing concept cars dating back to the Y-Job, the industry's first concept car, of 1938. Its recent concepts, all electric vehicles, are the Buick Enspire concept unveiled in April 2018, the Buick Electra concept unveiled in September 2020, and the Buick Wildcat concept which was unveiled in June 2022.\nDistinguishing features.\nTrishield.\nThe Buick Trishield is rooted in the ancestral coat of arms of the automaker's founder, David Dunbar Buick. That crest was a red shield with a checkered silver and azure diagonal line from the upper left to lower right, a stag above, and a punctured cross below. The division adopted this on its radiator grilles in 1937. In 1960, the logo underwent a major overhaul. Its single shield was replaced by a trio in red, white, and blue\u2014denoting the LeSabre, Invicta, and Electra then in the Buick lineup. It was supplanted by the Buick Hawk in the 1970s, but reemerged in simplified form in the 1980s. The Trishield became monochromatic in 2005, but the traditional colors returned in 2023.\nVentiPorts.\nA traditional Buick styling cue dating to 1949 is a series of three or four vents on the front fender behind the front wheels. The source of this design feature was a custom car of Buick stylist Ned Nickles, which in addition had a flashing light within each hole each synchronized with a specific spark plug simulating the flames from the exhaust stack of a fighter airplane. The flashing light feature was not used by Buick in production.\nThey were called VentiPorts because, as the 1949 sales brochure noted, they helped ventilate the engine compartment. Air entered from the grille into the engine bay, was pressurized by the radiator fan, and exited through the VentiPorts. Later in the model year, however, they were made non-functional and from then on were solely a styling feature.\nWhen introduced, the number of VentiPorts (three or four) denoted the size of straight-eight engine installed. Since displacement differences in straight-eight engines resulted in more significant differences in engine length than on V8s, the Roadmaster needed a longer chassis in front of the cowl to accommodate its larger engine. Thus, an extra VentiPort corresponded to that additional length. After the more compact V8 replaced the straight-eight engine in 1953 this difference in chassis length was no longer needed, but the convention remained. Consequently, when the Century, which shared the Special's smaller body, was reintroduced in 1954, it also received four VentiPorts to denote its engine's greater displacement. However, in 1955, the Super, which shared the Roadmaster's larger body, was promoted from three to four VentiPorts despite having the smaller displacement engine. The Invicta, which took the place of the Century in 1959 and had the smaller body with the larger displacement engine, had only three VentiPorts on introduction; thus the number of VentiPorts came to denote body size rather than engine size.\nIn 1961, Buick introduced the first V6 engine installed in an American passenger car, in the Buick Special, and three VentiPorts appeared on the side, now denoting the number of cylinders instead of displacement or body size. VentiPorts would continue to appear on some Buick models through 1981.\nIn 2003 VentiPorts were re-introduced on the Buick Park Avenue Ultra, and continued with its replacement, the Lucerne. Consistent with the tradition that held from 1961, the Lucerne's VentiPorts refer directly to the number of pistons: V6 models have three on each side, while V8s have four on each side.\nSweepspear.\nAnother styling cue from the 1940s through the 1970s was the Sweepspear, a curved trim line running almost the length of the car. Introduced as an option on the 1949 Buick Roadmaster Riviera hardtop coupe, the original Sweepspear was a chrome-plated steel rub strip which began level over the front wheel, gently curved down across the front fender and door, dove nearly to the rocker panel just ahead of the rear wheel, then flared up and over the rear wheel before leveling off again into a straight run back to the tail light.\nIn 1942 all GM vehicles had an appearance upgrade where the trailing edge of the front fender was extended across the front doors that was called \"Airfoil\" accented by parallel chrome strips on the front and rear fenders on Buick vehicles. In later years the character line of the \"Airfoil\" feature was accented with a stainless steel strip that evolved into the Buick \"Sweepspear\" for several decades.\nThe \"Riviera trim\", as it was initially called, was made available on the Roadmaster convertible very late in the '49 model year. It proved so popular that by the 1951 model year, it was made a standard feature on all Buicks. On 1950s models with two-tone paint, the Sweepspear separated the two colors.\nOriginally stainless steel, the Sweepspear eventually became a vinyl rub strip or simple character line in the sheetmetal, as hinted in some versions of the Buick Riviera, distinct on the 1968\u20131969 Skylark, and appearing on the 2008 Invicta concept car. Often optional trim was available to reinforce a plain character line in the bodywork.\nDelta fin.\nThe 1958 Buick was marketed beginning in September 1957, just as the space age began with the launching of Sputnik I on October 4 of that year. The \"Sweepspear\" evolved into the \"Delta Fin\" reminiscent of a rocket ship, which appeared on the all-new appearance for 1959, and was trimmed down in 1960 and removed for 1961.\nTaillight shapes.\nDuring the 1950s, the characteristic form of the Buick taillamps was a tier of small, circular bullet-shapes. In the early 1960s, most models began to evolve a wide, rectangular pattern, until the 1965 Skylark and Electra models appeared with full-width rear lamps.\nClassic grille styling.\nThe Buick styling cue (dating from the 1942\u20131958 period) that has most often reappeared, though, is for the grille to be a horizontal oval with many, thin, vertical chromed ribs bulging forward. This has sometimes been called the Buick \"dollar grin\", particularly on the early 1950s models, which had thick, highly polished ribs that somewhat resembled teeth. The 1950 model took this tooth theme to its extreme as the teeth crossed over the bumper exposing the 1950 \"grin\", which was the result of extending the bumper guards over the front bumper, and was advertised as \"Front and Center with Duty plus Beauty\". The 1951 model reined in the theme, bringing the bumper guard \"teeth\" back behind the bumper.\nWaterfall grille.\nIn recent years, Buick has adopted a waterfall grille, as seen on the Buick Velite concept car from 2004 and first used in production with the Buick Lucerne introduced for the 2006 model year. This waterfall grille bears some resemblance to grilles of Buicks from the 1980s, such as the Grand National.\nNailhead.\nThe Buick V8 engine, nicknamed the Nailhead because of its relatively small intake and exhaust valves which resembled nails, became popular with hot-rodders in the 1950s and 1960s because the vertical attachment of the valve covers, in contrast to the angled attachment of other V8 engines, enabled the engine to fit into smaller spaces while maintaining easy access for maintenance.\nPerformance.\nIn addition to premium and luxury vehicles, Buick has also been well known for its offerings of high-performance cars. Some of the better-known examples included the Gran Sport and Skylark GSX models of the 1960s and 1970s, and the Grand National and GNX models of the 1980s, with a performance package revival called T-Type.\nWorld distribution.\nAsia.\nBuick is one of China's most popular, best-selling automobiles. In 2016, General Motors sold over 1.1 million Buicks in China. Buicks have always been popular in China. In pre-World War II China, one in five cars was a Buick. Buicks were used by the last emperor Puyi, the first president Sun Yat-sen, and the first premier Zhou Enlai.\nSince 1999, a Buick Regal for China has been produced and sold by Shanghai GM and has proven to be popular among upscale, professional families, establishing Buick as one of the most popular vehicle brands in China. In addition, Buick of China sells a compact Excelle, similar to a five-door hatchback version called the HRV, and a minivan named the GL8. Many Buicks for the local market are equipped with smaller more fuel-efficient engines with double overhead camshafts, than those with overhead valves in the same nameplate for the American market.\nGM Taiwan was founded in August 1989. In the early 1990s, Buick, along with other GM brands, was very popular and frequently seen on Taiwanese streets. Park Avenue, 3rd and 4th generation Regal, and 6th generation Skylark used to be sold in Taiwan. In December 2004, General Motors signed a memorandum of understanding with Yulon, a firm based in Taiwan, for the licensed manufacture of Buick vehicles there. In July 2005, Yulon GM Motor Co. Ltd. (Yulon GM), a joint venture with 51 percent equity stake held by Yulon Motor and 49 percent by GM, was founded.\nIn April 2010, Buick debuted a localised version of LaCrosse, named Alpheon, to the South Korean market.\nMexico.\nBuicks were sold in Mexico from 1921 until 1962, when a protectionist policy on behalf of the government restricted the percentage of imported parts that could be used in the manufacture of vehicles and the sale of imported cars. From then onwards, all GM products were sold by Chevrolet dealerships. In 1990, after a heavy modification to the protectionist policy of the sixties, GM started assembling the Buick Century in Mexico, at the plant in Ramos Arizpe, in the state of Coahuila, just south of Texas, and selling it through Mexican Chevrolet dealerships, so it was not uncommon for many people to call it \"Chevrolet Century\". In 1997, GM stopped selling Buicks in Mexico and the brand was not sold there until 2009.\nWith the announcement in 2009 of the elimination of the Pontiac brand, it was speculated that Buicks would be sold once again in Mexico since there was a large network of Pontiac-GMC dealerships already in place. On July 24, 2009, Grace Lieblein, the new president of GM in Mexico, revealed that the Buick brand would be available in Mexico in late September of that year, after an absence of a dozen years, with the LaCrosse and the Enclave models. Buick shared the dealership floor with Pontiac and GMC until the Pontiac brand faded away in the summer of 2010.\nOn March 26, 2019, Buick announced that the Mexican division will offer only crossovers (Encore, Envision, and Enclave). The La Crosse sedan, Regal hatchback, and Regal TourX station wagon were dropped from the market as those brands were expected to be discontinued due to Opel's future (under new owner Stellantis). The Insignia is tied to the North American-badged Regal and Buick's decision to make the La Crosse exclusive to China.\nMiddle East.\nIn Israel, Buicks are imported by Universal Motors, Ltd. (UMI), which also imports other GM vehicles. For model years 2004 and 2005, the Buick LeSabre and Buick Rendezvous were sold. For model years 2006 and 2007, the Buick LaCrosse and Buick Lucerne were sold alongside the Rendezvous. For the 2008 model year, the Buick LaCrosse and Buick Lucerne were available. Buicks were marketed throughout the Middle East until the second-generation Buick Roadmaster was discontinued, and continued to be available in the Gulf Cooperation Council markets until 1996.\nNew Zealand.\nBuicks were once sold in New Zealand. They were also built at the GMNZ plant in Petone, outside Wellington.\nMotorsport.\nFor many years, Buick was a substitute for Chevrolet in automobile racing. Driver Phil Shafer drove a Buick to win the 1933 Elgin Trophy, considered to be the first officially organized stock car race in the United States.\nNo earlier than the 1960s, Buick was a competitor in the Indianapolis 500, and (like almost every other American manufacturer) also participated in the Grand National stock car racing series using its Regal and later the Gran Sport.\nThe golden age of Buick in motorsport, however, was early through late 1980s. General Motors entered the Regal, particularly the Grand National model, in the NASCAR Cup Series alongside the Oldsmobile Cutlass. Buick was also a major powerplant in the IndyCar Series and IMSA GT Series (particularly in the IMSA GTP class) for several years. The 1990s, however, proved to be the end of Buick's reign in motorsports, as GM replaced it for many years with Oldsmobile before phasing out that marque in 2004. Oldsmobile would be replaced by Pontiac until its demise in 2009, being replaced by Chevrolet.\nBuicks were also entered in the Trans Am Series in the 1980s and 1990s using aftermarket V8 engines.\nEnthusiast organizations.\nThe Buick Club of America, founded in 1966, is a non-profit organization dedicated to the preservation and restoration of automobiles built by the Buick Motor Division of General Motors Corporation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
{"id": "42256", "revid": "36449898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42256", "title": "MIDI Maze", "text": "MIDI Maze, also known as Faceball 2000, is a networked first-person shooter maze video game for the Atari ST developed by Xanth Software F/X and released in 1987 by Hybrid Arts. The game takes place in a maze of untextured walls. The world animates smoothly as the player turns, much like the earlier \"Wayout\", instead of only permitting 90 degree changes of direction. \nUsing the MIDI ports on the Atari ST, the game is said to have introduced deathmatch combat to gaming in 1987. It also predated the LAN party concept by several years. The game found a wider audience when it was converted to \"Faceball 2000\" on the Game Boy.\nGameplay.\nUp to 16 computers can be networked in a \"MIDI Ring\" by daisy chaining MIDI ports that are built into the Atari ST series.\nThe game area occupies only roughly a quarter of the screen and consists of a first-person view of a flat-shaded maze with a crosshair in the middle. All players are shown as \"Pac-Man\"-like smiley avatars in various colors. Bullets are represented as small spheres.\nThe game is started by a designated master machine, which sets rules, divides players into teams, and selects a maze. A number of mazes come with the game, and additional mazes can be constructed using a text-editor.\nDevelopment.\nThe original \"MIDI Maze\" team at Xanth Software F/X consisted of James Yee as the business manager, Michael Park as the graphic and networking programmer, and George Miller writing the AI and drone logic.\nPorts.\nA Game Boy version was developed by Xanth, and published in 1991 by Bullet-Proof Software, with the title \"Faceball 2000\". James Yee, owner of Xanth, had the idea of porting the 520ST application to the Game Boy. George Miller was hired to rewrite the AI-based drone logic, giving each drone a unique personality trait. This version allows two players with a Game Link Cable, or up to four players with the Four Player Adapter.\nIt is often rumored that the Game Boy version would allow up to 16 players by daisy-chaining Four Player Adapters, which is not the case. According to programmer Robert Champagne, the original game's code does contain a 16-player mode, but it required a special adapter that was planned to be bundled with the game, to create a \"chain\" of link cables. The 16-player mode and the adapter were announced in the April 1991 issue of Nintendo Power; however, Nintendo did not allow the adapter's release, so the 16-player mode cannot be enabled using original Game Boy systems. Later, a method was discovered to daisy-chain Game Boy Advance link cables to allow up to 15 players. In 2024, electrical engineer Zarithya was able to produce a 16-player adapter that replicated the functionality of the original adapter intended for the game, discovering that due to an off-by-one error, more than 15 players would never have been possible in the original release of the game even with compatible hardware. She was then able to modify the ROM to support up to 16 simultaneous players, and successfully start a 16-player match. She and others created two patches for the game, one to fix the 16-player functionality only, and another to upgrade the game to include Super Game Boy and Game Boy Color support (called \"Faceball 2000 DX\"), and released them on GitHub.\nA Super NES version, also titled \"Faceball 2000\", was released in 1992, supporting two players in split-screen mode. This version features completely different graphics and levels from the earlier Game Boy version. A variety of in-game music for this version was composed by George \"The Fat Man\" Sanger.\nA Game Gear version, also titled \"Faceball 2000\", was released to the Japanese market by Riverhill Soft. It is a colorized version of the monochrome Game Boy version, supporting two players with two handheld consoles connected by the Gear-to-Gear Cable.\nA PC-Engine CD-ROM version, titled only \"Faceball\" (\u30d5\u30a7\u30a4\u30b9\u30dc\u30fc\u30eb), was released in Japan by Riverhill Soft.\nUnreleased ports.\nA port of \"MIDI Maze\" for Atari 8-bit computers was developed by Xanth, but cancelled circa 1989. A prototype was eventually found and the ROM was released.\nAccording to Robert Champagne, other unreleased ports were worked on at Xanth, including IBM PC and NES.\nA port for Nintendo's Virtual Boy console, to be titled \"NikoChan Battle\" (\u30cb\u30b3\u3061\u3083\u3093\u30d0\u30c8\u30eb) in Japan, was almost completed, but canceled as the system was discontinued in late 1995. A prototype was found in 2013, and the ROM was subsequently released.\nReception.\nIn 1994, Sandy Petersen reviewed the game for \"Dragon\" magazine, giving it 2 out of 5 stars. Super Gamer magazine gave an overall review score of 82% writing: \"Ultra successful on the little Game Boy, this 3-D maze shoot-'em-up has been totally uprated for the SNES.\"\n\"Entertainment Weekly\" picked \"Faceball 2000\" as the #5 greatest game available in 1991, saying: \"The Game Boy meets virtual reality (i.e., artificial, computer-enhanced, first-person perspective). In \"Faceball 2000\", you assume the identity of a Holographically Assisted Physical Pattern Yielded for Active Computerized Embarkation\u00a0\u2013 or HAPPYFACE\u00a0\u2013 and hunt down your opponents. You can play alone or link up with as many as three additional players. More fun than real-life tag, and much more stimulating.\" CNET Gamecenter called \"MIDI Maze\" one of the 10 most innovative computer games of all time. In 2018, Den of Geek ranked the game 25th on their \"25 Underrated Game Boy Games.\"\nLegacy.\n\"Personal Computer World\" said that in 1987, \"MIDI Maze\" introduced the concept of deathmatch combat, using the built-in MIDI ports of the Atari ST for networking. TheGamer listed it as among ten games that revolutionized first-person shooters, which was also noted by Nostalgia Nerd and VG247. Ask.Audio marveled at how it used the Atari ST's MIDI port for multiplayer gaming, also noted by Paleotronic. Nomad's Reviews listed it as among the original first-person shooters, as did GamesRadar.\n\"MIDI-Maze II\" was later developed by Markus Fritze for Sigma-Soft and released as shareware.\n\"iMaze\" is an open source clone of the game for Unix-like systems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42257", "revid": "960841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42257", "title": "Hyundai Motor Company", "text": "South Korean multinational automaker\nHyundai Motor Company, often referred to as Hyundai Motors (Korean:\u00a0) and commonly known as Hyundai (), is a South Korean multinational automotive manufacturer headquartered in Seoul, South Korea, which was founded in 1967. Currently, the company owns 33.88 percent of Kia Corporation, and owns a luxury cars subsidiary, Genesis. The three brands altogether make up the Hyundai Motor Group.\nHyundai operates the second largest automobile manufacturing facility in the world in Ulsan, South Korea which has an annual production capacity of 1.6 million units. The company employs approximately 75,000 people worldwide. Hyundai vehicles are sold in 193 countries through 5,000 dealerships and showrooms. As of November 2024, Hyundai is the world's third-largest carmaker in terms of production, behind competitors Toyota and Volkswagen. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nChung Ju-yung (1915\u20132001) founded the Hyundai Engineering and Construction Company in 1947. Hyundai Motor Company was founded in 1967 with his brother Chung Se-yung. and the company's first model, the Cortina, was released in cooperation with Ford Motor Company in 1968. When Hyundai wanted to develop their own car, they hired George Turnbull in February 1974, the former managing director of Austin Morris at British Leyland. He in turn hired five other top British car engineers. They were body designer Kenneth Barnett, engineers John Simpson and Edward Chapman, John Crosthwaite, formerly of BRM, as chassis engineer and Peter Slater as chief development engineer. In 1975, the Pony, the first South Korean car, was released, with styling by Giorgio Giugiaro of Italdesign and powertrain technology provided by Japan's Mitsubishi Motors. Exports began in the following year to Ecuador and soon thereafter to the Benelux countries. Hyundai entered the British market in 1982, selling 2993 cars in their first year there.\nIn 1984, Hyundai began exporting the Pony to Canada, but not to the United States, as the Pony would not pass emissions standards there. Canadian sales greatly exceeded expectations, and it was at one point the top-selling car on the Canadian market. In 1985, the one millionth Hyundai car was built. Until the 1986 introduction of the larger Hyundai Grandeur, Hyundai offered a locally assembled Ford Granada for the South Korean executive market. The import of these knocked down kits was permitted as long as Hyundai exported five cars for every single Granada brought in (the same demands were placed on Kia).\nOverseas expansion.\nIn 1986, Hyundai began to sell cars in the United States, and the Excel was nominated as \"Best Product #10\" by \"Fortune\" magazine, largely because of its affordability. The company began to produce models with its own technology in 1988, beginning with the midsize Sonata. In the spring of 1990, aggregate production of Hyundai automobiles reached the four million mark. In 1991, the company succeeded in developing its first proprietary gasoline engine, the four-cylinder Alpha, and also its own transmission, thus paving the way for technological independence.\nIn 1996, Hyundai Motor India Limited was established with a production plant in Irungattukottai near Chennai, India.\nIn 1998, after a shake-up in the South Korean auto industry caused by overambitious expansion and the Asian financial crisis, Hyundai acquired the majority of rival Kia Motors.\nDesign and quality improvements.\nIn 1998, Hyundai began to overhaul its image in an attempt to establish itself as a world-class brand. Chung Ju-yung transferred leadership of Hyundai Motor to his son, Chung Mong-koo, in 1999. Hyundai's parent company, Hyundai Motor Group, invested heavily in the quality, design, manufacturing, and long-term research of its vehicles. It added a 10-year or warranty to cars sold in the United States and launched an aggressive marketing campaign.\nIn 2004, Hyundai was ranked second in \"initial quality\" in a survey/study by J.D. Power and Associates in North America. Hyundai is now one of the top 100 most valuable brands worldwide according to Interbrand. Since 2002, Hyundai has also been one of the worldwide official sponsors of the FIFA World Cup.In 2004, Hyundai Motor Company had $57.2\u00a0billion in sales in South Korea making it the country's second largest corporation, or chaebol, after Samsung. Worldwide sales in 2005 reached 2,533,695 units, an 11 percent increase over the previous year.\nIn 2006, the South Korean government initiated an investigation of Chung Mong-koo's practices as head of Hyundai, suspecting him of corruption. On 28 April 2006, Chung was arrested, and charged for embezzlement of 100\u00a0billion South Korean won (US$106\u00a0million). As a result, Hyundai vice chairman and CEO, Kim Dong-jin, replaced him as head of the company.\nIn 2011, Hyundai sold 4.05 million cars worldwide and the Hyundai Motor Group was the world's fourth largest automaker behind GM, Volkswagen and Toyota.\nOn 30 September 2011, Yang Seung-suk announced his retirement as CEO of Hyundai Motor Co. In the interim replacement period, Chung Mong-koo and Kim Eok-jo divided the duties of the CEO position.\nIn 2014, Hyundai started an initiative to focus on improving vehicle dynamics in its vehicles and hired Albert Biermann, former Vice President of Engineering at BMW M, to direct chassis development for Hyundai vehicles, stating: \"The company intends to become a technical leader in ride and handling, producing vehicles that lead their respective segments for driver engagement.\"\n2020\u2013present.\nOn 14 October 2020, Euisun Chung was inaugurated as the new chairman of the Hyundai Motor Group. His father, Chung Mong-koo, has been made Honorary Chairman.\nIn April 2021, the company said that its profits rose by 187%, the highest rise in four years. The company recorded a profit of $1.16 billion from the beginning of 2021 until March.\nIn October 2024, Hyundai Motor said it had signed a 610-gigawatt-hour (GWh) power purchase agreement (PPA) with SK E&amp;S and other partners, the latest in its renewable energy transition efforts.\nIn November 2024, the company announced that its Global Chief Operating Officer, Jose Munoz will hold the new role of global co-CEO beginning 1 January 2025. Munoz will be the first foreigner to hold such a high executive post in a giant South Korean conglomerate. The promotion is said to be credited to Munoz's resilience and strategies in pushing for record sales in the North America region.\nDesign emphasis.\nIn 2006, Hyundai hired Thomas B\u00fcrkle as head of the company's design center in R\u00fcsselsheim, Germany. B\u00fcrkle had previously worked for BMW, having designed the BMW 3 Series (E46), and the BMW 6 Series (E63). Hyundai's current design philosophy is known as \"Fluidic Sculpture\", which is heavily inspired by nature.\nIn 2018, the company announced the \"Sensuous Sportiness\" next-generation design direction. The design philosophy was unveiled at the 2018 Geneva Motor Show demonstrated by the Le Fil Rouge concept car, and has been rolled out into their recent models, ranging from sedans to SUVs. The front grille was first introduced with the 2022 NX4 Generation Tucson. The \"Sensuous Sportiness\" design identity and strategy has won Design Management Institute's (DMI) Design Value Award 2020.\nResearch and development.\nHyundai has six research and development centers, located in South Korea (three offices), Germany, Japan and India. Additionally, a center in California develops designs for the United States.\nHyundai established the Hyundai Design Center in Fountain Valley, California in 1990. The center moved to a new $30\u00a0million facility in Irvine, California in 2003, and was renamed the Hyundai Kia Motors Design and Technical Center. The facility also housed Hyundai America Technical Center, Inc, a subsidiary responsible for all engineering activities in the U.S. for Hyundai. Hyundai America Technical Center moved to its new , $117\u00a0million headquarters in Superior Township, Michigan (near Ann Arbor) in 2005.\nIn 2004, Hyundai America Technical Center completed construction of its Hyundai/Kia proving ground in California City, California. The facility is located in the Mojave Desert and features a oval track, a Vehicle Dynamics Area, a vehicle-handling course inside the oval track, a paved hill road, and several special surface roads. A complex featuring offices and indoor testing areas is located on the premises as well. The facility was built at a cost of $50\u00a0million.\nIn the 2021 review of WIPO's annual World Intellectual Property Indicators Hyundai ranked as 4th in the world for its 141 industrial design registrations being published under the Hague System during 2020. This position is up on their previous 7th-place ranking for 57 industrial design registrations being published in 2019.\nRegional operations.\nHyundai has invested in manufacturing plants in North America, India, the Czech Republic, Russia, China and Turkey as well as research and development centers in Europe, Asia, North America and the Pacific Rim.\nNorth America.\nUnited States.\nHyundai Motor America began selling cars in the United States on 20 February 1986, with a single model, the Hyundai Excel. That year, Hyundai set a record of selling the most automobiles in its first year of business in the United States compared to any other car brand; total sales in 1986 were 168,882.\nInitially well received, the Excel's faults soon became apparent; cost-cutting measures caused reliability to suffer. With an increasingly poor reputation for quality, Hyundai sales plummeted, and many dealerships either earned their profits on repairs or abandoned the product. At one point, Hyundai became the butt of many jokes (i.e. Hyundai stands for \"Hope you understand nothing's driveable and inexpensive\").\nIn response, Hyundai began investing heavily in the quality, design, manufacturing, and long-term research of its vehicles. The company added free maintenance for the first 2 years or 24,000 miles for all its new cars sold, starting with the 1992 model year. It also added a 10-year or powertrain warranty (known as the Hyundai Advantage) to its vehicles sold in the United States.\nHyundai incorporated a new manufacturing facility, Hyundai Motor Manufacturing Alabama, in April 2002. The new plant in Montgomery, Alabama, was completed during 2004, at a cost of $1.7\u00a0billion. Production started in May 2005. It employed more than 3,000 workers in 2012.\nBy 2004, sales had dramatically increased, and the reputation of Hyundai cars improved. In 2004, Hyundai tied with Honda for initial brand quality in a survey/study from J.D. Power and Associates, for having 102 problems per 1000 vehicles. This made Hyundai second in the industry, only behind Toyota, for initial vehicle quality. The company continued this tradition by placing third overall in J.D. Power's 2006 Initial Quality Survey, behind only Porsche and Lexus.\nIn 2009, the Hyundai Genesis luxury sedan was named 2009 North American Car of the Year, the first for Hyundai. It also won the 2009 Canadian Car of the Year after winning its category of Best New Luxury Car under $50,000. The Hyundai's V8 Tau engine in the Genesis received 2009 Ward's 10 Best Engines award.\nIn January 2012, the Hyundai Elantra was named the North American Car of the Year at the North American International Auto Show, selling more than 200,000 cars since the model's redesigned debut.\nSupernal.\nThe Hyundai Motor Company established Supernal, an urban air mobility (UAM) subsidiary, in the United States in 2020. The name means \"Best Quality\" and \"Heavenly\". On 8 November 2023, Hyundai announced plans to build a plant in the US to produce flying taxis. As of February 2025, a full-scale technology demonstrator was undergoing ground testing.\nThe prototype uses wingtip tilting rotors and four propellers fixed on booms that connect the wing to a \"Bronco tail\"\u2014named after the Rockwell OV-10 Bronco tail. In 2023, Supernal established its headquarters in Washington D.C., its research and development facility is in Fremont, California, and its engineering headquarters is in Irvine, California.\nCanada.\nIn 1989, Hyundai Auto Canada Inc. opened a stamping and assembly plant in Bromont, Quebec, employing 800. The plant cost $387.7\u00a0million, with Quebec and Canadian federal government subsidies of $131\u00a0million. The plant was designed to manufacture approximately 2000 Hyundai Sonatas per week. Subsequently, Chrysler and Hyundai considered a joint venture that would have Chrysler rebranding the Sonata manufactured at Bromont \u2013 only to later announce the deal had failed. The Bromont plant was operational for four years before it closed \u2013 with Hyundai's sales unable to support the plant. With boost in sales in 2009, Hyundai Auto Canada Inc. is currently planning to build a new plant in Canada and resume production in Canada. Hyundai subsequently sold the plant, which was eventually purchased by Olymbec inc, a Quebec real estate developer. Hyundai is the No. 1 import car brand in Canada without a local plant. Sales over 100,000 cars-per-year mark in 2012.\nMexico.\nHyundai Motor Mexico entered the Mexican market in 2014 with the imported vehicles such as Grand i10, the Elantra, and the ix35. Soon afterwards, the Hyundai Sonata joined the lineup. Prior to the introduction of the Hyundai brand for non-commercial vehicles, Hyundai passenger vehicles, light-duty cargo vans, and passenger vans were distributed by Chrysler de M\u00e9xico, branded as Dodge.\nSouth America.\nBrazil.\nIn October 2012, Hyundai launched a new small bi-fuel car, the HB20, designed specifically for the Brazilian mass-market. The car was developed under the \"Projeto HB\" (Hyundai Brazil) project, and is built at a new Hyundai factory in Brazil, located in Piracicaba, S\u00e3o Paulo. The plant is the first wholly owned Hyundai plant in Latin America. With an investment of around R$1.2 billion, the plant has the capacity to produce 180,000 cars per year under three shifts.\nHyundai vehicles have also been produced in Brazil by local partner, Caoa Group at a plant located in An\u00e1polis, Goi\u00e1s. Production here started with the HR model in 2007, and continued with the Tucson in 2010, the HD78 truck in 2011, and the ix35 in 2013.\nAsia.\nChina.\nHyundai formed a 50-50 joint venture with Beijing Automotive Group since 2002 to produce cars in China. The joint venture is called Beijing Hyundai, which also manufactures several models which are exclusive to the Chinese market. It began operations in China by producing Sonata in December 2002. The joint venture sold 700,000 passenger cars in 2010, 855,995 car sales in 2012, and 2014 saw the company sell 1,120,000 vehicles. At its peak, the company had five plants: three located in Beijing, one in Hubei, and one in Chongqing.\nHyundai cars sold well in China until 2016, when sales fell by half because of their over-reliance on sedans, poor brand images and local Chinese automakers compete with price-competitive SUVs. It marked the start of a slump that continued into 2019, when the company announced plans to cut jobs in the region.\nHawtai partnership.\nBetween 2002 and 2010, Hawtai Motor had produced Chinese-market versions of the Hyundai Matrix, the Hyundai Santa Fe and the Hyundai Terracan. The Santa Fe was the fifth most-purchased SUV in China in 2010, and some of Hawtai's versions may greatly differ from those sold in other markets. Hyundai ended its partnership with Hawtai in 2010.\nCommercial vehicles.\nIn October 2010, Hyundai signed an agreement with Sichuan Nanjun Automobile on setting up a commercial vehicle joint venture called Sichuan Hyundai Motor Co. Ltd.\nIndia.\nHyundai Motor India Limited (HMIL) was formed on 6 May 1996. During the entry of Hyundai in 1996, fellow South Korean Daewoo had entered the Indian automobile market just three years before, while Ford, Opel and Honda had entered less than a year back. Hyundai's first car in the country, the Hyundai Santro was launched on 23 September 1998 and was considered a success. It became the second best-selling car in the country from 2000.\nHyundai has two manufacturing plants in India located at Sriperumbudur in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu. Both plants have a combined annual capacity of 600,000 units. In the year 2007, Hyundai opened its R&amp;D facility in Hyderabad, employing now nearly 450 engineers from different parts of the country. Hyundai Motor India Engineering (HMIE) gives technical &amp; engineering support in vehicle development to Hyundai's main R&amp;D centre in Namyang, Korea. Hyundai is currently the second largest auto exporter from India. It is making India the global manufacturing base for small cars.\nIn June 2017, The Competition Commission of India imposed \u20b987 crore ($13.6 million) penalty for unfair business practices with respect to providing discounts for cars.\nBangladesh\nHyundai vehicles are assembled in Bangladesh with local partner, Fair Technology. Its manufacturing plant in Bangabandhu Hi-Tech Park was opened on 19 January 2023. The current focus is on importing completely knocked down (CKD) parts and assembling those in the facility. The plant is expected to manufacture 10,000 cars per year.\nJapan.\nHyundai started to market its vehicles in 2001. Despite having growing sales worldwide, Hyundai struggled in Japan, having sold only 15,095 passenger cars from 2001 to 2009. Following an announcement in November 2009, Hyundai pulled their passenger car division out of the Japanese market and focused on their commercial vehicle division instead.\nAccording to the newspaper \"The Chosun Ilbo\", the reason for Hyundai's failure in the car market was due to the company's inability to recognize the value of small cars due to parking spaces. For instance, actor Bae Yong-joon was hired to endorse the mid-sized Sonata in Japan to appeal to housewives who watched the drama \"Winter Sonata\". The marketing campaign backfired, as large sedans are driven primarily by middle-aged men, while housewives prefer compact cars. In addition, the Sonata was priced too similarly to its Japanese rivals, which resulted in poor sales. The company said that it is possible for them to come back to Japan fully if market conditions continue to improve.\nOn 9 February 2022, Hyundai announced a comeback to Japan by marketing eco-friendly vehicles like the Ioniq 5 and Nexo with pre-orders from May 2022 for delivery beginning in July 2022 under the company name \"Hyundai Mobility Japan\". As of 2022, Hyundai Mobility Japan operates an office and R&amp;D center in Yokohoma. In addition, they only operate their sales through online means only.\nPhilippines.\nHyundai first entered the Philippine market with the Hyundai Excel compact car and the Hyundai Grace van in the early 1990s, later introducing the Hyundai Starex and the second generation Hyundai Elantra towards the end of the decade. Hyundai Asia Resources, Inc. (HARI) was the distributor of Hyundai passenger cars and currently the official distributor of Hyundai commercial vehicles in the country. The company was appointed by Hyundai Motor Company of South Korea in August 2001 as the official distributor of Hyundai vehicles in the Philippines. In early 2022, Hyundai Motor Philippines, Inc. (HMPH) became the official distributor of Hyundai passenger cars in the country after the company took over its passenger car operations from HARI, It started their operations on 1 June 2022.\nIndonesia.\nIn November 2019, Hyundai announced that it is building the first wholly owned Southeast Asian car plant located in Indonesia. Known as Hyundai Motor Manufacturing Indonesia (HMMI), it is built in Cikarang, Bekasi and will fully operate in the second half of 2021 with the annual capacity of 150,000 vehicles. Half of the output would be exported to the neighbouring countries in Southeast Asia. A total of US$1.55 billion (Rp 21.7 trillion) would be invested to the plant along with the future product developments until 2030. HMMI would produce a region-specific compact MPV among other models.\nVietnam.\nIn Vietnam, Hyundai operates as a joint venture with Thanh Cong Group, establishing Hyundai Thanh Cong Vietnam (HTV). According to the data of the Vietnam Association of Automobile Manufacturers (VAMA), Hyundai was the best-selling car brand in Vietnam in 2023 with 67,450 vehicles sold, followed by Toyota with 57,414 vehicles, and Kia with 40,773 vehicles.\nTurkey.\nIn September 1997, Hyundai opened a manufacturing plant in Turkey, located in \u0130zmit, Kocaeli Province. The facility, named Hyundai Assan Otomotiv, was built as a 50-50% joint venture between the Hyundai Motor Company and the Kibar Holding of Turkey, the first stage investment raising to US$180 million. It currently has an annual production capacity of 125,000 units and it manufactured the Accent, the H-100, the Starex, the Matrix and since 2010, the i20. In May 2013, Hyundai Turkey Izmit plant capacity was increased to up to 200,000 units with 470 million Euro investment. The i10 and i20 were started to be produced in the plant.\nMalaysia.\nIn November 2024, it was reported that Hyundai Motor will be investing RM2.16 billion to set up a manufacturing plant in Kulim, Kedah. It is the largest investment by the South Korean automakers in the country to date. The plant is anticipated to produce 7 models within the space of 5 years and is scheduled to open for business in 2025.\nEurope.\nGermany.\nHyundai has been operating an R&amp;D centre in Frankfurt, Germany since 1994, that has been responsible for monitoring technology developments in Europe and designing and engineering new cars for the European market. In September 2003, the company opened its new European headquarters in R\u00fcsselsheim, after an investment worth 50 million euro. The site became the new location for the R&amp;D centre and for the world rally team of the company.\nCzech Republic.\nIn November 2008, Hyundai opened its European plant in No\u0161ovice, Czech Republic, following an investment of over 1\u00a0billion euros and over two years of construction. The plant, which mainly manufactures the i30, ix20, ix35 for the European market, has an annual capacity of 300,000 cars. The new Hyundai plant is 90 kilometres north of Kia Motors' \u017dilina Plant in Slovakia.\nRussia.\nIn Russia, the production of the Hyundai Accent, Sonata, Elantra and Santa Fe models has been taking place at the TagAZ plant, located in Taganrog, since 2001, in the form of complete knock-down kits assembly. Since 2006, the factory has also been assembling the Hyundai Porter, County, Aero Town and the HD 500 commercial vehicles.\nIn June 2008, Hyundai started the construction of a new manufacturing plant in Saint Petersburg with a planned yearly capacity of 100,000 cars, that will eventually be increased to 200,000 units. It started mass production in January 2011, with two models: the Hyundai Solaris and the Kia Rio.\nIn September 2021, Hyundai Wia division opened a car engine manufacturing plant in Saint Petersburg, the biggest in Russia and the fifth in the world. The new plant is designed to produce about 330.000 engines for Hyundai Solaris and Creta as well as for Kia Rio by the end of the year 2021. The construction of the plant began in December 2019. In 2022, the company's revenue amounted to 112 billion rubles.\nIn January 2024 Hyundai sold its two plants in Russia, enabling the company to exit the Russian market at a cost of $214.7 million.\nAfrica.\nSouthern Africa.\nIn Botswana, the assembly of Hyundai Accent, Sonata, and Elantra models was undertaken by the Motor Company of Botswana at their Gaborone plant, since February 1993, in the form of complete knock-down kits. Almost all of the finished vehicles were exported across Botswana's border to South Africa, where the vast majority of dealerships are situated.\nEgypt.\nHyundai cars are also manufactured in Egypt, the local manufacturer is the Ghabbour Group, which is located in Cairo. They have a big model range and offers sports models of some car models which are only offered on the Egypt market. Formerly, the company had assembled vehicles such as the Verna.\nProduct line.\nHyundai produces sedans, hatchbacks, crossover SUVs, vans, pickups, heavy trucks and buses in numerous plants worldwide.\nCars.\nIts top-selling sedan, according to the company's sales data in 2021 was the Elantra (Avante in South Korea), which recorded 380,907 units. This model was produced in several plants, including in South Korea, United States, China, among others. Another popular sedan model is the Accent/Verna, which is popular in emerging markets including China, India, Middle East, as well as developed markets like North America. This model ceased to be produced in South Korea in 2019, as its production base were moved to Mexico and India.\nOther sedan models are the mid-size Sonata, executive Grandeur, and several China-oriented models which consist of Reina, Celesta, Lafesta, and Mistra.\nSome hatchback models developed by Hyundai have been divided into models developed to cater to the Indian market and the European market. Both the i10 and i20 are models built in India and Europe, with several changes between the Indian and European versions to ensure the model could fit according to each market. Other hatchback models include the entry-level Santro first introduced in 1998 for the Indian market, i30 C-segment car for developed markets, the HB20 for the Brazilian market, and the hatchback version of Accent for markets outside India and Europe.\nCrossovers/SUVs.\nHyundai entered the crossover SUV market early with the Santa Fe in 2000, followed by the smaller Tucson in 2004. The Santa Fe was a huge hit with American and European markets, despite receiving criticism in the past for Hyundai's obscure looks. It quickly became Hyundai's best seller and was one of the reasons Hyundai survived despite having their sales declined. As of 2020, Hyundai has sold more than 5,260,000 units of Santa Fe globally.\nThe first-generation Tucson shared its Elantra-based platform with the Kia Sportage. In most countries apart from South Korea and the United States, the Tucson was retired for the Hyundai ix35 from 2009 to 2015. However, the Tucson name was restored for the third generation, where it was to be used across all markets. It was unveiled at the Geneva Motor Show in 2015. The Tucson is the fourth best-selling SUV in the world in 2020, with a total sales of 451,703 units, below the Toyota RAV4, Honda CR-V, and Volkswagen Tiguan.\nBy mid-2010s, Hyundai moved into developing smaller crossover SUV models, starting from the Creta (ix25 in China) from 2014, and the Kona in 2017. The Kona is also consisted of a hybrid electric and a pure battery electric variant. By 2019, both model became the third and fourth-best selling vehicle of the brand, while the Creta has been the best-selling SUV in Russia since 2016, and India in 2020. In 2021, Hyundai released its first crossover SUV model in the South Korean light car segment, the Casper. It is the first venture of the brand in the segment in 15 years, and also the smallest automobile the brand produces of any kind.\nCurrently, Hyundai produces 12 crossover SUV models for different markets.\nHybrid and electric vehicles.\nHyundai Motor Company began developing flexible-fuel vehicles (FFVs) in 1988. The test vehicle was 1991 MY Scoupe FFV. Since March 1992, in Seoul, Korea, through at least November 1993, field trials of several FFVs had been performed over more than 30,000 miles.\nThe new hybrid-electric FGV-1 was unveiled at the Seoul Motor Show in 1995 which featured full-time electric drive technology. The 1995 FGV-1 was the result of Hyundai's first experiments with hybrid propulsion systems in 1994. The FGV-2 was the second vehicle to be produced. The company is using the \"parallel\" type design, which utilizes either the internal combustion engine or the electric motor. Others are the Elantra HEV and the Hyundai Accent HEV, which were unveiled in 1999 and 2000, respectively.\nThe first pure electric car developed by Hyundai was the Sonata Electric Vehicle in 1991. The car started as a Sonata sedan-based model. Hyundai planned to have six electric vehicles available for testing by the end of 1992.\nHyundai began mass-producing hybrid electric vehicles in 2008. The company is using Hybrid Blue Drive, which includes lithium polymer batteries, as opposed to lithium-ion. The new hybrid Sonata made its debut at the Los Angeles International Auto Show in November 2008. The 2011 Sonata Hybrid sales in the U.S. began in February 2011.\nIn 2009, Hyundai released the Avante LPI Hybrid in the South Korean domestic market in July. Hyundai showcased also the Hyundai BlueOn, an electric prototype of i10, was first unveiled at the Frankfurt Motor Show in 2009. At the 2010 Geneva Motor Show, Hyundai unveiled the i-flow, a concept car using a variant of the BLUE-WILL hybrid system.\nAs of \u00a02014[ [update]], cumulative global sales of hybrid models totaled 200,000 units, including both Hyundai Motors and Kia Motors hybrid models.\nIn 2016, Hyundai revealed the Ioniq five-door liftback to rival the Toyota Prius. The nameplate \"Ioniq\" is a portmanteau of \"ion\" and \"unique\". It is the first automobile to be offered in hybrid, plug-in hybrid, and all-electric variants with no \"standard\" internal combustion engine only version. The hybrid variant launched in its home market in February 2016, followed by the electric model in July 2016. The plug-in hybrid version followed in February 2017.\nIn August 2020, the company announced the launch of Ioniq as its own new electric brand and confirmed three new electric cars that will be sold under the sub-brand. Ioniq is Hyundai's second stand-alone brand after the Genesis. The new brand is going to utilise Hyundai's Electric Global Modular Platform (E-GMP), which they claims will enable \"fast charging capability and plentiful driving range.\" The automaker said the first of the three new global models will be the Ioniq 5, a midsize crossover, arriving in early 2021. It will be followed by the Ioniq 6 sedan in late 2022, and then by the Ioniq 7, a large SUV, in early 2024. New models will be named numerically, with even numbers for sedans, and odd numbers for SUVs.\nIn December 2020, Hyundai Motor Group announced details about its E-GMP platform that will be the underpinning of new Hyundai and Kia electric vehicles starting in 2021. Apart from Hyundai, Ioniq, and Kia brands, it will also be used for future Genesis electric cars. The platform's main components is a battery pack under the cabin and an all-in-one motor, transmission, and inverter designed and developed by Hyundai. By bundling the components, Hyundai said, it raised the maximum speed of the motor by up to 70 percent compared to existing motors, despite its small size. The company claimed that it is capable to handle power output up to from the system.\nIn February 2020, Hyundai launched its first vehicle built above the E-GMP platform, the Ioniq 5. It is the first product to be marketed under the Ioniq sub-brand. At its introduction, it is the most advanced electric vehicle produced by Hyundai. Its battery can be charged from 10 to 80 percent in 18 minutes with its 800 V charging capabilities by using a 350-kW charger. A five minutes charge will add to its range by WLTP standards. Its claimed maximum range is for the rear-wheel-drive 72.6 kWh variant.\nIn July 2022, Hyundai announced its new automotive factory in South Korea, solely dedicated for electric vehicles and with production set to begin in 2025. It will be the first Hyundai plant to open in South Korea since 1996.\nHyundai is currently expanding its full-electric lineup by adding the Ioniq 6 to its lineup, which debuted in Europe in the second half of 2022, and in the United States in spring of 2023. Hyundai is also expanding its full-electric lineup with the Ioniq 7, which is projected to hit the market in 2024.\nHydrogen vehicles.\nIn March 2018, Hyundai launched a hydrogen powered crossover SUV the Nexo. In October 2020, South Korean domestic sales of the Nexo exceeded 10,000 vehicles. As of July 2020, Hyundai had exported only 769 vehicles to the United States and Europe with supply limited due to domestic demand.\nIn 2020, Hyundai launched a hydrogen powered version of its Xcient truck the Xcient Fuel Cell delivering seven vehicles to customers in Switzerland. The Xcient Fuel Cell is the world's first production hydrogen fuel cell truck. In 2019, Hyundai formed Hyundai Hydrogen Mobility (HHM) together with Swiss company H2 Energy to lease trucks to Swiss customers with plans to deliver 50 trucks by 2020. Hyundai chose to launch in Switzerland as its road tax does not apply to zero-emission trucks and for its ability to produce hydrogen using hydropower. HHM formed a partnership with Hydrospider, a joint venture of H2Energy, Alpiq and Linde to produce hydrogen and to build hydrogen refuelling infrastructure in Switzerland. The 34-ton Xcient Fuel Cell has a 190 kW fuel cell supported by a 73\u00a0kW battery pack that stores energy from the fuel cell and from braking, seven hydrogen tanks, a maximum speed of , a driving range of about and a refueling time of between 8 and 20 minutes.\nIn 2020, Hyundai launched a hydrogen powered version of its Elec City bus the Elec City FCEV that has a capacity of 44 passengers with 24 seats and 20 standing seats. The bus has a 180 kW fuel cell supported by a 156\u00a0kW battery pack, five hydrogen tanks, a driving range of and a refuelling time of 15 minutes. In 2020, Hyundai exported two buses to Saudi Arabian oil company Saudi Aramco for demonstration.\nIn December 2021, Hyundai suspended development of its Genesis, and possibly its other, hydrogen cars.\nLight commercial vehicles.\nHyundai Motor started production of the H350 van (also called Solati) in Turkey from 2015.\nTrucks and buses.\nUnder the Truck &amp; Bus division, Hyundai produces several heavy trucks and buses. The company started selling trucks in 1969 with the D-750/800, followed by the R-182 as their first bus in 1970.\nA joint venture called the Daimler-Hyundai Truck Corporation was established between Hyundai and Daimler AG in 2000 to produce high-tech middle-range trucks and buses in the Korean market beginning in 2004. However, after numerous delays and disputes, the planned venture was cancelled in 2004, with DaimlerChrysler selling its 10.65 percent stake in Hyundai Motor.\nPartnerships.\nIn 2000, the company established a strategic alliance with DaimlerChrysler and severed its partnership with the Hyundai Group. In 2001, the Daimler-Hyundai Truck Corporation was formed. In 2004, however, DaimlerChrysler divested its interest in the company by selling its 10.5% stake for $900\u00a0million.\nIn February 2021, CNBC reported that Apple and Hyundai-Kia were close to finalizing a deal to build an autonomous Apple car. The vehicle was said to be completely designed by Apple and would be built in Hyundai or Kia plants; it could potentially have gone into production in 2024. However, Hyundai announced shortly after that it was no longer in talks with Apple.\nHeavy industries.\n\"Hyundai Rotem\" is a subsidiary, for manufacturing rolling stock, military equipment, and plant engineering.&lt;ref name=\"autoevolution/213717\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\n\"Hyundai Translead\" Manufactures Semi-Trailers, and Heavy Duty Trucks for the North American market.\nMotorsport.\nFor the 2002 season, Hyundai hired the four-time world champion Juha Kankkunen, along with Freddy Loix and Armin Schwarz. Kankkunen's fifth place in New Zealand was the team's best result, but they managed to edge out \u0160koda and Mitsubishi by one point in the battle for fourth place in the manufacturers' world championship. In September 2003, after a season hampered by budget constraints, Hyundai announced withdrawal from the WRC and planned to return in 2006, which did not happen.\nIn 2006, following the announcement that Korea was scheduled to earn a Formula One Grand Prix, Hyundai planned to enter the sport. The Korean Grand Prix was first held in 2010, but Hyundai have not entered the championship. Hyundai announced they would be revealing their future rally plans at the 2011 Chicago Auto Show, on 9 February. The current plans for rallying are focused around the newest Hyundai release, the Veloster.\n Hyundai i20 WRC \nThe Hyundai i20 WRC is a World Rally Car built by Hyundai for use in the 2014 World Rally Championship. It is based on the Hyundai i20 subcompact car, and was unveiled at the 2012 Paris Motor Show. The launch of the i20 marks Hyundai's return to the World Rally Championship after a ten-year absence. The car is scheduled to make its first competitive appearance at the 2014 Rallye Monte Carlo, but may compete during the 2013 season to aid development.\nThe car will be operated by Hyundai's performance division, Hyundai Motorsport from a base in Frankfurt, Germany.\nMarketing.\nCorporate social responsibility.\nIn 2008, Hyundai Motors established a committee to oversee its Corporate Social Responsibility programme. Among the programme's initiatives have been the \"Happy Move Global Youth Volunteers Program\".\nThe Hyundai Motors' India Foundation (HMIF) has invested more than 20 million rupees in various corporate social responsibility programmes in India. In 2011, it started the \"Go Green\" village adoption project in Tamil Nadu. Its aim was to promote environmentally friendly products, increase the forest cover in Tamil Nadu, and improve living and hygiene conditions in the region's villages. A number of schools have been adopted for improvement with the HMIF donating around 450 benches to government schools and drilling 10 bore wells.\nIn 2020, Hyundai Motors signed a contract with UN Development Programme and launched a campaign 'for Tomorrow' in 2021 to create and realize a solution for problems that global society faces. In 2022, the documentary film 'for Tomorrow' was released which contains the main story of the 'for Tomorrow' project.\nSports sponsorship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFinances.\nThe key trends for Hyundai Motor are (as of the financial year ending December 31):\nScandals and controversies.\nInflated fuel economy numbers.\nAfter an investigation in 2012, the EPA found that 35% of all 2011\u20132013 Hyundai and Kia vehicles had inflated fuel economy numbers; by as much as six miles per gallon. Currently, Hyundai and Kia have started a reimbursement program for the owners of the 2011\u20132013 affected vehicles. In 2014 the company was issued $350 million in penalties by the US government, agreed to pay $395 million in 2013 to resolve claims from vehicles owners, and agreed to pay $41.2 million to cover the \"investigative costs\" of 33 US state attorneys general.\nWrongly advertised engine and horsepower.\nSeveral consumers complained that the engine delivered with the Hyundai Veloster in Brazil was inferior to the one advertised. Independent tests confirmed that it was not the same engine, and it delivered only instead of the advertised , with the car earning derogatory nicknames like Slowster in the Brazilian market.\nMarketing controversy.\nIn April 2013, Hyundai Motors UK released a commercial depicting a man attempting to commit suicide via carbon monoxide poisoning in an ix35, only to fail to do so because of the vehicle's non-toxic emissions. The advert, produced by Hyundai's in-house agency Innocean Worldwide, received widespread criticism for promoting suicide. Hyundai has since taken down the video and issued a formal apology.\nVehicle security vulnerability.\nSince October 2022, following a TikTok trend, Hyundai vehicles especially in North America are highly targeted for theft due to their weaker security systems. Hyundai vehicles manufactured from 2016 to 2021 for the U.S. market that are not equipped with optional key fob and a push-button start mechanism lack immobilizers, a system that prevent the engine from being started unless a proper key is inserted. A video posted on TikTok depicted the theft process, which involves inserting a USB connector on a naked key slot and successfully starts a car. The vulnerability also affects vehicles produced by sister company Kia.\nHyundai and Kia acknowledged the vulnerability. Hyundai introduced a free anti-theft software patch starting February 14, 2023, with all eligible vehicles patched by June 23, 2023. Models that cannot be upgraded will have steering wheel lock reimbursements. Both companies also agreed to pay about $200 million to settle a U.S. class-action lawsuit, including up to $145 million for car owners' out-of-pocket losses. The settlement, announced on May 18, 2023, was rejected by a federal judge.\nAccording to U.S. authority National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, the trend has led to eight fatalities in the country.\nU.S. child labor allegations.\nIn 2022, Hyundai and its parts suppliers in the U.S. were discovered to be illegally employing child labor, primarily involving refugees from Central America. This issue involved parts suppliers, including Hyundai subsidiaries Hyundai Glovis and SMART, SL, Hwashin, and AJIN, many of which used temporary work agencies to recruit underage workers. These suppliers hired minors, some as young as 12, to operate heavy machinery, in direct violation of child labor laws. Following a Reuters report in July 2022, investigations confirmed these illegal practices, leading to fines and sanctions against several suppliers. In response to the scandal, Hyundai announced plans to divest its controlling stake in SMART.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
{"id": "42258", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42258", "title": "Electroception", "text": ""}
{"id": "42261", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42261", "title": "Irrigation", "text": "Agricultural artificial application of water to land\nIrrigation is the practice of applying controlled amounts of water to land to help grow crops, landscape plants, and lawns. Irrigation has been a key aspect of agriculture for over 5,000 years and has been developed by many cultures around the world. Irrigation helps to grow crops, maintain landscapes, and revegetate disturbed soils in dry areas and during times of below-average rainfall. In addition to these uses, irrigation is also employed to protect crops from frost, suppress weed growth in grain fields, and prevent soil consolidation. It is also used to cool livestock, reduce dust, dispose of sewage, and support mining operations. Drainage, which involves the removal of surface and sub-surface water from a given location, is often studied in conjunction with irrigation.\nSeveral methods of irrigation differ in how water is supplied to plants. Surface irrigation, also known as gravity irrigation, is the oldest form of irrigation and has been in use for thousands of years. In sprinkler irrigation, water is piped to one or more central locations within the field and distributed by overhead high-pressure water devices. Micro-irrigation is a system that distributes water under low pressure through a piped network and applies it as a small discharge to each plant. Micro-irrigation uses less pressure and water-flow than sprinkler irrigation. Drip irrigation delivers water directly to the root zone of plants. Subirrigation has been used in field crops in areas with high water tables for many years. It involves artificially raising the water table to moisten the soil below the root zone of plants.\nIrrigation water can come from groundwater (extracted from springs or by using wells), from surface water (withdrawn from rivers, lakes or reservoirs) or from non-conventional sources like treated wastewater, desalinated water, drainage water, or fog collection. Irrigation can be supplementary to rainfall, which is common in many parts of the world as rainfed agriculture, or it can be full irrigation, where crops rarely rely on any contribution from rainfall. Full irrigation is less common and only occurs in arid landscapes with very low rainfall or when crops are grown in semi-arid areas outside of rainy seasons.\nThe environmental effects of irrigation relate to the changes in quantity and quality of soil and water as a result of irrigation and the subsequent effects on natural and social conditions in river basins and downstream of an irrigation scheme. The effects stem from the altered hydrological conditions caused by the installation and operation of the irrigation scheme. Amongst some of these problems is depletion of underground aquifers through overdrafting. Soil can be over-irrigated due to poor distribution uniformity or management wastes water, chemicals, and may lead to water pollution. Over-irrigation can cause deep drainage from rising water tables that can lead to problems of irrigation salinity requiring watertable control by some form of subsurface land drainage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExtent.\nIn 2000, the total fertile land was 2,788,000\u00a0km2 (689\u00a0million acres), and it was equipped with irrigation infrastructure worldwide. Roughly 68% of this area is in Asia, 17% in the Americas, 9% in Europe, 5% in Africa and 1% in Oceania. The largest contiguous areas of high irrigation density are found in Northern and Eastern India and Pakistan along the Ganges and Indus rivers; in the Hai He, Huang He and Yangtze basins in China; along the Nile river in Egypt and Sudan; and in the Mississippi-Missouri river basin, the Southern Great Plains, and in parts of California in the United States. Smaller irrigation areas are spread across almost all populated parts of the world.\nBy 2012, the area of irrigated land had increased to an estimated total of 3,242,917\u00a0km2 (801\u00a0million acres), which is nearly the size of India. The irrigation of 20% of farming land accounts for the production of 40% of food production.\nGlobal overview.\nThe scale of irrigation increased dramatically over the 20th century. In 1800, 8 million hectares globally were irrigated, in 1950, 94 million hectares, and in 1990, 235 million hectares. By 1990, 30% of the global food production came from irrigated land. Irrigation techniques across the globe include canals redirecting surface water, groundwater pumping, and diverting water from dams. National governments lead most irrigation schemes within their borders, but private investors and other nations, especially the United States, China, and European countries like the United Kingdom, also fund and organize some schemes within other nations.\nBy 2021 the global land area equipped for irrigation reached 352 million ha, an increase of 22% from the\u00a0289 million ha of 2000 and more than twice the 1960s land area equipped for irrigation. The vast majority is located in Asia (70%), where irrigation was a key component of the green revolution; the Americas account for 16% and Europe for 8% of the world total. India (76 million ha) and China (75 million ha) have the largest equipped area for irrigation, far ahead of the United States of America (27 million ha). China and India also have the largest net gains in equipped area between 2000 and 2020 (+21 million ha for China and +15 million ha for India). All the regions saw increases in the area equipped for irrigation, with Africa growing the fastest (+29%), followed by Asia (+25%), Oceania (+24%), the Americas (+19%) and Europe (+2%).\nIrrigation enables the production of more crops, especially commodity crops in areas which otherwise could not support them. Countries frequently invested in irrigation to increase wheat, rice, or cotton production, often with the overarching goal of increasing self-sufficiency.\nWater sources.\nGroundwater and surface water.\nIrrigation water can come from groundwater (extracted from springs or by using wells), from surface water (withdrawn from rivers, lakes or reservoirs) or from non-conventional sources like treated wastewater, desalinated water, drainage water, or fog collection.\nWhile floodwater harvesting belongs to the accepted irrigation methods, rainwater harvesting is usually not considered as a form of irrigation. Rainwater harvesting is the collection of runoff water from roofs or unused land and the concentration of this.\nOther sources.\nIrrigation water can also come from non-conventional sources like treated wastewater, desalinated water, drainage water, or fog collection.\nIn countries where humid air sweeps through at night, water can be obtained by condensation onto cold surfaces. This is practiced in the vineyards at Lanzarote using stones to condense water. Fog collectors are also made of canvas or foil sheets. Using condensate from air conditioning units as a water source is also becoming more popular in large urban areas.\nAs of November\u00a02019[ [update]] a Glasgow-based startup has helped a farmer in Scotland to establish edible saltmarsh crops irrigated with sea water. An acre of previously marginal land has been put under cultivation to grow samphire, sea blite, and sea aster; these plants yield a higher profit than potatoes. The land is flood irrigated twice a day to simulate tidal flooding; the water is pumped from the sea using wind power. Additional benefits are soil remediation and carbon sequestration.\nCompetition for water resources.\nUntil the 1960s, there were fewer than half the number of people on the planet as of 2024. People were not as wealthy as today, consumed fewer calories and ate less meat, so less water was needed to produce their food. They required a third of the volume of water humans presently take from rivers. Today, the competition for water resources is much more intense, because there are now more than seven billion people on the planet, increasing the likelihood of overconsumption of food produced by water-thirsty animal agriculture and intensive farming practices. This creates increasing competition for water from industry, urbanisation and biofuel crops. Farmers will have to strive to increase productivity to meet growing demands for food, while industry and cities find ways to use water more efficiently.\nSuccessful agriculture is dependent upon farmers having sufficient access to water. However, water scarcity is already a critical constraint to farming in many parts of the world.\nIrrigation methods.\nThere are several methods of irrigation. They vary in how the water is supplied to the plants. The goal is to apply the water to the plants as uniformly as possible, so that each plant has the amount of water it needs, neither too much nor too little. Irrigation can also be understood whether it is \"supplementary\" to rainfall, as happens in many parts of the world, or whether it is \"'full\" irrigation, whereby crops rarely depend on any contribution from rainfall. Full irrigation is less common and only happens in arid landscapes experiencing very low rainfall or when crops are grown in semi-arid areas outside of any rainy seasons.\nSurface irrigation.\nSurface irrigation, also known as gravity irrigation, is the oldest form of irrigation and has been in use for thousands of years. In \"surface\" (\"furrow,\" \"flood\", or \"level basin\") irrigation systems, water moves across the surface of agricultural lands to wet it and infiltrate into the soil. Water moves by following gravity or the slope of the land. Surface irrigation can be subdivided into furrow,\" border strip or basin irrigation\". It is often called \"flood irrigation\" when the irrigation results in flooding or near flooding of the cultivated land. Historically, surface irrigation is the most common method of irrigating agricultural land across most parts of the world. The water application efficiency of surface irrigation is typically lower than other forms of irrigation, due in part to the lack of control of applied depths. Surface irrigation involves a significantly lower capital cost and energy requirement than pressurized irrigation systems. Hence, it is often the irrigation choice for developing nations, for low-value crops and for large fields. Where water levels from the irrigation source permit, the levels are controlled by dikes (levees), usually plugged by soil. This is often seen in terraced rice fields (rice paddies), where the method is used to flood or control the level of water in each distinct field. In some cases, the water is pumped or lifted by human or animal power to the level of the land.\nSurface irrigation is even used to water urban gardens in certain areas, for example, in and around Phoenix, Arizona. The irrigated area is surrounded by a berm and the water is delivered according to a schedule set by a local irrigation district.\nA special form of irrigation using surface water is spate irrigation, also called floodwater harvesting. In case of a flood (spate), water is diverted to normally dry river beds (wadis) using a network of dams, gates and channels and spread over large areas. The moisture stored in the soil will be used thereafter to grow crops. Spate irrigation areas are in particular located in semi-arid or arid, mountainous regions.\nMicro-irrigation.\n\"Micro-irrigation\", sometimes called localized irrigation, low volume irrigation, or trickle irrigation is a system where water is distributed under low pressure through a piped network, in a pre-determined pattern, and applied as a small discharge to each plant or adjacent to it. Traditional drip irrigation use individual emitters, subsurface drip irrigation (SDI), micro-spray or micro-sprinklers, and mini-bubbler irrigation all belong to this category of irrigation methods.\nDrip irrigation.\nDrip irrigation, also known as microirrigation or trickle irrigation, functions as its name suggests. In this system, water is delivered at or near the root zone of plants, one drop at a time. This method can be the most water-efficient method of irrigation, if managed properly; evaporation and runoff are minimized. The field water efficiency of drip irrigation is typically in the range of 80 to 90% when managed correctly.\nIn modern agriculture, drip irrigation is often combined with plastic mulch, further reducing evaporation, and is also the means of delivery of fertilizer. The process is known as fertigation.\nDeep percolation, where water moves below the root zone, can occur if a drip system is operated for too long or if the delivery rate is too high. Drip irrigation methods range from very high-tech and computerized to low-tech and labour-intensive. Lower water pressures are usually needed than for most other types of systems, except for low-energy center pivot systems and surface irrigation systems, and the system can be designed for uniformity throughout a field or for precise water delivery to individual plants in a landscape containing a mix of plant species. Although it is difficult to regulate pressure on steep slopes, pressure compensating emitters are available, so the field does not have to be level. High-tech solutions involve precisely calibrated emitters located along lines of tubing that extend from a computerized set of valves.\nSprinkler irrigation.\nIn \"sprinkler\" or overhead irrigation, water is piped to one or more central locations within the field and distributed by overhead high-pressure sprinklers or guns. A system using sprinklers, sprays, or guns mounted overhead on permanently installed risers is often referred to as a \"solid-set\" irrigation system. Higher pressure sprinklers that rotate are called \"rotors\" and are driven by a ball drive, gear drive, or impact mechanism. Rotors can be designed to rotate in a full or partial circle. Guns are similar to rotors, except that they generally operate at very high pressures of and flows of 3 to 76 L/s (50 to 1200 US gal/min), usually with nozzle diameters in the range of . Guns are used not only for irrigation, but also for industrial applications such as dust suppression and logging.\nSprinklers can also be mounted on moving platforms connected to the water source by a hose. Automatically moving wheeled systems known as \"traveling sprinklers\" may irrigate areas such as small farms, sports fields, parks, pastures, and cemeteries unattended. Most of these use a length of polyethylene tubing wound on a steel drum. As the tubing is wound on the drum powered by the irrigation water or a small gas engine, the sprinkler is pulled across the field. When the sprinkler arrives back at the reel the system shuts off. This type of system is known to most people as a \"water reel\" travelling irrigation sprinkler, and they are used extensively for dust suppression, irrigation, and land application of wastewater.\nOther travellers use a flat rubber hose that is dragged along behind while the sprinkler platform is pulled by a cable.\nCenter pivot.\nCenter pivot irrigation is a form of sprinkler irrigation utilising several segments of pipe (usually galvanized steel or aluminium) joined and supported by trusses, mounted on wheeled towers with sprinklers positioned along its length. The system moves in a circular pattern and is fed with water from the pivot point at the center of the arc. These systems are found and used in all parts of the world and allow irrigation of all types of terrain. Newer systems have drop sprinkler heads.\nAs of 2017[ [update]] most center pivot systems have drops hanging from a U-shaped pipe attached at the top of the pipe with sprinkler heads that are positioned a few feet (at most) above the crop, thus limiting evaporative losses. Drops can also be used with drag hoses or bubblers that deposit the water directly on the ground between crops. Crops are often planted in a circle to conform to the center pivot. This type of system is known as LEPA (Low Energy Precision Application). Originally, most center pivots were water-powered. These were replaced by hydraulic systems (\"T-L Irrigation\") and electric-motor-driven systems (Reinke, Valley, Zimmatic). Many modern pivots feature GPS devices.\nIrrigation by lateral move (side roll, wheel line, wheelmove).\nA series of pipes, each with a wheel of about 1.5 m diameter permanently affixed to its midpoint, and sprinklers along its length, are coupled together. Water is supplied at one end using a large hose. After sufficient irrigation has been applied to one strip of the field, the hose is removed, the water drained from the system, and the assembly rolled either by hand or with a purpose-built mechanism, so that the sprinklers are moved to a different position across the field. The hose is reconnected. The process is repeated in a pattern until the whole field has been irrigated.\nThis system is less expensive to install than a center pivot, but much more labor-intensive to operate \u2013 it does not travel automatically across the field: it applies water in a stationary strip, must be drained, and then rolled to a new strip. Most systems use diameter aluminum pipe. The pipe doubles both as water transport and as an axle for rotating all the wheels. A drive system (often found near the centre of the wheel line) rotates the clamped-together pipe sections as a single axle, rolling the whole wheel line. Manual adjustment of individual wheel positions may be necessary if the system becomes misaligned.\nWheel line systems are limited in the amount of water they can carry, and limited in the height of crops that can be irrigated. One useful feature of a lateral move system is that it consists of sections that can be easily disconnected, adapting to field shape as the line is moved. They are most often used for small, rectilinear, or oddly-shaped fields, hilly or mountainous regions, or in regions where labor is inexpensive.\nSubirrigation.\nSubirrigation has been used for many years in field crops in areas with high water tables. It is a method of artificially raising the water table to allow the soil to be moistened from below the plants' root zone. Often those systems are located on permanent grasslands in lowlands or river valleys and combined with drainage infrastructure. A system of pumping stations, canals, weirs and gates allows it to increase or decrease the water level in a network of ditches and thereby control the water table.\nSubirrigation is also used in the commercial greenhouse production, usually for potted plants. Water is delivered from below, absorbed by upwards, and the excess collected for recycling. Typically, a solution of water and nutrients floods a container or flows through a trough for a short period, 10\u201320 minutes, and is then pumped back into a holding tank for reuse. Sub-irrigation in greenhouses requires fairly sophisticated, expensive equipment and management. Advantages are water and nutrient conservation, and labor savings through reduced system maintenance and automation. It is similar in principle and action to subsurface basin irrigation.\nAnother type of subirrigation is the self-watering container, also known as a sub-irrigated planter. This consists of a planter suspended over a reservoir with some type of wicking material, such as a polyester rope. The water is drawn up the wick through capillary action. A similar technique is the wicking bed; this too uses capillary action.\nEfficiency.\nModern irrigation methods are efficient enough to supply the entire field uniformly with water, so that each plant has the amount of water it needs, neither too much nor too little. Water use efficiency in the field can be determined as follows:\nIncreased irrigation efficiency has a number of positive outcomes for the farmer, the community and the wider environment. Low application efficiency infers that the amount of water applied to the field is in excess of the crop or field requirements. Increasing the application efficiency means that the amount of crop produced per unit of water increases. Improved efficiency may be achieved by applying less water to an existing field or by using water more wisely, thereby achieving higher yields in the same area of land. In some parts of the world, farmers are charged for irrigation water, hence over-application has a direct financial cost to the farmer. Irrigation often requires pumping energy (either electricity or fossil fuel) to deliver water to the field or supply the correct operating pressure. Hence, increased efficiency will reduce both the water cost and energy cost per unit of agricultural production. A reduction of water use on one field may mean that the farmer is able to irrigate a larger area of land, increasing total agricultural production. Low efficiency usually means that excess water is lost through seepage or runoff, both of which can result in loss of crop nutrients or pesticides with potential adverse impacts on the surrounding environment.\nImproving the efficiency of irrigation is usually achieved in one of two ways: either by improving the system design or by optimizing the irrigation management. Improving system design includes conversion from one form of irrigation to another (e.g. from furrow to drip irrigation) and also through small changes in the current system (for example, changing flow rates and operating pressures). Irrigation management refers to the scheduling of irrigation events and decisions around how much water is applied.\nChallenges.\nEnvironmental impacts.\nNegative impacts frequently accompany extensive irrigation. Some projects which diverted surface water for irrigation dried up the water sources, which led to a more extreme regional climate. Projects that relied on groundwater and pumped too much from underground aquifers created subsidence and salinization. Salinization of irrigation water in turn damaged the crops and seeped into drinking water. Pests and pathogens also thrived in the irrigation canals or ponds full of still water, which created regional outbreaks of diseases like malaria and schistosomiasis. Governments also used irrigation schemes to encourage migration, especially of more desirable populations into an area. Additionally, some of these large nationwide schemes failed to pay off at all, costing more than any benefit gained from increased crop yields.\nOverdrafting (depletion) of underground aquifers: In the mid-20th century, the advent of diesel and electric motors led to systems that could pump groundwater out of major aquifers faster than drainage basins could refill them. This can lead to permanent loss of aquifer capacity, decreased water quality, ground subsidence, and other problems. The future of food production in such areas as the North China Plain, the Punjab region in India and Pakistan, and the Great Plains of the US is threatened by this phenomenon.\nTechnical challenges.\nIrrigation schemes involve solving numerous engineering and economic problems while minimizing negative environmental consequences. Such problems include:\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nArchaeological investigation has found evidence of irrigation in areas lacking sufficient natural rainfall to support crops for rainfed agriculture. Some of the earliest known use of the technology dates to the 6th millennium BCE in Khuzistan in the south-west of Iran. The site of Choga Mami, in present-day Iraq on the border with Iran, is believed to be the earliest to show the first canal irrigation in operation at about 6000 BCE.\nIrrigation was used as a means of manipulating water in the alluvial plains of the Indus valley civilization, the application of which is estimated to have begun around 4500 BCE and drastically increased the size and prosperity of their agricultural settlements. The Indus Valley Civilization developed sophisticated irrigation and water-storage systems, including artificial reservoirs at Girnar dated to 3000 BCE, and an early canal irrigation system from c. 2600 BCE. Large-scale agriculture was practiced, with an extensive network of canals used for the purpose of irrigation.\nFarmers in the Mesopotamian plain used irrigation from at least the third-millennium BCE.\nThey developed \"perennial irrigation\", regularly watering crops throughout the growing season by coaxing water through a matrix of small channels formed in the field.\nAncient Egyptians practiced \"basin irrigation\" using the flooding of the Nile to inundate land plots which had been surrounded by dikes. The flood water remained until the fertile sediment had settled before the engineers returned the surplus to the watercourse. There is evidence of the ancient Egyptian pharaoh Amenemhet III in the twelfth dynasty (about 1800 BCE) using the natural lake of the Faiyum Oasis as a reservoir to store surpluses of water for use during dry seasons. The lake swelled annually from the flooding of the Nile.\nThe Ancient Nubians developed a form of irrigation by using a waterwheel-like device called a \"sakia\". Irrigation began in Nubia between the third and second millennia BCE. It largely depended upon the flood waters that would flow through the Nile River and other rivers in what is now the Sudan.\nIn sub-Saharan Africa, irrigation reached the Niger River region cultures and civilizations by the first or second millennium BCE and was based on wet-season flooding and water harvesting.\nEvidence of \"terrace irrigation\" occurs in pre-Columbian America, early Syria, India, and China. In the Zana Valley of the Andes Mountains in Peru, archaeologists have found remains of three irrigation canals radiocarbon-dated from the 4th millennium BCE, the 3rd millennium BCE and the 9th century CE. These canals provide the earliest record of irrigation in the New World. Traces of a canal possibly dating from the 5th millennium BCE were found under the 4th-millennium canal.\nAncient Persia (modern-day Iran) used irrigation as far back as the 6th millennium BCE to grow barley in areas with insufficient natural rainfall. The Qanats, developed in ancient Persia about 800 BCE, are among the oldest known irrigation methods still in use today. They are now found in Asia, the Middle East, and North Africa. The system comprises a network of vertical wells and gently sloping tunnels driven into the sides of cliffs and steep hills to tap groundwater. The noria, a water wheel with clay pots around the rim powered by the flow of the stream (or by animals where the water source was still), first came into use at about this time among Roman settlers in North Africa. By 150 BCE, the pots were fitted with valves to allow smoother filling as they were forced into the water.\nSri Lanka.\nThe irrigation works of ancient Sri Lanka, the earliest dating from about 300 BCE in the reign of King Pandukabhaya, and under continuous development for the next thousand years, were one of the most complex irrigation systems of the ancient world. They included underground canals and artificial reservoirs to store water. These reservoirs and canal systems were used primarily to irrigate paddy fields, which require a lot of water to cultivate. Most of these irrigation systems still exist undamaged up to now, in Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa, because of the advanced and precise engineering. The system was extensively restored and further extended during the reign of King Parakrama Bahu (1153\u20131186 CE).\nChina.\nThe oldest known hydraulic engineers of China were Sunshu Ao (6th century BCE) of the Spring and Autumn period and Ximen Bao (5th century BCE) of the Warring States period, both of whom worked on large irrigation projects. In the Sichuan region belonging to the state of Qin of ancient China, the Dujiangyan Irrigation System devised by the Qin Chinese hydrologist and irrigation engineer Li Bing was built in 256 BCE to irrigate a vast area of farmland that today still supplies water. By the 2nd century CE, during the Han dynasty, the Chinese also used chain pumps which lifted water from a lower elevation to a higher one. These were powered by manual foot-pedal, hydraulic waterwheels, or rotating mechanical wheels pulled by oxen. The water was used for public works, providing water for urban residential quarters and palace gardens, but mostly for irrigation of farmland canals and channels in the fields.\nKorea.\nKorea, Chang Y\u014fngsil, also known as Jang Yeong-sil, a Korean engineer of the Joseon dynasty, under the active direction of the king, Sejong the Great, invented the world's first rain gauge, \"uryanggye\" (Korean:\u00a0) in 1441. It was installed in irrigation tanks as part of a nationwide system to measure and collect rainfall for agricultural applications. Planners and farmers could better use the information gathered in the survey with this instrument.\nNorth America.\nThe earliest agricultural irrigation canal system known in the area of the present-day United States dates to between 1200 BCE and 800 BCE and was discovered by Desert Archaeology, Inc. in Marana, Arizona (adjacent to Tucson) in 2009. The irrigation-canal system predates the Hohokam culture by two thousand years and belongs to an unidentified culture. In North America, the Hohokam were the only culture known to rely on irrigation canals to water their crops, and their irrigation systems supported the largest population in the Southwest by CE 1300. The Hohokam constructed various simple canals combined with weirs in their various agricultural pursuits. Between the 7th and 14th centuries, they built and maintained extensive irrigation networks along the lower Salt and middle Gila Rivers that rivaled the complexity of those used in the ancient Near East, Egypt, and China. These were constructed using relatively simple excavation tools, without the benefit of advanced engineering technologies, and achieved drops of a few feet per mile, balancing erosion and siltation. The Hohokam cultivated cotton, tobacco, maize, beans, and squash varieties and harvested an assortment of wild plants. Late in the Hohokam Chronological Sequence, they used extensive dry-farming systems, primarily to grow agave for food and fiber. Their reliance on agricultural strategies based on canal irrigation, vital in their less-than-hospitable desert environment and arid climate, provided the basis for the aggregation of rural populations into stable urban centers.\nSouth America.\nThe oldest known irrigation canals in the Americas are in the desert of northern Peru in the Za\u00f1a Valley near the hamlet of Nanchoc. The canals have been radiocarbon dated to at least 3400 BCE and possibly as old as 4700 BCE. The canals at that time irrigated crops such as peanuts, squash, manioc, chenopods, a relative of Quinoa, and later maize.\nModern history.\nThe scale of global irrigation increased dramatically over the 20th century. In 1800, 8 million hectares were irrigated; in 1950, 94 million hectares, and in 1990, 235 million hectares. By 1990, 30% of the global food production came from irrigated land. Irrigation techniques across the globe included canals redirecting surface water, groundwater pumping, and diverting water from dams. National governments led most irrigation schemes within their borders, but private investors and other nations, especially the United States, China, and European countries like the United Kingdom, funded and organized some schemes within other nations. Irrigation enabled the production of more crops, especially commodity crops in areas that otherwise could not support them. Countries frequently invested in irrigation to increase wheat, rice, or cotton production, often with the overarching goal of increasing self-sufficiency. In the 20th century, global anxiety, specifically about the American cotton monopoly, fueled many empirical irrigation projects: Britain began developing irrigation in India, the Ottomans in Egypt, the French in Algeria, the Portuguese in Angola, the Germans in Togo, and Soviets in Central Asia.\nNegative impacts frequently accompany extensive irrigation. Some projects that diverted surface water for irrigation dried up the water sources, which led to a more extreme regional climate. Projects that relied on groundwater and pumped too much from underground aquifers created subsidence and salinization. Salinization of irrigation water damaged the crops and seeped into drinking water. Pests and pathogens also thrived in the irrigation canals or ponds full of still water, which created regional outbreaks of diseases like malaria and schistosomiasis. Governments also used irrigation schemes to encourage migration, especially of more desirable populations into an area. Additionally, some of these large nationwide schemes failed to pay off at all, costing more than any benefit gained from increased crop yields.\nAmerican West.\nIrrigated land in the United States increased from 300,000 acres in 1880 to 4.1 million in 1890 to 7.3 million in 1900. Two thirds of this irrigation sources from groundwater or small ponds and reservoirs, while the other one third comes from large dams. One of the main attractions of irrigation in the West was its increased dependability compared to rainfall-watered agriculture in the East. Proponents argued that farmers with a dependable water supply could more easily get loans from bankers interested in this more predictable farming model. Most irrigation in the Great Plains region derived from underground aquifers. Euro-American farmers who colonized the region in the 19th century tried to grow the commodity crops that they were used to, like wheat, corn, and alfalfa, but rainfall stifled their growing capacity. Between the late 1800s and the 1930s, farmers used wind-powered pumps to draw groundwater. These windpumps had limited power, but the development of gas-powered pumps in the mid-1930s pushed wells deep into the Ogallala Aquifer. Farmers irrigated fields by laying pipes across the field with sprinklers at intervals, a labor-intensive process, until the advent of the center-pivot sprinkler after World War II, which made irrigation significantly easier. By the 1970s farmers drained the aquifer ten times faster than it could recharge, and by 1993 they had removed half of the accessible water.\nLarge-scale federal funding and intervention pushed through the majority of irrigation projects in the West, especially in California, Colorado, Arizona, and Nevada. At first, plans to increase irrigated farmland, largely by giving land to farmers and asking them to find water, failed across the board. Congress passed the Desert Land Act in 1877 and the Carey Act in 1894, which only marginally increased irrigation. Only in 1902 did Congress pass the National Reclamation Act, which channeled money from the sale of western public lands, in parcels up to 160 acres large, into irrigation projects on public or private land in the arid West. The Congressmen who passed the law and their wealthy supporters supported Western irrigation because it would increase American exports, 'reclaim' the West, and push the Eastern poor out West for a better life.\nWhile the National Reclamation Act was the most successful piece of federal irrigation legislation, the implementation of the act did not go as planned. The Reclamation Service chose to push most of the Act's money toward construction rather than settlement, so the Service overwhelmingly prioritized building large dams like the Hoover Dam. Over the 20th century, Congress and state governments grew more frustrated with the Reclamation Service and the irrigation schemes. Frederick Newell, head of the Reclamation Service, proving uncompromising and challenging to work with, falling crop prices, resistance to delay debt payments, and refusal to begin new projects until the completion of old ones all contributed. The Reclamation Extension Act of 1914, transferring a significant amount of irrigation decision-making power regarding irrigation projects from the Reclamation Service to Congress, was in many ways a result of increasing political unpopularity of the Reclamation Service.\nIn the lower Colorado Basin of Arizona, Colorado, and Nevada, the states derive irrigation water largely from rivers, especially the Colorado River, which irrigates more than 4.5 million acres of land, with a less significant amount coming from groundwater. In the 1952 case Arizona v. California, Arizona sued California for increased access to the Colorado River, under the grounds that their groundwater supply could not sustain their almost entirely irrigation-based agricultural economy, which they won. California, which began irrigating in earnest in the 1870s in San Joaquin Valley, had passed the Wright Act of 1887 permitting agricultural communities to construct and operate needed irrigation works. The Colorado River also irrigates large fields in California's Imperial Valley, fed by the National Reclamation Act-built All-American Canal.\nSoviet Central Asia.\nWhen the Bolsheviks conquered Central Asia in 1917, the native Kazakhs, Uzbeks, and Turkmens used minimal irrigation. The Slavic immigrants pushed into the area by the Tsarist government brought their irrigation methods, including waterwheels, the use of rice paddies to restore salted land, and underground irrigation channels. Russians dismissed these techniques as crude and inefficient. Despite this, tsarist officials maintained these systems through the late 19th century without other solutions.\nBefore conquering the area, the Russian government accepted a 1911 American proposal to send hydraulic experts to Central Asia to investigate the potential for large-scale irrigation. A 1918 decree by Lenin then encouraged irrigation development in the region, which began in the 1930s. When it did, Stalin and other Soviet leaders prioritized large-scale, ambitious hydraulic projects, especially along the Volga River. The Soviet irrigation push stemmed mainly from their late 19th century fears of the American cotton monopoly and subsequent desire to achieve cotton self-sufficiency. They had built up their textile manufacturing industry in the 19th century, requiring increased cotton and irrigation, as the region did not receive enough rainfall to support cotton farming.\nThe Russians built dams on the Don and Kuban Rivers for irrigation, removing freshwater flow from the Sea of Azov and making it much saltier. Depletion and salinization scourged other areas of the Russian irrigation project. In the 1950s, Soviet officials began also diverting the Syr Darya and the Amu Darya, which fed the Aral Sea. Before diversion, the rivers delivered of water to the Aral Sea per year, but after, they only delivered . Because of its reduced inflow, the Aral Sea covered less than half of its original seabed, which made the regional climate more extreme and created airborne salinization, lowering nearby crop yields.\nBy 1975, the USSR used eight times as much water as they had in 1913, mostly for irrigation. Russia's expansion of irrigation began to decrease in the late 1980s, and irrigated hectares in Central Asia capped out at 7 million. Mikhail Gorbachev killed a proposed plan to reverse the Ob and Yenisei for irrigation in 1986, and the breakup of the USSR in 1991 ended Russian investment in Central Asian cotton irrigation.\nAfrica.\nDifferent irrigation schemes with various goals and success rates have been implemented across Africa in the 20th century but have all been influenced by colonial forces. The Tana River Irrigation Scheme in eastern Kenya, completed between 1948 and 1963, opened up new lands for agriculture. The Kenyan government attempted to resettle the area with detainees from the Mau Mau uprising. Italian oil drillers discovered Libya's underground water resources during the Italian colonization of Libya. This water lay dormant until 1969, when Muammar al-Gaddafi and American Armand Hammer built the Great Man-Made River to deliver the Saharan water to the coast. The water largely contributed to irrigation but cost four to ten times more than the crops it produced were worth.\nIn 1912, the Union of South Africa created an irrigation department and began investing in water storage infrastructure and irrigation. The government used irrigation and dam-building to further social goals like poverty relief by creating construction jobs for poor whites and irrigation schemes to increase white farming. One of their first significant irrigation projects was the Hartbeespoort Dam, begun in 1916 to elevate the living conditions of the 'poor whites' in the region and eventually completed as a 'whites only' employment opportunity. The Pretoria irrigation scheme, Kammanassie project, and Buchuberg irrigation scheme on the Orange River all followed in the same vein in the 1920s and 30s.\nIn Egypt, modern irrigation began with Muhammad Ali Pasha in the mid-1800s, who sought to achieve Egyptian independence from the Ottomans through increased trade with Europe\u2014specifically cotton exportation. His administration proposed replacing the traditional Nile basin irrigation, which took advantage of the annual ebb and flow of the Nile, with irrigation barrages in the lower Nile, which better suited cotton production. Egypt devoted 105,000 ha to cotton in 1861, which increased fivefold by 1865. Most of their exports were shipped to England, and the United States Civil War-induced cotton scarcity in the 1860s cemented Egypt as England's cotton producer. As the Egyptian economy became more dependent on cotton in the 20th century, controlling even small Nile floods became more important. Cotton production was more at risk of destruction than more common crops like barley or wheat. After the British occupation of Egypt in 1882, the British intensified the conversion to perennial irrigation with the construction of the Delta Barrage, the Assiut Barrage, and the first Aswan Dam. Perennial irrigation decreased local control over water and made traditional subsistence farming or the farming of other crops incredibly difficult, eventually contributing to widespread peasant bankruptcy and the 1879-1882 'Urabi revolt.\nExamples by country.\nSee the below template: ( for mobile users.) \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0 (https://). Text taken from https://, FAO, FAO. "}
{"id": "42265", "revid": "569432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42265", "title": "Calling feature", "text": ""}
{"id": "42266", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42266", "title": "Victor Davis Hanson", "text": "American classicist and military historian (born 1953)\nVictor Davis Hanson (born September 5, 1953) is an American classicist, military historian, and conservative political commentator. He has been a commentator on modern and ancient warfare and contemporary politics for the \"New York Times\", the \"Wall Street Journal\", the \"National Review\", the \"Washington Times\", and other media outlets.\nHe is a professor emeritus of classics at California State University, Fresno, the Martin and Illie Anderson Senior Fellow in classics and military history at the Hoover Institution, and visiting professor at Hillsdale College. Hanson was awarded the National Humanities Medal in 2007 by President George W. Bush and was a presidential appointee in 2007\u20132008 on the American Battle Monuments Commission.\nEarly life and education.\nHanson grew up in Selma, California, in the San Joaquin Valley, and has worked there most of his life.\nHe is of Swedish and Welsh ancestry, and his father's cousin, after whom he was named, was killed in the Battle of Okinawa.\nHanson received a B.A. in classics and general Cowell College honors from the University of California, Santa Cruz in 1975, and his PhD in classics from Stanford University in 1980.\nAcademic career.\nHanson notes autobiographically that he was \"a full-time orchard and vineyard grower from 1980-1984, before joining the nearby CSU\" (California State University, Fresno) in 1984, to launch a classical studies program there. In 1991, Hanson was awarded the American Philological Association's Excellence in Teaching Award, given annually to the nation's top undergraduate teachers of Greek and Latin. He was named distinguished alumnus of the year for 2006 at University of California, Santa Cruz. He has been a visiting professor of classics at Stanford University in California (1991\u20131992) and a National Endowment for the Humanities fellow at the Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford, California (1992\u20131993). He was named a Alexander Onassis Fellow (2001), and a Nimitz Fellow at University of California, Berkeley (2006), and held the visiting Shifrin Chair of Military History at the U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland (2002\u20132003).\nIn 2004, he took early retirement from Cal State Fresno to focus on his political writing and popular history. Hanson has held a series of positions in conservative-leaning institutions and private foundations. He was appointed Fellow in California Studies at the Claremont Institute in 2002.\nHanson was appointed a Senior Fellow at the Hoover Institution, Stanford, California, a public policy think-tank where he is currently the chairman and principal investigator of the Working Group on the Role of Military History in Contemporary Conflict. He served as a William Simon Visiting Professor at the School of Public Policy at Pepperdine University, a private Christian institution in California, from 2009\u20132015, and was awarded in 2015 an Honorary Doctorate of Laws from the graduate school at Pepperdine. He gave the Wriston Lecture in 2004 for the Manhattan Institute whose mission is to \"develop and disseminate new ideas that foster greater economic choice and individual responsibility.\" He became a board member of the Bradley Foundation in 2015 and served on the HF Guggenheim Foundation board for over a decade.\nWriting.\nSince 2004, Hanson has written a weekly column syndicated by Tribune Content Agency, as well as a weekly column for \"National Review Online\" since 2001. He was awarded the National Humanities Medal (2007) by President George W. Bush, as well as the Eric Breindel Prize for opinion journalism (2002), and the Bradley Prize from the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation in 2008.\nHanson's \"Warfare and Agriculture\" (Giardini 1983), his PhD thesis, argued that Greek warfare could not be understood apart from agrarian life in general and suggested that the modern assumption that agriculture was irrevocably harmed during classical wars was vastly overestimated. Yale University lecturer Donald Kagan stated that \u201cHanson\u2019s work on the role of the small family farmer in the development of democracy is the most important work in Greek history in my lifetime,\u201d and that \u201cits significance is hard to exaggerate.\u201d\n\"The Western Way of War\" (Alfred Knopf 1989) explored the combatants' experiences of ancient Greek battle and detailed the Hellenic foundations of later Western military practice.\n\"The Other Greeks\" (The Free Press, 1995) argued that the emergence of a unique middling agrarian class explains the ascendance of the Greek city-state and its singular values of consensual government, sanctity of private property, civic militarism, and individualism. In \"Fields Without Dreams\" (The Free Press 1996, winner of the Bay Area Book Reviewers Award) and \"The Land Was Everything\" (The Free Press 2000, a \"Los Angeles Times\" notable book of the year), Hanson lamented the decline of family farming and rural communities and the loss of agrarian voices in American democracy. \"The Soul of Battle\" (The Free Press, 1999) traced the careers of Epaminondas, the Theban liberator, William Tecumseh Sherman, and George S. Patton in arguing that democratic warfare's strengths are best illustrated in short, intense, and spirited marches to promote consensual rule but bog down otherwise during long occupations or more conventional static battle.\nIn \"Mexifornia\" (Encounter 2003), a personal memoir about growing up in rural California and an account of immigration from Mexico, Hanson predicted that illegal immigration would soon reach crisis proportions unless legal, measured, and diverse immigration was restored, as well as the traditional melting-pot values of integration, assimilation, and intermarriage.\n\"Ripples of Battle\" (Doubleday 2003) chronicled how the cauldron of battle affects combatants' later literary and artistic work, as its larger influence ripples for generations, affecting art, literature, culture, and government. In \"A War Like No Other\" (Random House 2005, a \"New York Times\" notable book of the year), a history of the Peloponnesian War, Hanson offered an alternative history, arranged by methods of fighting (triremes, hoplites, cavalry, sieges, etc.) in concluding that the conflict marked a brutal watershed event for the Greek city-states. \"The Savior Generals\" (Bloomsbury 2013) followed the careers of five great generals (Themistocles, Belisarius, Sherman, Ridgway, Petraeus) and argued that rare qualities in leadership emerge during hopeless predicaments that only rare individuals can salvage.\n\"The End of Sparta\" (Bloomsbury 2011) is a novel about a small community of Thespian farmers who join the great march of Epaminondas (369/370 BC) to the heart of the Peloponnese to destroy Spartan hegemony, free the Messenian helots, and spread democracy in the Peloponnese.\nHanson has edited several collections of essays, including \"Hoplites\" (1991), \"Bonfire of the Humanities\" (with Bruce Thornton and John Heath, 2001), and \"Makers of Ancient Strategy\" (2010), as well as collections of his own articles, including \"An Autumn of War\" (2002), \"Between War and Peace\" (2004), and \"The Father of Us All\" (2010). He has written chapters of the \"Cambridge History of War\", and the \"Cambridge History of Ancient Warfare\".\n\"Carnage and Culture\".\nIn Hanson's book \"Carnage and Culture\" (Doubleday, 2001), published in Great Britain and the Commonwealth countries as \"Why the West Has Won\", he argued that the military dominance of Western civilization, beginning with the ancient Greeks, results from certain fundamental aspects of Western culture, such as consensual government, a tradition of self-critique, secular rationalism, religious tolerance, individual freedom, free expression, free markets, and individualism. Hanson's emphasis on cultural exception rejects racial explanations for Western military pre-eminence and disagrees with the environmental or geographical determinist explanations such as those put forth by Jared Diamond in \"Guns, Germs, and Steel\" (1997).\nIn a 2007 article on the Media Matters for America website, the American military officer Robert L. Bateman criticized Hanson's thesis and argued that Hanson's point about Western armies preferring to seek out a decisive battle of annihilation is rebutted by the Second Punic War, in which Roman attempts to annihilate the Carthaginians instead led to the Carthaginians annihilating the Romans at the Battle of Cannae. Bateman argued that Hanson was wrong about Western armies' common preferences in seeking out a battle of annihilation and argued that the Romans defeated the Carthaginians only via the Fabian strategy of keeping their armies in being and not engaging Hannibal in battle. In a response published on his personal website, Hanson argued that Bateman had misunderstood and misrepresented his thesis. Hanson stated that in the Second Punic War, the Romans initially sought out decisive battles but were reluctantly forced to resort to a Fabian strategy after several defeats at the hands of a tactical genius until they had rebuilt their military capacity, when they ultimately defeated Hannibal in decisive battles. He also said that since the Carthaginians themselves had adopted many \"Western\" methods of warfare from the Greeks, Hannibal, too, was keen to seek decisive battles.\nUnited States education and classical studies.\nHanson co-authored the book \"Who Killed Homer? The Demise of Classical Education and the Recovery of Greek Wisdom\" with John Heath in 1998. The book explores the issue of how classical education has declined in the US and what might be done to restore it to its former prominence. That is important, according to Hanson and Heath, because knowledge of classical Greece and Rome is necessary for a full understanding of Western culture. To begin a discussion along those lines, the authors state, \"The answer to why the world is becoming Westernized goes all the way back to the wisdom of the Greeks\u2014reason enough why we must not abandon the study of our heritage.\"\nThe political scientist Francis Fukuyama reviewed \"Who Killed Homer?\" favorably in \"Foreign Affairs\" and wrote that, \"The great thinkers of the Western tradition\u2014from Hobbes, Burke, and Hegel to Weber and Nietzsche (who was trained as a classical philologist)\u2014were so thoroughly steeped in Greek thought that they scarcely needed to refer back to original texts for quotations. This tradition has come under fire from two camps, one postmodernist that seeks to deconstruct the classics on the grounds of gender, race, and class, and the other pragmatic and career-minded that asks what value the classics have in a computer-driven society. The authors' defense of a traditionalist approach to the classics is worthy.\"\nThe classicists Victoria Cech and Joy Connolly found \"Who Killed Homer?\" to have considerable pitfalls. Reviews of the book have noted several problems with the authors' perception of classical culture. According to Cech, \"One example is the relation of the individual to the state and the 'freedom' of belief or of inquiry in each. Socrates and Jesus were put to death by their respective states for articulating inconvenient doctrines. In Sparta, where the population of citizens (male) were carefully socialized in a military system, no one seems to have differed from the majority enough to merit the death penalty. But these differences are not sorted out by the authors, for \"their mission is to build an ideal structure of classical attitudes by which to reveal our comparative flaws\", and their point is more what is wrong with us than what was right with Athens. I contend that Hanson and Heath are actually comparing modern academia not to the ancient seminal cultures but to the myth that arose about them over the last couple of millennia.\" According to Connolly, Professor of Classics at New York University as of 2016, \"Throughout history, the authors say, women have never enjoyed equal rights and responsibilities. At least in Greece, 'the veiled, mutilated, and secluded were not the norm' (p. 57). Why waste time, then, as feminist scholarship does, 'merely demarcating the exact nature of the sexism of the Greeks and the West' (p. 102)? From their point of view, in fact, the real legacy of feminism is the destruction of the values of family and community.\"\nPolitical views.\nHanson was at one time a registered member of the Democratic Party but is a conservative who voted for George W. Bush in the 2000 and 2004 elections. As of 2020, he was a registered independent. He defended George W. Bush and his policies, especially the Iraq War. He vocally supported Bush's Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, describing him as \"a rare sort of secretary of the caliber of George Marshall\" and a \"proud and honest-speaking visionary\" whose \"hard work and insight are bringing us ever closer to victory.\"\nHanson, a supporter of Donald Trump, wrote a 2019 book called \"The Case for Trump\". Trump praised the book, in which Hanson defends Trump's insults and incendiary language as \"uncouth authenticity\", and praises Trump for \"an uncanny ability to troll and create hysteria among his media and political critics.\"\nHe has been described as a neoconservative by some commentators for his views on the Iraq War and stated, \"I came to support neocon approaches first in the wars against the Taliban and Saddam, largely because I saw little alternative.\" Hanson's 2002 \"An Autumn of War\" called for going to war \"hard, long, without guilt, apology or respite until our enemies are no more.\" In the context of the Iraq War, Hanson wrote, \"In an era of the greatest affluence and security in the history of civilization, the real question before us remains whether the United States\u00a0\u2013 indeed any Western democracy\u00a0\u2013 still possesses the moral clarity to identify evil as evil, and then the uncontested will to marshal every available resource to fight and eradicate it.\"\nRace relations.\nIn July 2013, Attorney General Eric Holder gave a speech where he mentioned that as a black man, he needed to deliver \"the Talk\" to his son to instruct him on how to interact with police as a young black man. In response to Holder's speech, Hanson wrote a column, \"Facing Facts about Race,\" in which he offered his own version of \"the Talk,\" the need to inform his children to be careful of young black men when venturing into the inner city, who Hanson argued were statistically more likely to commit violent crimes than young men of other races, and so it was understandable for the police to focus on them. Ta-Nehisi Coates of \"The Atlantic\" described Hanson's column as \"stupid advice\": \"in any other context we would automatically recognize this 'talk' as stupid advice. If I were to tell you that I only employ Asian-Americans to do my taxes because 'Asian-Americans do better on the Math SAT', you would not simply question my sensitivity, but my mental faculties.\"\nArthur Stern called \"Facing Facts About Race\" an \"inflammatory\" column based upon crime statistics that Hanson had never cited: \"His presentation of this controversial opinion as undeniable fact without exhaustive statistical proof is undeniably racist.\" The journalist Kelefa Sanneh, in response to \"Facing Facts About Race,\" wrote, \"It's strange, then, to read Hanson writing as if the fear of violent crime were mainly a \"white or Asian\" problem, about which African-Americans might be uninformed, or unconcerned\u00a0\u2013 as if African-American parents weren't already giving their children more detailed and nuanced versions of Hanson's 'sermon', sharing his earnest and absurd hope that the right words might keep trouble at bay.\" Hanson, in response to Sanneh's essay, accused him of a \"McCarthyite character assassination\" and \"infantile, if not racialist, logic.\"\nObama criticism.\nHanson was a critic of President Barack Obama. He criticized the Obama administration for what he saw as \"appeasing\" Iran and Russia, and blamed Obama for the outbreak of the war in Ukraine in 2014. In May 2016, Hanson argued that Obama failed to maintain a credible threat of deterrence and that \"the next few months may prove the most dangerous since World War II.\"\nPersonal life.\nOn June 18, 1977, Hanson married Cara Webb. They had three children\u2014two daughters and a son. The couple divorced in 2005. In 2013, Hanson married Jennifer Heyne. In 2014, Hanson's youngest daughter, Susannah, died of leukemia.\nHanson's mother, sister-in-law and maternal aunt have also died of cancer.\nHanson resides on a farm outside of Selma in California's Central Valley, which has been in his family since the 1870s.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42267", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42267", "title": "Open content movement", "text": ""}
{"id": "42271", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42271", "title": "Cost accounting", "text": "Procedures to optimize practices in cost efficient ways\nCost accounting is defined by the Institute of Management Accountants as \"a systematic set of procedures for recording and reporting measurements of the cost of manufacturing goods and performing services in the aggregate and in detail. It includes methods for recognizing, allocating, aggregating and reporting such costs and comparing them with standard costs\". Often considered a subset or quantitative tool of managerial accounting, its end goal is to advise the management on how to optimize business practices and processes based on cost efficiency and capability. Cost accounting provides the detailed cost information that management needs to control current operations and plan for the future.\nCost accounting information is also commonly used in financial accounting, but its primary function is for use by managers to facilitate their decision-making.\nOrigins of cost accounting.\nAll types of businesses, whether manufacturing, trading or producing services, require cost accounting to track their activities. Cost accounting has long been used to help managers understand the costs of running a business. Modern cost accounting originated during the Industrial Revolution when the complexities of running large scale businesses led to the development of systems for recording and tracking costs to help business owners and managers make decisions. Various techniques used by cost accountants include standard costing and variance analysis, marginal costing and cost volume profit analysis, budgetary control, uniform costing, inter firm comparison, etc. Evaluation of cost accounting is mainly due to the limitations of financial accounting. Moreover, maintenance of cost records has been made compulsory in selected industries as notified by the government from time to time. \nIn the early industrial age most of the costs incurred by a business were what modern accountants call \"variable costs\" because they varied directly with the amount of production. Money was spent on labour, raw materials, the power to run a factory, etc., in direct proportion to production. Managers could simply total the variable costs for a product and use this as a rough guide for decision-making processes.\nSome costs tend to remain the same even during idle periods, unlike variable costs, which rise and fall with volume of work (and thus variable costs are higher in busy periods, and fall during idle periods). Over time, these \"fixed costs\" have become more important to managers. Examples of fixed costs include the depreciation of plant and equipment, and the cost of departments such as maintenance, tooling, production control, purchasing, quality control, storage and handling, plant supervision and engineering.\nIn the early nineteenth century, these costs were of little importance to most businesses. However, with the growth of railroads, steel and large scale manufacturing, by the late nineteenth century these costs were often more important than the variable cost of a product, and allocating them to a broad range of products led to bad decision making. Managers must understand fixed costs in order to make decisions about products and pricing.\nFor example: a company produces railway coaches and has only one product. To make each coach, the company needs to purchase $60 of raw materials and components and pay 6 labourers $40 each. Therefore, the total variable cost for each coach was $300. Knowing that making a coach requires spending $300, managers know they cannot sell below that price without losing money on each coach. Any price above $300 would make a contribution to the fixed costs of the company. If the fixed costs are, say, $1000 per month for rent, insurance and owner's salary, the company could therefore sell 5 coaches per month for a total of $3000 (priced at $600 each), or 10 coaches for a total of $4500 (priced at $450 each), and make a profit of $500 in each case.\nCost accounting methods.\nThe following are some of the different cost accounting approaches:\nElements of cost accounting.\nBasic cost elements are:\nMaterial (inventory).\nThe materials directly contributed to a product and those easily identifiable in the finished product are called direct materials. For example, paper in books, wood in furniture, plastic in a water tank, and leather in shoes are direct materials. Other, usually lower cost items or supporting material used in the production of in a finished product are called indirect materials. For example, lubricants used to keep machines running, or the chemicals used during the garment manufacturing processes.\nFurthermore, these can be categorized into three different types of inventories that must be accounted for in different ways; raw materials, work-in-progress, and finished goods.\nLabour.\nAny wages paid to workers or a group of workers which may directly co-relate to any specific activity of production, maintenance, transportation of material, or product, and directly associate in the conversion of raw material into finished goods are called direct labour. Wages paid to trainees or apprentices does not come under the category of direct labour as they have no significant value.\nOverheads.\nOverheads include:\nThese categories are flexible, sometimes overlapping as different cost accounting principles are applied.\nClassification of costs.\nImportant classifications of costs include:\nStandard cost accounting.\nStandard Costing is a technique of Cost Accounting to compare the actual costs with standard costs (that are pre-defined) with the help of Variance Analysis. It is used to understand the variations of product costs in manufacturing. Standard costing allocates fixed costs incurred in an accounting period to the goods produced during that period. This allowed the \"full cost\" of products that were not sold in the period they were produced to be recorded as 'inventory' in the Balance sheet to be carried forward to the next accounting period, using a variety of complex accounting methods, which was consistent with the principles of GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting Principles). It also essentially enabled managers to ignore the fixed costs, and look at the results of each period in relation to the \"standard cost\" for any given product.\nFor Example: if the railway coach company normally produced 40 coaches per month, and the fixed costs were still $1000/month, then each coach could be said to incur an Operating Cost/overhead of $25 =($1000 / 40). Adding this to the variable costs of $300 per coach produced a full cost of $325 per coach.\nThis method tended to slightly distort the resulting unit cost, but in mass-production industries that made one product line, and where the fixed costs were relatively low, the distortion was very minor.\nFor Example: if the railway coach company made 100 coaches one month, then the unit cost would become $310 per coach ($300 + ($1000 / 100)). If the next month the company made 50 coaches, then the unit cost = $320 per coach ($300 + ($1000 / 50)), a relatively minor difference.\nAn important part of standard cost accounting is a variance analysis, which breaks down the variation between actual cost and standard costs into various components (volume variation, material cost variation, labor cost variation, etc.) so managers can understand \"why costs were different from what was planned\" and take appropriate action to correct the situation.\nThe development of throughput accounting.\nAs business became more complex and began producing a greater variety of products, the use of cost accounting to make decisions to maximize profitability came into question. Management circles became increasingly aware of the Theory of Constraints in the 1980s and began to understand that \"every production process has a limiting factor\" somewhere in the chain of production. As business management learned to identify the constraints, they increasingly adopted throughput accounting to manage them and \"maximize the \"throughput dollars\"\" (or other currency) from each unit of constrained resource.\nThroughput accounting aims to make the best use of scarce resources (bottleneck) in a JIT (Just in time) environment.\n\"Throughput\", in this context, refers to the amount of money obtained from sales minus the cost of materials that have gone into making them.\nformula_1\nformula_2\nActivity-based costing.\nActivity-based costing (ABC) is a system for assigning costs to products based on the activities they require. In this case, activities are those regular actions performed inside a company. \"Talking with the customer regarding invoice questions\" is an example of activity inside most companies.\nCompanies may be moved to adopt ABC by a need to improve costing accuracy, that is, understand better the true costs and profitability of individual products, services, or initiatives. ABC gets closer to true costs in these areas by turning many costs that standard cost accounting views as indirect costs essentially into direct costs. By contrast, standard cost accounting typically determines so-called indirect and overhead costs simply as a percentage of certain direct costs, which may or may not reflect actual resource usage for individual items.\nUnder ABC, accountants assign 100% of each employee's time to the different activities performed inside a company (many will use surveys to have the workers themselves assign their time to the different activities). The accountant then can determine the total cost spent on each activity by summing up the percentage of each worker's salary spent on that activity.\nA company can use the resulting activity cost data to determine where to focus its operational improvements. For example, a job-based manufacturer may find that a high percentage of its workers are spending their time trying to figure out a hastily written customer order. Via (ABC) Activity-based costing, the accountants now have a currency amount pegged to the activity of \"Researching Customer Work Order Specifications\". Senior management can now decide how much focus or money to budget for resolving this process deficiency. Activity-based management includes (but is not restricted to) the use of activity-based costing to manage a business.\nWhile (ABC) Activity-based costing may be able to pinpoint the cost of each activity and resources into the ultimate product, the process could be tedious, costly and subject to errors.\nAs it is a tool for a more accurate way of allocating fixed costs into a product, these fixed costs do not vary according to each month's production volume. For example, the elimination of one product would not eliminate the overhead or even direct labour cost assigned to it. Activity-based costing (ABC) better identifies product costing in the long run, but may not be too helpful in day-to-day decision-making.\nIntegrating EVA and process-based costing.\nRecently, Mocciaro Li Destri, Picone and Min\u00e0 (2012) proposed a performance and cost measurement system that integrates the Economic Value Added criteria with Process-Based Costing (PBC). The EVA-PBC methodology allows us to implement the EVA management logic not only at the firm level, but also at lower levels of the organization. EVA-PBC methodology plays an interesting role in bringing strategy back into financial performance measures.\nLean accounting.\nLean accounting has developed in recent years to provide the accounting, control, and measurement methods supporting lean manufacturing and other applications of lean thinking such as healthcare, construction, insurance, banking, education, government and other industries.\nThere are two main thrusts for Lean Accounting. The first is the application of lean methods to the company's accounting, control, and measurement processes. This is not different from applying lean methods to any other processes. The objective is to eliminate waste, free up capacity, speed up the process, eliminate errors &amp; defects, and make the process clear and understandable. The second (and more important) thrust of Lean Accounting is to fundamentally change the accounting, control, and measurement processes so they motivate lean change &amp; improvement, provide information that is suitable for control and decision-making, provide an understanding of customer value, correctly assess the financial impact of lean improvement, and are themselves simple, visual, and low-waste. Lean Accounting does not require the traditional management accounting methods like standard costing, activity-based costing, variance reporting, cost-plus pricing, complex transactional control systems, and untimely and confusing financial reports. These are replaced by:\nAs an organization becomes more mature with lean thinking and methods, they recognize that the combined methods of lean accounting in fact creates a lean management system (LMS) designed to provide the planning, the operational and financial reporting, and the motivation for change required to prosper the company's on-going lean transformation.\nMarginal costing.\nThe cost-volume-profit analysis is the systematic examination of the relationship between selling prices, sales, production volumes, costs, expenses and profits. This analysis provides very useful information for decision-making in the management of a company. For example, the analysis can be used in establishing sales prices, in the product mix selection to sell, in the decision to choose marketing strategies, and in the analysis of the impact on profits by changes in costs. In the current environment of business, a business administration must act and take decisions in a fast and accurate manner. As a result, the importance of cost-volume-profit is still increasing as time passes.\n\"CONTRIBUTION MARGIN\"\nA relationship between the cost, volume and profit is the contribution margin. The contribution margin is the revenue excess from sales over variable costs. The concept of contribution margin is particularly useful in the planning of business because it gives an insight into the potential profits that a business can generate. The following chart shows the income statement of a company X, which has been prepared to show its contribution margin:\n\"CONTRIBUTION MARGIN RATIO\"\nThe contribution margin can also be expressed as a percentage. The contribution margin ratio, which is sometimes called the profit-volume ratio, indicates the percentage of each sales dollar available to cover fixed costs and to provide operating revenue. For the company Fusion, Inc. the contribution margin ratio is 40%, which is computed as follows:\nformula_3\nThe contribution margin ratio measures the effect on operating income of an increase or a decrease in sales volume. For example, assume that the management of Fusion, Inc. is studying the effect of adding $80,000 in sales orders. Multiplying the contribution margin ratio (40%) by the change in sales volume ($80,000) indicates that operating income will increase $32,000 if additional orders are obtained. To validate this analysis the table below shows the income statement of the company including additional orders:\nVariable costs as a percentage of sales are equal to 100% minus the contribution margin ratio. Thus, in the above income statement, the variable costs are 60% (100% - 40%) of sales, or $648,000 ($1,080,000 X 60%). The total contribution margin $432,000, can also be computed directly by multiplying the sales by the contribution margin ratio ($1,080,000 X 40%).\nGovernment procurement.\nThe United States' federal procurement rules (the Federal Acquisition Regulation, FAR) require government Contracting Officers negotiating contract prices to verify that suppliers' cost submissions are in accordance with the government's contract cost principles and procedures and, in certain cases, the requirements and procedures of the federal Cost Accounting Standards. Relevant cost data or pricing data may be required from the supplier, in order to undertake a \"cost realism analysis\", also known as a \"price realism analysis\". FAR defines a cost realism analysis as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The process of independently reviewing and evaluating specific elements of each offeror's proposed cost estimate to determine whether the estimated proposed cost elements are realistic for the work to be performed; reflect a clear understanding of the requirements; and are consistent with the unique methods of performance and materials described in the offeror's technical proposal. Similarly, where a government agency requests a fixed price submission, provision may be made for a cost or price realism analysis to take place during the evaluation process.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42272", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42272", "title": "Management accounting", "text": "Field of business administration, part of the internal accounting system of a company\nIn management accounting or managerial accounting, managers use accounting information in decision-making and to assist in the management and performance of their control functions.\nDefinition.\nOne simple definition of management accounting is the provision of financial and non-financial decision-making information to managers. In other words, management accounting helps the directors inside an organization to make decisions. This is the way toward distinguishing, examining, deciphering and imparting data to supervisors to help accomplish business goals. The information gathered includes all fields of accounting that educates the administration regarding business tasks identifying with the financial expenses and decisions made by the organization. Accountants use plans to measure the overall strategy of operations within the organization.\nAccording to the Institute of Management Accountants (IMA), \"Management accounting is a profession that involves partnering in management decision making, devising planning and performance management systems, and providing expertise in financial reporting and control to assist management in the formulation and implementation of an organization's strategy\".\nManagement accountants (also called managerial accountants) look at the events that happen in and around a business while considering the needs of the business. From this, data and estimates emerge. Cost accounting is the process of translating these estimates and data into knowledge that will ultimately be used to guide decision-making.\nThe Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA) being the largest management accounting institute with over 100,000 members describes Management accounting as analysing information to advise business strategy and drive sustainable business success.\nThe Institute of Certified Management Accountants (ICMA) has over 15,000 qualified professionals worldwide, with members in 50-countries. Its CMA postgraduate education program now is firmly established in 19 overseas markets, namely Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, Cyprus, Dubai, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Iran, Japan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Nepal, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Philippines; Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Vietnam.\nTo facilitate its educational objectives, the Institute has accredited a number of universities which have master's degree subjects that are equivalent to the CMA program. Some of these universities also provide in-house training and examinations of the CMA program. Accounting graduates can do CMA accredited units at these universities to qualify for CMA status. The ICMA also has a number of Recognised Provider Institutions (RPIs) that run the CMA program in Australia and overseas. The CMA program is also available online in regions where the face-to-face delivery of the program is not possible.\nScope, practice, and application.\nThe Association of International Certified Professional Accountants (AICPA) states management accounting as a practice that extends to the following three areas:\nThe Institute of Certified Management Accountants (CMA) states, \"A management accountant applies his or her professional knowledge and skill in the preparation and presentation of financial and other decision oriented information in such a way as to assist management in the formulation of policies and in the planning and control of the operation undertaking\".\nManagement accountants are seen as the \"value-creators\" amongst the accountants. They are more concerned with forward-looking and taking decisions that will affect the future of the organization; than in the historical recording and compliance (score keeping) aspects of the profession. Management accounting knowledge and experience can be obtained from varied fields and functions within an organization, such as information management, treasury, efficiency auditing, marketing, valuation, pricing, and logistics. In 2014 CIMA created the Global Management Accounting Principles (GMAPs). The result of research from across 20 countries in five continents, the principles aim to guide best practice in the discipline.\nFinancial versus Management accounting.\nManagement accounting information differs from financial accountancy information in several ways:\nFocus: \nTraditional versus innovative practices.\nThe distinction between traditional and innovative accounting practices is illustrated with the visual timeline \"(see sidebar)\" of managerial costing approaches presented at the Institute of Management Accountants 2011 Annual Conference.\nTraditional standard costing (TSC), used in cost accounting, dates back to the 1920s and is a central method in management accounting practiced today because it is used for financial statement reporting for the valuation of income statement and balance sheet line items such as cost of goods sold (COGS) and inventory valuation. Traditional standard costing must comply with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP US) and actually aligns itself more with answering financial accounting requirements rather than providing solutions for management accountants. Traditional approaches limit themselves by defining cost behavior only in terms of production or sales volume.\nIn the late 1980s, accounting practitioners and educators were heavily criticized on the grounds that management accounting practices (and, even more so, the curriculum taught to accounting students) had changed little over the preceding 60 years, despite radical changes in the business environment. In 1993, the Accounting Education Change Commission Statement Number 4 calls for faculty members to expand their knowledge about the actual practice of accounting in the workplace. Professional accounting institutes, perhaps fearing that management accountants would increasingly be seen as superfluous in business organizations, subsequently devoted considerable resources to the development of a more innovative skills set for management accountants.\nVariance analysis is a systematic approach to the comparison of the actual and budgeted costs of the raw materials and labour used during a production period. While some form of variance analysis is still used by most manufacturing firms, it nowadays tends to be used in conjunction with innovative techniques such as \"life cycle cost analysis\" and \"activity-based costing\", which are designed with specific aspects of the modern business environment in mind. \"Life-cycle costing\" recognizes that managers' ability to influence the cost of manufacturing a product is at its greatest when the product is still at the design stage of its product life-cycle (i.e., before the design has been finalized and production commenced), since small changes to the product design may lead to significant savings in the cost of manufacturing the products.\nActivity-based costing (ABC) recognizes that, in modern factories, most manufacturing costs are determined by the amount of 'activities' (e.g., the number of production runs per month, and the amount of production equipment idle time) and that the key to effective cost control is therefore optimizing the efficiency of these activities. Both lifecycle costing and activity-based costing recognize that, in the typical modern factory, the avoidance of disruptive events (such as machine breakdowns and quality control failures) is of far greater importance than (for example) reducing the costs of raw materials. Activity-based costing also de-emphasizes direct labor as a cost driver and concentrates instead on activities that drive costs, as the provision of a service or the production of a product component.\nOther approach is the German Grenzplankostenrechnung (GPK) costing methodology. Although it has been in practiced in Europe for more than 50 years, neither GPK nor the proper treatment of 'unused capacity' is widely practiced in the U.S.\nAnother accounting practice available today is resource consumption accounting (RCA). RCA has been recognized by the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) as a \"sophisticated approach at the upper levels of the continuum of costing techniques\" The approach provides the ability to derive costs directly from operational resource data or to isolate and measure unused capacity costs. RCA was derived by taking costing characteristics of GPK, and combining the use of activity-based drivers when needed, such as those used in activity-based costing.\nA modern approach to close accounting is continuous accounting, which focuses on achieving a point-in-time close, where accounting processes typically performed at period-end are distributed evenly throughout the period.\nRole within a corporation.\nConsistent with other roles in modern corporations, management accountants have a dual reporting relationship. As a strategic partner and provider of decision based financial and operational information, management accountants are responsible for managing the business team and at the same time having to report relationships and responsibilities to the corporation's finance organization and finance of an organization.\nThe activities management accountants provide inclusive of forecasting and planning, performing variance analysis, reviewing and monitoring costs inherent in the business are ones that have dual accountability to both finance and the business team. Examples of tasks where accountability may be more meaningful to the business management team vs. the corporate finance department are the development of new product costing, operations research, business driver metrics, sales management scorecarding, and client profitability analysis. (See financial planning.) Conversely, the preparation of certain financial reports, reconciliations of the financial data to source systems, risk and regulatory reporting will be more useful to the corporate finance team as they are charged with aggregating certain financial information from all segments of the corporation.\nIn corporations that derive much of their profits from the information economy, such as banks, publishing houses, telecommunications companies and defence contractors, IT costs are a significant source of uncontrollable spending, which in size is often the greatest corporate cost after total compensation costs and property related costs. A function of management accounting in such organizations is to work closely with the IT department to provide IT cost transparency.\nGiven the above, one view of the progression of the accounting and finance career path is that financial accounting is a stepping stone to management accounting. Consistent with the notion of value creation, management accountants help drive the success of the business while strict financial accounting is more of a compliance and historical endeavor.\nSpecific methodologies.\nActivity-based costing (ABC).\nActivity-based costing was first clearly defined in 1987 by Robert S. Kaplan and W. Bruns as a chapter in their book \"Accounting and Management: A Field Study Perspective\". They initially focused on the manufacturing industry, where increasing technology and productivity improvements have reduced the relative proportion of the direct costs of labor and materials, but have increased relative proportion of indirect costs. For example, increased automation has reduced labor, which is a direct cost, but has increased depreciation, which is an indirect cost.\nGrenzplankostenrechnung.\nGrenzplankostenrechnung (GPK) is a German costing methodology, developed in the late 1940s and 1960s, designed to provide a consistent and accurate application of how managerial costs are calculated and assigned to a product or service. The term Grenzplankostenrechnung, often referred to as GPK, has best been translated as either \"marginal planned cost accounting\" or \"flexible analytic cost planning and accounting\".\nThe origins of GPK are credited to Hans Georg Plaut, an automotive engineer, and Wolfgang Kilger, an academic, working towards the mutual goal of identifying and delivering a sustained methodology designed to correct and enhance cost accounting information. GPK is published in cost accounting textbooks, notably \"Flexible Plankostenrechnung und Deckungsbeitragsrechnung\" and taught at German-speaking universities.\nLean accounting (accounting for lean enterprise).\nIn the mid- to late-1990s several books were written about accounting in the lean enterprise (companies implementing elements of the Toyota Production System). The term \"lean accounting\" was coined during that period. These books contest that traditional accounting methods are better suited for mass production and do not support or measure good business practices in just-in-time manufacturing and services. The movement reached a tipping point during the 2005 Lean Accounting Summit in Dearborn, Michigan, United States. 320 individuals attended and discussed the advantages of a new approach to accounting in the lean enterprise. 520 individuals attended the 2nd annual conference in 2006 and it has varied between 250 and 600 attendees since that time.\nResource consumption accounting (RCA).\nResource consumption accounting (RCA) is formally defined as a dynamic, fully integrated, principle-based, and comprehensive management accounting approach that provides managers with decision support information for enterprise optimization. RCA emerged as a management accounting approach around 2000 and was subsequently developed at CAM-I, the Consortium for Advanced Manufacturing\u2013International, in a Cost Management Section \"RCA interest group\" in December 2001.\nThroughput accounting.\nThe most significant recent direction in managerial accounting is throughput accounting; which recognizes the interdependencies of modern production processes. For any given product, customer or supplier, it is a tool to measure the contribution per unit of constrained resource.\nTransfer pricing.\nManagement accounting is an applied discipline used in various industries. The specific functions and principles followed can vary based on the industry. Management accounting principles in banking are specialized but do have some common fundamental concepts used whether the industry is manufacturing-based or service-oriented. For example, transfer pricing is a concept used in manufacturing but is also applied in banking. It is a fundamental principle used in assigning value and revenue attribution to the various business units. Essentially, transfer pricing in banking is the method of assigning the interest rate risk of the bank to the various funding sources and uses of the enterprise. Thus, the bank's corporate treasury department will assign funding charges to the business units for their use of the bank's resources when they make loans to clients. The treasury department will also assign funding credit to business units who bring in deposits (resources) to the bank. Although the funds transfer pricing process is primarily applicable to the loans and deposits of the various banking units, this proactive is applied to all assets and liabilities of the business segment. Once transfer pricing is applied and any other management accounting entries or adjustments are posted to the ledger (which are usually memo accounts and are not included in the legal entity results), the business units are able to produce segment financial results which are used by both internal and external users to evaluate performance.\nResources and continuous learning.\nThere are a variety of ways to keep current and continue to build one's knowledge base in the field of management accounting. Certified Management Accountants (CMAs) are required to achieve continuing education hours every year, similar to a Certified Public Accountant. A company may also have research and training materials available for use in a corporate owned library. This is more common in Fortune 500 companies who have the resources to fund this type of training medium.\nThere are also journals, online articles and blogs available. The journal \"Cost Management\" () and the Institute of Management Accounting (IMA) site are sources which include \"Management Accounting Quarterly\" and \"Strategic Finance\" publications.\nTasks and services provided.\nListed below are the primary tasks/services performed by management accountants. The degree of complexity relative to these activities are dependent on the experience level and abilities of any one individual.\nRelated qualifications.\nThere are several related professional qualifications and certifications in the field of accountancy including:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42273", "revid": "6133955", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42273", "title": "Fence", "text": "Freestanding structure preventing movement across a boundary\nA fence is a structure that encloses an area, typically outdoors creating a boundary, and is usually constructed from posts that are connected by boards, wire, rails or netting. A fence differs from a wall in not having a solid foundation along its whole length.\nAlternatives to fencing include a ditch (sometimes filled with water, forming a moat).\nTypes.\nBy function.\nA balustrade or railing is a fence to prevent people from falling over an edge, most commonly found on a stairway, landing, or balcony. Railing systems and balustrades are also used along roofs, bridges, cliffs, pits, and bodies of water.\nAnother aim of using a fence is to limit intrusion. In support of these barriers there are sophisticated technologies that can be applied on the fence itself to strengthen the defence of an area, such as: \nLegal issues.\nIn most developed areas the use of fencing is regulated, variously in commercial, residential, and agricultural areas. Height, material, setback, and aesthetic issues are among the considerations subject to regulation.\nRequired use.\nThe following types of areas or facilities often are required by law to be fenced in, for safety and security reasons:\nHistory.\nServitudes are legal arrangements of land use arising out of private agreements. Under the feudal system, most land in England was cultivated in common fields, where peasants were allocated strips of arable land that were used to support the needs of the local village or manor. By the sixteenth century the growth of population and prosperity provided incentives for landowners to use their land in more profitable ways, dispossessing the peasantry. Common fields were aggregated and enclosed by large and enterprising farmers\u2014either through negotiation among one another or by lease from the landlord\u2014to maximize the productivity of the available land and contain livestock. Fences redefined the means by which land is used, resulting in the modern law of servitudes.\nIn the United States, the earliest settlers claimed land by simply fencing it in. Later, as the American government formed, unsettled land became technically owned by the government and programs to register land ownership developed, usually making raw land available for low prices or for free, if the owner improved the property, including the construction of fences. However, the remaining vast tracts of unsettled land were often used as a commons, or, in the American West, \"open range\" as degradation of habitat developed due to overgrazing and a tragedy of the commons situation arose, common areas began to either be allocated to individual landowners via mechanisms such as the Homestead Act and Desert Land Act and fenced in, or, if kept in public hands, leased to individual users for limited purposes, with fences built to separate tracts of public and private land.\nUnited Kingdom.\nGenerally.\nOwnership of a fence on a boundary varies. The last relevant original title deed(s) and a completed seller's property information form may document which side has to put up and has installed any fence respectively; the first using \"T\" marks/symbols (the side with the \"T\" denotes the owner); the latter by a ticked box to the best of the last owner's belief with no duty, as the conventionally agreed conveyancing process stresses, to make any detailed, protracted enquiry. Commonly the mesh or panelling is in mid-position. Otherwise it tends to be on non-owner's side so the fence owner might access the posts when repairs are needed but this is not a legal requirement. Where estate planners wish to entrench privacy a close-boarded fence or equivalent well-maintained hedge of a minimum height may be stipulated by deed. Beyond a standard height planning permission is necessary.\nThe hedge and ditch ownership presumption.\nWhere a rural fence or hedge has (or in some cases had) an adjacent ditch, the ditch is normally in the same ownership as the hedge or fence, with the ownership boundary being the edge of the ditch furthest from the fence or hedge. The principle of this rule is that an owner digging a boundary ditch will normally dig it up to the very edge of their land, and must then pile the spoil on their own side of the ditch to avoid trespassing on their neighbour. They may then erect a fence or hedge on the spoil, leaving the ditch on its far side. Exceptions exist in law, for example where a plot of land derives from subdivision of a larger one along the centre line of a previously existing ditch or other feature, particularly where reinforced by historic parcel numbers with acreages beneath which were used to tally up a total for administrative units not to confirm the actual size of holdings, a rare instance where Ordnance Survey maps often provide more than circumstantial evidence namely as to which feature is to be considered the boundary.\nFencing of livestock.\nOn private land in the United Kingdom, it is the landowner's responsibility to fence their livestock in. Conversely, for common land, it is the surrounding landowners' duty to fence the common's livestock out such as in large parts of the New Forest. Large commons with livestock roaming have been greatly reduced by 18th and 19th century Acts for enclosure of commons covering most local units, with most remaining such land in the UK's National Parks.\nFencing of railways.\nA 19th-century law requires railways to be fenced to keep people and livestock out. It is also illegal to trespass on railways, incurring a fine of up to \u00a31000.\nUnited States.\nDistinctly different land ownership and fencing patterns arose in the eastern and western United States. Original fence laws on the east coast were based on the British common law system, and rapidly increasing population quickly resulted in laws requiring livestock to be fenced in. In the west, land ownership patterns and policies reflected a strong influence of Spanish law and tradition, plus the vast land area involved made extensive fencing impractical until mandated by a growing population and conflicts between landowners. The \"open range\" tradition of requiring landowners to fence out unwanted livestock was dominant in most of the rural west until very late in the 20th century. Even today, a few isolated regions of the west still use the open range system. More recently, fences are generally constructed on the surveyed property line as precisely as possible. Today, across the nation, each state can develop its own laws regarding fences. In many cases for both rural and urban property owners, the laws were designed to require adjacent landowners to share the responsibility for maintaining a common boundary fenceline, for example in California. Today, however, only 22 states have retained that provision. In Texas a landowner has no legal obligation to share in the costs or future maintenance of a fence built by his or her neighbor, unless previously agreed. There is no specific statutes but court cases have set this legal precedent.\nSome U.S. states, including Texas, Illinois, Missouri, and North Carolina, have enacted laws establishing that purple paint markings on fences (or trees) are the legal equivalent of \"No Trespassing\" signs. The laws are meant to spare landowners, particularly in rural areas, from having to continually replace printed signs that often end up being stolen or obliterated by the elements.\nHungary.\nAlong the shores of Lake Balaton, reed fences are often used to separate holiday cottages.\nCultural value of fences.\nThe value of fences and the metaphorical significance of a fence, both positive and negative, has been extensively utilized throughout western culture. A few examples include:\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "42274", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42274", "title": "Barbed wire", "text": "Type of steel fencing wire constructed with sharp edges or points\nBarbed wire, also known as barb wire or bob wire (in the Southern and Southwestern United States), is a type of steel fencing wire constructed with sharp edges or points arranged at intervals along the strands. Its primary use is the construction of inexpensive fences, and it is also used as a security measure atop walls surrounding property. As a wire obstacle, it is a major feature of the fortifications in trench warfare.\nA person or animal trying to pass through or over barbed wire will suffer discomfort and possibly injury. Barbed wire fencing requires only fence posts, wire, and fixing devices such as staples. It is simple to construct and quick to erect, even by an unskilled person.\nThe first patent in the United States for barbed wire was issued in 1867 to Lucien B. Smith of Kent, Ohio, who is regarded as the inventor. Joseph F. Glidden of DeKalb, Illinois, received a patent for the modern invention in 1874 after he made his own modifications to previous versions.\nWire fences are cheaper and easier to erect than their alternatives (one such alternative is Osage orange, a thorny bush that is time-consuming to transplant and grow). When wire fences became widely available in the United States in the late 19th century, it became more affordable to fence much larger areas than before, and intensive animal husbandry was made practical on a much larger scale.\nAn example of the costs of fencing with lumber immediately prior to the invention of barbed wire can be found with the first farmers in the Fresno, California, area, who spent nearly $4,000 () to have wood for fencing delivered and erected to protect of wheat crop from free-ranging livestock in 1872.\nHistory.\nBefore 1865.\nFencing consisting of flat and thin wire was first proposed in France, by Leonce Eugene Grassin-Baledans in 1860. His design consisted of bristling points, creating a fence that was painful to cross. In April 1865 Louis Fran\u00e7ois Janin proposed a double wire with diamond-shaped metal barbs; Francois was granted a patent. Michael Kelly from New York had a similar idea, and proposed that the fencing should be used specifically for deterring animals.\nMore patents followed, and in 1867 alone there were six patents issued for barbed wire. Only two of them addressed livestock deterrence, one of which was from American Lucien B. Smith of Ohio. Before 1870, westward movement in the United States was largely across the plains with little or no settlement occurring. After the American Civil War the plains were extensively settled, consolidating America's dominance over them.\nRanchers moved out on the plains, and needed to fence their land in against encroaching farmers and other ranchers. The railroads throughout the growing West needed to keep livestock off their tracks, and farmers needed to keep stray cattle from trampling their crops. Traditional fence materials used in the Eastern U.S., like wood and stone, were expensive to use in the large open spaces of the plains, and hedging was not reliable in the rocky, clay-based and rain-starved dusty soils. A cost-effective alternative was needed to make cattle operations profitable.\n1873 meeting and initial development.\nThe \"Big Four\" in barbed wire were Joseph Glidden, Jacob Haish, Charles Francis Washburn, and Isaac L. Ellwood. Glidden, a farmer in 1873 and the first of the \"Big Four\", is often credited for designing a successful sturdy barbed wire product, but he let others popularize it for him. Glidden's idea came from a display at a fair in DeKalb, Illinois in 1873, by Henry B. Rose. Rose had patented \"The Wooden Strip with Metallic Points\" in May 1873.\nThis was simply a wooden block with wire protrusions designed to keep cows from breaching the fence. That day, Glidden was accompanied by two other men, Isaac L. Ellwood, a hardware dealer and Jacob Haish, a lumber merchant. Like Glidden, they both wanted to create a more durable wire fence with fixed barbs. Glidden experimented with a grindstone to twist two wires together to hold the barbs on the wire in place. The barbs were created from experiments with a coffee mill from his home.\nLater Glidden was joined by Ellwood who knew his design could not compete with Glidden's for which he applied for a patent in October 1873. Meanwhile, Haish, who had already secured several patents for barbed wire design, applied for a patent on his third type of wire, the S barb, and accused Glidden of interference, deferring Glidden's approval for his patented wire, nicknamed \"The Winner\", until November 24, 1874.\nBarbed wire production greatly increased with Glidden and Ellwood's establishment of the Barb Fence Company in DeKalb following the success of \"The Winner\". The company's success attracted the attention of Charles Francis Washburn, Vice President of Washburn &amp; Moen Manufacturing Company, an important producer of plain wire in the Eastern U.S. Washburn visited DeKalb and convinced Glidden to sell his stake in the Barb Wire Fence Company, while Ellwood stayed in DeKalb and renamed the company I.L Ellwood &amp; Company of DeKalb.\nPromotion and consolidation.\nIn the late 1870s, John Warne Gates of Illinois began to promote barbed wire, now a proven product, in the lucrative markets of Texas. At first, Texans were hesitant, as they feared that cattle might be harmed, or that the North was somehow trying to make profits from the South. There was also conflict between the farmers who wanted fencing and the ranchers who were losing the open range.\nDemonstrations by Gates in San Antonio in 1876 showed that the wire could keep cattle contained, and sales then increased dramatically. Gates eventually parted company with Ellwood and became a barbed wire baron in his own right. Throughout the height of barbed wire sales in the late 19th century, Washburn, Ellwood, Gates, and Haish competed with one another. Ellwood and Gates eventually joined forces again to create the American Steel and Wire Company, later acquired by The U.S. Steel Corporation.\nBetween 1873 and 1899 there were as many as 150 companies manufacturing barbed wire. Investors knew that the business required minimal capital, and almost anyone with determination could profit by manufacturing a new wire design. There was then a sharp decline in the number of manufacturers, and many were consolidated into larger companies, notably the American Steel and Wire Company, formed by the merging of Gates's and Washburn's and Ellwood's industries.\nSmaller companies were decimated because of economies of scale and the smaller pool of consumers available to them, compared to the larger corporations. The American Steel and Wire Company established in 1899 employed vertical integration: it controlled all aspects of production, from producing the steel rods to making many different wire and nail products from that steel. It later became part of U.S. Steel, and barbed wire remained a major source of revenue.\nIn the American West.\nBarbed wire was important in protecting range rights in the Western U.S. Although some ranchers put notices in newspapers claiming land areas, and joined stockgrowers associations to help enforce their claims, livestock continued to cross range boundaries. Fences of smooth wire did not hold stock well, and hedges were difficult to grow and maintain. Barbed wire's introduction in the West in the 1870s dramatically reduced the cost of enclosing land. \nOne fan wrote the inventor Joseph Glidden:\nit takes no room, exhausts no soil, shades no vegetation, is proof against high winds, makes no snowdrifts, and is both durable and cheap.\nBarbed wire emerged as a major source of conflict with the so-called \"Big Die Up\" incident in the 1880s. This occurred because of the instinctual migrations of cattle away from the blizzard conditions of the Northern Plains to the warmer and plentiful Southern Plains, but by the early 1880s this area was already divided and claimed by ranchers. The ranchers in place, especially in the Texas Panhandle, knew that their holdings could not support the grazing of additional cattle, so the only alternative was to block the migrations with barb wire fencing.\nMany of the herds were decimated in the winter of 1885, with some losing as many as three-quarters of all animals when they could not find a way around the fence. Later other smaller scale cattlemen, especially in central Texas, opposed the closing of the open range, and began cutting fences to allow cattle to pass through to find grazing land. In this transition zone between the agricultural regions to the south and the rangeland to the north, conflict erupted, with vigilantes joining the scene causing chaos and even death. The Fence Cutting Wars ended with the passage of a Texas law in 1884 that made fence cutting a felony. Other states followed, although conflicts occurred through the early years of the 20th century. An 1885 federal law forbade placing such fences across the public domain.\nBarbed wire is cited by historians as the invention that tamed the West. Herding large numbers of cattle on open range required significant manpower to catch strays. Barbed wire provided an inexpensive method to control the movement of cattle. By the beginning of the 20th century, large numbers of cowboys were unnecessary.\nIn the Southwest United States.\nJohn Warne Gates demonstrated barbed wire for Washburn and Moen in Military Plaza, San Antonio, Texas in 1876. The demonstration showing cattle restrained by the new kind of fencing was followed immediately by invitations to the Menger Hotel to place orders. Gates subsequently had a falling out with Washburn and Moen and Isaac Ellwood. He moved to St. Louis and founded the Southern Wire Company, which became the largest manufacturer of unlicensed or \"bootleg\" barbed wire.\nAn 1880 US District Court decision upheld the validity of the Glidden patent, effectively establishing a monopoly. This decision was affirmed by the US Supreme Court in 1892. In 1898 Gates took control of Washburn and Moen, and created the American Steel and Wire monopoly, which became a part of the United States Steel Corporation.\nThis led to disputes known as the range wars between open range ranchers and farmers in the late 19th century. These were similar to the disputes which resulted from enclosure laws in England in the early 18th century. These disputes were decisively settled in favor of the farmers, and heavy penalties were instituted for cutting a barbed wire fence. Within 2 years, nearly all of the open range had been fenced in under private ownership. For this reason, some historians have dated the end of the Old West era of American history to the invention and subsequent proliferation of barbed wire.\nInstallation.\nThe most important and most time-consuming part of a barbed wire fence is constructing the \"corner post\" and the bracing assembly. A barbed wire fence is under tremendous tension, often up to half a ton, and so the corner post's sole function is to resist the tension of the fence spans connected to it. The bracing keeps the corner post vertical and prevents slack from developing in the fence.\n\"Brace posts\" are placed in-line about from the corner post. A horizontal \"compression brace\" connects the top of the two posts, and a diagonal wire connects the top of the brace post to the bottom of the corner post. This diagonal wire prevents the brace post from leaning, which in turn allows the horizontal brace to prevent the corner post from leaning into the brace post. A second set of brace posts (forming a \"double brace\") is used whenever the barbed wire span exceeds .\nWhen the barbed wire span exceeds , a \"braced line assembly\" is added in-line. This has the function of a corner post and brace assembly but handles tension from opposite sides. It uses diagonal brace wire that connects the tops to the bottoms of all adjacent posts.\n\"Line posts\" are installed along the span of the fence at intervals of . An interval of is most common. Heavy livestock and crowded pasture demands the smaller spacing. The sole function of a line post is not to take up slack but to keep the barbed wire strands spaced equally and off the ground.\nOnce these posts and bracing have been erected, the wire is wrapped around one corner post, held with a hitch (a timber hitch works well for this) often using a staple to hold the height and then reeled out along the span of the fence replacing the roll every 400 m. It is then wrapped around the opposite corner post, pulled tightly with wire stretchers, and sometimes nailed with more fence staples, although this may make readjustment of tension or replacement of the wire more difficult. Then it is attached to all of the line posts with fencing staples driven in partially to allow stretching of the wire.\nThere are several ways to anchor the wire to a corner post:\nBarbed wire for agriculture use is typically double-strand &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;12+1\u20442-gauge, zinc-coated (galvanized) steel and comes in rolls of length. Barbed wire is usually placed on the inner (pasture) side of the posts. Where a fence runs between two pastures livestock could be with the wire on the outside or on both sides of the fence.\nGalvanized wire is classified into three categories; Classes I, II, and III. Class I has the thinnest coating and the shortest life expectancy. A wire with Class I coating will start showing general rusting in 8 to 10 years, while the same wire with Class III coating will show rust in 15 to 20 years. Aluminum-coated wire is occasionally used, and yields a longer life.\nCorner posts are in diameter or larger, and a minimum in length may consist of treated wood or from durable on-site trees such as osage orange, black locust, red cedar, or red mulberry, also railroad ties, telephone, and power poles are salvaged to be used as corner posts (poles and railroad ties were often treated with chemicals determined to be an environmental hazard and cannot be reused in some jurisdictions). In Canada spruce posts are sold for this purpose. Posts are in diameter driven at least and may be anchored in a concrete base square and deep. Iron posts, if used, are a minimum in diameter. Bracing wire is typically smooth 9-gauge. Line posts are set to a depth of about . Conversely, steel posts are not as stiff as wood, and wires are fastened with slips along fixed teeth, which means variations in driving height affect wire spacing.\nDuring the First World War, screw pickets were used for the installation of wire obstacles; these were metal rods with eyelets for holding strands of wire, and a corkscrew-like end that could literally be screwed into the ground rather than hammered, so that wiring parties could work at night near enemy soldiers and not reveal their position by the sound of hammers.\nGates.\nAs with any fence, barbed wire fences require gates to allow the passage of persons, vehicles and farm implements. Gates vary in width from to allow the passage of vehicles and tractors, to on farm land to pass combines and swathers.\nOne style of gate is called the Hampshire gate in the UK, a New Zealand gate in some areas, and often simply a \"gate\" elsewhere. Made of wire with posts attached at both ends and in the middle, it is permanently wired on one side and attaches to a gate post with wire loops on the other. Most designs can be opened by hand, though some gates that are frequently opened and closed may have a lever attached to assist in bringing the upper wire loop over the gate post.\nGates for cattle tend to have four wires when along a three wire fence, as cattle tend to put more stress on gates, particularly on corner gates. The fence on each side of the gate ends with two corner posts braced or unbraced depending on the size of the post. An unpounded post (often an old broken post) is held to one corner post with wire rings which act as hinges. On the other end a full-length post, the tractor post, is placed with the pointed end upwards with a ring on the bottom stapled to the other corner post, the latch post, and on top a ring is stapled to the tractor post, tied with a Stockgrower's Lash or one of numerous other opening bindings. Wires are then tied around the post at one end then run to the other end where they are stretched by hand or with a stretcher, before posts are stapled on every . Often this type of gate is called a portagee fence or a portagee gate in various ranching communities of coastal Central California.\nMost gates can be opened by push post. The chain is then wrapped around the tractor post and pulled onto the nail, stronger people can pull the gate tighter but anyone can jar off the chain to open the gate.\nUses.\nAgriculture.\nBarbed wire fences remain the standard fencing technology for enclosing cattle in most regions of the United States, but not all countries. The wire is aligned under tension between heavy, braced, fence posts (strainer posts) and then held at the correct height by being attached to wooden or steel fence posts, and/or with battens in between.\nThe gaps between posts vary depending on type and terrain. On short fences in hilly country, steel posts may be placed every , while in flat terrain with long spans and relatively few stock they may be spaced up to apart. Wooden posts are normally spaced at on all terrain, with 4 or 5 battens in between. However, many farmers place posts apart as battens can bend, causing wires to close in on one another.\nBarbed wire for agricultural fencing is typically available in two varieties: soft or mild-steel wire and high-tensile. Both types are galvanized for longevity. High-tensile wire is made with thinner but higher-strength steel. Its greater strength makes fences longer lasting because it resists stretching and loosening better, coping with expansion and contraction caused by heat and animal pressure by stretching and relaxing within wider elastic limits. It also supports longer spans, but because of its elastic (springy) nature, it is harder to handle and somewhat dangerous for inexperienced fencers. Soft wire is much easier to work but is less durable and only suitable for short spans such as repairs and gates, where it is less likely to tangle.\nIn high soil-fertility areas where dairy cattle are used in great numbers, 5- or 7-wire fences are common as the main boundary and internal dividing fences. On sheep farms 7-wire fences are common with the second (from bottom) to fifth wire being plain wire. In New Zealand wire fences must provide passage for dogs since they are the main means of controlling and driving animals on farms.\nAround the turn of the 20th century, in some rural areas, barbed wire fences were used for local telephone networks.\nWarfare and law enforcement.\nBarbed wire was used for the first time by Portuguese troops defending from African tribes during the Combat of Magul in 1895. Less well known is its extensive usage in the Russo-Japanese War.\nIn 1899 barbed wire was also extensively used in the Boer War, where it played a strategic role bringing spaces under control, at military outposts as well as to hold the captured Boer population in concentration camps.\nThe government of the United States built its first international border fence from 1909 to 1911 along the California-Mexico border. It included barbed wire and was intended to keep cattle from moving between the two countries. In 1924, the United States created its border patrol, which built more barbed wire fences on the Mexican border; this time to prevent people from crossing.\nMore significantly, barbed wire was used extensively by all participating combatants in World War I to prevent movement, with deadly consequences. Barbed wire entanglements were placed in front of trenches to prevent direct charges on men below, increasingly leading to greater use of more advanced weapons such as high-powered machine guns and grenades. A feature of these entanglements was that the barbs were much closer together, often forming a continuous sequence.\nBarbed wire could be exposed to heavy bombardments because it could be easily replaced, and its structure included so much open space that machine guns rarely destroyed enough of it to defeat its purpose. However, barbed wire was defeated by the tank in 1916, as shown by the Allied breakthrough at Amiens through German lines on August 8, 1918.\nOne British writer described how the Germans used barbed wire as follows: The enemy wire was always deep, thick, and securely staked with iron supports, which were either crossed like the letter X, or upright, with loops to take the wire and shaped at one end like corkscrews so as to screw into the ground. The wire stood on these supports on a thick web, about four feet high and from thirty to forty feet across. The wire used was generally as thick as sailor's marline stuff, or two twisted rope yarns. It contained, as a rule, some sixteen barbs to the foot. The wire used in front of our lines was generally galvanized, and remained grey after months of exposure. The (German) wire, not being galvanized, rusted to a black color, and shows up black at a great distance. \nDuring the Great Depression, migratory work camps in the United States used barbed wire.\nIn the 1930s and 1940s Europe the Nazis used barbed wire in concentration camp and extermination camp architecture, where it usually surrounded the camp and was electrified to prevent escape. Barbed wire served the purpose of keeping prisoners contained.\nInfirmaries in extermination camps like Auschwitz where prisoners were gassed or experimented on were often separated from other areas by electrified wire and were often braided with branches to prevent outsiders from knowing what was concealed behind their walls.\nDuring the United States' World War II Internment of Japanese Americans, barbed wire was used to enclose the concentration camps, such as Manzanar.\nDuring the 1968 Chicago riots, barbed wire was attached to the fronts of police and National Guard vehicles. The vehicles were used to drive into protesters and rioters and were nicknamed \"Daly dozers\" after then-Chicago mayor Richard J. Daley.\nSafety and injuries.\nMost barbed wire fences, while sufficient to discourage cattle, are passable by humans who can simply climb over or through the fence by stretching the gaps between the wires using non-barbed sections of the wire as handholds. To prevent humans crossing, many prisons, and other high-security installations construct fences with razor wire, a variant which replaces the barbs with near-continuous cutting surfaces sufficient to injure unprotected persons who climb on it. Both razor wire and barbed wire can be bypassed with protection, such as a thick carpet, or with the use of wire cutters.\nA commonly seen alternative is the placement of a few strands of barbed wire at the top of a chain link fence. The limited mobility of someone climbing a fence makes passing conventional barbed wire more difficult. On some chain link fences, these strands are attached to a bracket tilted 45 degrees towards the intruder, further increasing the difficulty.\nBarbed wire began to be widely used as an implement of war during World War I. Wire was placed either to impede or halt the passage of soldiers, or to channel them into narrow defiles in which small arms, particularly machine guns, and indirect fire could be used with greater effect as they attempted to pass. Artillery bombardments on the Western Front became increasingly aimed at cutting the barbed wire that was a major component of trench warfare, particularly once new \"wire-cutting\" fuzes were introduced midway through the war.\nAs the war progressed, the wire was used in shorter lengths that were easier to transport and more difficult to cut with artillery. Other inventions were also a result of the war, such as the screw picket, which enabled construction of wire obstacles to be done at night in No Man's Land without the necessity of hammering stakes into the ground and drawing attention from the enemy.\nDuring the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, the accommodation of Afghan refugees into Pakistan was controlled in Pakistan's largest province, Balochistan, under General Rahimuddin Khan, by making the refugees stay for controlled durations in barbed wire camps (see Controlling Soviet\u2013Afghan war refugees).\nThe frequent use of barbed wire on prison walls, around concentration camps, and the like, has made it symbolic of oppression and denial of freedom in general. For example, in Germany, the totality of East Germany's border regime is commonly referred to with the short phrase \"Mauer und Stacheldraht\" (that is, \"wall and barbed wire\"), and Amnesty International has a barbed wire in their symbol.\nMovement against barbed wire can result in moderate to severe injuries to the skin and, depending on body area and barbed wire configuration, possibly to the underlying tissue. Humans can manage not to injure themselves excessively when dealing with barbed wire as long as they are cautious. Restriction of movement, appropriate clothing, and slow movement when close to barbed wire aid in reducing injury.\nInfantrymen are often trained and inured to the injuries caused by barbed wire. Several soldiers can lie across the wire to form a bridge for the rest of the formation to pass over; often any injury thus incurred is due to the tread of those passing over and not to the wire itself.\nInjuries caused by barbed wire are typically seen in horses, bats, or birds. Horses panic easily, and once caught in barbed wire, large patches of skin may be torn off. At best, such injuries may heal, but they may cause disability or death (particularly due to infection). Birds or bats may not be able to perceive thin strands of barbed wire and suffer injuries.\nFor this reason, horse fences may have rubber bands nailed parallel to the wires.\nMore than 60 different species of wildlife have been reported in Australia as victims of entanglement on barbed wire fences, and the wildlife friendly fencing project is beginning to address this problem.\nGrazing animals with slow movements that will back off at the first notion of pain (\"e.g.\", sheep and cows) will not generally suffer the severe injuries often seen in other animals.\nBarbed wire has been reported as a tool for human torture. It is also frequently used as a weapon in hardcore professional wrestling matches, often as a covering for another type of weapon\u2014Mick Foley was infamous for using a baseball bat wrapped in barbed wire\u2014and infrequently as a covering of or substitute for the ring ropes.\nBecause of the risk of injuries, in 2010 Norway prohibited making new fences with barbed wire for limiting migration of animals. Electric fences are used instead. Consequently, automotive brands such as Bentley and Rolls-Royce Motor Cars use Norwegian (and other Northern European region) hides for producing leather interior in their cars, since the hides from Norwegian cattle have fewer scratches than hides from countries where barbed wire is used.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences and further reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42277", "revid": "8771785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42277", "title": "Aryan race", "text": "Pseudoscientific racial grouping\nThe Aryan race is a pseudoscientific historical race concept that emerged in the late-19th century to describe people who descend from the Proto-Indo-Europeans as a racial grouping. The terminology derives from the historical usage of Aryan, used by modern Indo-Iranians as an epithet of \"noble\". Anthropological, historical, and archaeological evidence does not support the validity of this concept.\nThe concept derives from the notion that the original speakers of the Proto-Indo-European language were distinct progenitors of a superior specimen of humankind, and that their descendants up to the present day constitute either a distinctive race or a sub-race of the Caucasian race, alongside the Semitic race and the Hamitic race. This taxonomic approach to categorizing human population groups is now considered to be misguided and biologically meaningless due to the close genetic similarity and complex interrelationships between these groups.\nThe term was adopted by various racist and antisemitic writers during the 19th century, including Arthur de Gobineau, Richard Wagner, and Houston Stewart Chamberlain, whose scientific racism influenced later Nazi racial ideology. By the 1930s, the concept had been associated with both Nazism and Nordicism, and used to support the white supremacist ideology of Aryanism that portrayed the Aryan race as a \"master race\", with non-Aryans regarded as racially inferior (\"Untermensch\", lit.\u2009'subhuman') and an existential threat that was to be exterminated. In Nazi Germany, these ideas formed an essential part of the state ideology that led to the Holocaust.\nHistory.\nDebates on linguistic homeland.\nIn the late 18th century, Proto-Indo-European (PIE) was constructed as the hypothesized common proto-language of the Indo-European languages. Sir William Jones, who was acclaimed as the \"most respected linguist in Europe\" for his \"Grammar of the Persian Language\" (1771), was appointed one of the three justices of the Supreme Court of Bengal. Jones, who arrived in Calcutta and began his study of Sanskrit and the Rig Veda, was astonished by the lexical similarities between Sanskrit and other Indo-European languages such as Persian, Gothic, Greek, and Latin, and concluded that Sanskrit\u2014as a descendant language\u2014belonged to the same proto- or parent-language in the language family\u2014that is PIE, as the other Indo-European languages, in his \"Third Anniversary Discourse on the Hindus\" (1786). However, the linguistic homeland of the original speakers of Proto-Indo-European was a politicized debate among the archaeologists and comparative historical linguists since the start, entangling in chauvinistic causes. Some European nationalists and dictators, most notably the Nazis, later attempted to identify the Proto-Indo-European homeland in their country or region as racially superior.\nAccording to Leon Poliakov, the concept of the Aryan race was deeply rooted in philology, based on the work of Sir William Jones' claiming that Sanskrit was related to Greco-Roman (European) languages. Other thinkers invented secularized origins for European civilization that were not based on the biblical genealogies from which Europe's aristocracy had long claimed descent.\nRomanticism and Social Darwinism.\nThe influence of Romanticism in Germany saw a revival of the intellectual quest for \"the German language and traditions\" and a desire to \"discard the cold, artificial logic of Enlightenment\". After Darwin's 1859 publication of \"On the Origin of Species\" and publicization of the theorized model of Proto-Indo-European language (PIE), the Romantics convicted that language was a defining factor in national identity, combined with the new ideas of Darwinism. The German nationalists misemployed the scientific theory of natural selection for the rationalization of the supposed fitness of some races over others, although Darwin himself never applied his theory of fitness to vague entities such as races or languages. The \"unfit\" races were suggested as a source of genetic weakness, and a threat that might contaminate the superior qualities of the \"fit\" races. The misleading mixture of pseudoscience and Romanticism produced new racial ideologies which used distorted Social Darwinist interpretations of race to explain \"the superior biological-spiritual-linguistic essence of the Northern Europeans\" in self-congratulatory studies. Subsequently, the German Romantics' quest for a \"pure\" national heritage led to the interpretation of the ancient speakers of PIE language as the distinct progenitors of a \"racial-linguistic-national stereotype\".\nInvention.\nRacial association of the term Aryan.\nThe term \"Aryan\" was originally used as an ethnocultural self-designative identity and epithet of \"noble\" by Indo-Iranians and the authors of the oldest known religious texts of \"Rig Veda\" and \"Avesta\" within the Indo-Iranian branch of Indo-European language family\u2014Sanskrit and Iranian, who lived in ancient India and Iran. Although the Sanskrit \u0101\u0301rya- and Iranian *arya- descended from a form *\u0101\u0306rya-, it was only attested to the Indo-Iranian tribes. Benjamin W. Fortson states that there may have been no term for self-designation of Proto-Indo-Europeans, and no such morphemes has survived. J. P. Mallory et al. states although the term \"Aryan\" takes on an ethnic meaning attesting to Indo-Iranians, there is no grounds for ascribing this semantic use to the Proto-Indo-European reconstruction of lexicon \"*h\u2082ery\u00f3s\" i.e. there is no evidence that the speakers of proto-language referred to themselves as \"Aryans\". However, in the 19th century, it was proposed that \u0101\u0301rya- was not only the tribal self-designation of Indo-Iranians, but self-designation of Proto-Indo-Europeans themselves, a theory rejected by modern scholarships. \"Aryan\" then came to be used by scholars of the 19th century to refer to Indo-Europeans. The now-discredited and chronologically reconstructed North European hypothesis was endorsed by such scholars who situated the PIE homeland in northern Europe, which led to the association of \"Proto-Indo-Europeans\", originally a hypothesized linguistic population of Eurasian PIE speakers, with a new, imagined biological category: \"a tall, light-complexioned, blonde, blue-eyed race\" - supposed phenotypic traits of Nordic race. The anglicized term \"Aryan\" then developed into a purely racialist meaning implicating Nordic racial type. However, modern scholarship of Indo-European studies use \"Aryan\" and \"Indo-Aryan\" in their original senses referring to Indo-Iranian and Indic branch of Indo-Europeans.\nClassification of human races based on the now-pseudoscientific study of phenotypical differences developed during the nineteenth century and evidence in support of such theories were sought from the study of language and reconstructions of language families. Scholars of this era established the ethnological term \"Aryan\" as the race that had spoken the Proto-Indo-European language, and in this context, the term was often used as a synonym for \"Indo-Europeans\".\nScholars point out that, even in ancient times, the Aryan identity as asserted in the \"Rig Veda\" was cultural, religious, and linguistic, not racial; nor do the \"Vedas\" contemplate racial purity. The Rig Veda affirms a ritualistic barrier: an individual is considered Aryan if they sacrifice to the right gods, which requires performing traditional prayer in the traditional language, and does not connote a racial barrier. Michael Witzel states that term Aryan \"does not mean a particular \"people\" or even a particular 'racial' group but all those who had joined the tribes speaking Vedic Sanskrit and adhering to their cultural norms (such as ritual, poetry, etc.)\". Scholars state that the historical Aryans, the Vedic period Bronze Age tribes who lived in Iran, Afghanistan, and the northern Indian subcontinent\u2014composers of the Rig Veda and Avesta\u2014were unlikely to be blond or blue-eyed, contrary to the proponents of Aryanism and Nordicism.\nNorth Europe hypothesis and archaeological affirmation.\nThe racial interpretation of \"Aryans\" stems from the now-discredited culture-historical archaeology theory of Gustaf Kossinna, who asserted a one-to-one correspondence between archaeological culture and archaeological race. According to Kossinna, the continuity of a \"culture\" exposits the continuity of a \"race\" which lived continuously in the same area, and the resemblance of a culture in a younger layer to a culture from an older layer indicates that the autochthonous tribe from the homeland had migrated. Kossinna developed an ethnic paradigm in archaeology called settlement archaeology and practiced the nationalistic interpretation of German archaeology for the Third Reich. The obsolete North European hypothesis was endorsed by Kossinna and Karl Penka, including German nationalists, which was later used by the Nazis to condone their genocidal and racist state policies. Kossinna identified the Proto-Indo-Europeans with the Corded Ware culture, and placed the Proto-Indo-European homeland in Schleswig-Holstein. He argued a diffusionist model of culture, and emphasised the racial superiority of Germanic peoples over Romans (Roman Empire) and French, whom he described as destroyers of culture as compared to Germanics. Kossinna's ideas have been heavily criticised for its inherent ambiguities in the method and advocacy for the ideology of a Germanic master race.\nEarliest utilization of Aryan race.\nMax M\u00fcller popularized the term Aryan in his writings on comparative linguistics, and is often identified as the first writer to mention an Aryan race in English. He began the racial interpretation of the Vedic passages based upon his editing of the \"Rigveda\" from 1849 to 1874. He postulated a small Aryan clan living on a high elevation in central Asia, speaking a proto-language ancestral to later Indo-European languages, which later branched off in two directions: one moved towards Europe and the other migrated to Iran, eventually splitting again with one group invading north-western India and conquering the dark-skinned \"dasas\" of Scythian origin who lived there. The northern Aryans of Europe became energetic and combative, and they invented the idea of a nation, while the southern Aryans of Iran and India were passive and meditative and focussed on religion and philosophy.\nThough he occasionally used the term \"Aryan race\" afterward, M\u00fcller later objected to the mixing of the linguistic and racial categories, and was \"deeply saddened by the fact that these classifications later came to be expressed in racist terms\". In his 1888 lecture at Oxford, he stated, \"[the] science of Language and the science of Man cannot be kept too much asunder [...] it would be as wrong to speak of Aryan blood as of dolichocephalic grammar\", and in his \"Biographies of Words and the Home of the Aryas\" (1888), he writes, \"[the] ethnologist who speaks of Aryan race, Aryan blood, Aryan eyes, and hair, is a great sinner as a linguist [...]\".\nEuropean scholars of 19th century interpreted the Vedic passages as depicting battle between light-skinned Aryan migrants and dark-skinned indigenous tribes, but modern scholars reject this characterization of racial division as a misreading of the Sanskrit text, and indicate that the Rig Vedic opposition between \"\u0101rya\" and \"dasyu\" is distinction between \"disorder, chaos and dark side of human nature\" contrasted with the concepts of \"order, purity, goodness and light\", and \"dark and light worlds\". In other contexts of the Vedic passages the dinstiction between \"\u0101rya\" and \"dasyu\" refers to those who had adopted the Vedic religion, speaking Vedic Sanskrit, and those who opposed it.\nHowever, increasing number of Western writers of this era, especially among anthropologists and non-specialists influenced by Darwinist theories, contrasted \"Aryans\" as a \"physical-genetic species\" rather than an ethnolinguistic category.\nEncyclopedias and textbooks of historiography, ethnography, and anthropology from this era, such as Meyers Konversations-Lexikon, Brockhaus Enzyklop\u00e4die, Nordisk familjebok, H. G. Wells's \"A Short History of the World\", John Clark Ridpath's \"Great Races of Mankind\", and other works reinforced European racial constructions developed on now-pseudoscientific concepts such as racial taxonomy, Social Darwinism, and scientific racism to classify human races.\nTheories of racial supremacy.\nThe term \"Aryan\" was adopted by various racist and antisemitic writers such as Arthur de Gobineau, Theodor Poesche, Houston Chamberlain, Paul Broca, Karl Penka and Hans G\u00fcnther during the nineteenth century for the promotion of scientific racism, spawning ideologies such as Nordicism and Aryanism. The connotation of the term \"Aryan\" was detached from its proper geographic and linguistic confinement as a Indo-Iranian branch of Indo-European language family by this time. The inequality of races and the notion of a \"superior race\" was universally accepted by the scholars of this era, therefore race was referred to \"national character and national culture\" beyond biological confinement.\nIn 1853, Arthur de Gobineau published \"An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races\", in which he originally identified the Aryan race as the white race, and the only civilized one, and conceived cultural decline and miscegenation as intimately intertwined. He argued that the Aryans represented a superior branch of humanity, and attempted to identify the races of Europe as Aryan and associated them with the sons of Noah, emphasizing superiority, and categorized non-Aryan as an intrusion of the Semitic race. According to him, northern Europeans had migrated across the world and founded the major civilizations, before being diluted through racial mixing with indigenous populations described as racially inferior, leading to the progressive decay of the ancient Aryan civilizations.\nIn 1878, German American anthropologist Theodor Poesche published a survey of historical references attempting to demonstrate that the Aryans were light-skinned blue-eyed blonds.\nIn 1899, Houston Stewart Chamberlain published what is described as \"one of the most important proto-Nazi texts\", \"The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century\", in which he theorized an existential struggle to the death between a superior German-Aryan race and a destructive Jewish-Semitic race.\nIn 1916, Madison Grant published \"The Passing of the Great Race\", a polemic against interbreeding between \"Aryan\" Americans, the original Thirteen Colonies settlers of British-Scots-Irish-German origin, with immigrant \"inferior races\", which according to him were, Poles, Czechs, Jews, and Italians. The book was a best-seller at the time.\nWhile the Aryan race theory remained popular, particularly in Germany, some authors opposed it, in particular Otto Schrader, Rudolph von Jhering and the ethnologist Robert Hartmann, who proposed to ban the notion of Aryan from anthropology. The term was also adopted by various occultists and esoteric ideological systems of this era, such as Helena Blavatsky, and Ariosophy.\nNazism.\nSubhuman and inferior races in Nazi Germany.\nThe racial policies of Nazi Germany, the 1935 Nuremberg Laws, and the racist doctrines of Adolf Hitler considered Jews, Roma and Slavs, including Poles, Czechs, Russians and Serbs, \"racially inferior sub-humans\" (); the term was also applied to \"Mischling\" (persons of mixed \"Aryan\" and non-Aryan, such as Jewish, ancestry) and black people.\nConnotation of the term Aryan in Nazi racial theories.\nA definition of Aryan that included all non-Jewish Europeans was deemed unacceptable, and the Expert Committee on Questions of Population and Racial Policy of 1933 brought together important Nazi intellectuals Alfred Ploetz, Fritz Thyssen, and Ernst R\u00fcdin to plan the course of Nazi racial policy, defining an Aryan as one who was \"tribally related to the German blood and descendant of a \"Volk\"\". The term \"Volksdeutsche\" was used by Nazis to indicate \"ethnic Germans\" who did not hold German Reich citizenship; \"Volksdeutsche\" further consist of \"racial groups\"\u2014minorities within a state\u2014who are descendants of a \"Volk\" domiciled in Europe in a closed tribal settlement and are closely related to German racial community. The Nazi concept of \"Volksgemeinschaft\" racially unified ethnic Germans, including those living outside the German Reich, propounding only the members of the racial community be considered Aryan.\nMembers of the SS deemed Aryans not to be of a single ethnic group, and did not have to be exclusively German, but could be selected from populations across Europe to create \"master race\". Nazi Party established the organization NSDAP/AO to disseminate Nazi propaganda among the ethnic German minorities considered \"Volksdeutsche\" in central and eastern Europe. Nazi racial theories considered the \"purest stock of Aryans\" the Nordic people, identified by physical anthropological features such as tallness, white skin, blue eyes, narrow and straight noses, dolichocephalic skulls, prominent chins, and blond hair, including Scandinavians, Germans, English and French, with Nordic and Germanic people being the \"master race\" (). Recent archaeogenetic studies contradict these ideas, and instead suggest that Proto-Indo-European speaking peoples probably had brown eyes and hair, and intermediate skin complexion.\nHistorical revisionism.\nAfter the death of Kossinna, Heinrich Himmler, and other Nazi figures such as Alfred Rosenberg, adopted his nationalistic theories of Germanic peoples and methodologies, including settlement archaeology, and founded the SS organization Ahnenerbe () for conducting archaeological investigations of a presumed \"Germanic expansion in pre-history\". Nazi scholars endorsed the now-discredited North European hypothesis in an effort to prove PIE was originally spoken by an \"Aryan master race\", and associated the Semitic languages with \"inferior races\". Historical revisionism around race was disseminated through the Nazi think tank Ahnenerbe. Hitler regularly invoked Social Darwinist concepts of Ernst Haeckel such as higher evolution (), struggle for existence (), selection (), struggle for life (), in his Nazi racial ideology, which is the central theme in the chapter \"Nation and Race\" of \"Mein Kampf\". Haeckel's Social Darwinism was also praised by Alfred Ploetz, founder of the German Society for Racial Hygiene, who made him an honorary member of the eugenic organization.\nNazi eugenics and Nordic supremacy.\nIn 1938, the Reich Ministry of Education released the German biology curriculum which reflected the curriculum developed by the National Socialist Teachers League and emphasized the Social Darwinst interpretation of the evolution of human races. , who had joined the SS and worked for the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute of Anthropology publishing theories of Nazi eugenics and racial evolution, claimed the Nordic race as a highly evolved race, and Aboriginal Australians as being the lowest rank in the racial hierarchy. Hans F. K. G\u00fcnther was considered to be the most influential Nazi anthropologist, although he was not professionally trained. G\u00fcnther's racist writings on Nordicism was suffused with the ideas of Gobineau, who believed the Nordic race had originated in northern Europe and spread through conquest; this had expressed approval of the Nazi eugenics policies and had critical influence on scientific racism. G\u00fcnther's theories gained acclamation from Hitler, who later included his books as a recommended reading material for the Nazi Party members. After the Nazis came to power, selective breeding for supposed Aryan traits such as athleticism, blond hair and blue eyes was encouraged, while the \"inferior races\" and people with physical or mental illness were deemed \"life unworthy of life\" () and many were interned in concentration camps.\nEthnic cleansing and the Holocaust.\nThe culmination of Nazi eugenicist and racial hygiene programs of sterilization and extermination aimed at creating an \"Aryan master race\" and eliminating \"inferior non-Aryan types\" such as Jews, Slavs, Poles, Roma, homosexuals, and the disabled. Nazi Germany introduced the Anti-Jewish legislation that systemically discriminated against Jews by requiring Aryan certification for a German Reich citizen. After Hitler became the Chancellor of Germany, the public policies of Nazi Germany became increasingly hostile towards supposed \"inferior types\", particularly Jews, who were considered to be the highest manifestation of the Semitic race, and segregation of Jews in ghettos culminated in the policy of extermination the Nazis called the Final Solution to the Jewish Question. The state-sponsored persecution systematically murdered over 6 million Jews, 5.7 million Slavs, 1.8\u20133 million Poles, 270,000 disabled people, among other victims, including children through mass shooting, gas chamber, gas van, and concentration camps, in the process known as the Holocaust. The ethnic Germans considered \"Volksdeutsche\" joined the local SS organizations under NSDAP/AO and participated in Nazi-sponsored pogroms in eastern and central Europe during the Holocaust, including seizures of Jewish property. The Aryan race belief was used by the Nazis to justify the persecution, depicting the victims as the \"antipode and eternal enemy of the Aryans\".\nWhite supremacy.\nFollowing Nazi Germany's defeat in World War II, various neo-Nazi and racial nationalist movements developed a more inclusive definition of Aryan claiming to Western European peoples, with Nordic and Germanic peoples being the most \"racially pure\". However, in the United States, most white nationalists define whiteness broadly as people of European ancestry, and some consider Jews to be white although this is controversial within white nationalist circles.\nMany white supremacist neo-Nazi groups and prison gangs, notably in the United States, view themselves as part of an Aryan race, including the Aryan Brotherhood, Aryan Nations, Aryan Guard, Aryan Republican Army, White Aryan Resistance, Aryan Circle, Aryan Brotherhood of Texas, and others.\nNeo-pagan movements.\nIndo-European history, real and feigned, plays a significant role in various neo-pagan movements.\nRussian neo-paganism.\nThe Russian Slavophile movements borrowed various discrete ideas of a presumed \"prestigious Aryan origin\" of Europeans from Nazi Germany. Although Russian Orthodoxy was the primary religious influence on Russian nationalists, the primacy of Christianity was treated skeptically by these groups, who later began searching for an ancient text to rationalize a \"return to the origins\". Various writers in the newspaper \"Zhar-Ptitsa\" showed interest in a purported manuscript\u2014the Book of Veles\u2014which supposedly dated to the first century BCE. F. A. Izenbek, a White Army officer, alleged the discovery of this manuscript during the Russian Civil War. However one of Izenbek's friends, Iurii Miroliubov, had forged the manuscript, and used the term \"Vedism\" to describe Russian neo-paganism; he later appropriated the Indian religious scripture, the Vedas, to aggrandize the manuscript. Nationalistic white Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9s and neo-Pagans consider the manuscript to be an authentic historical source of Slavic antiquity, who claim a direct link between \"ancient Aryans\" and themselves as Slavs. However, the manuscript is declared literary forgery by scholars. Alexey Dobrovolsky, a Russian neo-Nazi, is considered the founding Nazi ideologue of Slavic Neopaganism.\nGoddess movement.\nWith the rise of first-wave feminism, various authors of the Goddess movement cast the ancient Indo-Europeans as a \"patriarchal, warlike invaders who destroyed a utopian prehistoric world of feminine peace and beauty\" in various archaeological dramas and books such as Riane Eisler's \"The Chalice and the Blade\" (1987) and Marija Gimbutas's \"Civilization of the Goddess\" (1991).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42278", "revid": "50818624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42278", "title": "Sepp Blatter", "text": "Swiss football administrator (born 1936)\nJoseph Sepp Blatter (born Josef Blatter; 10 March 1936) is a Swiss former football administrator who served as the eighth president of FIFA from 1998 to 2015. He has been suspended from participating in FIFA activities since 2015 as a result of the FIFA corruption case made public that year, which remains in place until 2027.\nFrom a background in business, public relations, and sports administration, Blatter became general secretary of FIFA in 1981 and was then elected president at the 51st FIFA Congress on 8 June 1998, succeeding Jo\u00e3o Havelange, who had headed the organization since 1974. Blatter was re-elected in 2002, 2007, 2011, and 2015. Like his predecessor Havelange, Blatter built his power base in FIFA by increasing the influence of numerous African and Asian countries in world football through the expansion of participating teams in various FIFA tournaments, culminating in the highly controversial awarding of the 2022 World Cup to Qatar. Although he has persistently been dogged by claims of corruption and financial mismanagement, Blatter's reign oversaw a vast expansion in revenues generated by the FIFA World Cup.\nOn 2 June 2015, six days after the United States government indicted several current and former FIFA officials and sports marketing companies for bribery and money laundering, Blatter announced that he would call for elections to choose a new president of FIFA and that he would not stand in these elections, but he also said he would remain in his position until an extraordinary FIFA Congress could be held for his successor to be elected. Criminal proceedings were announced against Blatter by the Swiss Attorney General's office on 25 September 2015, regarding \"criminal mismanagement... and misappropriation\".\nIn October 2015, Blatter and other top FIFA officials were suspended amid the investigation, and in December the independent FIFA Ethics Committee ejected Blatter from office and banned him from taking part in any FIFA activities over the following eight years. On 24 February 2016, a FIFA appeals committee upheld the suspension but reduced it from eight years to six. On 24 March 2021, he received a second ban for six years and was fined the amount of CHF 1,000,000 by the body's Ethics Committee after a probe into massive bonus payments. Issa Hayatou served as the acting President of FIFA until an extraordinary FIFA Congress was held in late February 2016, electing Gianni Infantino as the 9th president of FIFA.\nEarly life.\nBlatter was born in Visp in the Swiss canton of Valais with the given name of \"Josef\". He studied in Saint Maurice, before getting a degree in business and economics from the University of Lausanne in 1959. Blatter has had a long and varied career, including posts such as head of public relations for the tourist board of his native canton, as well as general secretary of the Swiss Ice Hockey Federation.\nBlatter was Director of Sports Timing and Relations of Longines S.A., and was involved in the organization of the 1972 and 1976 Olympic Games.\nFIFA.\nFrom 1975 onwards, Blatter worked at FIFA, first as technical director (1975\u20131981), then general secretary (1981\u20131998), before his election as FIFA president in 1998. He was re-elected as head of FIFA in 2002, and was re-elected unopposed for another four years on 31 May 2007, even though only 66 of 207 FIFA members nominated him.\nBlatter and FIFA were often dogged by controversy and allegations of corruption. His tenure saw controversy over allegations of financial mismanagement and the acceptance of bribes resulting in Qatar's successful 2022 World Cup bid.\nBlatter has attracted criticism from the media, senior football figures and players, due to controversial statements. These include the claim that Latin American countries would applaud John Terry for having an extramarital affair, and that on-field racism could be corrected with a handshake, among others. He also drew criticism at the 2014 FIFA World Cup seeding, when he interrupted a \"one-minute silence\" for former South-African president Nelson Mandela, who died the day before, after eleven seconds. Michael van Praag, the chairman of the Royal Dutch Football Association, called his behavior \"preposterous\" and expressed the hope Blatter would not be reelected in 2015.\nBlatter has been publicly heckled, at the World Cup in Seoul and the Confederations Cup in Frankfurt, both in 2002 and 2005, in his home town of Visp in 2011, at the 2012 Women's Olympic Football Final Medal Ceremony, and at the opening of Confederations Cup match in 2013. In order to avoid protest, no speeches were given at the 2014 FIFA World Cup.\n1998 election.\nBlatter's 1998 election to the presidency of FIFA over UEFA President Lennart Johansson occurred amidst much controversy. Blatter's 2002 candidacy was marked with rumours of financial irregularities and backroom dealings, culminating with direct accusations of bribery, by a third party, made in the British press by Farra Ado, vice-president of the Confederation of African Football and president of the Somali Football Federation, who claimed to have been offered $100,000 to vote for Blatter in 1998.\n2004 Comments on women's football.\nIn 2004, Blatter said during an interview in the Swiss newspaper Sonntagsblick, when asked how to increase the popularity of women's football, \"Let the women play in more feminine clothes like they do in volleyball. They could, for example, have tighter shorts. Female players are pretty, if you excuse me for saying so, and they already have some different rules to men - such as playing with a lighter ball. That decision was taken to create a more female aesthetic, so why not do it in fashion?\" His comments resulted in heated responses.\n2006 FIFA World Cup.\nIn the 2006 FIFA World Cup, after a controversial second-round match between Portugal and the Netherlands, which saw referee Valentin Ivanov issue a record 16 yellow cards and four red cards, Blatter was said to have lambasted the officiating referee, and said that Ivanov should have given himself a yellow card for his poor performance as a referee. He later said he regretted his words and promised to officially apologise to Ivanov. The apology was never given, and the referee was removed from further officiating.\nForeign 'over-representation' on club teams.\nBlatter was criticized in 2007 and 2008 for trying to change European Union employment law regarding the number of foreign players that football clubs could field at any one time. His plans were to set a restriction of five foreign players and having six players from the said team's own nationality. Blatter believed this would help the countries' national sides by having more national players playing in their leagues.\nBlatter has often referred to the English Premier League as one of the major problems in football and used it as an example, due to the influence of foreign players, coaches and owners in the top teams.\nWorld Cup's chosen sites.\nIt was reported that Blatter had \"cut an unofficial deal with UEFA head Michel Platini\" to ensure Europe would receive the 2018 World Cup, such that if the non-European bids did not withdraw from 2018 \"they will find themselves frozen out and not given any backing by the FIFA High Command, damaging their chances of being serious contenders for the second tournament.\"\nEleven bids were submitted in March 2009 covering 13 nations. Mexico and Indonesia withdrew. Five of the remaining nine bids\u2014South Korea, Qatar, Japan, Australia and the United States\u2014were only for the 2022 World Cup, while all the others were bidding for both the 2018 and 2022 World Cups. Because all of the bids for the 2018 World Cup were from European nations, and FIFA's rules dictate that countries belonging to confederations that hosted either of the two preceding tournaments are not eligible to host, the bids of England, Russia, Netherlands/Belgium and Spain/Portugal were forced to be for 2018 only.\nTechnological assistance.\nThe criticism attracted by Blatter's refusal to allow goal-line technology or video replays intensified following the controversial Frank Lampard disallowed goal in the match between England and Germany on 27 June 2010.\nTwo days later, Blatter stated that he deplored the \"evident referee mistakes\" in the England v Germany and Mexico v Argentina matches, and apologised to the English Football Association and the Mexican Football Federation (the two organizations directly concerned by the referees' mistakes), acknowledging that Lampard had indeed scored against Germany and that T\u00e9vez's goal against Mexico had been scored from an offside position.\nHe added: \"It is obvious that after the experiences so far at this World Cup it would be a nonsense not to re-open the file on goal-line technology. [\u2026] We will come out with a new model in November on how to improve high level referees. [\u2026] I cannot disclose more of what we are doing but something has to be changed.\"\n2011 FIFA presidential election.\nIn 2011, elections were scheduled for the FIFA presidency, in which Blatter was again the incumbent candidate, running for a fourth consecutive term. The ChangeFIFA organisation, on 29 March 2011, endorsed former Chilean defender and for three years running South American Footballer of the Year El\u00edas Figueroa as candidate for the presidency, urging national federations to nominate him, but, subsequently, Figueroa decided not to accept the nomination, stating that \"in such a short period of time\" he could not develop a case \"worthy of the magnitude and importance of such a distinguished job\"\nThe vote took place at the 61st FIFA Congress in Zurich. The only other candidate, Mohammed bin Hammam of Qatar, withdrew from the presidential race on 28 May, just before the vote. Bin Hammam had supported Blatter's 1998 and 2002 presidential campaigns, but admitted that he had fallen out with Blatter over issues within the FIFA Executive Committee. The FIFA ethics committee that investigated bribery claims against Bin Hammam and CONCACAF head Jack Warner announced that Blatter will not face an investigation into claims that he knew of the bribery and did nothing about it, because of a lack of evidence.\nBlatter criticised the International Olympic Committee (IOC), stating FIFA manage their finances \"like a housewife\", after the IOC announced it would look into allegations of corruption against Issa Hayatou, president of the Confederation of African Football.\nThere being no other nominations, Blatter ran unopposed in the ensuing presidential election and was re-elected for a fourth term, with 186 of the 203 votes cast. In his campaign, Blatter had stipulated that, if re-elected in 2011, he would not run again for president. Blatter received criticism for not postponing his 2011 election in which his term as FIFA President was extended through 2015, despite the fact that all other candidates for the role had been suspended or withdrew.\nAllegations of financial mismanagement.\nAmidst internal divisions, FIFA's secretary-general Blatter's deputy and former prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Michel Zen-Ruffinen drew up a 30-page dossier outlining allegations of financial mismanagement within the organisation. The dossier alleged that the collapse of FIFA's marketing partner ISL had led to losses of up to 100 million US dollars under Blatter's management.\nThe allegations were backed by Johansson, and the dossier was handed to the Swiss authorities, but they cleared Blatter of any wrongdoing and FIFA had to pay all the costs. An internal investigation within FIFA was halted by Blatter because members of it broke confidentiality agreements. This questionable behaviour led him to remove Zen-Ruffinen from office immediately before the 2002 FIFA World Cup.\nIn April 2012 the Council of Europe published a report which stated it would be \"difficult to imagine\" that Blatter would have been unaware of \"significant sums\" paid to unnamed FIFA officials by ISSM/ISL in connection with lucrative contracts for World Cup television rights and the subsequent bankruptcy and collapse of ISL in 2001. The Council of Europe report will be considered by over 300 parliamentarians from the 47 Council of Europe member states in Strasbourg.\nAwarding of 2018 and 2022 World Cup.\nControversy came in the British press when Russia was awarded the 2018 event, with England receiving just two of their \"promised\" votes; this controversy was dismissed by Blatter as the English showing themselves to be \"bad losers\". The awarding of the 2022 games to Qatar was also controversial. The illegality of homosexuality in the nation caused Blatter to joke that \"I would say they [gay fans] should refrain from any sexual activities\", which brought criticism from retired basketball player John Amaechi and gay rights groups.\n2013 FIFA Ethics Committee investigation.\nOn 29 April 2013, FIFA's Ethics Committee concluded its investigation into allegations of illegal payments to FIFA officials from the organisation's former marketing partner International Sports and Leisure (ISL), which went bankrupt in 2001, and published its report.\nFIFA president Sepp Blatter was cleared of any misconduct, but his predecessor, Brazilian Jo\u00e3o Havelange, resigned as FIFA's honorary president over his part in the scandal, since Havelange along with former FIFA Executive Committee members Ricardo Teixeira and Dr. Nicol\u00e1s Leoz were found to have accepted illegal payments between 1992 and May 2000. A week before FIFA's ethics committee announced its findings, 84-year-old Leoz had resigned from his post as president of the South American Football Confederation, citing \"health reasons\".\nBlatter, in a statement, \"note[d] with satisfaction\" that the report \"confirms that 'President Blatter's conduct could not be classified in any way as misconduct with regard to any ethics rules'.\" He added he has \"no doubt that FIFA, thanks to the governance reform process that [Blatter] proposed now has the mechanisms and means to ensure that such an issue does not happen again\", though admitting that the scandal \"has caused untold damage to the reputation of [FIFA].\"\n2015 FIFA presidential election, controversy and resignation.\nIn 2015, elections were scheduled for the FIFA presidency, in which Blatter was again the incumbent candidate, running for a fifth consecutive term. Prince Ali bin Hussein was his opponent in the election.\nThe vote took place at the 65th FIFA Congress in Z\u00fcrich on 29 May 2015. Neither party received the necessary two-thirds majority of votes from the first round with Blatter receiving 133 to Prince Ali's 73. According to FIFA rules, a second round should have been held for the two candidates, with a simple majority being sufficient for victory. However, before the second round of voting commenced, Prince Ali announced his withdrawal, handing Blatter victory by default.\nOn 2 June 2015, FIFA abruptly called a press conference at their Z\u00fcrich headquarters, where Blatter announced that he would resign from the post of FIFA president amid the ongoing corruption scandal.\nDuring the news conference he said: \"My mandate does not appear to be supported by everybody\" and announced an extraordinary congress scheduled \"as soon as possible\" to elect his successor. Blatter announced that he would remain in office until his successor could be elected at the extraordinary congress, likely to be held some time between December 2015 and March 2016. He continued with the words: \"While I have a mandate from the membership of FIFA, I do not feel that I have a mandate from the entire world of football\u2014the fans, the players, the clubs, the people who live, breathe, and love football as much as we all do at FIFA\".\nSubsequently, on 26 June Blatter prompted speculation that he might be preparing to renege on this resignation, when he was quoted as saying that \"I have not resigned, I put my mandate in the hands of an extraordinary congress\". This seemed to contradict his comments from 2 June 2015. He was further quoted as saying that he resigned \"to take away the pressure from FIFA and my employees, including [pressure] from the sponsors\". Reports speculated that it appears that Blatter will step down at the \"extraordinary congress\" though the situation remains vague.\nOn 25 September, Swiss investigators announced that they were investigating Blatter in relation to payments made to UEFA president Michel Platini. While Blatter and Platini denied any impropriety around the payments, major FIFA sponsors Coca-Cola, Visa Inc., McDonald's, and Budweiser issued public statements requesting that he resign for the good of FIFA.\nOn 8 October 2015, he was suspended from FIFA for 90 days while investigations into payments made to Michel Platini were conducted. FIFA said in a statement: \"The grounds for these decisions are the investigations that are being carried out by the investigatory chamber of the ethics committee.\" On 21 December, FIFA's ethics committee banned both Blatter and Platini from football for eight years. In February 2016, a FIFA appeals committee upheld the suspension but reduced it from eight years to six. Platini appealed to the European Court of Human Rights, which rejected his appeal.\nOn 22 December 2020, FIFA filed a criminal complaint against Blatter relating to his role in the FIFA Museum project.\nOn 24 March 2021, he received a second ban for six years and was fined the amount of CHF 1,000,000 by the body's Ethics Committee after a probe into massive bonus payments.\nOn 2 November 2021, Blatter was formally charged by Swiss authorities for fraud and falsifying documents in connection with the improper payments to Platini. Blatter and Platini were cleared of the charges eight months later. Despite the verdict having been appealed by Swiss federal prosecutors, Blatter and Platini were acquitted a second time in March 2025.\nPost FIFA.\nBlatter has been critical of football's leadership since his departure from FIFA, specifically criticising FIFA president Gianni Infantino and UEFA president Aleksander \u010ceferin. Blatter noted that when he had started working in FIFA, the organization was poor and was not the powerhouse it is today and admits he played a major role in the commercialisation of football, which has led to an increase in non-sports sponsors. Blatter stated that awarding the 2022 FIFA World Cup to Qatar was a mistake. Blatter has been critical of the expansion and creation of tournaments like the FIFA World Cup, UEFA Champions League, UEFA Europa League, UEFA Conference League, FIFA Club World Cup, and UEFA Nations League and has warned that oversaturation, rising costs, and fan violence could cause interest in football to drop. Blatter also criticised the awarding of the 2030 FIFA World Cup to six countries in three continents (Argentina, Morocco, Paraguay, Portugal, Spain, and Uruguay), stating the tournament would lose its identity. Blatter also criticised the 2034 FIFA World Cup in Saudi Arabia, saying that it would go against the human rights and democracy that make up FIFA's values while giving Saudi Arabia increasing influence in football as well as the bidding process for both 2030 and 2034 that was designed to favor Saudi Arabia.\nSexual assault allegation.\nIn November 2017, American goalkeeper Hope Solo accused Blatter of sexual assault at the FIFA Ballon d'Or awards in 2013. During an interview with the Portuguese newspaper \"Expresso\", Solo stated she \"had Sepp Blatter grab my ass\" just before the two presented an award together to Abby Wambach. She stated she \"was in shock and completely thrown off. I had to quickly pull myself together to present my team-mate with the biggest award of her career and celebrate with her in that moment, so I completely shifted my focus to Abby.\" Blatter's spokesman Thomas Renggli stated \"This allegation is ridiculous.\"\nHonours.\nBlatter has been the recipient of numerous awards, medals, honorary degrees, and citizenships from nation states, sport governing bodies, special interest groups, universities and cities.\nBlatter's honorary degree from De Montfort University was revoked by the institution in October 2015, as it had previously been given in recognition of his ethical conduct.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1981, Blatter changed the spelling of his first name from Josef to Joseph. He later adopted his nickname, Sepp, as his middle name.\nBlatter's first wife was Liliane Biner. The couple had a daughter, shortly after which they divorced. In 1981, Blatter married Barbara K\u00e4ser, the daughter of Helmut K\u00e4ser, Blatter's predecessor as secretary general of FIFA. Their marriage lasted ten years until Barbara died from complications after an operation. In 1995, Blatter began dating Ilona Boguska, a Polish friend of his daughter Corinne, before they separated in 2002.\nBlatter married for a third time on 23 December 2002, to Graziella Bianca, a dolphin trainer who was a friend of his daughter. Their marriage ended in divorce in 2004. Since 2014, he has been in a domestic partnership with Linda Barras.\nBlatter was raised as a Catholic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42279", "revid": "45764203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42279", "title": "Bass drum", "text": "Drum that produces a low or indefinite pitch\nThe bass drum is a large drum that produces a note of low definite or indefinite pitch. The instrument is typically cylindrical, with the drum's diameter usually greater than its depth, with a struck head at both ends of the cylinder. The heads may be made of calfskin or plastic and there is normally a means of adjusting the tension, either by threaded taps or by strings. Bass drums are built in a variety of sizes, but size does not dictate the volume produced by the drum. The pitch and the sound can vary much with different sizes, but the size is also chosen based on convenience and aesthetics. Bass drums are percussion instruments that vary in size and are used in several musical genres. Three major types of bass drums can be distinguished.\nIn many forms of music, the bass drum is used to mark or keep time. The bass drum makes a low, boom sound when the mallet hits the drumhead. In marches, it is used to project tempo (marching bands historically march to the beat of the bass). A basic beat for rock and roll has the bass drum played on the first and third beats of bars in common time, with the snare drum on the second and fourth beats, called backbeats. In jazz, the bass drum can vary from almost entirely being a timekeeping medium to being a melodic voice in conjunction with the other parts of the set.\nEtymology.\nBass drums have many synonyms and translations, such as \"gran cassa\" (It), \"grosse caisse\" (Fr), \"Grosse Trommel\" or \"Basstrommel\" (Ger), and \"bombo\" (Sp).\nHistory.\nThe earliest known predecessor to the bass drum was the Turkish davul, a cylindrical drum that featured two thin heads. The heads were stretched over hoops and then attached to a narrow shell. To play this instrument, a person would strike the right side of the davul with a large wooden stick, while the left side would be struck with a rod. When struck, the davul produced a sound much deeper than that of the other drums in existence. Because of this unique tone, davuls were used extensively in war and combat, where a deep and percussive sound was needed to ensure that the forces were marching in proper step with one another. The military bands of the Ottoman Janissaries in the 18th century were one of the first groups to utilize davuls in their music; Ottoman marching songs often had a heavy emphasis on percussion, and their military bands were primarily made up of davul, cymbal and kettle drum players.\nDavuls were ideal for use as military instruments because of the unique way in which they could be carried. The Ottoman janissaries, for example, hung their davuls at their breasts with thick straps. This made it easier for the soldiers to carry their instruments from battle to battle. This practice does not seem to be limited to just the Ottoman Empire, however; in Egypt, drums very similar to davuls were braced with cords, which allowed the Egyptian soldiers to carry them during military movements.\nThe davul, however, was also used extensively in non-military music. For example, davuls were a major aspect of Turkish folk dances. In Ottoman society, davul and shawm players would perform together in groups called davul-zurnas, or drum and shawm circles.\nAt its peak, the Ottoman Empire stretched from Vienna down to northern Africa and most of the middle east. This long reach meant that many aspects of Ottoman culture, including the davul and other janissary instruments, were likely introduced to other parts of the world. In Africa, the indigenous population took the basic idea of the davul \u2013 that is, a two-headed cylindrical drum that produces a deep sound when struck \u2013 and both increased the size of the drum and changed the material from which it was made, leading to the development of the long drum. The long drum can be made in a variety of different ways but is most typically constructed from a hollowed-out tree trunk. This is vastly different from the davul, which is made from a thick shell. Long drums were typically 2 meters in length and 50 centimeters in diameter, much larger than the Turkish drums on which they were based. The indigenous population also believed that the tree from which the long drum was made had to be in perfect shape. Once an appropriate tree was selected and the basic frame for the long drum was constructed, the Africans took cow hides and soaked them in boiling hot water, in order to stretch them out. Although the long drum was an improvement on the davul, both drums were nevertheless played in a similar fashion. Two distinct sticks were used on the two distinct sides of the drum itself. A notable difference between the two is that long drums, unlike davuls, were used primarily for religious purposes.\nAs the use of the long drum began to spread across Europe, many composers and musicians started looking for even deeper tones that could be used in compositions. As a result of this demand, a narrow-shelled, single-headed drum called the gong drum was introduced in Britain during the 19th century. This drum, which was 70-100 centimeters in diameter and deep-shelled, was similar to the long drum in both size and construction. When struck, the gong drum produced a deep sound with a rich resonance. However, the immense size of the drum, coupled with the fact that there was not a second head to help balance the sound, meant that gong drums tended to produce a sound with a definite pitch. As a result, they fell out of favor with many composers, as it became nearly impossible to incorporate them in an orchestra in any meaningful way.\nBecause they were unable to be used by orchestras, music makers began to build smaller gong drums that would not carry a definite pitch. This smaller version of the gong drum is today called the orchestral bass drum, and it is the prototype with which people are most familiar today. The modern bass drum is used primarily in orchestras. The drum, similar to the davul and long drum, is double-headed, rod tensioned and measures roughly 40 inches in diameter and 20 inches in width. Most orchestral bass drums are situated within a frame, which allows them to be positioned at any angle.\nBass drums are also highly visible in modern drum kits. In 1909, William Ludwig created a workable bass drum pedal, which would strike a two-headed bass drum in much the same way as a drumstick. During the 1960s, many rock \u2018n\u2019 roll drummers began incorporating more than one bass drum in their drum kit, including the Who's Keith Moon and Cream's Ginger Baker.\nClassical music.\nIn classical music, composers have much more freedom in the way the bass drum is used than in other genres of music. Common uses are:\nApart from the standard beaters mentioned above, implements used to strike the drum may include keyboard percussion mallets, timpani mallets, and drumsticks. The hand or fingers can also be used (it. con la mano). The playing techniques possible include rolls, repetitions and unison strokes. Bass drums can sometimes be used for sound effects. e.g. thunder, or an earthquake.\nMounting.\nBass drums are too large to be handheld and are always mounted in some way. The usual ways of mounting a bass drum are:\nStrikers.\nBass drums can have a variety of strikers depending on the music:\nElectronic music.\nIn electronic music, bass drums, especially kick drums, are frequently used. Kick drum sounds are prominent in various music styles, including American genres like footwork and African genres such as gqom.\nKit drumming.\nIn a drum kit, the bass drum is much smaller than in traditional orchestral use, most commonly in diameter. Sizes range from in diameter while depths range from , with being normal. Vintage bass drums are generally shallower than the current standard of .\nSometimes the front head of a kit bass drum has a hole in it to allow air to escape when the drum is struck for shorter sustain. Muffling can be installed through the hole without taking off the front head. The hole also allows microphones to be placed into the bass drum for recording and amplification. In addition to microphones, sometimes trigger pads are used to amplify the sound and provide a uniform tone, especially when fast playing without a decrease in volume is desired. Professional drummers often choose to have a customized bass drum front head, with the logo or name of their band on the front.\nThe kit bass drum may be more heavily muffled than the classical bass drum, and it is popular for drummers to use a pillow, blanket, or professional mufflers inside the drum, resting against the batter head, to dampen the blow from the pedal, and produce a shorter \"thud\".\nDifferent beaters have different effects, and felt, wood and plastic ones are all popular. Bass drums sometimes have a tom-tom mount on the top, to save having to use (and pay for) a separate stand or rack. Fastening the mount involves cutting a hole in the top of the bass drum to attach it; \"virgin\" bass drums do not have this hole cut in them, and so are professionally prized.\nBass drum pedal.\nIn 1900, Sonor drum company introduced its first single bass drum pedal. William F. Ludwig made the bass drum pedal workable in 1909, paving the way for the modern drum kit. A bass drum pedal operates much the same as the hi-hat control; a footplate is pressed to pull a chain, belt, or metal drive mechanism downward, bringing a beater or mallet forward into the drumhead. The beater head is usually made of either felt, wood, plastic, or rubber and is attached to a rod-shaped metal shaft. The pedal and beater system are mounted in a metal frame and like the hi-hat, a tension unit controls the amount of pressure needed to strike and the amount of recoil upon release.\nDouble bass drum pedal.\nA double bass drum pedal operates much the same way as a single bass drum pedal does, but with a second footplate controlling a second beater on the same drum. Most commonly this is attached by a shaft to a remote beater mechanism alongside the primary pedal mechanism. One notable exception to this pattern is the symmetrical Sleishman twin bass drum pedal.\nAlternatively, some drummers opt for two separate bass drums with a single pedal on each, for a similar effect.\nDrop-clutch.\nWhen using a double bass drum pedal, the foot which normally controls the hi-hat pedal moves to the second bass drum pedal, and so the hi hat opens and remains open. A drop clutch can be used to keep the hi-hat in the closed position, even with the foot removed from the pedal.\nPedal techniques.\nThere are 3 primary ways to play single strokes with one foot. The first is heel-down technique, where the player's heel is planted on the pedal and the strokes are played with the ankle. This stroke is good for quiet playing and quick syncopated rhythms. The next technique is heel-up, where the player's heel is lifted off of the pedal and the strokes originate from the hip. The ankle is still flexed with each stroke, but the full weight of the leg can be used to add additional power for louder playing situations. Lifting the heel allows access to several double stroke techniques as well. The third primary technique is the floating stroke where the heel is lifted off the pedal as in heel-up, but the stroke is played primarily from the ankle as in heel-down. This motion can allow greater speed and higher note density at louder volumes but is not efficient for slow tempos or sparse rhythms.\nDrummers such as Thomas Lang, Virgil Donati, and Terry Bozzio are capable of performing complicated solos on top of an ostinato bass drum pattern. Thomas Lang, for example, has mastered the heel-up and heel-down (single- and double-stroke) to the extent that he is able to play dynamically with the bass drum and to perform various rudiments with his feet.\nIn order to play \"doubles\" on the pedal, drummers can employ 3 main techniques: slide, swivel, or heel-toe. In the slide technique, the pedal is struck around the middle area with the ball of the foot. As the drum produces a sound, the toe is slid up the pedal. After the first stroke, the pedal will naturally bounce back, hit the toe as it slides upwards, and rebound for a second strike. In the swiveling double, the pedal is struck once in the normal manner for the first note, then the heel is immediately rotated around the ball of the foot to the side of the pedal while simultaneously playing a second stroke. This rotation can be to the inside or outside, either will work, and results in a faster second stroke than is ordinarily possible. In the heel-toe technique the foot is suspended above the foot-board of the pedal. The entire foot is brought down and the ball of the foot strikes the pedal. The foot snaps up, the heel comes off the footboard, and the toes come down for a second stroke. Once mastered either technique allows the player to play very fast double strokes on the bass drum. Noted players include Rod Morgenstein, Tim Waterson (who formerly held the world record for the fastest playing on a bass drum, using double bass), Tomas Haake, Chris Adler, Derek Roddy, Danny Carey and Hellhammer. The technique is commonly used in death metal and other extreme forms of music where triggers and double bass are typically employed. Double strokes can only properly replace single strokes for long runs of evenly spaced notes when using triggers or sample replacement as the sound is inherently uneven. Some tempos are only possible with double strokes, however.\nDouble bass drum.\nIn many forms of heavy metal and hard rock, as well as some forms of jazz, fusion, and punk, two bass drums are used, or alternatively two pedals on one bass drum. If two drums are used, that is often to give a more impressive appearance on large stages, but sometimes, the second drum is pitched differently to provide some variety in the notes, thus creating a more nuanced sound. The first person to use and popularize the double bass drum setup was jazz drummer Louie Bellson, who came up with the idea when he was still in high school. Ray McKinley was, by 1941, using this setup as well. Double bass drums were popularized in the 1960s by rock drummers Ginger Baker of Cream, Keith Moon of The Who, Mitch Mitchell of the Jimi Hendrix Experience, and Nick Mason of Pink Floyd. After 1970, Billy Cobham and Narada Michael Walden used double kick drum with the jazz fusion project Mahavishnu Orchestra, Chester Thompson with Frank Zappa and Weather Report, Barriemore Barlow with Jethro Tull, and Terry Bozzio with Frank Zappa. For these genres the focus was 'odd-meter grooves and mind blowing solos'. Double bass drumming later became an integral part of heavy metal, as pioneered by the likes of Les Binks, Carmine Appice, Ian Paice, Cozy Powell, Phil Taylor and Tommy Aldridge. American thrash metal band Slayer's former drummer Dave Lombardo was named \"the godfather of double bass\" by the magazine \"Drummerworld\". Later metal genres including death metal use double kick drumming extensively often with blast beat techniques, whilst focusing on precision, 'endurance', 'speed' and 'rapid footwork'.\nDouble bass drumming can be achieved with a number of techniques; most commonly, with simple alternating single strokes. However, in order to increase the speed, some drummers use the heel-toe technique; these are essentially double strokes where the drummer can perform two hits with one foot movement, which causes less fatigue at higher tempos.\nNotable names that have a hand in raising the bar for double bass drumming, include: Terry Bozzio, Simon Philips, Virgil Donati, Derek Roddy, Gene Hoglan, George Kollias, Bobby Jarzombek and Tomas Haake. Bozzio introduced the ostinato in his \"Melodic Drumming and the Ostinato\" educational DVDs, playing various drum rudiments on the feet, while freely playing with the hands, creating polyrhythms. Donati is regarded as the first drummer to successfully use inverted double strokes with both feet, in addition to complex, syncopated ostinato patterns. Roddy, Hoglan and Kollias are acknowledged as the leaders of extreme metal drumming with their use of single strokes at 250+ beats per minute, while, Jarzombek and Haake's double bass drumming influenced the djent genre.\nThe history and development of double bass (as well as notated playing instruction) can be traced in the books \"Encyclopedia of Double Bass Drumming \" written by Bobby Rondinelli and Michael Lauren and \"The Complete Double Bass Drumming Explained\" written by Ryan Alexander Bloom. In addition to these books, \"Double Bass Drumming\" written by Joe Franco and \"Double Bass Drum Freedom\" written by Virgil Donati are also commonly used resources for double bass instruction.\nIn marching bands.\nThe \"bass line\" is a unique musical ensemble consisting of graduated pitch marching bass drums commonly found in marching bands and drum and bugle corps. Each drum plays a different note, and this gives the bass line a unique task in a musical ensemble. Skilled lines execute complex linear passages split among the drums to add an additional melodic element to the percussion section. This is characteristic of the marching bass drum\u2014its purpose is to convey complex rhythmic and melodic content, not just to keep the beat. The line provides impact, melody, and tempo due to the nature of the sound of the instruments. The bass line usually has from as many as seven bass drums to as few as two. But most high school drumlines consist of between three and five.\nComponents.\nA bass line typically consists of four or five musicians, each carrying one tuned bass drum, although variations do occur. Smaller lines are not uncommon in smaller groups, such as some high school marching bands, and several groups have had one musician playing more than one bass drum, usually small ones, with one mounted on top of the other.\nThe drums are typically between 16\" and 32\" in diameter, but some groups have used bass drums as small as 14\" and larger than 36\". The drums in a bass line are tuned such that the largest will always play the lowest note with the pitch increasing as the size of the drum decreases. Individually, the drums are usually tuned higher than other bass drums (drum set kick drums or orchestral bass drums) of the same size, so that complex rhythmic passages can be heard clearly and articulated.\nUnlike the other drums in a drumline, the bass drums are generally mounted sideways, with the drumhead facing horizontally, rather than vertically. This results in several things. First of all, to ensure that a vibrating membrane is facing the audience, bass drummers must face perpendicular to the rest of the band and so are the only section in most groups whose bodies do not face the audience while playing. Consequently, bass drummers usually point their drums at the back of the bass drummer in front of them, so that the drum heads will all be lined up, from the audience's point of view, next to one another in order to produce optimal sound output.\nPlaying.\nSince the bass drum is oriented differently from a snare or tenor drum, the stroke itself is different, but the fundamentals remain the same. The player's forearms should be parallel to the ground and bent at the elbows. The line between their shoulder and elbow should be vertical and the mallet should be held upward at a 45-degree angle. The hands hold bass mallets in such a way as to place the center of the mallet in the center of the head. The mallet shaft bottom should be flush against the bottom part of the hand when playing, differing from other grips typical to percussion instruments.\nThe motion of the basic stroke is either similar to the motion of turning a doorknob, that is, an absolute forearm rotation, or similar to that of a snare drummer, where the wrist is the primary actor, or more commonly, a hybrid of these two strokes. Bass drum technique sees huge variation between different groups both in the ratio of forearm rotation to wrist turn and the differing views on how the hand works while playing. Some techniques also call for the use of fingers supporting the motion of the mallet by opening or closing, but no matter whether it is open or closed the thumb needs to be close to the rest of the fingers.\nHowever, the basic stroke on a drum produces just one of the many sounds a bass line can produce. Along with the solo drum, the \"unison\" is one of the most common sounds used. It is produced when all of the bass drums play a note at the same time and with a balanced sound; this option has a very full, powerful sound. The rim click, which is when the shaft (near the mallet head) is struck against the rim of the drum, either solo or in unison. Rimshots are rare on a bass drum and usually only happen on the top drums.\nThe different positions of the typical five person bass line each require different skills, though not necessarily different levels of skills. Contrary to the popular belief that \"higher is better,\" each drum has its own critical role to play. Bottom, or fifth bass, is the largest, heaviest, and lowest drum in the drumline. Consequently, it is used frequently to help maintain pulse in an ensemble and is thus sometimes referred to as the \"heartbeat\" of the group (the bottom bass was also often referred to as the \"thud\" bass in days gone by, indicating that many of their notes were the last one at the end of a phrase). Although this player does not always play as many notes as fast as other bass drummers (the depth of pitch renders most complex passages indistinguishable from a roll), his or her role is essential not only to the sound of the bass line or the drum line, but to the ensemble as a whole, especially in the case of parade bands.\nThe fourth bass is slightly smaller than the bottom drum (generally smaller in diameter) and can function tonally similar to its lower counterpart, but usually plays slightly more rapid parts and is much more likely to play \"off the beat\" - in the middle rather than at the beginning or end of a passage. The third bass is the middle drum, both in terms of position and tone. Its function is usually that of the archetypical bass drum. This player plays an integral role in the actual rendering of complex linear passages. The second bass is known for having a job in the drumline. This player's parts are very likely to be directly adjacent to the beginning or end of a phrase and less likely to be on a beat, which is highly counter-intuitive, especially to a new player. Sometimes this drum can function about the same as the top drum, but usually the second and top drummer function as a unit, playing rudimentarily difficult passages split between them.\nTop, or first, bass is the highest pitched drum in the bass line and usually starts or ends phrases. The high tension drum heads allow this player to play notes that are just as taxing as those of the snare line, and often the top bass will play a part in unison with the snare line to add some depth to their sound. Some bass lines have more than five bass drums, with the largest being the largest number (bass 7 on a 7 bass line), and the smallest being referred to as first bass.\nMarching.\nIn a marching band's field show, bass drummers typically face either goal line. It can be difficult to see the drum major and other players on the field when facing away from the center. For this reason, the players may turn to face the opposite direction during a show. Turns are typically done in unison or rippled for a different effect. \nWith large bass drums, more strength and control is required to turn quickly. Achieving a clean turn requires the player to use large core muscles to stop momentum of the drum at the correct time and direction.\nIn some marching bands, the bass drum is used to give orders to the band. For example,\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "42280", "revid": "1046972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42280", "title": "Crash cymbal", "text": "Unpitched percussion instrument\nA crash cymbal is a type of cymbal that produces a loud, sharp \"crash\" and is used mainly for occasional accents, as opposed to a ride cymbal. It can be mounted on a stand and played with a drum stick, or by hand in pairs. One or two crash cymbals are a standard part of a drum kit. Suspended crash cymbals are also used in bands and orchestras, either played with a drumstick or rolled with a pair of mallets to produce a slower, swelling crash. Sometimes a drummer may hit two different crash cymbals in a kit at the same time to produce a very loud accent, usually in rock music.\nAlthough crash cymbals range in thickness from paper-thin to very heavy, all crash cymbals have a fairly thin edge. They are typically in diameter, but sizes down to and up to are manufactured. Custom crash cymbals up to in diameter have been used by big bands. Different thicknesses are used for different kinds of music, and the alloy for each manufacturer's models varies. A thick cymbal is likely to be used by a metal or rock band, while thinner cymbals are generally used in lighter rock. Darker crashes are best used for jazz. \nThe sound of a crash is changed by its luster. A cleaner cymbal creates a crisper sound, whereas a cymbal showing signs of oxidation (called a 'raw' cymbal) creates a duller sound.\nPosition.\nCrash cymbals were traditionally placed on the left side of the drum set (for a right-handed drummer) since the normally larger ride cymbal is usually on the right, however some drummers set up their crash on the right. Often a drummer will have multiple crashes, and so may set them up with one or two on each side or, less commonly, one mounted very closely above another, usually larger crash or ride.\nCracking.\nCrash cymbals are often the first ones in a drum set to warp and ultimately crack, due to repeated striking of the edge. Cracking is generally in the form of a fracture along the edge, or across the bow, often originating from the edge. Cracks are caused by poor technique or excessive playing or more rarely as a result of a defect originating from manufacture or damage to the cymbal not caused by playing, for example dropping. If a crack is left untreated, it will begin to follow the lathe grooves around the cymbal and could potentially spread all the way around and back to the point where it started, causing the outer portion of a cymbal to simply drop off. Often, lower quality sheet cymbals are more likely to crack, due to stress caused in some areas by pressing sheet metal. Thicker cymbals are also more likely to crack due to their brittleness and less freedom to vibrate. Cymbal manufacturers suggest that wear on the cymbal can be reduced by playing with glancing blows, angled to the side and slightly away from the vertical, about a quarter of the way between the edge and the center and allowing the drum stick to bounce off naturally, rather than forcing the stick down at the cymbal head-on. This allows the cymbal to vibrate freely and for little stress to be caused on the edge or at the center hole, thus reducing the chance of a crack. Cracked cymbals are often fixed either temporarily or permanently by drilling a hole at either end of the crack (often the crack will spread further than it appears to the naked eye, so this method is often not as effective) or removing the cracked portion or cutting the cymbal's edge down, although this method can drastically alter a cymbal's sound. Both of these methods are often ineffective at stopping cracks, but usually slow the spread of a crack down.\nOrchestral crash cymbals.\nA matching pair of crash cymbals played by striking the two together are known as clash cymbals. Clash cymbals are part of a standard orchestral percussion section. Two tones are normally used by major orchestras, known as \"Germanic\" or \"Wagnerian\" (heavier) and \"Viennese\" (lighter); a third, rarer tone is known as \"French\" (lighter still). Crash cymbals are also used in marching bands and wind ensembles.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42281", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42281", "title": "Inter mirifica", "text": "One of the Second Vatican Council's magisterial documents\nInter mirifica (lit.\u2009'Among the wonderful' in Latin), subtitled \"Decree on the Media of Social Communication\", is one of the Second Vatican Council's 16 magisterial documents. The decree aims to address the concerns, problems, and potential of social communication.\nThe final text was approved on 24 November 1963 by a vote of 1598 to 503, at the end of the Council's second session. It was promulgated by Pope Paul VI on 4 December 1963, after another vote, this time with 1960 in favour and 164 opposed.\n\"Inter mirifica\" identifies social communication as the press, cinema, television, and other similar types of communication.\nHistorical background.\nWhile \"Inter mirifica\" was one of the first decrees to reach a conclusion during Vatican II, the document itself went through many drafts, throughout its development. Over 70 drafts of \"Inter mirifica\" were prepared, yet out of all of these drafts, only nine were ready for final approval from the Vatican Council. The first draft \"Schema of a constitution on the Means of Social Communications\", combined with the other six, were made into one volume by July 1962. This draft document consisted of an Introduction (nos 1\u20135), doctrines of the Church (6-33), the Apostolate of the Church in the field (34-48), the discipline and the ecclesiastical order (49-63), the different means of social communication (64-105), other means of Social Communication (106-111) and a conclusion (112-114). Although the discussion on \"Inter mirifica\" lasted for a short period (November 23\u201327, 1962), the document underwent a drastic change. The final draft, reduced to a quarter of its original length, which contains an introductory section, two short chapters and a conclusion.\nThemes of \"Inter mirifica\".\nThe \"mirifica\" of the Latin title is more fully expressed in the opening words of the document as \"the wonderful technological discoveries which men of talent, especially in the present era, have made with God's help\". For the purposes of this document, \"the press, movies, radio, television and the like\" are singled out as a human achievement which, if properly used, can be laid at the service of mankind.\nIts themes include:\nSummary.\nChapter II: On the Pastoral Activity of the Church (#13\u201322).\nChapter II of \"Inter mirifica\" is concerned with how the church can use the media to support its apostolic or pastoral activities. A note of urgency is mentioned, along with a concern about the potential for \"harmful developments\". Pastors and lay people with media roles and skills have particular responsibilities.\nThere is a strong sense of the responsibility and leadership that the Council expected all Church authorities to demonstrate. In doing so, all members of the Church were called to ensure a positive message of the Church in media, as well as a way for authorities to remove any harmful projects as well. These responsibilities include the establishment and promotion of \"a truly Catholic press\", and the importance of suitable training in media skills for priests, religious and lay people. The document also refers to:\nThe overall relationship between the Catholic Church and the media, to the Vatican Council, is a way to help with the advancement of man's being and their religious journey. Therefore, through the use of media, all individuals are able to learn about the teachings of the Catholic Church and move towards truth and goodness.\nConclusions (#23\u201324).\nThe Council states in its conclusion (\"Conclusione\" in the Italian version, translated as \"Appendices\" in the English translation) that it looks forward to a relationship between Catholic authorities and \"all men of goodwill, especially those who have charge of these media\", which will result in the use of the media \"solely [for] the good of society\". The Secretariat for the Supervision of Publications and Entertainment, with its future wider brief, was then invited to issue a further pastoral instruction covering the issues raised in the decree.\nSignificance.\nCardinal Francis Arinze writes that the significance of \"Inter mirifica\" lay less in its contents than in the fact that this was the first time an ecumenical council of the church had \"addressed the topic of communications and gave a mandate to clergy and laity on the use of the communications media\".\nEffects and aftermath of \"Inter mirifica\".\nThe document's immediate reception was fairly negative. The document was heavily criticized for falling short of expectations, as well as failing to provide any new or different thoughts or instructions on social communications. At the close of the council, in a brief assessment of the documents it had produced, the \"New York Times\" said this text had been \"generally condemned as inadequate and too conservative\". These sentiments have been the long-standing memories of the document, with these sentiments continuing 40 years following the decree.\nHowever, the document did provide the beginning stages for further Church instructions on social communications, with the further documents of \"Communio et Progressio\" and \"Aetatis Novae\", and from the document emerged the World Communication Day (in full: World Social Communications Day), which was envisaged by the Council as \"a day on which the faithful are instructed in their responsibilities\" regarding the media. Pope Paul VI held the first World Communication Day on 7 May 1967, recalling the Council's desire \"to draw the attention of her children and of all men of good will to the vast and complex phenomenon of the modem means of social communication, such as the press, motion pictures, radio and television, which form one of the most characteristic notes of modern civilization\". Pope John Paul II vigorously promoted responsibility and positive goals in social communications, not only in person but also through messages given on this day, and through supporting the Pontifical Council for Social Communications. The 59th World Social Communications Day took place in May 2025.\nThe term \"social communications\", apart from its more general use, has become the preferred term within documents of the Catholic Church for reference to media or mass media. It has the advantage, as a term, of wider connotation - all communication is social but not all communication is \"mass\". In effect, though, the two terms are used synonymously.\nLater documents.\nIn the church's follow-up and expansion of \"Inter mirifica\", the document \"Communio et progressio\" was published \"by order of the Second Vatican Council\" in 1971. A further document, \"Aetatis Novae\", was published in 1992. In 2005, John Paul II wrote his final apostolic letter, \"The Rapid Development\", on the topic of social communications.\nIn his message \"The Priest and Pastoral Ministry in a Digital World: New Media at the Service of the Word\" to priests for the 44th World Communications Day (16 May 2010), Pope Benedict XVI called for them to become digital citizens and engage with the information society, saying, \"Priests stand at the threshold of a new era: as new technologies create deeper forms of relationship across greater distances, they are called to respond pastorally by putting the media ever more effectively at the service of the Word... Who better than a priest, as a man of God, can develop and put into practice, by his competence in current digital technology, a pastoral outreach capable of making God concretely present in today's world and presenting the religious wisdom of the past as a treasure which can inspire our efforts to live in the present with dignity while building a better future?\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42282", "revid": "49473253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42282", "title": "Dignitatis humanae", "text": "Catholic Declaration on Religious Freedom\nDignitatis humanae (\"Of the Dignity of the Human Person\") is the Second Vatican Council's Declaration on Religious Freedom. In the context of the council's stated intention \"to develop the doctrine of recent popes on the inviolable rights of the human person and the constitutional order of society\", \"Dignitatis humanae\" spells out the church's support for the protection of religious liberty. It set the ground rules by which the church would relate to secular states.\nThe passage of this measure by a vote of 2,308 to 70 is considered by many to be one of the most significant events of the council. This declaration was promulgated by Pope Paul VI on December 7, 1965.\n\"Dignitatis humanae\" became one of the key points of dispute between the Vatican and traditionalist Catholics such as Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre who argued that the council document was incompatible with previous authoritatively stated Catholic teaching.\nBackground.\nEarlier Catholic view.\nHistorically, the ideal of Catholic political organization was a tightly interwoven structure of the Catholic Church and secular rulers generally known as Christendom, with the Catholic Church having a favoured place in the political structure. In 1520, Pope Leo X in the papal bull \"Exsurge Domine\" had censured the proposition \"That heretics be burned is against the will of the Spirit\" as one of a number of errors that were \"either heretical, scandalous, false, offensive to pious ears, or seductive of simple minds and against Catholic truth\".\nHowever, during the same period, the Catholic Church condemned the Regalist, Gallican and Caesaropapist heresies that aspired to a State, under the pretext of its Confessionality, with inherent rights to intervene in religious matters (such as the Conversion of people or the repression of Heresy) that were typically a protest of the ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. So, the Church rather defended the Augustinian and Thomist doctrine which stated that, only by concession of the Spiritual Power of the Papacy (considered of a higher order according to the Doctrine of the two swords), is that a Christian Government could use its Temporal Power in such matters, so that the civil Authority then could represses heresy or apostasy (if and only there was a just cause, something that only the Papacy could determine), but teaching as magisterial doctrine that it was not an inherent right of the State to be an institution with religious faculties, and therefore, the Church strongly condemned the Christian rulers who, during the European Wars of Religion, abused such concessions of the Church with the Patronato (or usurped the powers of the Catholic ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as in the case of countries that embraced the Protestant Reformation and founded national Churches controlled by the State, such as the Anglican Church whose head was the King of England) in order to violate the rights of people who were not attached to the true Church, who according to the Holy See should be treated with compassion and called to correct themselves so that they return to Orthodoxy (not be brutally repressed without respect for a Presumption of innocence) while also condemning rulers who wanted to repress or ignore the rights of non-Christians, such as Muslims or Jews, who were not under the jurisdiction of Christians because they were in a different religious communion, and therefore even outside the jurisdiction of the Inquisition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The punishment of crimes belongs to civil magistrates only insofar as those crimes are contrary to political ends, public peace, and human justice; but coercion with respect to those acts that are opposed to religion and the salvation of the soul is essentially a function of the spiritual power [the power of the Church], so that the authority to make use of temporal penalties for the purposes of such correction must have been assigned in particular to this spiritual power.\u2014\u200a\nIn short, the Church reserved for the Clergy the right to judge the religious conscience of souls to determine who was a Heretic and how to deal with them judicially (reserving the most severe penalties for repeat heretics or those who admitted to being apostates publicly), while the State did not have such Prerogatives by themselves, but by the grace of the true Church of Christ (the Holy See), which also did not consider it morally acceptable to interfere with the conscience of non-Christians that lacked of Baptism, these having to be respected in their condition as natural non-Christians (according to Jus gentium and Natural law) and to have the freedom to profess their religion among their communities (such as the Ghettos) as long as they do not proselytize what the Church understands as false religions whose expansion would endanger Salvation in Christianity (the Church then leaning towards defending Catholic Unity, which involved religious Uniformism at a political level, and so Catholic political supremacy in societies with a Catholic majority).\nLate modern pre-Conciliar teaching.\nFollowing the French Revolution, the Papacy had found itself in a bitter clash against liberalism and revolutionary ideas: harsh anti-clerical measures such as the Civil Constitution of the Clergy had drawn harsh condemnation from the Holy See. The Magisterium was particularly concerned with the rise of indifferentism and relativism and the ideas of religious pluralism and freedom of conscience were seen as expression of both and were strongly rejected by several Pontiffs. Thus, the Catholic Church condemned religious freedom (as how was defined the concept by Liberal philosophy) as a heresy during the Papacy of Pius IX with the encyclical Quanta cura, and this condemnation was reaffirmed with the Syllabus of Errors (a compendium of heretical propositions condemned by the Magisterium of the Church). Both condemnations were a continuation of a long series of reactionary condemnations against the Modernist Heresy and Liberal Theology that had arisen since the end of the 18th Century, in which was relevant the opposition of the Church to the \"philosophical innovations\" of the Enlightenment (as well as to the secular States that emerged from the Atlantic Revolutions) under the argument that political Liberalism, through the right to Freedom of worship, encouraged religious Indifference and forced Secularization that violated the political duties of Catholic societies to defend religious practice and Christian values in the public sphere (reducing religious life to a purely private matter, which was considered to endanger Salvation in Christianity and would only lead to Dechristianization through an increase in non-practicing Catholics), as well as for violating the socio-political rights of the Church in the face of the Anticlerical policies of the Secularists (who also sought to promote religious Minorities and the expansion of Irreligious population, as well as trying to convince the civil power to intervene against the ecclesiastical jurisdiction to increase the power of the state and seize church properties). \nIn this context of hostility between Catholics and Liberals in politics due to irreconcilable differences about Philosophy of Law, the Church would strongly condemn the right to Religious Freedom, but only as was formulated by liberal ideologues such concept (being open a possible aceptance in the future under different definitions), which was understood under the heretical proposition that \"all religions (or all Christian confessions) are equally true and valid\" on which liberal jurists based their definition of Religious Freedom. However, this never implied that the Church sought to deny the rights of people who were by birth non-Catholic people (because in the eyes of Natural Law and Ius gentium, they had a right to accept or reject Catholic Doctrine according to the good faith of their hearts), only to affirm that, as a consequence of the Catholic Faith being considered the only true religion, the rest of the religious positions by Logic couldn't have the same rights as the Catholic faith in the political order (if and only if the political society confessed the Catholic faith, so that being ruled by a Catholic ruler), arguing that error has no rights, and so the Church sought to call on Catholic Rulers (in a historical context where most governments still were confessional States) to not alter those historical relations of Catholic supremacy in the political sphere, because for the Holy See, Rulers with a sincere Catholic faith had a duty to condemn the Separation of Church and State (as understood by liberals) as a heresy, and not be badly influenced by liberal preaching arguing that the abolition of the privileges of the Catholic Church was necessary to achieve \"public peace\" (that there would be no political division in the state if the political differences between confessionalities were no longer recognized, aspiring to equalize them all before the law). Leo XIII, Pius XI and Pius XII, while reiterating traditional Catholic teaching, had also argued that \"every man in the State may follow the will of God and, from a consciousness of duty and free from every obstacle, obey His commands\" and that \"laws which impede this profession and practice of Faith are against natural law\". John XXIII had made a distinction between \"error as such\" and the person in error, who preserves his dignity.\nVatican II and religious freedom.\nThird session (1964).\nThe debate on a separate Declaration on Religious Liberty was held on September 23\u00a0\u2013 September 25, as promised by Pope Paul the year before. However, in October an attempt was made by the Curial party to return this declaration to review by a special commission, which contained many hostile members and was outside the jurisdiction of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity. Protest by bishops to Pope Paul resulted in the declaration staying under Unity with a different working commission which reviewed and amended it. \nFourth session (1965).\nThis re-revised text was approved by the council on October 25, with only minor amendments allowed afterward (including some disliked by Murray). The final vote was taken and the declaration was promulgated at the end of council on December 7, 1965. The claim by some that this overwhelming majority was due to intense lobbying by the reformist wing of Council Fathers among those prelates who initially had reservations or even objections.\nTraditionalist Catholic reception.\nSociety of Saint Pius X.\nThe Society of Saint Pius X (SSPX) rejects in particular point 2 of the \"Dignitatis Humanae\" (taken up again in no. 2108 of the Catechism of the Catholic Church) which states: \"The right to religious liberty is neither a moral license to adhere to error, nor a supposed right to error, but rather a natural right of the human person to civil liberty, i.e., immunity, within just limits, from external constraint in religious matters by political authorities. This natural right ought to be acknowledged in the juridical order of society in such a way that it constitutes a civil right.\"\nThe SSPX's claims its doctrine comes from the teachings of Pius XII and Leo XIII. They claim that Pope Pius IX, in his encyclical \"Quanta cura\" (1864), while admitting the tolerance of error on the part of public authorities, stated that the right to freedom of public expression and dissemination could not be recognized for those religions that did not serve the truth, such as the Catholic religion. They also state that Leo XIII, in his encyclical \"Libertas\", explained that a false religion has no right to spread.\"\"\nArchbishop Marcel Lefebvre cited \"Libertas\" as one of the fundamental reasons for his difficulties with the Second Vatican Council. It remains a focus for attacks from Traditionalists in the 21st century.\nThe Society of St. Pius X criticized how \"Dignitatis humanae\" approached religious freedom with an argument from history: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The saints have never hesitated to break idols, destroy their temples, or legislate against pagan or heretical practices. The Church\u00a0\u2013 without ever forcing anyone to believe or be baptized\u00a0\u2013 has always recognized its right and duty to protect the faith of her children and to impede, whenever possible, the public exercise and propagation of false cults. To accept the teaching of Vatican II is to grant that, for two millennia, the popes, saints, Fathers and Doctors of the Church, bishops, and Catholic kings have constantly violated the natural rights of men without anyone in the Church noticing. Such a thesis is as absurd as it is impious.The Vatican's position that the SSPX must acknowledge \"Dignitatis humanae\" and \"Nostra aetate\" as authoritative remained as of April\u00a02017[ [update]] a key point of difference between the two.\nInterpretation in continuity.\nThe interpretation of the document, according to the Hermeneutics of Continuity, is that the Second Vatican Council's defense of religious freedom, along with other concepts commonly associated with the Charter of Human Rights (the latter developed according to liberal ideologies condemned by the Magisterium of the Church), is a defense that \"is always given as long as they are subordinated to natural law and the common good\", not understanding them as subjective rights that allow a false right to believe in error (maintaining the condemnations in \"Quanta cura\" and the \"Syllabus\" against Indifferentism as well as the social teaching for Catholic Rulers to protect Political catholicism), but as objective rights where there are duties of every State to protect the rights of the human person to believe in the true religion.\nThus, it is inferred that \"Dignitates Humanae\" considers implicit that a Christian State has commitments to safeguard the salvation of souls (aspiring to Catholic unity) and to avoid apostasies or the spread of heresy. Therefore, its emphasis of the document (already assuming the above \"a priori\" in the Tradition of the Church) aims to make explicit that a secular Government, to be legitimate in view of the eternal law and the natural order (even if it were a non-Christian State), should allow the right for all human person to be able to search for the true religion, instead of imposing Secularism or State Atheism on the one hand, as well as imposing Forced Conversions or a Sacerdotal State on the other hand.\nOn the contradictions some see between \"Dignitatis humanae\" and Pope Pius IX's \"Syllabus of Errors\", the SSPX has argued that:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the religious freedom condemned in the \"Syllabus of Errors\" refers to religious freedom looked at from the point of view of the action of the intellect, or freedom respecting the truth; whereas the freedom of religion guaranteed and encouraged by \"Dignitatis humanae\" refers to religious freedom looked at from the point of view of the action of the will in morals. In other words, those who see in these different expressions a change in teaching are committing the fallacy of univocity of terms in logic. The terms \"freedom\" refer to two very different acts of the soul.\nInternational Theological Commission, 2019.\nOn 21 March 2019, Pope Francis approved the publication of a document produced by the International Theological Commission called \"Religious freedom for the good of all: Theological approach to contemporary challenges\". It attempts to update \"Dignitatis humanae\" in the light of the increasing diversity and secularization seen since the Council: \"the cultural complexity of today's civil order\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42283", "revid": "13127810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42283", "title": "Nostra aetate", "text": "1965 Catholic Church document on relations with non-Christian religions\n (from Latin: \"In our time\"), or the Declaration on the Relation of the Church with Non-Christian Religions, is an official declaration of the Second Vatican Council, an ecumenical council of the Catholic Church. It was promulgated on 28 October 1965 by Pope Paul VI. Its name comes from its incipit, the first few words of its opening sentence, as is tradition. It passed the Council by a vote of 2,221 to 88 of the assembled bishops.\nIt is not a dogmatic document. The shortest of the 16 final documents of the Council, it is \"the first in Catholic history to focus on the relationship that Catholics have with Jews.\" Similarly, is considered a monumental declaration in describing the Church's relationship with Muslims. It \"reveres the work of God in all the major faith traditions.\" It begins by stating its purpose of reflecting on what humankind has in common in these times when people are being drawn closer together. The preparation of the document was largely under the direction of Cardinal Augustin Bea as President of the Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity, along with his \"periti\" (advisors), such as John M. Oesterreicher, Gregory Baum and Bruno Hussar.\nFollowing an approach by Jules Isaac, a French-born Jew who was associated with the Seelisberg Conference of the International Council of Christians and Jews, in which he claimed that Christian antisemitism had prepared the way for the Holocaust, a sympathetic Pope John XXIII endorsed the creation of a document which would address a new, less adversarial approach to the relationship between the Catholic Church and Rabbinic Judaism. Within the Church, conservative Cardinals were suspicious and Middle Eastern Catholics strongly opposed the creation of such a document. With the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict in full swing, the governments of the Arab world such as Egypt (in particular), Lebanon, Syria, and Iraq vocally lobbied against its development (the document was subjected to several leaks during its development due to the involvement of the intelligence agencies of several nations). Jewish organisations such as the American Jewish Committee, B'nai B'rith, and the World Jewish Congress also lobbied for their side with the assistance of liberal clergymen.&lt;section end=Modern criticism of the Catholic Church transclusion/&gt; After going through numerous drafts, compromises were made and a statement was added on Islam to mollify the security concerns of the Arab Christians. Finally, statements on Eastern religions, Buddhism and Hinduism were also added.\nHistory of the document.\nBefore his death in 1963, Pope John XXIII wrote a statement which he intended to be read aloud in all Roman Catholic Churches of the world on a fixed date:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are conscious today that many many centuries of blindness have cloaked our eyes so that we can no longer either see the beauty of Thy Chosen People nor recognize in their faces the features of our privileged brethren. We realize that the mark of Cain stands upon our foreheads. Across the centuries our brother Abel has lain in the blood which we drew or shed the tears we caused by forgetting Thy Love. Forgive us for the curse we falsely attached to their name as Jews. Forgive us for crucifying Thee a second time in their flesh. For we knew not what we did\nOriginally, \"Nostra aetate\" was only supposed to focus on the relationship between the Catholic church and Judaism. There were five different drafts of the document before a final version was accepted. Some bishops and cardinals objected, including Middle Eastern bishops who were unsympathetic to the new state of Israel. Cardinal Bea decided to create a less contentious document which would stress ecumenism between the Catholic Church and all non-Christian faiths. While coverage of Hinduism and Buddhism is brief, two of the document's five sections are devoted to Islam and Judaism.\nBefore the Council: \"Decretum de Iudaeis\", 1960\u20131962.\nThe specific origins of \"Nostra aetate\" can be traced directly to a meeting between Pope John XXIII and Jewish-French historian Jules Isaac on 13 June 1960. Isaac wanted a document at the Second Vatican Council, in light of the Holocaust, to specifically address the relationship between the Catholic Church and Judaism. In his meeting with Roncalli, Isaac used diplomatic language, pointing to the Fourth Chapter of the Catechism of the Council of Trent, in which Jews are mentioned in combination with the Romans as \"advisors and perpetrators of the passion\" and that the Catechism lays ultimate responsibility for the death of Jesus Christ, not just upon the Jews, but upon humanity's original sin and the \"vices and crimes which people have committed from the beginning of the world to the present day and will go on committing until the end of time.\" Thus, Isaac, argued, even within the context of Catholic doctrine, it would be possible for the Holy See to make a statement distancing the Church from preaching the concept of Jewish deicide (to which Isaac attributed a significant bulk of what he called \"Christian anti-semitism\"). Roncalli, more so than his predecessors, was favourably disposed to such a suggestion; previously as the Archbishop Apostolic Delegate to Turkey, he had had a long relationship with Jewish communities and since being raised to the Papacy in 1958, had ushered in a period of \"openness to the world\" (what was called \"giovanissimo\"). Roncalli had already removed from the Good Friday prayer for the Jews the term \"perfidious\" (meaning faithless) in 1959.\nIsaac, a French-born Jew, had a long history of activism in regard to Jewish ethno-religious concerns, tracing back to the Dreyfus affair when he was a teenager. Leading up to the Second World War, he had been part of the left-wing group \"CVIA\" and after the war he had founded, along with , Edmond Fleg and other French-born Jews, the \"\" on 26 February 1948. This was following on from the Seelisberg Conference of the International Council of Christians and Jews (originally an American-British initiative) a year earlier at which Isaac had been a key speaker. Through several works, \"Jesus and Israel\" (1946), the \"Genesis of Anti-Semitism\" (1948) and \"The Teaching of Contempt\" (1962)\u2014the latter published at the start of Vatican II\u2014Isaac had laid out his central thesis that, the \"most dangerous form of anti-semitism is Christian anti-semitism\", which he treats not as a peripheral anomaly, but inherent in its origins, from the Passion as described by the Four Evangelists in the Gospels, through the Church Fathers to the present day. Isaac's solution to this was that Christianity must \"amend\" its beliefs, expunge from its doctrines any \"teachings of contempt\" which present Rabbinic Judaism as rejected or inferior and adopt a new relationship with Jews. The Vicomte L\u00e9on de Poncins, a French aristocrat and contemporary Catholic critic of Isaac, held the view that Issac's presentation was bias, due to its absence of any recognition of anti-Christian teachings within Rabbinic Judaism and addressing historic controversies (i.e., Jesus in the Talmud, the Marranos and accusations of Jewish involvement in anti-Christian revolutionary movements) and that Isaac's theories merely aimed to heap calumny upon the Catholic Church, accusing it of injustice.\nJohn XXIII had created the Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity (SECU), a few days before his meeting with Isaac on 5 June 1960. This organisation was to be headed up by Cardinal Augustin Bea, a veteran German Jesuit cleric, with Bishop Johannes Willebrands, a Dutch clergyman, appointed as his Secretary. The body was developed to address the relationship between the Catholic Church and other separate groups who identified as Christians. Many of the \"periti\" appointed to the Secretariat had been part of the ecumenical movement and thus tended to be supportive of a broad and liberal interpretation of its objectives. With the first plenary meeting of the SECU in November 1960, a second official mandate was put under their aegis: a view on Catholic\u2013Jewish relations. Bea sought outside opinion from Jewish figureheads for \"Dei Judaeis\" and was advised to approach Nahum Goldmann, president of the World Jewish Congress. The two men met in Autumn 1960: Goldmann explained to Bea that while the WJC were open to the idea, many proponents of Orthodox Judaism would be resistant to any collaboration. Some of the Orthodox Rabbis, while opposed to Christianity for theological reasons anyway, also feared that they too may be pressured into changing exclusivistic doctrines essential to their own religion, such as their claim to being the \"chosen people\" and thus preferred not to get involved. Similarly, within the Catholic Church itself, conservative elements in the Curia and the Doctrinal Commission (with figures such as Cardinal Alfredo Ottaviani and Fr. Sebastian Tromp) were opposed to the works of the SECU, due to what they viewed as the threat to Catholic doctrine by religious indifferentism.\nIf predominantly Latin Catholic conservatives within the Roman Curia were opposed to any document on the Jews for theological reasons, then the Arab world (whether Muslim or Christian) was concerned with it for immanently political reasons, relating to the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict. Egypt, then under the leadership of Gamal Abdel Nasser, particularly concerned itself with all Vatican documents on the Jews which were published since the time of Isaac's visit to Roncalli back in 1960. The \"Voice of the Arabs\", based in Cairo, ascribed this move to a \"Zionist plot to capitalize on the Vatican Council in order to further the oppression of the Palestinian refugees.\" The Lebanese Embassy and the Egyptian Embassy in Rome made their complaints known to the Vatican. In spite of this, Roncalli allowed the SECU under Bea to continue its work on a document on Jewish-Catholic relations. Bea openly met with Ralph Friedman and Zacariah Shuster of the American Jewish Committee at Rome in 1961, inviting them to submit a memorandum on anti-Jewish elements in Catholic textbooks and liturgy. The AJC responded to the SECU with two documents: \"The Image of the Jew in Catholic Teaching\" by Judith Banki and then \"Anti-Jewish Elements in Catholic Liturgy\", outlining the changes to Church teachings and practices that they wanted the planned Council to implement. As part of this, Bea also agreed to meet with Abraham Joshua Heschel of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America and Max Horkheimer of the Frankfurt School in November 1961 to discuss new Church approaches to the Jews.\nWith the Curial conservatives\u2014largely from Italy and Spain\u2014and the Arab Christians now on the backfoot, a different approach was presented; the security of Christians in the Middle East. It was put to Roncalli that nothing must be done that would compromise the position of the Catholic Church in the Middle East and that the Church has a pastoral responsibility to ensure above all that Christians in the Middle East could practice their faith unmolested (any kind of outreach to Jews likely being seen as a precursor to Holy See recognition of the State of Israel). Instead of a document just dealing with Judaism, a general statement on non-Christian religions should be prepared and in any case any Council should be delayed until at least 1965, they argued. Instead of agreeing to their demands, Roncalli doubled down on his project. He stated that a Council would be called in the following year and addressing Jewish-Catholic relations would be put to the Central Preparatory Commission. The \"Commentary Magazine\", an American Jewish publication, also claimed in an article published in 1965, that Roncalli intended to set up a permanent Secretariat for Jewish Relations after the council, the SECU itself would be permanent and that non-Christian advisers would be permitted to attend the council and be able to submit documents to it, despite not being members of the Catholic Church.\nWorking underneath Bea were four clerics; John M. Oesterreicher, Gregory Baum, Leo Rudloff and Georges Tavard. The German, Karl Thieme, who was not involved in the drafting, was a major influence on the intellectual reorientation of Oesterreicher due to the debates the two had. After meeting several times at Seton Hall University in New Jersey, the group drafted for Bea a study document \"Questions Concerning the Jews\" (\"Questiones de Iudaeis\"), which was drafted properly as the \"Decree on the Jews\" (\"Decretum de Iudaeis\"), with Oesterreicher's pen being most prominent. The document was completed in November 1961. External pressure on the Catholic Church to conform to the \"zeitgeist\" and make an explicit statement on Judaism was also heightened by a meeting in New Delhi in December 1961, where the World Council of Churches (a major ecumenical organisation controlled by Protestants) issued an explicit proclamation in which they stated \"the historic events which led to the Crucifixion should not be so presented as to fasten upon the Jewish people of today responsibilities which belong to our corporate humanity.\" The polemics intensified, as Egyptian media outlets such as \"Al Gomhuria\" argued that Bea's ancestral name was \"Behar\" and that he was of Jewish ancestry. The actually confirmed Jewish ancestry of converts who were involved in writing the document under Cardinal Bea; Oesterreicher and Baum; was also highlighted as proof of a supposed \"Zionist plot\".\nThe initial drafting of \"Decretum de Iudaeis\" by the SECU was completed in November 1961. The actual text of the document was four paragraphs long. Much of the first paragraph was uncontroversial to all factions, as it highlighted the continuity of the Catholic Church with the Patriarchs and Prophets of Israel before the coming of Jesus Christ and the nature of the Church as the spiritual continuation of ancient Israel's covenant with the god of Abraham (the only criticism conservative elements had of this was the relevance of Old Covenant Judaism to a document on relations with modern Talmud-centered Rabbinic Judaism). Much of the controversy over the actual text of \"Decretum de Iudaeis\", was based on innovationary interpretations of \"Romans 11\", which was used as justification for the line \"it would be an injustice to call this people accursed, since they are greatly beloved for the sake of the Fathers and the promises made to them.\" Contrary to \"Matthew 27\", which mentioned a blood curse, traditionally highlighted by many Church Fathers and Doctors of the Church. The text, also referencing \"Romans 11\", broached eschatological themes in regard to the eventual union of Jews with the Church. This new interpretation of \"Romans 11\" had been developed by Karl Thieme (a longtime correspondent of John M. Oesterreicher, one of the main SECU \"periti\" and drafters under Bea), a pioneer in Catholic-Jewish interfaith dialogue since the late 1930s and a contributor to Gertrud Luckner's \"\". According to John Connelly, author of \"From Enemy to Brother\" (2012), for the draft Oesterreicher directly borrowed from Thieme's vision for \"Romans 11\", which he had formulated for an ecumenical congress in Evanston in 1954 (Thieme had in turn being influenced by Karl Barth and Barth had allegedly drawn it from Moses Maimonides). In addition to this, a final, uncited paragraph in this version of the draft claimed that \"Whoever despises or persecutes this people does injury to the Catholic Church.\"\nIn June 1962, the World Jewish Congress, acting on its own initiative, appointed Dr. Chaim Wardi, an Israeli counsellor in the Israeli Ministry of Religious Affairs, as an \"unofficial Jewish observer\" at the council. The Israeli Foreign Ministry under Golda Meir publicly endorsed this. The issue became known as the \"Wardi affair\" and caused a political crisis for the Vatican under Roncalli, who had maintained that the document had no political implications and was about encouraging amicable religious relations. Within five days of Wardi's \"appointment\", Cardinal Amleto Giovanni Cicognani as Secretary of the Central Preparatory Commission removed the \"Decretum de Iudaeis\" schema from the agenda (as Cardinal Secretary of State, he was particularly sensitive to diplomatic issues), never to be presented in this form to the council as a whole. While the Jewish schema was off the agenda for the First Session of Vatican II, the issue was not put to rest, as liberals, starting with the actions of Cardinal Achille Li\u00e9nart made a strong early showing to direct the general course of the council. The possibility of a Jewish document still loomed large for its opponents. In October 1962, with the opening of the council, a document entitled \"Il Complotto contro la Chiesa\" (\"The Plot Against the Church\") under the \"pseudonym\" of Maurice Pinay was anonymously distributed to all attending. Allegedly funded by Egypt and elements in northern Italy, the specific authorship of the document has remained a mystery. The document was originally authored in Spanish and is potentially a collaborative work of Mexican origin; some Italian sources have attributed the spread of the document at the Council in part to Fr. Joaqu\u00edn S\u00e1enz y Arriaga, a Mexican priest and former Jesuit. It warned vigilance to the Council members, with the 800-page polemic claiming that since the times of Christ, for 1900 years, Judaism had worked to overthrow Christianity and the Catholic Church, claiming involvement of the \"Synagogue of Satan\" in every major heresy, as well as encouraging \"enemies\" such as Freemasonry and Communism.\nSecond Session of the Council, 1962\u20131963.\nSince his initial meetings with Bea in 1962, with many other meetings following, including significantly a meeting at the AJC's headquarters in New York on 31 March 1963; Rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel became the primary figure articulating the religious Jewish viewpoint to the Vatican on behalf of the American Jewish Committee during the Second Vatican Council. He had been brought into contact with Bea, through his student, the AJC's Rabbi Marc Tanenbaum. Associated with Conservative Judaism, Heschel also had a keen interest in Jewish mysticism. Unafraid to get involved in politics, Heschel had inserted himself into the American civil rights movement and protested against the Vietnam War. His memorandum on behalf of the American Jewish Committee, entitled \"On Improving Catholic\u2013Jewish Relations\", had a significant influence on proceedings of Bea's Secretariat. The meeting in New York had also been attended by Bea's Secretary Msgr. Johannes Willebrands and Fr. Felix Morlion, president of Rome's Pro Deo University. The evening following the AJC meeting, a lavish dinner was put on in honour of Bea at New York's Plaza Hotel. It included over 400 Jewish, Protestant and Catholic leaders. As well as Herschel and Bea, other major figures present included U Thant, the Secretary General of the United Nations and Muhammad Zafarullah Khan, President of the UN General Assembly, American Cardinals Richard Cushing and Francis Spellman and also Nelson Rockefeller as Governor of New York, amongst many others. According to Lazare Landau, writing in the \"Tribune Juive\", similar, but more discreet meetings took place in France between Fr. Yves Congar and the Jewish community at the \"Centre communautaire de le Paix\" in Strasbourg.\nThe main aims of Heschel and the Jewish side had been to encourage the alteration of the Catholic presentation of Jewish responsibility in regard to the trial and crucifixion of Jesus Christ (what is sometimes known as Jewish deicide). And in addition to this, the Jewish side wanted a stop to any efforts; whether peaceful or not; at converting Jews to Christianity. While Cardinal Bea was highly sympathetic, attempting to present this within a framework of Catholic doctrinal orthodoxy, which it would require to pass through the council was proving difficult to achieve, for a number of reasons. Specifically, the Gospel of Matthew mentions the blood curse and the Gospel of John many similar themes. In addition to this, the Magisterium of the Catholic Church traditionally affirmed \"Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus\" and that the covenant with God, since Jesus Christ was exclusively with the Christians and that the Catholic Church is the New Israel (superseding any ancestry-based Old Covenant; rendering Jewish rites null and void). These teachings had passed down through the Gospels, many Church Fathers, Doctors of the Church and Ecumenical Councils over numerous centuries. Nevertheless, Cardinal Bea, with the blessing of Roncalli intended to press forward at the Second Session with these proposed changes. It had been decided that, after the setback of the Wardi affair, the schema, now entitled \"On the Attitude of Catholics Toward Non-Christians and Especially Toward Jews\" would be incorporated as a fourth chapter under a document \"On Ecumenism\"; this while a minor setback, was still satisfactory to its proposers because the drafting of that document also fell under the control of Bea's Secretariat.\nIn 1963, a controversial play was released by the German writer Rolf Hochhuth called \"The Deputy\", which popularised a theme of insinuating Pope Pius XII's \"indifference\" to Nazi Germany's mass killing of Jews during World War II. The play, offensive to the sensibilities of Catholics, led to a rebuff by Pius XII's former advisor Giovanni Montini, Archbishop of Milan. In addition to this, Oesterreicher, writing in \"America\", addressing the AJC and B'nai B'rith directly, urged them to speak out against the play. Before the start of the Second Session, John XXIII died in June 1963, setting off the 1963 Papal conclave in the middle of the council. Several years after the death of John XXIII, a \"Prayer for the Jews\" was published in \"Commentary Magazine\" (associated with the AJC), attributed to Pope John XXIII, starting a rumor that Roncalli had intended it to be read out before his death but that it was stopped by the Church. The author, one \"F. E. Cartus\", claimed that the prayer included the lines \"We realize that the mark of Cain stands upon our foreheads. Across the centuries our brother Abel has lain in the blood we drew, or shed tears we caused by forgetting Your love\" and \"Forgive us the curse we falsely attached to their name as Jews. Forgive us for crucifying You a second time in the flesh.\" Journalist Joseph Roddy alleged\u2014in a 1966 \"Look Magazine\" article about the debate about Jews during the Second Vatican Council\u2014that this prayer was a fabrication by Malachi Martin, one of the \"periti\" who worked under Cardinal Bea, a Jesuit priest who was known to be critical of Catholic hierarchy, and published his critiques under a wide number of pseudonyms. Roddy pointed to two timely and remunerated 1965 articles that were penned under the pseudonym \"F. E. Cartus\", one for \"Harper's Magazine\" and one for the American Jewish Committee's magazine \"Commentary\".\nRoddy alleged that tidbits of information were leaked to the New York press that detailed Council failings vis a vis Jews under the pseudonym of \"Pushkin\". Roddy claimed two unidentified persons were one and the same person\u2014a \"young cleric-turned-journalist\" and a \"Jesuit of Irish descent working for Cardinal Bea ... who was active in the Biblical Institute\"\u2014he figuratively named as \"Timothy O'Boyle-Fitzharris, S.J.\" so as not to reveal the true identity of his source. In his 2007 book \"Spiritual Radical: Abraham Joshua Heschel in America\", Edward K. Kaplan confirmed that Martin cooperated with the American Jewish Committee during the Council \"for a mixture of motives, both lofty and ignoble. ... [He] primarily advised the committee on theological issues, but he also provided logistical intelligence and copies of restricted documents.\" It is confirmed in the book that Martin used the pseudonyms \"Forest\" and \"Pushkin\". Kaplan acknowledges that \"The Pilgrim\" by Michael Serafian, was requested from Martin by Abraham J. Heschel, who arranged for the book to be published by Roger W. Straus, Jr.'s Farrar, Straus and Giroux printing company. It was published in the hope that it would influence the deliberations in the council. Once Martin's identity as author was revealed, it led to protests \"and the book had to be removed from circulation at considerable financial loss to the publisher\". Kaplan lastly states that Martin was the primary source of information for Joseph Roddy in writing his 1966 article for \"Look Magazine\", and that \"O'Boyle-Fitzharris\" was, in fact, Martin. Kaplan judges the Roddy article as \"dangerously misleading [due] to the credence it gives to the claim that without organised Jewish pressure the council declaration on the Jews would not have been accepted.\"\nGiovanni Montini (who took the Papal name Paul VI) emerged from the 1963 conclave as a continuity John XXIII candidate for the council; the conservative elements in the Curia had backed Cardinal Ildebrando Antoniutti and the more radical liberal elements had proposed Cardinal Giacomo Lercaro, but settled on Montini on the suggestion of Cardinals Frings and Li\u00e9nart. Montini confirmed that Cardinal Bea's mandate on addressing Judaism had been renewed.\nThe Second Session of the council began in the autumn of 1963 and by 8 November 1963 when \"On Ecumenism\", including its fourth chapter \"On the Attitude of Catholics Toward Non-Christians and Especially Toward Jews\" and fifth chapter \"On Religious Liberty\" was distributed to the Council Fathers, the liberals were confident, having gained in other areas of the Second Session. Elements in the Roman Curia, concerned that the chapters included heresy, approached Paul VI in private with severe concerns, accusing the Collegialists of setting up Bea as a de facto \"Second Pope\". A document was also published, \"The Jews and the Council in the Light of Scripture and Tradition\", arguing that the chapters were heretical. In addition to this, Paul VI was due to visit the Holy Places in East Jerusalem (then held by the Kingdom of Jordan) on 4 January 1964, whereby he would be meeting with Orthodox Patriarch Athenagoras I of Constantinople, with the ecumenical goal of mending the schism between Catholicism and Orthodoxy. Members of the Curia thus argued that approving the controversial chapter on the Jews would jeopardize this effort and leave the 400,000 Orthodox Christians in the Arab world (including many Palestinian Christians) almost certain to oppose any sort of reunification with Rome. The first to third \"schemas\" should be put up to consideration and then at some later date (only two weeks of the Second Session remained) the fourth and fifth schemas should be looked at again. The stalling tactic worked and when the Second Session closed without the issue being voted on, Moderator, Cardinal Gregorio Pietro Agagianian was non-committal on a future review of the chapters.\nThird Session of the Council, 1963\u20131964.\nCardinal Cicognani's \"middle path\" revision.\nIn the United States, where Western political power was centralised in the 1960s and most of the American Bishops represented at the council were staunch supporters of a pro-Jewish statement and a declaration on religious liberty\u2014with the notable exception of Cardinal James Francis McIntyre\u2014there was anxiety about the way the Second Session had ended voiced at the National Catholic Welfare Council. During Paul VI's visit to East Jerusalem, he travelled briefly through what was the State of Israel but was bogged down defending the record of Pius XII in light of \"The Deputy\" and made a speech hoping for Jews to convert to Christianity. While there, Maximos V Hakim, the Archbishop of Jerusalem from the Melkite Greek Catholic Church passed the Pope a document purporting to show \"a slow but deliberate process of de-Christianization\" initiated by the Israeli government. The concern of the American Bishops about the fate of the document was shared by the two secular Jewish points-of-contact for the American Bishops and thus the Vatican; Zacariah Shuster of the AJC and Joseph L. Lichten of the Anti-Defamation League of B\u2019nai B\u2019rith (Frith Becker of the World Jewish Congress also kept an eye on the proceedings, but took a more backseat role after the embarrassment caused by the Wardi affair). On the contested deicide issue, Cardinals Joseph Ritter, Albert Gregory Meyer, Richard Cushing and Francis Spellman were particularly insistent on supporting the Jewish position, as were Archbishop Patrick O'Boyle and Bishop Stephen Aloysius Leven; they also had the support of the Catholic Media Association. Some hope had been restored after six AJC members, headed up by Rose Sperry, had an audience with Paul VI in Rome and he personally agreed with the sentiment of Cardinal Spellman on the deicide issue.\nA new draft document was prepared between January and September 1964. Paul VI had given the SECU orders to make mention of Islam and a general reference to non-Christian religions (in the hopes of alleviating the concerns of the Arab world; both the Eastern Catholics and the Arab governments). Also all reference to the much contested \"deicide\" issue would be removed due to the concerns the conservative faction had with it. This posed a problem for Cardinal Bea and his \"periti\", as, if he agreed to making the document a general one about non-Christian religions, then it could be very easily argued that its drafting should fall under the newly created Secretariat for Non-Christians under Cardinal Paolo Marella, a conservative opponent of Bea. And if the SECU refused to make changes, it would naturally go back to Cardinal Cicognani's Coordinating Committee (a Curialist, upholding the Pope's agenda). Eventually, Bea agreed to remove the term \"deicide\", but deferred to the Coordinating Committee on adding statements about other non-Christian religions. With the document now under the Coordinating Committee, some restructuring took place: discreetly avoiding letting the American Cardinals know the details, especially. The new version highlighted, like the very first draft, Christianity as heirs of the Prophets, Patriarchs and covenant of the Old Testament, it expressed hope that the Jews will eventually convert to the Catholic Church (and thus Catholic sermons and catechesis, should avoid denigrating Jews). It also stated that the Church, \"just as it severely disapproves of any wrong inflicted upon human beings everywhere, it also deplores and condemns hatred and maltreatment of Jews.\"\nA report was leaked to \"The New York Times\" on 12 June 1964 reporting that the deicide issue had been cut out of the document. Whole sections of the confidential document turned up in the \"New York Herald Tribune\". According to Edward Kaplan, the author of \"Spiritual Radical: Abraham Joshua Heschel in America, 1940\u20131972\", the AJC had secured a secret \u201cmole\u201d or \"double-agent\" within Bea's Secretariat, an eccentric Jesuit priest, Malachi Martin. As part of his activities, Martin leaked pieces of confidential information about the progress of draft documents to the AJC and the New York media (in particular \"The New York Times\", the \"New York Herald Tribune\" and \"Time Magazine\") under the name \u201cPushkin\u201d. Shuster referred to Martin in reports as \"Heschel's young friend\". In May 1964, an insider \u201ctell-all account\u201d about the council was published as \"The Pilgrim\", under the pseudonym of \"Michael Serafian\". This work was released by Malachi Martin, at the behest of Abraham Joshua Heschel, through Roger Straus\u2019 Farrar, Straus and Giroux publishing company. Disparaging to Christianity, it claimed \u201cno one conscious of what has made modern Europe can deny that the pyres and the crematoria, the mephitic smoke and stench of the extermination camps in Nazi Germany, were, if not the logical conclusion, at least one extremist consequence of the normal Christian attitude to the Jews.\u201d Around this time, Msgr George G. Higgins arranged an audience with Paul VI for Arthur Goldberg, the United States Ambassador to the United Nations. And then Cardinal Cushing arranged a meeting between Paul VI and Shuster, with Heschel also present. The Pope and Heschel clashed as the latter demanded the topics rejecting the deicide charge and blood guilt be reinserted and forbidding all Christian proselytising to Jews, to which Paul VI would not agree. Shuster somewhat embarrassed, spoke to Paul VI more diplomatically in French to cut Heschel out (as a secular man, Shuster was less concerned about the proselytising issue). Like Jules Isaac before him, Heschel invoked the Holocaust, in an article from September 1964 he wrote, \"I am ready to go to Auschwitz any time, if faced with the alternative of conversion or death.\"\nPaul VI made his position known on the general direction of the council, with his August 1964 encyclical \"Ecclesiam suam\", in which he tried to portray a cautious reformist position. He warned about relativism and even modernism, laying out a dialogue with the world which was still directed towards the ideal of conversion of non-Catholics, but on a practical level advocated cooperation for defending \"religious liberty, human brotherhood, good culture, social welfare, and civil order.\" For the first time, during the Third Session of the Second Vatican Council, the contents of the draft schema \"On the Jews and Non-Christians\", was actually discussed on the floor by Council Fathers from 28 September 1964 and lasted two days. The \"middle-ground\" approach of the Paul VI-Cicognani revision (with the word deicide removed and mention of Islam, Hinduism and Buddhism included), while trying to please all factions managed to alienate all sides in the process. Cardinal Ernesto Ruffini, Archbishop of Palermo representing the conservative faction, concerned with Catholic doctrinal integrity in rejecting the document, warned against \"Talmudic teachings\" and stated at the podium; \"It is clear that Christians love Jews, for such is the law of Christians, but Jews should be exhorted to cease hating us and regarding us as contemptible animals.\" As ever, Catholic leaders from the Arab world also spoke out against any document focusing exclusively on the Jews without any mention of the Muslims, including: Cardinal Patriarch Ignatius Gabriel I Tappouni of the Syriac Catholic Church, Patriarch Maximos IV Saigh and Bishop Joseph Tawil of the Melkite Greek Catholic Church and Archbishop Pietro Sfair of the Maronite Church. Sfair was instrumental during the drafting of the Second Vatican Council document Nostra Aetate to highlight the House of Mary (in Ephesus, Turkey) and Marian devotion as a matter of shared interest between Christians and Muslims. Archbishop P. Sfair of the Maronite Rite (Rome) considered the reference which the declaration \"De non christianis\" made to the Muslims'adoration of the one and remunerating God as insufficient. Mention should also be made of Mohammed's affirmation of the virginal conception and birth of Christ through Mary, the most exalted among women. The Archbishop recalled the respect with which the earliest Muslims treated the Christians and the Christian beliefs. He insisted that the declaration should give greater consideration to that which the Muslims believed, to the truths which they proposed for belief, than to their less essential cultural factors. \nThe combined liberalising factions; headed up by the Rhineland Alliance and the American Cardinals; held different approaches, with ultimately the same goal in mind. One group, consisting of Cardinals Joseph Ritter of St. Louis, Albert Gregory Meyer of Chicago, Franz K\u00f6nig of Vienna and Achille Li\u00e9nart of Lille (supported by Bishops Elchinger and M\u00e9ndez Arceo) took to the podium and spoke clearly against the \"watered down\" Paul VI-Cicognani revision and supported a full return to the previous draft authored by Cardinal Bea and the SECU, with the repudiation of the deicide theme against Jews of any generation clearly included. The other group, consisting of Cardinals Richard Cushing of Boston, Giacomo Lercaro of Bologna and Paul-\u00c9mile L\u00e9ger of Montreal (supported by Bishops , , Jaeger, Pocock and O'Boyle) proposed instead that the new draft should be accepted, to get its foot in the door, but amended to cover the deicide issue and an explicitly condemnation of what they called \"persecutions and injustices\" against Jews throughout the ages, to the present day. Two Americans, Bishop Leven and Archbishop O'Boyle, took the most radical position on the topic and proposed the document should repudiate any hope of Jewish conversion to Christianity, flirting with themes of universal salvation and dual-covenant theology respectively. Cardinal John Heenan, the English Archbishop of Westminster, also spoke in favour of the liberal faction on the issue at a press conference the following day. On the deicide question, he admitted that \u201cJesus Christ was condemned to death by the Sanhedrin,\u201d but \"the Jewish people as such cannot be held guilty for the death of Christ.\" He affirmed to \"do all [he] could to satisfy the desires of [his] Jewish friends.\" The document was sent back to the SECU for amendments on 29 September 1964 with over 70 suggestions.\nCardinal Felici's letters, return to the SECU.\nThe political backlash was immediate: Salah al-Din al-Bitar, the Ba'athist Prime Minister of Syria announced \"world Zionism and Israel are trying to mobilize Catholics against the Arabs\" and that the declaration \"cannot be considered to be a purely religious matter.\u201d Charles Helou, the President of Lebanon arranged for ten Bishops from the Levant and North Africa to telegram the Pope stating that the \"Gospels teach clearly the Jewish crime of deicide. In this matter of the Jewish declaration we see clearly the intrigues of Zionist politics.\" Similar statements were made by the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, at the insistence of the Egyptian government. The political implications of the document was discussed privately at the Cairo Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement in October 1964 between Syrian, Lebanese and Egyptian delegates. It was agreed that they would not make a public statement on the issue at the Conference but that Sukarno, President of Indonesia, would discuss it with Paul VI during his visit on 12 October 1964. At this meeting, Sukarno warned that all Vatican diplomatic missions in Arab countries might be closed if the document was adopted. At the same time that Sukarno was visiting Rome, a Palestinian delegation lodged a complaint with the Vatican about the document, seeing it as favouring Zionism by proxy, despite the assurances of the Vatican that it was not political in nature.\nIn the middle of this crisis, two letters had been received by Bea from Cardinal Pericle Felici, Secretary General of the council on 9 October 1964. It dealt with two key documents under the auspices of the SECU; \"On Religious Liberty\" and \"On the Jews and Non-Christians\". The letter stated that Paul VI wanted a completely new text to be drafted on religious liberty, with a more mixed commission involved in creating the draft; including the addition of Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre (Superior General of the Holy Ghost Fathers), Cardinal Michael Browne, Fr. Aniceto Fern\u00e1ndez Alonso (Master of the Order of Preachers) and Cardinal Giovanni Colombo. Of these men, the first three were unambiguously hostile to the document and the latter was a personal favourite of Paul VI. Meanwhile, the Jewish issue would not be addressed in a stand-alone document, but would become part of \"Schema 13\". This too would be rewritten by a more mixed commission including members drawn from Bea's Secretariat and Cardinal Alfredo Ottaviani's Doctrinal Commission. Cardinal Felici's two letters were \"leaked\" by Malachi Martin and became features in publications such as \"The New York Times\".\nThe liberals, drawn from the Rhineland Alliance and the American Cardinals, arranged a memorandum to be issued to the Pope to protest this in the strongest terms. A gathering took place at the residence of Cardinal Josef Frings of Cologne, where a number of other Cardinals added their voice to the petition. Supporters of the Frings motion explicitly named by the media included longtime interested parties Cardinals Ritter, Meyer, K\u00f6nig, Li\u00e9nart and Lercaro, along with Cardinals Ra\u00fal Silva Henr\u00edquez of Chile, Julius D\u00f6pfner of Munich, Joseph-Charles Lef\u00e8bvre of Bourges, Bernardus Johannes Alfrink of Utrecht and Leo Joseph Suenens of Brussels. This was highly significant as it included three out of four Moderators of the Second Vatical Council (only the Eastern Catholic Moderator, Cardinal Gregorio Pietro Agagianian, did not sign up to it). They wanted the return of the Jewish document and the document on religious liberty to the SECU, they wanted to complain that the conservative minority were already able to \"water down\" some of the more radical elements in documents that had already been voted on and they were opposed to delaying the Council any further (rumours had abounded that Paul VI wanted to delay the council as it stood for three years, so the subjects covered could mature for a Fourth Session). With this memorandum in hand, the leader of the faction, Cardinal Frings held a meeting with Paul VI on 13 November 1964 to express the concerns of the liberal Council fathers. Frings demanded that the Pope not intervene unilaterally (invoking the recent victories for Collegiality) and to follow the procedural rules established by the council. Paul VI intimated that he would take into consideration concerns, but also wanted to go more slowly, holding that radical steps would confuse and alienate the Catholic faithful in places like Italy, Spain and Latin America.\nNot just on this question, but in general, the Third Session of the Second Vatican Council had been a disaster for the conservative faction in the lead up to the presentation of the Jewish document in September 1964. \"Lumen gentium\" had been voted in favour of which endorsed Collegiality and married lay deacons. \"Unitatis redintegratio\" allowed for closer ecumenical ties with non-Catholics and allowed for all who are baptised the \"right to be called Christian\", endorsing in some cases for common worship. The proposed stand-alone document on Mariology, which was to declare the Blessed Virgin Mary the Mediatrix of All Graces (something Protestants would not accept), was thrown out and subsumed under \"Lumen gentium\". As well as the document on the Jews, there was still outstanding a document proclaiming religious liberty and also \"Schema 13\" on the horizon, with debates on issues such as contraception, birth control, conscientious objection, disarmament, etc., no longer completely off the table. Thus, the conservative minority were fighting a rear-guard action on numerous fronts. At a meeting held on the same day as Frings\u2019 audience with Paul VI, the conservative grouping the \"Coetus Internationalis Patrum\" under the Presidency of Archbishop Geraldo de Proen\u00e7a Sigaud met with Cardinal Ruffini in attendance to discuss what they should do next. They were confidence that Paul VI would never allow a stand-alone Jewish document due to the mounting Arab political pressure and decided, contrary to what Cardinal Felici had laid out, they would work against the Jewish issue being covered in \"Schema 13\" (this document, \"On the Church in the Modern World\", was going to pass, just its final composition was still in play and if the Jewish issue was under it then it could slip through). This would prove to be a tactical blunder.\nBlack Thursday, Council fathers vote.\nFollowing these discussions, the SECU under Bea prepared a new draft very favourable to the position of the liberals. The document stripped out all mention of conversion of Jews and condemning accusations of \"deicide\" was back. This, despite carrying a more ambiguous title, with Jews no longer explicitly highlighted, with the \"Declaration on the Church's Relationship to Non-Christian Religions\". Bea hoped that Paul VI would be favourably disposed to this, with his upcoming visit to Bombay in the Republic of India, as a sympathetic comment on Hinduism was also included, alongside generic statements against \"discrimination.\" When the document came to Cardinal Ottaviani's Theological Commission for examination, the Commission refused to incorporate it into \"Schema 13\" and without proposing alterations to the text, simply returned it to the SECU. Then it went back to Cardinal Cicognani's Coordinating Committee (who, technically could not alter the text). The Egyptian Ministry of Guidance had got wind of the new draft through conservative allies in Rome and was preparing a memorandum from Christian leaders in the Arab world against it on 28 October 1964. Cicognani, who wanted to delay the document, wanted Egypt's memorandum to be brought to Paul VI's attention first. The memorandum asked why Rome would side with \"10 million Jews over 100 million Arabs\" and brought up the issue of Jewish deicide. On the other side, the American Cardinals (except McIntyre) and the Moderators of the council (from the Rhineland Alliance) were equally turning up the diplomatic pressure.\nThe pressure of the American Cardinals (including on their side the American media) and support from most of the Council Fathers, as well as the increasingly blunt approach of the Egyptians had made it difficult for the Pope to do anything but order the printing of the new version of the document. Cicognani delayed for eight days as the end of the Third Session was approaching and proposed a maneuver, wherein the three \"natural\" parts of the document would be voted on individually; Hinduism and Buddhism as the first, Islam as the second and then the more controversial and keenly contested section on Judaism as third. It was decided that the showdown on two of the most fought over documents would take place successively; the document \"On Religious Liberty\" would be released on 17 November 1964 with a vote on 19 November, while \"Relations with Non-Christians\" would be released on 18 November 1964 with a vote promised for 20 November.\nThe main battle was seen as the document \"On Religious Liberty\" and \"Relations with Non-Christians\" was closely connected to it but flowed downstream from it. The liberal and conservative factions were much the same with both documents and indeed the American theologian John Courtney Murray, keenly supported by most of the American Cardinals, had provided the underpinning principles of the text \"On Religious Liberty\". The fiercely contested nature of the documents came to a head in what is known as Black Thursday or the \"day of the bomb\" (\"la bomba oggi\"). On the Thursday, when Cardinal Eug\u00e8ne Tisserant arose to announce that no vote would be taking place on that document due to 250 to 300 wishing for it to be delayed, uproar broke out on the floor of the Third Session. Cardinals Meyer and Ritter argued openly with Cardinals Siri and Ruffini at the table of the Council Presidents and the American Bishop Francis Frederick Reh, Rector of the Pontifical North American College, took up a paper and began a petition among the angry Bishops, which garnered 1,500 supporters. The Americans\u2014Cardinals Ritter, Meyer and Leger\u2014stormed off to confront the Pope. Paul VI was watching the proceedings on close circuit television and had Cardinal Felici called to restore order to the proceedings. Bishop , a prominent liberal clergymen and talented orator, took to the podium and explained in a matter of a fact manner how, why and who was responsible for delaying the vote on the document, to applause.\nThe Pope, having decided on a course of action that the vote on the document \"On Religious Liberty\" would be suspended until a Fourth Session, could not back down lest he undermine his own authority. And so the Third Session entered its finally voting day deeply divided, with the liberal faction deeply frustrated and political, diplomatic and media hostility from states on both sides of the Cold War conflict; East and West; hostile to the idea of the confessional state, aimed at the Holy See. Attempts to introduce a relaxed atmosphere and mollify the Bishops with the announcement that those in attendance would be given a gold medal and that new powers would be conferred upon the General Superiors changed little. Even the most ardent member of the Roman Curia opposed to a document on Judaism, Cardinal Ruffini, at this point relented with international hostility aimed at the Holy See over the issue of religious liberty, admitting that a vote go ahead on Cardinal Bea's \"Relations with Non-Christians\", with the fight over the \"bigger fish\" \"On Religious Liberty\" successfully delayed for another day. There would be no split vote on different religions, all of the parts of the document would be voted on as a single entity. An overwhelming majority of the Council Fathers, 89%, voted in favour of the document, making \"Relations with Non-Christians\" an official document of the Second Vatican Council at the close of the Third Session. The document itself had not yet been promulgated by the Pope, so there was possibility for alteration to the text, but it could not now be removed from the council.\nFourth Session of the Council, 1964\u20131965.\nWhile leaders of the Jewish community in the United States had been elated by the ending of the Third Session, the exact nature of the text was not set in stone and there was still room to \"nuance\" or \"qualify\" the final text within Council rules. Between the closure of the Third Session on 21 November 1964 and the opening of the Fourth Session on 14 September 1965, a couple of controversies pertaining to the issue arose. Firstly, , the Bishop of Segni (a historically important diocese close to Rome) and member of the \"Coetus Internationalis Patrum\" wrote an article entitled, \"La questione giudaica davanti al Concilio Vaticano II\" in his diocesan magazine in February 1965 that affirmed the traditional teaching of the Catholic Church on the matter: namely, that adherents of Rabbinic Judaism at the time of Christ and to the present day, bore guilt for the trial and crucifixion of Christ and that \"judgment of condemnation by God\" hung over Judaism. The President of the American Jewish Committee bewailed the article as an \"anti-Semitic attack.\" A few weeks later on Passion Sunday, Paul VI himself, within the sermon during Mass in Rome, spoke of the role played by Jews of the time in the crucifixion of Jesus Christ (to the disappointment of Elio Toaff, the Chief Rabbi of Rome).\nMost significant of all was the reporting in \"The New York Times\" by their Rome-correspondent Robert C. Dotty, that Paul VI had turned the document over to four doctrinal \"consultants\", to make it not contradict Sacred Scripture and to mollify Arab opinion. Cardinal Bea was visiting New York that week and denied these claims, stating that it was still under the SECU and he sought to clear up any misunderstandings with Morris B. Abram of the American Jewish Committee about the Passion Sunday and Bishop Carli controversies. Nevertheless, in Rome, discussions were taking place about modifications to \"Chapter 4\" in May 1965: the word \"deicide\" was removed from the document forever, and additionally, Paul VI suggested adapting the phrase \u201cdeplores, indeed condemns, hatred and persecution of Jews\u201d in order to exclude the words \u201cindeed condemns\u201d. These changes were voted on and accepted by elements of Bea's Secretariat and the final form of the document had been reached. While this was taking place, the Maronite President of Lebanon, Charles Helou had an audience with the Pope and consequently, due to rumours which reached across the Atlantic, the Vatican Press Office made statements saying that the declaration remained unchanged. In the \"New York Times\", Dotty was publishing articles with dubious claims that the document was \"under study\" (when it had already been completed) and that the document may be dropped completely. These and other similar articles led to criticisms of the Church from Willem Visser 't Hooft, the Protestant head of the World Council of Churches who warned that if the Jewish issue was removed there would be consequences for ecumenism. The AJC similarly, through the person of Rabbi Tanenbaum, confronted Msgr George G. Higgins, who passed on the concerns to Cardinal Cushing. The \"Deutscher Koordinierungsrat der Gesellschaften f\u00fcr Christlich-J\u00fcdische Zusammenarbeit\" also sent a letter to Rome complaining that there was now a \"crisis of confidence \"vis-\u00e0-vis\" the Catholic Church.\u201d\nThe earlier \"tactical leaks\" strategy involving Malachi Martin, the AJC's mole who fed the \"New York Times\" and \"TIME\", to push the document in a direction desired by the American Jewish community was no longer effectual: Martin had been released from his priestly vows to the Jesuits in May\u2013June 1965. The final form of the document had been released to the public, revealing that the Jewish elements had been watered down. A number of significant events took place that year, which garnered media attention: in October 1965, Paul VI became the first Pope to address the United Nations calling for \u201cNo more war, war never again.\u201d While visiting the United States, at a Mass attended by 40,000 people at the Yankee Stadium in New York City (with millions more watching on television), Paul VI quoted \"\" from the Gospel of John which states \"the disciples were bolted for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood before them and said \"Peace be to you!\".\" While intended as a friendly message in \"the world's most Jewish city\", there were widespread misunderstandings and many Jews and liberal Catholics criticised the sermon as \"unthinking\" and linked this to the development of the document on the Jews. With the final vote approaching on 14 October 1965, both Jewish and Arab lobbies doubled-down and pushed for their agendas: Shuster of the AJC wanted the \"weakening\" of the document completely reversed, while a final 28-page Arab request was submitted, urging the Catholic Bishops to save the faith from \u201ccommunism and atheism and the Jewish-Communist alliance.\"\nWhile the form of the final document to be put to the floor at the Fourth Session of the Second Vatican Council had been disappointing to Shuster and Lichten of the AJC and B\u2019nai B\u2019rith respectively, Higgins convinced them that it was better to \"settle for what they could get.\" Bishop Stephen Aloysius Leven gave some false hope to his friends in the American Jewish community that the American bishops could still vote against the new version but upon realising that this would simply add votes to the Arab &amp; conservative side who wanted no document at all, the tactic was abandoned. By this point, even Cardinal Bea was content for the \"deicide\" issue to be dropped so long as the document was finally promulgated. Fr. Ren\u00e9 Laurentin, also wrote a late plea to strengthen the Jewish aspect of the document, but by now momentum was against further revisions. In its final form, 1,763 voted in favour of the document and 250 bishops opposed it. It was subsequently promulgated on 28 October 1965 by Pope Paul VI as \"Nostra aetate\" (\"In our time\"). The media in the United States and Europe subsequently ran with sensationalistic headlines such as \"Vatican Pardons Jews\" and \"Jews Exonerated in Rome\", despite the fact that the deicide issue had now been removed from the document. Meanwhile, diplomatic statements were prepared by the AJC and B'nai B'rith, which tried to focus on what they saw as the positives while also airing their disappointment that some of the biggest issues had been dropped and the document much watered down from previous versions. The most vocal critic was Rabbi Heschel, who described avoiding dealing with the deicide issue as \u201can act of paying homage to Satan.\u201d\nSummary.\nThe document begins by stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In our time, when day by day mankind is being drawn closer together, and the ties between different peoples are becoming stronger, the Church examines more closely her relationship to non-Christian religions. In her task of promoting unity and love among men, indeed among nations, she considers above all in this declaration what men have in common and what draws them to fellowship.\nThe key observation about other faiths reads: \"The Catholic Church rejects nothing that is true and holy in these religions. She regards with sincere reverence those ways of conduct and of life, those precepts and teachings, which though different in many aspects from the ones she holds and sets forth, nonetheless often reflect a ray of truth which enlightens all men.\"\n\"Nostra aetate\" examined, among other belief systems, Hinduism and Buddhism, and stated that the Church \"rejects nothing that is true and holy\" in other religions.\nReligious freedom became a new part of Catholic teaching with Vatican II and this declaration. \"Nostra aetate\" declared that there are positive elements in other religions and religious stereotypes and prejudices can be overcome through interreligious dialogue. Pope Francis said, \"From indifference and opposition, we've turned to cooperation and goodwill. From enemies and strangers, we've become friends and brothers.\"\nThe final paragraph calls on Catholics to enter into \"dialogue and collaboration\" with those of other faiths.\nIt describes the eternal questions which have dogged men since the beginning, and how the various religious traditions have tried to answer them.\nIt mentions some of the answers that some Hindus, Buddhists, and members of other faiths have suggested for such philosophical questions. It notes the willingness of the Catholic Church to accept some truths present in other religions in so much as they reflect Catholic teaching and may lead souls to Christ.\nPart three goes on to say that the Catholic Church regards the Muslims with esteem, and then continues by describing some of the things Islam has in common with Christianity: worship of One God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, Merciful and Omnipotent, Who has spoken to men; the Muslims' respect for Abraham and Mary, and the great respect they have for Jesus, whom they consider to be a Prophet and not God. The synod urged all Catholics and Muslims to forget the hostilities and differences of the past and to work together for mutual understanding and benefit. Some of these themes are repeated in chapter two of \"Lumen gentium\".\nPart four of the text deals with Jews. Repeated in the text is the traditional teaching that the Catholic Church sees the beginnings of its Faith in the Patriarchs and Prophets of ancient Israel. It also notes that the Apostles and many of the early Disciples of Jesus Christ at the founding of the Catholic Church had their roots in the Jews of that time, despite the fact that \"Jerusalem did not recognize the time of her visitation, nor did the Jews in large number, accept the Gospel; indeed not a few opposed its spreading.\" The most significant departure in the document from previous approaches was that \"this sacred synod wants to foster and recommend that mutual understanding and respect which is the fruit, above all, of biblical and theological studies as well as of fraternal dialogues.\" This paved the way for Catholic\u2013Jewish interfaith dialogue in the decades following on from the Second Vatican Council in a manner which was not commonplace before.\nThe final text of \"Nostra aetate\", as promulgated in 1965, in regard to the question of Jewish deicide (that is to say Jewish culpability for the trial and crucifixion of Jesus Christ) did not include the word \"deicide\" specifically, as it had in some previously proposed versions. On this issue, the document says \"what happened in His passion cannot be charged against all the Jews, without distinction, then alive, nor against the Jews of today.\" The exclusion of the specific term \"deicide\" and the textual ambiguity resulting from the fierce debates at the council is such that the text has been interpreted in different ways, the \"cannot be charged against all the Jews, without distinction\" allows conservatives to present that the Jews who had become Christians, then and since, were not culpable, while others present it as exonerating the Jews of deicide as a whole. At the time of its promulgation, liberal elements within the SECU and American Jewish organisations saw the final version of the text as a defeat for their position on this issue.\nOn the question of antisemitism, the document says that the Church \"decries hatred, persecutions, displays of anti-Semitism, directed against Jews at any time and by anyone.\" Earlier versions of the text said that it \"condemns\" it, but this was removed from the final version.\nThe fifth part states that all men are created in God's image, and that the \"Church reproves, as foreign to the mind of Christ, any discrimination against men or harassment of them because of their race, color, condition of life, or religion.\"\nOpposition.\n\"Nostra aetate\", along with the adjacent documents, \"Dignitatis humanae\" (On Religious Liberty), \"Unitatis redintegratio\" (On Ecumenism), and \"Lumen gentium\" (The Church) are among the documents from the Second Vatican Council that are frequently highlighted for the most scathing criticism by traditional Catholics. The central accusation, from traditionalist Catholics, is that these documents express and encourage a spirit of religious indifferentism, that is to say that they dissuade the conversion of non-Catholics (contrary to the Catholic doctrine of \"Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus\" and thus, within this context, exclude them from the possibility of attaining eternal salvation), that they also discourage or confuse those who are already Catholic by suggesting that other religions may have validity, and that there is a radical discontinuity with what the Catholic Church has already proclaimed Magisterially about non-Christian religions.\nThe statement \"They adore the one God, living and subsisting in Himself; merciful and all-powerful, the Creator of heaven and earth\", has been accused by the SSPX of being an explicit error within the context of Catholic teaching, due to the fact that the Catholic Church defines the one God in the \"Apostles' Creed\" and the \"Nicene Creed\" as the Holy Trinity (Islamic doctrine explicitly rejects the Divinity of Jesus Christ and does not acknowledge the Holy Ghost as God) and sacred scripture, in has Jesus Christ stating \"No one comes to the Father except through Me\". However, this accusation has been answered by pointing out that, if Muslims do not worship the true God, then neither did the ancient patriarchs such as Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Moses, since they had no knowledge of the Holy Trinity. Fr. Brian Harrison O.S. mentions: \"In short, although Muslim worship, which includes a flat denial of Christ\u2019s divinity, is not in itself fitting, God-pleasing, or salvific in character, the object of that defective worship\u2014that is, the Being toward whom it is directed\u2014is nevertheless the true God, imperfectly understood, as distinct from a disguised demon or a nonexistent figure of myth or legend.\" The document also states \"The Church regards with esteem also the Moslems\", which traditionalists have argued is inappropriate to say in a Church document, claiming that within all major Islamic schools of \"fiqh\", the punishment for a Muslim male to convert to the Catholic Church is the death penalty and that Islamic law places Christian non-Muslim nations into the category of \"dar al-harb\" (\"house of war\").\nPost-Conciliar developments.\nTo flesh out these implications and ramifications, the Vatican's Commission for Interreligious Relations with the Jews issued its \"Guidelines and Suggestions for Implementing the Conciliar Declaration Nostra Aetate\" in late 1974. The Commission later released \"Notes on the Correct Way to Present Jews and Judaism in the Teaching and Catechesis of the Roman Catholic Church\" in 1985.\nThe U.S. Congress passed a resolution acknowledging the fortieth anniversary of \"Nostra aetate\".\nThe Vatican's Commission for Religious Relations with Jews released a new document exploring the unresolved theological questions at the heart of Christian\u2013Jewish dialogue. Entitled \"The Gifts and Calling of God are Irrevocable\", it marked the 50th anniversary of the ground-breaking declaration \"Nostra Aetate\".\nOn the fiftieth anniversary of the document's release, Sayyid Syeed, the national director of the Islamic Society of North America's Office for Interfaith and Community Alliances, pointed out that \"Nostra Aetate\" was released during the 1960s civil rights movement in the United States, at a time when Islamic centers and student groups were being founded on university campuses, and from these humble beginnings the \"Catholic church acted as a big brother\" in its understanding of a religious minority, a sentiment that has continued since the terrorist attacks of 9/11 when the Church opened its doors to them amidst growing Islamophobia.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42285", "revid": "5383404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42285", "title": "Gravissimum educationis", "text": "1965 Catholic declaration on education\nGravissimum educationis is the Second Vatican Council's Declaration on Christian Education. It was promulgated on 28 October 1965 by Pope Paul VI, following approval by the assembled bishops by a vote of 2,290 to 35.\nTo revitalize this teaching, updating it to today\u2019s challenges, Pope Francis created the Gravissimum Educationis Foundation \u2013 Culture for Education.\nDescription.\nThe document is generally referred to, not by its English-language title, \"Declaration on Christian Education\", but by the opening words of its original Latin text, which mean \"extremely important education\".\nThe document quotes at length from \"Divini illius Magistri\" (\"That divine teacher\", 1929) by Pope Pius XI.\nParents as primary educators.\n\"Since parents have given children their life, they are bound by the most serious obligation to educate their offspring and therefore must be recognized as the primary and principal educators. This role in education is so important that only with difficulty can it be supplied where it is lacking. Parents are the ones who must create a family atmosphere animated by love and respect for God and man, in which the well-rounded personal and social education of children is fostered. Hence the family is the first school of the social virtues that every society needs.\"\n\"Gravissimum Educationis - Culture for Education\" Foundation.\nOn October 28, 2015, Pope Francis founded the \"Gravissimum Educationis\" Foundation.\nThe Foundation is a not-for-profit, and pursues scientific and cultural aims to promote education and culture in the world. In particular, the Foundation aims to promote projects aimed at establishing and consolidating collaborative relationships between entities and institutions active in the educational sector; promote cultural projects and events aimed at fostering, also in the educational sphere, reflection on key topics of contemporary debate and dialogue between arts, cultures and faith; implement projects and initiatives related to the Global Compact on Education.\nThe Foundation is an instrumental entity and participates in the mission of the Dicastery for Culture and Education of the Holy See, that preserves and promotes the cultural and educational heritage of the Catholic Church.\nThe Foundation is governed by a Board of Directors chaired by Cardinal Jos\u00e9 Tolentino de Mendon\u00e7a. The Secretary General is Monsignor Davide Milani, and the Treasurer is Dr. Paolo Buzzonetti.\nDevelopments.\nOn October 27, 2025, Pope Leo XIV, at the conclusion of the Jubilee Mass with Pontifical university students, signed in St. Peter\u2019s Basilica the Apostolic Letter entitled \"Drawing New Maps of Hope\". The Apostolic Letter has been made public in the following day, on occasion of the 60th anniversary of \"Gravissimum Educationis\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42287", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42287", "title": "Atlantic Cod", "text": ""}
{"id": "42289", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42289", "title": "Deep sea fish species", "text": ""}
{"id": "42293", "revid": "7021758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42293", "title": "From Here to Eternity", "text": "1953 film directed by Fred Zinnemann\nFrom Here to Eternity is a 1953 American romantic war drama film directed by Fred Zinnemann and written by Daniel Taradash, based on the 1951 novel of the same name by James Jones. It deals with the tribulations of three United States Army soldiers, played by Burt Lancaster, Montgomery Clift, and Frank Sinatra, stationed on Hawaii in the months leading up to the attack on Pearl Harbor. Deborah Kerr and Donna Reed portray the women in their lives. The supporting cast includes Ernest Borgnine, Philip Ober, Jack Warden, Mickey Shaughnessy, Claude Akins, and George Reeves.\nIt won 8 Academy Awards out of 13 nominations, including Best Picture, Director (Fred Zinnemann), Adapted Screenplay, Supporting Actor (Frank Sinatra), and Supporting Actress (Donna Reed). Jones's book title originates from Rudyard Kipling's 1892 poem \"Gentlemen-Rankers\", about soldiers of the British Empire who had \"lost [their] way\" and were \"damned from here to eternity\".\nThe film is famed for its torrid seaside scene of two of its main characters lying in the sand at the water's edge kissing in an adulterous tryst, a groundbreaking display in its time. In 2002, \"From Here To Eternity\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nIn 1941, Private Robert E. Lee Prewitt, a bugler and career soldier who was once a professional boxer, transfers from Fort Shafter to a rifle company at Schofield Barracks on the island of Oahu. Captain Dana \"Dynamite\" Holmes wants him on his regimental boxing team, but Prewitt refuses absolutely, with no further explanation. Consequently, Holmes makes Prewitt's life miserable and ultimately orders First Sergeant Milton Warden to prepare a court-martial. Warden suggests doubling Prewitt's company punishment as an alternative. Prewitt is hazed by the other NCOs and is supported only by his close friend, Private Angelo Maggio.\nPrewitt and Maggio join a social club where Prewitt becomes attracted to Lorene. Prewitt confides to her he quit boxing after blinding his sparring partner. At the club, Maggio argues with stockade Sergeant \"Fatso\" Judson. Later, at a local bar, Judson provokes Maggio and the two nearly come to blows before Warden intervenes.\nDespite being warned, Warden risks prison when he starts fraternizing with Holmes's wife, Karen. Her marriage to Holmes is unhappy and distant, made worse after Holmes's drinking and infidelity resulted in the stillbirth of her only child and consequent infertility. Karen encourages Warden to become an officer, which would enable her to divorce Holmes and marry him.\nMaggio is sentenced to the stockade after walking off guard duty and getting drunk, subjecting him to Judson's unqualified (and unauthorized) wrath. Prewitt discovers Lorene's name is really Alma, and her goal is to make enough money at the club to go back to the mainland and marry. Prewitt tells her his career is in the military, and the two wonder whether they have a future together.\nA member of Holmes's boxing team, Sergeant Galovitch, picks a fight with Prewitt. Holmes fails to stop it, which is noticed by the regimental commander. When Prewitt prevails in the fight, Holmes finally intervenes and is about to punish Prewitt again; but, does nothing after learning Galovitch started the fight.\nMaggio escapes from the stockade after a brutal beating from Judson and dies in Prewitt's arms. Seeking revenge, Prewitt engages Judson in a back alley knife fight. Prewitt kills Judson but is badly wounded and stays with Lorene. Warden covers for Prewitt's absence.\nAfter initiating a review into Holmes's conduct, the regimental commander orders his resignation in lieu of a court martial. Holmes's replacement, Captain Ross, reprimands the other NCOs, demotes Galovitch to private, and affirms there will be no more promotions through boxing. Karen tells Warden that Holmes's resignation is forcing them back to the mainland, but Warden reveals he has no interest in becoming an officer, effectively ending their relationship. Warden promises her that they will meet somewhere someday.\nOn December 7, the Japanese attack Pearl Harbor. Warden takes command, orders coffee be made and leads a fierce resistance to the attack. Despite Lorene's pleas to stay with her, Prewitt attempts to rejoin his company but is shot dead by military police when he refuses to halt. Warden identifies him as a hardhead but a good soldier.\nDays later, Karen and Lorene coincidentally stand next to each other on a ship going to the mainland. Karen tosses her leis into the sea, wondering if she will ever return to Hawaii. Lorene tells Karen she herself will not return, as her \"fianc\u00e9\", whom she identifies as Prewitt, was a bomber pilot who died during the attack and was awarded a Silver Star. Karen recognizes the name but says nothing.\nProduction.\nS. Sylvan Simon suggested to Harry Cohn that Columbia buy the rights to the novel and Simon was assigned to make the film but died from a heart attack in May 1951 before he could make preparations for the film.\nHollywood legend has it that Frank Sinatra got the role in the film by means of his alleged Mafia connections, and it was the basis for a similar subplot in \"The Godfather\". However, that has been dismissed on several occasions by the cast and crew of the film. Director Fred Zinnemann commented that \"the legend about a horse's head having been cut off is pure invention, a poetic license on the part of Mario Puzo, who wrote \"The Godfather\"\". One explanation of Sinatra's casting is that his then-wife Ava Gardner persuaded studio head Harry Cohn's wife to use her influence with him; this version is related by Kitty Kelley in her Sinatra biography.\nJoan Crawford and Gladys George were offered roles, but George lost her role when the director decided he wanted to cast the female roles against type, and Crawford's demands to be filmed by her own cameraman led the studio to take a chance on Deborah Kerr, also playing against type.\nKim Stanley heavily campaigned for the role of Lorene, which later garnered an Academy Award for Donna Reed.\nThe on-screen chemistry between Lancaster and Kerr may have spilled off-screen; it was alleged that the stars became involved romantically during filming.\nThe songs \"Re-Enlistment Blues\" and \"From Here to Eternity\" were written by Robert Wells and Fred Karger.\nIn 1951, LIFE magazine reported the novel's sale price to Hollywood as $82,500.\nDifferences from the novel.\nSeveral of the novel's controversial plot points were changed or eliminated for the film to satisfy the Production Code Office and the U.S. Army. Army cooperation was necessary for the film crew to shoot on location at Schofield Barracks, use training aircraft, and obtain military footage of Pearl Harbor for use in the film, as well as for cost reasons. According to screenwriter Daniel Taradash, both the Code Office and the Army were impressed by his script, which reduced the number of censorship problems.\nIn the novel, Lorene was a prostitute at a brothel, but in the film, she is a hostess at a private social club. Karen's hysterectomy in the novel was caused by the unfaithful Holmes transmitting gonorrhea to her, but in the film, her hysterectomy resulted from a miscarriage, thus avoiding the topic of venereal disease. The changes were made to meet Code Office standards.\nIn the novel, several of the enlisted men fraternize with homosexuals, and one soldier commits suicide as a result, but homosexuality is not mentioned or directly explored in the film. Again, the change was made to satisfy the Code Office. However, J. E. Smyth has written that the film's treatment of Judson's behavior towards Maggio \"has all the indications of sexual abuse, and therefore reintroduces the fear of homosexuality in the 1930s military that the rest of the script had to repress for obvious reasons of censorship\". \nIn the novel, Captain Holmes ironically receives his desired promotion, and is transferred out of the company. In the film, Holmes is forced to resign from the Army under threat of court-martial for his ill-treatment of Prewitt. The Army insisted on this change, which the filmmakers reluctantly made. Director Zinnemann later complained that the scene where Holmes is reprimanded was \"the worst moment in the film, resembling a recruiting short\", and wrote, \"It makes me sick every time I see it.\"\nIn the novel, Judson's systematic abuse of Maggio and other prisoners, including Prewitt at one point, is portrayed in detail. However, in the film, Maggio's abuse happens offscreen, and it is told only verbally to Prewitt, who remains free. The Army required that the abuse of Maggio not be shown and that Judson's behavior toward Maggio be portrayed as \"a sadistic anomaly, and not as the result of Army policy, as depicted in Jones' book\". The filmmakers agreed, seeing these changes as improvements. Maggio, who survives and is discharged in the novel, dies in the film, having been combined with two other prisoner characters from the novel (one of whom is killed by Judson in the novel) to add drama and make Maggio a stronger, more tragic figure. The Army was further appeased by the filmmakers' inclusion of a line suggesting that Maggio's death was partially caused by his falling off a truck during a prison break, rather than solely by Judson's beatings.\nReception.\nOpening to rave reviews, \"From Here to Eternity\" proved to be an instant hit with critics and public alike, the Southern California Motion Picture Council extolling: \"A motion picture so great in its starkly realistic and appealing drama that mere words cannot justly describe it.\"\n\"Variety\" agreed:\nThe James Jones bestseller, \"From Here to Eternity\", has become an outstanding motion picture in this smash screen adaptation. It is an important film from any angle, presenting socko entertainment for big business. The cast names are exceptionally good, the exploitation and word-of-mouth values are topnotch, and the prospects in all playdates are very bright, whether special key bookings or general run.\nOf the actors, \"Variety\" went on to say,\nBurt Lancaster, whose presence adds measurably to the marquee weight of the strong cast names, wallops the character of First Sergeant Milton Warden, the professional soldier who wet-nurses a weak, pompous commanding officer and the GIs under him. It is a performance to which he gives depth of character as well as the muscles which had gained marquee importance for his name. Montgomery Clift, with a reputation for sensitive, three-dimensional performances, adds another to his growing list as the independent GI who refuses to join the company boxing team, taking instead the 'treatment' dished out at the C.O.'s instructions. Frank Sinatra scores a decided hit as Angelo Maggio, a violent, likeable Italo-American GI. While some may be amazed at this expression of the Sinatra talent versatility, it will come as no surprise to those who remember the few times he has had a chance to be something other than a crooner in films.\nThe \"New York Post\" applauded Frank Sinatra, remarking, \"He proves he is an actor by playing the luckless Maggio with a kind of doomed gaiety that is both real and immensely touching.\" \"Newsweek\" also stated that, \"Frank Sinatra, a crooner long since turned actor, knew what he was doing when he plugged for the role of Maggio.\" John McCarten of \"The New Yorker\" concurred, writing that the film \"reveals that Frank Sinatra, in the part of Mr. Clift's best friend who winds up in the stockade, is a first-rate actor.\"\nThe cast agreed; Burt Lancaster commented in the book \"Sinatra: An American Legend\" that, \"[Sinatra's] fervour, his bitterness had something to do with the character of Maggio, but also with what he had gone through the last number of years. A sense of defeat and the whole world crashing in on him... They all came out in that performance.\"\nDespite the rivalry between their respective characters, Sinatra and Borgnine, both from Italian roots, became lifelong friends. They corresponded with each other at Christmas season by exchanging cards signed using their film characters' names, \"Maggio\" and \"Fatso\". At a Dean Martin Celebrity Roast honoring Sinatra, Borgnine mockingly reprised his Fatso Judson character.\nThe film was number one in the United States for four weeks during September 1953, with a gross of $2,087,000. With a final gross of $30.5 million equating to earnings of $12.2 million, \"From Here to Eternity\" not only became one of the highest-grossing films of 1953, but also one of the ten highest-grossing films of the decade. Adjusted for inflation, its box office gross would exceed US$277 million in 2017 dollars.\nDespite the positive response of the critics and public, the Army was reportedly not pleased with its depiction in the finished film, and refused to let its name be used in the opening credits. The Navy banned the film from being shown to its servicemen on its ships or Naval shore installations, calling it \"derogatory of a sister service\" and a \"discredit to the armed services\", although the Army and Air Force Motion Picture services purchased the film for screenings.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a score of 88% from 100 reviews, with an average rating of 8.3/10. The website's critics consensus reads, \"It has perhaps aged poorly, but this languidly paced WWII romance remains an iconic, well-acted film, featuring particularly strong performances from Burt Lancaster and Montgomery Clift.\" On Metacritic, the film holds a weighted average score of 85 out of 100 based on 21 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nAwards and nominations.\nWilliam Holden, who won the Academy Award for Best Actor for \"Stalag 17\", felt that Lancaster or Clift should have won. Sinatra later said that he thought his performance of heroin addict Frankie Machine in \"The Man with the Golden Arm\" was more deserving of an Oscar than his role as Maggio.\nTelevision.\nAn unsuccessful television pilot starring Darren McGavin as 1st Sgt. Warden, Roger Davis as Pvt. Prewitt, and Tom Nardini as Pvt. Maggio was made in 1966.\nIn 1979, William Devane starred as 1st Sgt. Warden in a miniseries that became a television series in 1980.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42294", "revid": "49190008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42294", "title": "The Lost Weekend", "text": "1945 film by Billy Wilder\nThe Lost Weekend is a 1945 American drama film noir directed by Billy Wilder, and starring Ray Milland and Jane Wyman. It was based on Charles R. Jackson's 1944 novel about an alcoholic writer. The film was nominated for seven Academy Awards and won four: Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor, and Best Adapted Screenplay. It also shared the Grand Prix at the first Cannes Film Festival, making it one of only four films\u2014the other three being \"Marty\" (1955), \"Parasite\" (2019) and \"Anora\" (2024)\u2014to win both the Academy Award for Best Picture and the highest award at Cannes.\nOn review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 97% based on 70 reviews, with an average rating of 8.4/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"Director Billy Wilder's unflinchingly honest look at the effects of alcoholism may have had some of its impact blunted by time, but it remains a powerful and remarkably prescient film.\" In 2011, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nPlot.\nOn Thursday, alcoholic New York writer Don Birnam is packing for a weekend vacation with his brother Wick. Although they are leaving mid-afternoon, when Don's girlfriend Helen drops by with gifts for him and two tickets for a concert that afternoon, Don suggests that Wick attends with her; the brothers can then catch a later train. His motive is self-serving: he has a bottle hanging by a rope outside the window and wants to retrieve it and secure it in his suitcase. Wick eventually discovers the bottle. Don claims to have forgotten it was there; Wick pours it down the drain. Now, knowing that all the liquor Don had hidden in the apartment has been disposed of, and believing that he has no money for more, Helen and Wick go to the concert.\nAfter finding ten dollars Wick left for the cleaning lady, Don heads for Nat's Bar, calling in at a liquor store on the way to purchase two bottles of rye. He intends to be back home in time to meet Wick and catch their train but his drinking makes him lose track of time. Arriving home, he sees Wick and Helen on the street and, concealing himself, overhears Wick say that he has given up on helping Don and is leaving, scolding Helen for deciding to stay and wait for Don. Don sneaks back into the apartment and hides a bottle while drinking the other one.\nOn Friday, at Nat's Bar, Don learns that Helen came in looking for him the previous night. Don says that he intends to write a novel about his battle with alcoholism, called \"The Bottle\". In a flashback, he recalls how he first met Helen at the opera house. The cloakroom has mixed up their coats. Subsequently, the two strike up a romance, and he remains sober during this time. While going to meet her parents, he overhears them talking about his unemployment and how they are not certain if he is good enough for Helen. He loses his nerve and sneaks off, after phoning Helen from a booth and making a phony excuse, ostensibly intending to meet her parents later. However, he returns home and gets drunk. She goes to his apartment, where Wick tries to cover for him, but Don confesses that he is two people: \"Don the writer\", whose fear of failure causes him to drink, and \"Don the drunk\", who always has to be bailed out by Wick. Helen devotes herself to helping him.\nAfter telling Nat the story behind his proposed novel, Don heads back home to begin writing it. However, his alcohol cravings get the better of him and he begins a search for that second bottle from the previous night. He cannot remember where he hid it. He goes to a nightclub, realizes that he cannot pay the bill and steals money from a woman's purse. He is caught, thrown out, and told never to return. Once home, he finds the hidden bottle by chance and drinks himself into a stupor.\nOn Saturday, Don is broke and feeling sick. He decides to pawn his typewriter so he can buy more alcohol, although he dreads the walk to the shop because he feels so ill. He discovers the pawnshops are closed for Yom Kippur. Desperate for money, he visits Gloria, a prostitute who has a crush on him. She gives him some money, but he falls down her stairs and is knocked unconscious.\nOn Sunday, Don wakes up in an alcoholics' ward at Bellevue Hospital, where a nurse, Bim Nolan, mocks him and other guests at \"Hangover Plaza\". Bim offers to help offset his sure-to-come delirium tremens, but Don rejects the assistance and escapes while the staff is occupied with a raving, violent patient.\nOn Monday, Don steals a bottle of whiskey from a store after threatening the owner and spends the day drinking. Suffering from delirium tremens, he hallucinates a nightmarish scene in which a bat flies in through his window and kills a mouse, spilling its blood. His screams alert the tenant, who contacts Helen, who immediately goes over. Finding Don collapsed and in a delirious state, she assists him to clean up and get to bed; she stays overnight on his couch.\nOn Tuesday morning, Don slips out and pawns Helen's coat, the one that had brought them together. She trails him to the pawn shop and learns from the pawnbroker that Don traded the coat for his gun, for which he has bullets at home. She races back to Don's apartment and interrupts him just as he is about to shoot himself. She pleads with him, even going so far as to beg him to drink the last portion of whisky left in the bottle he had stolen and which she had concealed. She declares she would rather he be alive as an alcoholic. He refuses and, while they are arguing, Nat arrives to return Don's typewriter. After Nat leaves, Helen finally convinces him that \"Don the writer\" and \"Don the drunk\" are the same person. He commits to writing his novel \"The Bottle\", dedicated to her, which will recount the events of the weekend. As evidence of his resolve, he drops a cigarette into the glass of whisky to make it undrinkable.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Ray Milland as Don Birnam\nProduction and notable features.\nWilder was originally drawn to this material after having worked with Raymond Chandler on the screenplay for \"Double Indemnity\". Chandler was a recovering alcoholic at the time, and the stress and tumultuous relationship with Wilder during the collaboration caused him to start drinking again. Wilder made the film, in part, to try to explain Chandler to himself.\nWilder originally wanted Jose Ferrer for the role of Don, but he turned it down. Charles Brackett's first choice for playing Helen was Olivia de Havilland, but she was involved with a lawsuit that prevented her from being in any film at that time. It has been said that Katharine Hepburn and Jean Arthur were also considered for the role.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFilm critic Manny Farber in \"The New Republic\", January 7, 1946, offered this appraisal of Frank Faylen\u2019s performance as \"Bim\" Nolan in \"The Lost Weekend\":\n\"One episode where the directing and the acting have a fling involves a male nurse, in a provocative, sneering act\u2014one of the only inspired movie portraits of homosexuality I have ever seen.\"\nThe majority of the film was shot at Paramount Studios in Hollywood. Wilder, however, insisted they shoot part of the film on location in New York City to create a distinct sense of realism. On October 1, 1944, Wilder and his small crew began filming in New York, mostly along Third Avenue in Midtown East Manhattan. To further create a realistic atmosphere, Wilder and his crew used hidden cameras, placing them behind boxes or in the back of trucks, and capturing Milland as he walked up 3rd Avenue among actual pedestrians who were unaware a film was being made. The production also had the unprecedented permission to film inside Bellevue Hospital in the alcoholic ward, a request that would be denied to future films. After completing filming in New York, the cast and crew returned to California to resume principal photography, where they recreated several New York locations, including a replica of P. J. Clarke's, a tavern often frequented by author Charles Jackson.\nThe film also made famous the \"character walking toward the camera in a daze as time passes\" camera effect.\nOnce \"The Lost Weekend\" was completed, it was shown to a preview audience, who laughed at what they considered Milland's overwrought performance, and the studio considered shelving the film. Part of the problem was that the print shown at the preview did not have Mikl\u00f3s R\u00f3zsa's original musical soundtrack, but instead had a temporary track containing upbeat jazz music. However, once the R\u00f3zsa score was in place, along with a re-shoot of the last scene, audiences and critics reacted favorably. The film's musical score was among the first to feature the theremin, which was used to create the pathos of alcoholism.\nRights to the film are currently held by Universal Studios, which owns the pre-1950 Paramount sound feature film library via EMKA, Ltd.\nThe film differs significantly from the book by leaving out the novel's noted homosexual overtones, namely the strong implication that Don Birnam is (as was the book's author, Charles Jackson) a closeted homosexual.\nThe liquor industry launched a campaign to undermine the film even before its release. Allied Liquor Industries, a national trade organization, wrote an open letter to Paramount warning that anti-drinking groups would use the film to reinstate prohibition. Liquor interests allegedly enlisted gangster Frank Costello to offer Paramount $5 million to buy the film's negative to burn it. Wilder quipped that if they\u2019d offered him $5 million, \"I would have [burned the negative].\"\nReception.\nJames Agee, critic and author, wrote in \"The Nation\" 1945: \"... it is unusually hard, tense, cruel, intelligent, and straightforward. But I see nothing in it that is new, sharply individual, or strongly creative. It is, rather, a skillful restatement, satisfying and easy to overrate in a time of general dereliction and fatuousness, of some sound basic commonplaces.\" Leslie Halliwell gave it four of four stars, stating: \"Startlingly original on its release, this stark little drama keeps its power, especially in the scenes on New York streets and in a dipso ward. It could scarcely have been more effectively filmed.\" Pauline Kael wrote, \"... an unusually daring popular melodrama... The picture lacks fluidity, and the slowly paced scenes seem overcalculated, with each colorful character and tense vignette standing out too sharply; everything is nailed down to a meaning for us. The whole thing is shot in imaginative resonance; what it has is the Brackett-Wilder specialty\u2014a distinctive cruel (and sometimes cruelly funny) edge.\" \"Leonard Maltin\" gave the film four of four stars: \"Unrelenting drama of alcoholism\u2014and a landmark of adult film-making.\"\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a 97% rating based on 74 reviews. The site's consensus: \"Director Billy Wilder's unflinchingly honest look at the effects of alcoholism may have had some of its impact blunted by time, but it remains a powerful and remarkably prescient film.\"\nBox office performance.\nThe film was a commercial success. Produced on a budget of $1.25 million, it grossed $11 million at the box office, earning $4.3 million in US theatrical rentals.\nAcademy Awards.\nAt the 18th Academy Awards in March 1946, \"The Lost Weekend\" received seven nominations and won in four categories.\nCannes Film Festival.\nThis film also shared the 1946 \"Grand Prix du Festival International du Film\" at the first Cannes Film Festival and Milland was awarded Best Actor. To date, \"The Lost Weekend\", \"Marty\" (1955), \"Parasite\" (2019), and \"Anora\" (2024) are the only films ever to win both the Academy Award for Best Picture and the highest award at the Cannes Film Festival. (\"Marty\" received the \"Palme d'Or\" (Golden Palm), which, beginning at the 1955 festival, replaced the \"Grand Prix du Festival International du Film\" as the highest award.)\nNational Film Registry.\nIn 2011, \"The Lost Weekend\" was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. The Registry said the film was \"an uncompromising look at the devastating effects of alcoholism\" and that it \"melded an expressionistic film-noir style with documentary realism to immerse viewers in the harrowing experiences of an aspiring New York writer willing to do almost anything for a drink.\"\nAdaptations.\n\"The Lost Weekend\" was adapted as a radio play on the January 7, 1946, broadcast of The Screen Guild Theater, starring Milland, Wyman, and Faylen in their original film roles.\nOn March 10, 1946, three days after winning the Academy Award, Milland appeared as a guest on a radio broadcast of \"The Jack Benny Show\". In a spoof of \"The Lost Weekend\", Milland and Jack Benny played alcoholic twin brothers. Phil Harris, who normally played Jack Benny's hard-drinking bandleader on the show, played the brother who tried to convince Ray and Jack to give up liquor. (\"Ladies and gentlemen,\" said an announcer, \"the opinions expressed by Mr. Harris are written in the script and are not necessarily his own.\") In the alcoholic ward scene, smart-aleck Frank Nelson played the ward attendant who promised Ray and Jack that they would soon start seeing DT visions of strange animals. When the DT visions appeared (with Mel Blanc providing pig squeals, monkey chatters, and other animal sound effects), Ray chased them off. \"Ray, they're gone!\", Benny shouted. \"What did you do?\" Milland replied, \"I threw my Oscar at them!\"\nOn April 21, 1949, Jackie Gleason, making his debut as a regular on NBC's \"The Hank Ladd Show\" (known before that date as \"The Arrow Show\", newly recast and retitled accordingly), delivered what \"Variety\" dubbed the episode's \"standout segment\" with his \"Lost Weekend\" spoof. Portraying the protagonist as a \"five-year-old moppet who gets plastered on soft drinks,\" he is seen \"guzzling milkshakes and cokes, weaving down Third Avenue and finally, hit by the DT's, scared witless by a Mickey Mouse.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42296", "revid": "1778754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42296", "title": "Grammatical number", "text": "Use of grammar in a language to express number\nIn linguistics, grammatical number is a feature of nouns, pronouns, adjectives and verb agreement that expresses count distinctions (such as \"one\", \"two\" or \"three or more\"). English and many other languages present number categories of singular or plural. Some languages also have a dual, trial and paucal number or other arrangements.\nThe word \"number\" is also used in linguistics to describe the distinction between certain grammatical aspects that indicate the number of times an event occurs, such as the semelfactive aspect, the iterative aspect, etc. For that use of the term, see \"Grammatical aspect\".\nOverview.\nMost languages of the world have formal means to express differences of number. One widespread distinction, found in English and many other languages, involves a simple two-way contrast between singular and plural number (\"car\"/\"cars\", \"child\"/\"children\", etc.). Discussion of other more elaborate systems of number appears below. \nGrammatical number is a morphological category characterized by the expression of quantity through inflection or agreement. As an example, consider the English sentences below:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe quantity of apples is marked on the noun\u2014\"apple\" singular number (one item) vs. \"apples\" plural number (more than one item)\u2014on the demonstrative, \"that/those\", and on the verb, \"is/are\". In the second sentence, all this information is redundant, since quantity is already indicated by the numeral \"two\".\nA language has grammatical number when its noun forms are subdivided into morphological classes according to the quantity they express, such that:\nThis is partly true for English: every noun and pronoun form is singular or plural (a few, such as \"fish\", \"cannon\" and \"you\", can be either, according to context). Some modifiers of nouns\u2014namely the demonstrative determiners\u2014and finite verbs inflect to agree with the number of the noun forms they modify or have as subject: \"this car\" and \"these cars\" are correct, while *\"this cars\" and *\"these car\" are incorrect. However, adjectives do not inflect for number, and many verb forms do not distinguish between singular and plural (\"She/They went\", \"She/They can go\", \"She/They had gone\", \"She/They will go\"). \nMany languages distinguish between count nouns and mass nouns. Only count nouns can be freely used in the singular and in the plural. Mass nouns, like \"milk\", \"gold\", and \"furniture\", are normally invariant. (In some cases, a normally mass noun X may be used as a count noun to collect several distinct kinds of X into an enumerable group; for example, a cheesemaker might speak of goat, sheep, and cow milk as \"milks\".) \nNot all languages have number as a grammatical category. In those that do not, quantity must be expressed either directly, with numerals, or indirectly, through optional quantifiers. However, many of these languages compensate for the lack of grammatical number with an extensive system of measure words.\nJoseph Greenberg has proposed a number category hierarchy as a linguistic universal: \"No language has a trial number unless it has a dual. No language has a dual unless it has a plural.\" This hierarchy does not account for the paucal.\nGeographical distribution.\nObligatory plural marking of all nouns is found throughout the languages of western and northern Eurasia and most parts of Africa. The rest of the world's languages present a heterogeneous picture. Optional plural marking is common in Southeast and East Asia and Australian languages, and complete lack of plural marking is particularly found in New Guinea and Australian languages. In addition to the areal correlations, there also seems to be at least one correlation with morphological typology: isolating languages appear to favor no or non-obligatory plural marking. This can be seen particularly in Africa, where optionality or absence of plural marking is found particularly in the isolating languages of West Africa.\nTypes of number.\nSingular and plural.\nOne of the simplest number distinctions a language can make is singular and plural. Singular denotes exactly one referent, while plural denotes more than one referent. For example, in English:\nTo mark number, English has different singular and plural forms for nouns and verbs (in the third person): \"my dog watches television\" (singular) and \"my dogs watch television\" (plural). This is not universal: Wambaya marks number on nouns but not verbs, and Onondaga marks number on verbs but not nouns. Latin has different singular and plural forms for nouns, verbs, \"and\" adjectives, in contrast to English where adjectives do not change for number. Tundra Nenets can mark singular and plural on nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, and postpositions. The most common part of speech to show a number distinction is pronouns. An example of a personal pronoun system distinguishing singular and plural is that of Wayor\u00f3:\nDual.\nLike the singular denotes exactly one item, the dual number denotes exactly two items. For example, in Cams\u00e1:\nIn languages with a singular/dual/plural paradigm, the exact meaning of plural depends on whether the dual is obligatory or facultative (optional). In contrast to English and other singular/plural languages where plural means two or more, in languages with an obligatory dual, plural strictly means three or more. This is the case for Sanskrit, North Mansi, and Alutiiq. In languages with a facultative dual, two of something can be referred to using either the dual or the plural, and so plural means two or more. This is the case for modern Arabic dialects, at least some Inuktitut dialects, and Yandruwandha. In some languages, the dual is obligatory in certain cases but facultative in others. In Slovene, it is obligatory for pronouns but facultative for nouns. In Comanche, it is obligatory when referring to humans, facultative for other animate nouns, and rarely used for inanimate nouns.\nThere are also languages where use of the dual number is more restricted than singular and plural. In the possessive noun forms of Northern S\u00e1mi, the possessor can be in the dual number, but the noun possessed can only be singular or plural. Pronouns are the only part of speech with a dual form in some Polynesian languages, including Samoan, Tuvaluan, and M\u0101ori. In Maltese, the dual only exists for about 30 specific nouns, of which it is obligatory for only 8 (hour, day, week, month, year, once, hundred, and thousand). Words that can take a facultative dual in Maltese include egg, branch, tear, and wicker basket. In Mezquital Otomi, the dual can only be used by an adult male speaking to another adult male.\nDual number existed in all nouns and adjectives of Proto-Indo-European around 4000 BCE, and was inherited in some form in many of its prehistoric, protohistoric, ancient, and medieval descendents. Only rarely has it persisted in Indo-European languages to the modern day. It survived in Proto-Germanic in the first and second person pronouns, where it was then inherited by Old English, Old High German, Old Low German, Early Old Swedish, Old Norwegian, Old Icelandic, and Gothic. It continued in Icelandic until the 1700s, some dialects of Faroese until at least the late 1800s, and some dialects of North Frisian through the 1900s. From Proto-Greek it entered Ancient Greek, and from Proto-Indo-Iranian it entered Sanskrit. From Proto-Slavic, it still exists today in Slovene and the Sorbian languages. Indo-European languages that have long ago lost the dual still sometimes have residual traces of it, such as the English distinctions \"both\" vs. \"all\", \"either\" vs. \"any\", and \"neither\" vs. \"none\". The Norwegian , cognate with English \"both\", has further evolved to be able to refer to more than two items, as in , literally \"both apples, pears, and grapes.\"\nTrial.\nThe trial number denotes exactly three items. For example, in Awa:\nIt is rare for a language to mark the trial on nouns, and some sources even claim that trial marking on nouns does not exist. However, it has been recorded for a few languages; besides Awa, Arabana, Urama, and Angaataha have trial number. It is much more common for a language to have trial pronouns, the case for the Austronesian languages of Larike, Tolai, Raga, and Wamesa. A minimal example is Nukna, which has only a single trial pronoun, , which can be either 2nd or 3rd person. The trial may also be marked on verbs, such as in Lenakel.\nWhile the dual can be obligatory or facultative, according to Greville Corbett there are no known cases of an obligatory trial, so the trial might always be facultative. However, languages may have both a facultative dual and a facultative trial, like in Larike, or an obligatory dual and a facultative trial, like in Ngan'gi.\nMost languages with a trial are in the Austronesian family, and most non-Austronesian languages with a trial are nearby in Oceania. The latter category includes the Austronesian-influenced English creole languages of Tok Pisin, Bislama, and Pijin. In Australia, the trial can also be found in Aboriginal languages of many different language families. In Indonesia, trial pronouns are common in the storytelling of Abun, a possible language isolate. In the Solomon Islands, trial pronouns are used very frequently in Touo, either a Central Solomon language or a language isolate. As a result, bilingual speakers of Touo and Pijin will use trial pronouns a lot more commonly in Pijin than other speakers, for whom the trial is usually a lot less common than the dual. A very rare example of a spoken language with the trial (in both pronouns and verbs) outside of Oceania is Muklom Tangsa, spoken in northeast India.\nPaucal.\nThe paucal number represents 'a few', a small inexactly numbered group of items. For example, in Motuna:\nAlmost all languages with a paucal also have a dual. Nouns in Mocov\u00ed only have singular, paucal, and plural. The pronouns in Mussau and Lihir have dual, trial, and paucal.\nThe lower bound of the paucal is usually defined by what other number categories exist in the language. In singular/paucal/plural paradigms, use of the paucal begins at two, but with the addition of the dual, the paucal begins at three. There is usually no exact upper bound on how many paucal refers to, and its approximate range depends on both language and context. It has been recorded as going up to about 5 in Warndarrang, about 6 in Baiso, 10 in Arabic, and about 10 or 15 in Murrinh-patha. In Manam, the primary factor for using the paucal is not a specific number range, but the referents forming a single group; although the paucal is most common between 3 and 5, it has been used with more than 20. In Paamese, a major factor is relative group size compared to the plural, such that even though the paucal generally means 12 or fewer, a group of 2,000 people may be referred to in the paucal when contrasted with a group of 100,000 referred to in the plural.\nMuch like the dual, it is crosslinguistically variable which words and parts of speech may be marked with the paucal. Baiso has the paucal only for nouns and not pronouns, whereas Yimas has the paucal only for pronouns and not nouns. In Meryam Mir, the paucal is mostly marked on the verbs. Avar has the paucal for only about 90 specific nouns, including brush, spade, snake, and daughter-in-law (the only kin term that can take the paucal in Avar). Takivatan Bunun has a paucal only in its distal demonstratives used in reference to people.\nIt is common for former trials to evolve in meaning to become paucals, and many Austronesian languages have paucal markers that are etymologically derived from the numeral three, indicating the old usage. It is less common for duals to evolve into paucals, but this has been observed in some dialects of Arabic. Paucals that are etymologically trials are sometimes incorrectly described as being trials. For example, trial pronouns were once described as being found in all the Kiwaian languages, but it is now recognized that many actually have a paucal instead. Linguist Michael Cysouw has suggested that \"most\" languages reported to have trials in fact have mislabelled paucals, and that true trials are very rare. On the other hand, Luise Hercus stated in her published grammar of Arabana that the language's trial (which can be marked on nouns) is a true trial which cannot act as a paucal. Similar things have been said about trial pronouns in Larike and Anejom\u0303.\nRussian has what has variably been called paucal numerals, the count form, the adnumerative, or the genitive of quantification. When a noun in the nominative case has a numeral added to quantify it, the noun becomes genitive singular with 2, 3, or 4, but genitive plural with 5 or above. Many linguists have described these as paucal constructions. However, some have disagreed on the grounds that a Russian noun cannot be declined to stand by itself and mean anywhere between 2 and 4. Similar constructions can be found in other Slavic languages, including Polish, Serbo-Croatian, and Slovene. Because Slovene also has a regular dual, there is a four-way distinction of nouns being singular with 1, dual with 2, plural with 3 or 4, and genitive plural with 5 or more.\nGreater paucal.\nThe greater paucal number is a larger paucal category, for an inexactly numbered group that is larger in size than a smaller paucal. It can be found in the pronouns of the Austronesian language of Sursurunga, which exhibit a five-way distinction described as singular, dual, paucal, greater paucal, and plural. The Sursurunga paucal is used for smaller groups, usually of about three or four, or for nuclear families of any size. The Sursurunga greater paucal is used for groups of four or more (and must be used instead of the plural for a group of two or more dyads). There is thus some overlap between the two groups; a family of four can be referred to in Sursurunga by either of the paucals. This distinction is found both in Sursurunga's personal pronouns and in two different sets of possessive pronouns, one for edible things and one for non-edible things.\nQuadral.\nThe quadral number denotes exactly four items. Apparent examples of its use are almost entirely confined to pronouns, and specifically those in the languages of Oceania or in sign languages. It has been contested whether the quadral truly exists in natural language; some linguists have rejected it as an extant category, while others have accepted it. Some languages that have previously been described as having a quadral, like Sursurunga, have since been reanalyzed as having a paucal instead.\nLike trial forms, quadral forms of pronouns have been said to be attested in the Melanesian pidgins of Tok Pisin, Bislama, and Pijin. However, while these are grammatically possible, they are rare, and plural forms are almost always used in their place.\nMany different sign languages have been explicitly described as having quadral pronoun forms. Estonian Sign Language has even been described as having the quadral for nouns.\nMarshallese has been said to have the quadral as a regular feature in its pronoun system. While the apparent Marshallese quadral can mean exactly four, it also has an alternate rhetorical use in speeches to larger groups in order to impart a sense of individual intimacy. According to Greville Corbett, this means it is better classified as a paucal. However, there is not consensus that this alternate use means Marshallese does not truly have a quadral; the final 2016 reference grammar of Marshallese by Byron W. Bender, a linguist with expertise in the language, still refers to it as having a quadral. Besides singular, dual, trial, and quadral or paucal, Marshallese additionally has two different plural forms, one for five or more and one for two or more (referred to as multiple and plural absolute respectively), creating a partially overlapping six-way number distinction. Kove has been recorded as having a similar pronoun system as Marshallese, with one addition: the plural (2+) is split between two categories, one for members of the same family and one for members of different families, creating a seven-way distinction.\nA few other languages have also been claimed to have quadral pronouns. Robert Blust and others have said they exist in some of the Austronesian Kenyah languages, specifically the highland Lepo\u02bc Sawa dialect spoken in Long Anap. There seems to be no other published sources of info on this dialect's pronouns, and an investigation into the lowland Lebo\u2019 Vo\u2019 dialect has revealed a paucal instead of a quadral. A quadral claim has also been made for the animate demonstrative pronouns in Nauruan. Outside the Austronesian family, Abun storytelling reportedly frequently contains quadral pronouns in addition to trial ones. Perhaps the only known spoken language outside Oceania to have a claimed quadral is Apinay\u00e9 of Brazil, recorded as having a third person pronominal prefix meaning \"they four\", although this has been little researched or described.\nIn some Austronesian languages with a singular/dual/trial/plural pronoun system, the plural forms are etymologically related to the number four. This has led to suggestions or assertions that historically a true quadral did exist, but it has since morphed into a plural form. It has thus been hypothesized that the quadral existed in Proto-Oceanic and Proto-Southern Vanuatu.\nQuintal.\nThe quintal number denotes exactly five items. Apparent examples of its use can mostly only be found in pronouns of sign languages. Like the quadral, its existence has been contested, and only some classifications accept it.\nLike trial and quadral forms, rare quintal forms of pronouns have been said to be attested in Tok Pisin and Bislama. These languages insert numerals to represent exact numbers of referents. For example, in Bislama, the\u00a0numerals (two) and (three) are contained within the second person pronouns (dual) and (trial). These forms theoretically have no specific limit, but in practicality usually stop at three.\nSign languages described as having a quintal in addition to the quadral include American Sign Language, Argentine Sign Language, British Sign Language, German Sign Language, Levantine Arabic Sign Language, and Ugandan Sign Language.\nThe validity has been debated of categorizing sign language pronouns as having a quadral or a quintal. Linguist Susan McBurney has contended that American Sign Language has a true dual, but that the trial, quadral, and quintal should instead be classified as numeral incorporation rather than grammatical number. This is motivated by the dual marker handshape being distinct from the handshape for the numeral two, in contrast to higher number markers; the ability to also incorporate these numerals into other words, including those for times and amounts; and the use of markers higher than the dual not being obligatory, with replacement by the plural being acceptable. There was not enough data available to McBurney to argue whether or not these reasons equally applied to other sign languages. Linguist Raquel Veiga Busto has argued they do not equally apply to Catalan Sign Language, and has applied the terms quadral and quintal to the language's pronouns for convenience without taking an official stance as to whether they are grammatical number or numeral incorporation. A third model is to categorize the apparent trial/quadral/quintal forms as \"cardinal plurals\", or forms of the grammatical plural number where the number of people is specified. Other authors have treated these concepts as perfectly equivalent, referring to pronoun numeral incorporation while still applying the terms quadral and quintal.\nThere are also cases of sign language pronouns indicating specific numbers of referents above five. Ugandan Sign Language has a rare pronoun form for exactly six people. Some American Sign Language speakers have incorporated numerals up to nine into inclusive pronouns upon solicitation. Israeli Sign Language theoretically has the grammatical ability to incorporate numerals up to ten into pronouns.\nGreater plural.\nGreater plural is a number larger than and beyond plural. In various forms across different languages, it has also been called the global plural, the remote plural, the plural of abundance, the unlimited plural, and the superplural. For example, in Tswana:\nThe greater plural may also be a component of larger number systems. Nouns in Barngarla have a four-way distinction of singular, dual, plural, and greater plural. The same four-way distinction is found in Mokilese pronouns, where a former trial has evolved to become a plural, leaving the former plural with a greater plural meaning. A different four-way distinction of singular, paucal, plural, and greater plural can be found in some verbs of Hualapai. A more complex system is found in Mele-Fila: pronouns distinguish singular, dual, plural, and greater plural, but articles attached to nouns distinguish singular, paucal, and plural. The result is that for full sentences, there is a combined five-way distinction of singular, dual, paucal, plural, and greater plural. Singular and plural have straightforward number agreements, whereas dual has dual pronouns but paucal articles, paucal has plural pronouns but paucal articles, and greater plural has greater plural pronouns but plural articles.\nThe exact meaning of and terminology for the greater plural differs between languages. In some languages like Miya, it represents a large number of something, and has been called the plural of abundance. In other languages like Kaytetye, it can refer to all of\u00a0something in existence, and has been called the global plural.\nLike some other grammatical numbers, languages also vary as to which cases the greater plural may be used in. The greater plural is more common in nouns than in pronouns. Accordingly, in Kaytetye, the greater plural exists only in nouns and not pronouns. Oppositely, Mokilese has the greater plural in pronouns but not nouns. Chamacoco has the greater plural only in first person inclusive pronouns, second person pronouns, and first person inclusive verb inflections. Tigre has the greater plural only in a single word, , which means a large number of deer.\nGreatest plural.\nGreatest plural is a number larger than and beyond greater plural. It has\u00a0also been called the \"even greater plural\". For example, in Warekena:\nA similar system is found in Banyun, where the greater plural represents unlimitedness, and the greatest plural represents \"a higher degree of unlimitedness\".\nLinguist Daniel Harbour has represented the paucal, greater paucal, plural, greater plural, and greatest plural as collectively definable by \"cuts\" that divide the range of possible numbers into different sections. One low cut defines paucal and plural, and one high cut defines plural and greater plural. Two low cuts define paucal, greater paucal, and plural; one low cut and one high cut define paucal, plural, and greater plural; and two high cuts define plural, greater plural, and greatest plural. There does not appear to be any language with three such cuts, and so no language with three paucal categories and an \"even greater paucal\".\nBecause they are inexactly defined, the existence of multiple plural categories may blur the line between paucal and plural. For example, Mele-Fila is said to have a paucal, plural, and greater plural. However, the transition between plural and greater plural occurs around 15 to 20. This puts the Mele-Fila \"plural\" in range of some larger \"paucals\" described in other languages. Thus the distinction is muddied between a system of paucal, plural, greater plural, and a system of paucal, greater paucal, plural. Other examples can be found in the related languages of Northern Gumuz and Daats\u02bciin. Northern Gumuz is said to mark the plural and greater plural on verbs, and Daats\u02bciin is said to mark \"three degrees of plurality\" (plural, greater plural, and greatest plural) on verbs. In both languages though, the \"plural\" is often actually a paucal, understood to mean about two to four. However, in neither language is this always the case. The Northern Gumuz paucal/plural may sometimes refer to \"much greater than four\".\nGeneral, singulative, and plurative.\nIn some languages, the default form of a noun is not singular, but rather general, which does not specify number and could mean one or more than one. Singular and plural forms are marked from the general form. The general is used when the specific number is deemed irrelevant or unimportant. In this system, the singular is often called the singulative, to distinguish it as derived from a different form. Similarly, the plural derived from the general has been called the plurative. For example, in Pular:\nHowever, some languages only have a two-way difference between general and plurative, like in Japanese:\nLess common is a two-way distinction between general and singulative. No language has this as its default number contrast, although some languages have specific nouns with this distinction. For example, in Sidama:\nIn some languages like Afar, few nouns have a three-way contrast of general/singulative/plurative, but nouns with two-way contrasts of general/singulative and general/plurative are both common.\nThere are also languages which regularly employ different number systems with a dual, trial, paucal, or greater plural in addition to a general:\n\u00a0\n\u00a0\n\u00a0\n\u00a0\nAdditional other systems can be seen in some languages only for specific nouns:\nMinimal, unit augmented, and augmented.\nMinimal, unit augmented, and augmented are a different set of number categories for pronouns in languages that grammatically treat a first person dual inclusive pronoun identically to singular pronouns, and a first person trial inclusive pronoun identically to dual pronouns. It is a relative paradigm that replaces the absolute paradigm of singular, dual, trial, and plural for languages where absolute classification is ill-fitting.\nFor example, under a singular/dual/trial/plural analysis, the pronouns in Ilocano and Bininj Kunwok are:\n\u00a0\n\u00a0\n\"Singular\" does not exist for first person inclusive, which is by definition at least two people. In Ilocano, the \"dual\" \"only\" exists for first person inclusive, and likewise for the \"trial\" in Bininj Kunwok. Such categorization has been called \"inelegant.\" It can also poorly reflect the grammatical structure: using the suffix , Bininj Kunwok treats the first person inclusive \"trial\" identically to the \"duals\" in other persons, even though it refers to three people.\nThe alternate analysis is thus:\n\u00a0\n\u00a0\nThe 'minimal' number is the smallest possible group for each category. For 1st exclusive, 2nd, and 3rd, this is one, and for 1st inclusive, this is two. Unit augmented is one more than minimal. For 1st exclusive, 2nd, and 3rd, this is two, and for 1st inclusive, this is three. Augmented is an equivalent to plural. In a minimal/augmented system, augmented means more than one for 1st exclusive, 2nd, and 3rd, and means more than two for 1st inclusive. In a minimal/unit augmented/augmented system, augmented means more than two for 1st exclusive, 2nd, and 3rd, and means more than three for 1st inclusive.\nBesides Ilocano, languages considered to have a minimal/augmented pronoun system include Tagalog, Maranao, Maskelynes, and Ho-Chunk. The three-way distinction with the addition of unit augmented is mostly found in Australian Aboriginal languages, more specifically non-Pama-Nyungan languages. Among the very few languages outside Australia it applies to is the Austronesian language \u00c4iwoo and the Trans\u2013New Guinea language of Kunimaipa.\nMinimal and augmented may also combine with paucal to create a three-way pronoun system of minimal, paucal, and augmented/plural. This is reportedly the case with Kayapo. A four-way system of minimal, unit augmented, paucal, and plural is theoretically possible, but has never been observed in any natural language.\nComposed numbers.\nComposed numbers are number categories built from multiple number markers combined. They are \"a rare phenomenon.\"\nDual and plural.\nIn Breton:\nBreton only has the dual for nouns that naturally come in pairs, mostly body parts and items of clothing. The composed dual and plural indicates multiple sets of two each, whereas the regular plural represents multiple items without them conceptualized as coming in pairs. There is at least one attestation in Ancient Egyptian, from an inscription dating to the reign of Merneptah, of the exact same grammatical construction with the word \"hand\" (to mean multiple pairs of hands).\nA similar category can be found in some nouns of Classical Arabic, where it has been called the \"dual of the plural\". However, its meaning is the reverse of the Breton construction. Rather than multiple sets of two each, it indicates two sets of multiple each. Thus\u00a0there is , spear (singular); , two spears (dual); , spears (plural); and , two groups of spears (dual of the plural). The Arabic dual of the plural more specifically implies a minimum of six items, or two groups of three each.\nPlural and plural.\nIn Breton and Classical Arabic, as well as in Somali and Maasai, some nouns may compose the plural with itself, to mean multiple different groups. This has been called the \"plural of the plural\", the plural plural, or the double plural. An Arabic example is , dog (singular); , dogs (plural); and , groups of dogs (double plural). The Arabic double plural implies a minimum of nine items, or three groups of three each. Some Classical Arabic nouns may even compose the plural with itself yet again, to create the \"plural plural plural\" or triple plural, such as , sect (singular); , sects (plural); , groups of sects (double plural); and , groups of groups of sects (triple plural). The triple plural implies a minimum of 27 items. According to the 15th century linguist and polymath Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, the Arabic word for male camel, , may be cumulatively pluralized up to six times: (plural), (double plural), (triple plural), (quadruple plural), (quintuple plural), and (sextuple plural).\nConflated numbers.\nSome number categories, formed from the combination of other existing categories, have only been attested as occurring secondarily alongside other grammatical number systems within a language. These have been called conflated numbers.\nSingular-dual.\nA few languages have specific parts of speech that distinguish between two number categories: one or two, and more than two. The former category can be thought of as a single conflated singular-dual number. For example, in the nouns of Kalaw Lagaw Ya:\nThe pronouns and verbs of Kalaw Lagaw Ya distinguish singular, dual, and plural, leaving no ambiguity between one and two in full sentences.\nWhile Kalaw Lagaw Ya has the singular-dual in all nouns, Central Pame has it specifically in inanimate nouns, such as , spoon(s) (one or two), and , spoons (plural, three or more). Pame animate nouns largely have a full three-way distinction: , dog (singular); , two dogs (dual); and , dogs (plural). \nThe singular-dual may also be found in verbs: Hopi verbs distinguish singular-dual and plural (3+), while Hopi pronouns distinguish singular and plural (2+). The dual can be represented with a plural pronoun combined with a singular-dual verb. This phenomenon has been called a constructed number or a Frankendual. However, Hopi nouns still overtly distinguish singular, dual, and plural. Idi goes even further by having no specific dual markers of any kind for any part of speech, with the only way to represent dual being combining a singular-dual verb with a plural noun. A more complex example comes from Koasati, where besides plural, some verbs have singular and dual, some verbs just have singular, and some verbs just have singular-dual:\nSingular-dual-trial.\nIn the Tucanoan language of Tuyuca, inanimate classifiers (which attach\u00a0to nouns) distinguish one to three versus more than three:\nThe related Tucanoan language of Wanano also has some nouns that function this\u00a0way.\nThe same number distinction is\u00a0also seen in the verb for \"climb\" in Miriwoong, an Australian language.\nSingular-dual-trial-quadral.\nIn Piratapuyo, closely related to Wanano, some nouns\u00a0with inanimate classifiers distinguish between one and four versus more than four:\nSingular-paucal.\nZuni, similarly to Hopi, shows a singular-dual versus plural distinction in its verbs, and a plural noun with a nonplural verb indicates dual. However, the opposite combination, a nonplural noun with a plural verb, is also possible, and can be variably interpreted as one, two, or a few. Zuni nouns have thus been described as having a \"singular-paucal\" versus plural distinction.\nSome nouns in Navajo have also been described as working this\u00a0way, such as:\nSimilarly, although Larike pronouns exhibit singular, dual, trial, and plural, they can only be used for human referents. For nonhuman referents, there are only two possible numbers, which are marked on the verb: a plural, and a \"singular\" that can be used to mean anywhere from one to a few.\nNondual.\nThe nondual number means any number except two. For example, in Wangkumara:\nWangkumara does not normally mark number directly on nouns. Instead, it distinguishes singular, dual, and plural using adnominal pronouns, plural-indicating adjectives like 'many', or marking on other adjectives. The exception is that nouns take the dual enclitic when referring to two. Thus for nouns alone, the only distinction is dual and nondual.\nA more complex system can be found in the Tanoan languages of Kiowa and Jemez. These languages have what is called an inverse number system. Although the languages distinguish between singular, dual, and plural, any given noun only has a single possible number marker. What number is implicit in an unmarked noun depends on its class. In Kiowa, by default, Class I nouns are singular-dual, Class II nouns are plural (two or more), Class III nouns are dual, and Class IV nouns are mass nouns\u00a0with no number. The inverse number marker changes\u00a0the noun to whatever number(s) the unmarked noun isn't, such as changing Class III nouns from dual to nondual. In Jemez, Class III nouns are the opposite: they are inherently nondual, and get marked for dual.\n\u00a0\n\u00a0\nThe nondual versus dual distinction may also be found in verbs. Timbisha has verbs with several different possible number distinctions, including nondual ones. A more minor example is Forest Enets, which has\u00a0the nondual only in its intransitive third person imperative verbs.\nThe nondual violates a proposed universal of conflated systems, namely that they will always encompass every value except plural. Regardless, the nondual has still been referred to as a conflation of number values.\nNumberless languages.\nA small number of languages have no grammatical number at all, even in pronouns. A well known example is Pirah\u00e3. Acehnese comes close, but appears to have a singular/plural distinction only in the first person pronouns.\nDistributives and collectives.\nDistributives and collectives are two related categories whose inclusion in grammatical number has been contested. Both describe how members of a group are viewed, rather than how many members are in that group.\nDistributive plural.\nThe distributive plural denotes multiple entities that are separated and distinct, either in physical space, through time, or by type. For example, in Dagaare:\nIn Dagaare, the distributive plural may indicate either referents in different locations or referents of different types. By contrast, in Quileute, it only means referents in different locations, and in Mohawk, it only means referents of different types. Thus in Mohawk there is , towel, and , various products for wiping like towels, napkins, and so on. It is also possible to have distributive pronouns, such as those found in Yir-Yoront, which distinguish between \"you and I\" and \"you and I, acting separately\".\nHowever, it is most common to mark the distributive on verbs. This may distribute the action across various individuals, such as in the Paraguayan Guaran\u00ed constructions: , \"they dropped a pebble\"; , \"they each dropped a pebble\". It may also distribute the action across\u00a0time, such as in the N\u00eal\u00eamwa words , to throw, and , to throw (repeatedly). Some \u01c2\u02bcAmkoe verbs offer multiple senses of the distributive for one verb: , to stab; , to stab (repeatedly); , to stab (several things at different locations). The distributive plural may be a part of even larger paradigms: in Urarina, intransitive verbs describing a positional state (such as \"it is lying on its side\") distinguish between singular, dual, paucal, plural (4+), and distributive plural.\nWhile some linguists have treated the distributive as a category of grammatical number, others have rejected this. A few things make its categorization as a grammatical number potentially problematic. Several languages allow the distributive to be added to mass nouns that are normally not considered to have number, such as the Dagaare , gold, and , \"gold in different locations\". This can be described as a nondistributive versus distributive distinction, with neither being singular or plural. Several languages also allow separate plural and distributive markers to be added to a word at the same time. Additionally, grammatical number frequently requires agreement, but distributivity does not.\nCollective plural.\nThe collective plural denotes multiple entities that are considered together as a unit. It is often conceptualized as the opposite of the distributive. For example, in Tunica:\nThe collective may be limited to just a small subset of nouns, like in Kujireray, where it can only be used with certain insects and small objects: , fly; , flies; and , swarm of flies. Just like the distributive, the collective can also change the meaning of verbs, as in Panyjima: , to stand, and , to stand together. In Vaeakau-Taumako, the collective is indicated through different articles: , the person; , the people; and , the group of people.\nThe collective presents similar issues as the distributive in its potential classification as grammatical number, including the fact that some languages allow both collective and plural markers on the same words. Adding a collective to a plural word does not change the number of referents, only how those referents are conceptualized.\nNumber in specific languages.\nBasque.\nBasque declension has four grammatical numbers: indefinite, definite singular, definite plural, and definite close plural:\nA noun followed by an adjective or a demonstrative is in the absolutive case, and the last word in the phrase is declined:\n (\"The house / House\"). (\"A house\"). (\"A big house\"). (\"In a big house\"). (\"That big house\"). (\"In that big white house\").\nIf the amount is known, the plural grammatical numbers are used: (\"The thieves have broken in two houses\" [indefinite: the houses are unknown to the speakers]). (\"The thieves have broken in two or three houses\" [indefinite: the speakers does not know the exact amount of houses]). (\"The thieves have broken in both houses\" [definite plural: both are known to the speakers]). (\"The thieves have broken in these two houses\" [definite close plural: both are being shown by the speaker]).\nThe indefinite is also used in some idioms and set phrases: (\"Good day! / Good morning!\"), (\"Bon appetit!\"), (\"From house to house\"), (\"Go to the mass\"), (\"To look for a house\"), and as the root for compound words (, , \"Person or thing which brings loss to a home\") or derivative words (, \"To go home / To send home\"; , \"fond of home\"; , \"housebuilder\").\nIt is also used to include oneself in the group referred to: (\"The Navarrese like celebrations\": the speaker is not a Navarrese). (\"We Navarrese like celebrations\": the speaker is a Navarrese).\nVerbs have four singular persons and three plural ones, as follows:\nSingular:\nPlural:\nEnglish.\nEnglish is typical of most world languages, in distinguishing only between singular and plural number. Singular corresponds to exactly one (or minus one), while plural applies to all other cases, including more and less than one or even 1.0. The plural form of a noun is usually created by adding the suffix \"-(e)s\". The pronouns have irregular plurals, as in \"I\" versus \"we\", because they are ancient and frequently used words going back to when English had a well developed system of declension. English verbs distinguish singular from plural number in the third person present tense (\"He goes\" versus \"They go\"). Old English also contained dual grammatical numbers; Modern English retains a few residual terms reflective of dual number (such as \"both\" and \"neither\", as opposed to \"all\" and \"none\" respectively), but they are generally considered to no longer constitute a separate grammatical number.\nFinnish.\nThe Finnish language has a plural form of almost every noun case (except the comitative, which is formally only plural).\nHowever, when a number is used, or a word signifying a number (monta- many), the singular version of the partitive case is used.\nand where no specific number is mentioned, the plural version of the partitive case is used\nand in the possessive (genitive)\nFrench.\nIn modern Romance languages, nouns, adjectives and articles are declined according to number (singular or plural only). Verbs are conjugated for number as well as person. French treats zero as using the singular number, not the plural.\nIn its written form, French declines nouns for number (singular or plural). In speech, however, the majority of nouns (and adjectives) are not declined for number. The typical plural suffix, or , is silent, no longer indicating a change in pronunciation. Spoken number marking on the noun appears when liaison occurs.\nNormally, the article or determiner is the primary spoken indicator of number.\nHebrew.\nIn Modern Hebrew, a Semitic language, most nouns have only singular and plural forms, such as \"book\" and \"books\", but some have distinct dual forms using a distinct dual suffix (largely nouns pertaining to numbers or time, such as \"two thousand\" and \"two weeks\"), some use this dual suffix for their regular plurals (largely body parts that tend to come in pairs, such as \"eyes\", as well as some that do not, such as \"teeth\"), and some are inherently dual (such as \"pants\" and \"bicycle\"). Adjectives, verbs, and pronouns agree with their subjects' or antecedents' numbers, but only have a two-way distinction between singular and plural; dual nouns entail plural adjectives, verbs, and pronouns.\nMortlockese.\nThe Mortlockese language of the Mortlock Islands uses a base 10 counting system. Pronouns, nouns and demonstratives are used exclusively in the singular and plural forms through the use of classifiers, suffixes and prefixes. There are no other dual or trial grammatical forms in the Mortlockese language. Different forms that can be used in the language include first person singular and plural words, second person singular words like , second person plural words like used to refer to an outside group, and third person plural words.\nRussian.\nModern Russian has a singular vs plural number system, but the declension of noun phrases containing numeral expressions follows complex rules. For example, (\"I have one book-\"nom. sing.\"/three book-\"gen. sing.\"/five book-\"gen. plur.\"\"). See Dual number: Slavic languages for a discussion of number phrases in Russian and other Slavic languages.\nThe numeral \"one\" also has a plural form used with pluralia tantum, as in , \"one clock\". The same form is used with countable nouns in meaning \"only\": \"There are only idiots around\".\nSwedish.\nSwedish inflects nouns in singular and plural. The plural of the noun is usually obtained by adding a suffix, according to the noun's declension. The suffixes are as follows: in the 1st declension (e.g. \u2013 ), in the 2nd (e.g. \u2013 ), in the 3rd (e.g. \u2013 ), in the 4th (e.g. \u2013 ) and no inflectional suffix is added for the nouns in the 5th declension (e.g. \u2013 ). Verbs in Swedish do not distinguish singular from plural number, but adjectives do.\nConstructed languages.\nAuxiliary languages often have fairly simple systems of grammatical number. In one of the most common schemes (found, for example, in Interlingua and Ido), nouns and pronouns distinguish between singular and plural, but not other numbers, and adjectives and verbs do not display any number agreement. In Esperanto, however, adjectives must agree in both number and case with the nouns that they qualify.\nL\u00e1adan uses a singular-paucal-superplural breakdown, with paucal indicating between two and five items inclusive.\nFormal expression.\nSynthetic languages typically distinguish grammatical number by inflection. (Analytic languages, such as Chinese, often do not mark grammatical number.)\nSome languages have no marker for the plural in certain cases, e.g. Swedish \u2013 \"house, houses\" (but \u2013 \"the house\", \u2013 \"the houses\").\nIn most languages, the singular is formally unmarked, whereas the plural is marked in some way. Other languages, most notably the Bantu languages, mark both the singular and the plural, for instance Swahili (see example below). The third logical possibility, found in only a few languages such as Welsh and Sinhala, is an unmarked plural contrasting with marked singular. Below are some examples of number affixes for nouns (where the inflecting morphemes are underlined):\nElements marking number may appear on nouns and pronouns in dependent-marking languages or on verbs and adjectives in head-marking languages.\nIn the English sentence above, the plural suffix \"-s\" is added to the noun \"cowboy\". In the equivalent in Western Apache, a head-marking language, a plural affix is added to the verb \"he is teaching him\", resulting in \"he is teaching them\" while noun \"cowboy\" is unmarked for number.\nNumber particles.\nPlurality is sometimes marked by a specialized number particle (or number word). This is frequent in Australian and Austronesian languages. An example from Tagalog is the word [m\u0250\u02c8\u014ba]: compare \"house\" with \"houses\". In Kapampangan, certain nouns optionally denote plurality by secondary stress: \"man\" and \"woman\" become \"men\" and \"women\".\nClassifiers with number morphology.\nIn Sanskrit and some other languages, number and case are fused categories and there is concord for number between a noun and its predicator. Some languages however (for example, Assamese) lack this feature.\nLanguages that show number inflection for a large enough corpus of nouns or allow them to combine directly with singular and plural numerals can be described as non-classifier languages. On the other hand, there are languages that obligatorily require a counter word or the so-called classifier for all nouns. For example, the category of number in Assamese is fused with the category of classifier, which always carries a definite/indefinite reading. The singularity or plurality of the noun is determined by the addition of the classifier suffix either to the noun or to the numeral. Number system in Assamese is either realized as numeral or as nominal inflection, but not both. Numerals [ek] 'one' and [dui] 'two', can be realized as both free morpheme and clitics. When used with classifiers, these two numerals are cliticised to the classifiers.\nPingelapese is a Micronesian language spoken on the Pingelap atoll and on two of the eastern Caroline Islands, called the high island of Pohnpei. In Pingelapese, the meaning, use, or shape of an object can be expressed through the use of numerical classifiers. These classifiers combine a noun and a number that together can give more details about the object. There are at least five sets of numerical classifiers in Pingelapese. Each classifier has a numeral part and a classifier part that corresponds to the noun it is describing. The classifier follows the noun in a phrase. There is a separate set of numerical classifiers that is used when the object is not specified. Examples of this is the names of the days of the week.\nObligatoriness of number marking.\nIn many languages, such as English, number is obligatorily expressed in every grammatical context. Some limit number expression to certain classes of nouns, such as animates or referentially prominent nouns (as with proximate forms in most Algonquian languages, opposed to referentially less prominent obviative forms). In others, such as Chinese and Japanese, number marking is not consistently applied to most nouns unless a distinction is needed or already present.\nA very common situation is for plural number to not be marked if there is any other overt indication of number, as for example in Hungarian: \"flower\"; \"flowers\"; \"six flowers\".\nTransnumeral.\nMany languages, such as Chinese, Korean, Japanese and Malay (including Indonesian), particularly spoken in Southeast and East Asia, have optional number marking. In such cases, an unmarked noun is neither singular nor plural, but rather ambiguous as to number. This is called \"transnumeral\" or sometimes \"general number,\" abbreviated TRN. In many such languages, number tends to be marked for definite and highly animate referents, most notably first-person pronouns.\nNumber agreement.\nVerbs.\nIn many languages, verbs are conjugated according to number. Using French as an example, one says (\"I see\"), but (\"we see\"). The verb (\"to see\") changes from in the first person singular to in the plural. In everyday English, this often happens in the third person (\"she sees\", \"they see\"), but not in other grammatical persons, except with the verb \"to be\".\nIn English, and in Indo-European languages in general, the verb is singular or plural to match whether the subject of the sentence is singular or plural. Oppositely, in Xavante, transitive verbs match the number of the object. In West Greenlandic, the verb is marked for the number of both the subject and the object.\nAdjectives and determiners.\nAdjectives often agree with the number of the noun they modify. For example, in French, one says \"a tall tree\", but \"two tall trees\". The singular adjective becomes in the plural, unlike English \"tall\", which remains unchanged.\nDeterminers may agree with number. In English, the demonstratives \"this\", \"that\" change to \"these\", \"those\" in the plural, and the indefinite article \"a\", \"an\" is either omitted or changes to \"some\". In French and German, the definite articles have gender distinctions in the singular but not the plural. In Italian, Spanish and Portuguese, both definite and indefinite articles are inflected for gender and number, e.g. Portuguese \"the\" (singular, masc./fem.), \"the\" (plural, masc./fem.); \"a(n)\" (singular, masc./fem.), \"some\" (plural, masc./fem.), \"two\" (plural, masc./fem.).\nIn the Finnish sentence \"Nights are dark\", each word referring to the plural noun \"nights\" (\"night\" = ) is pluralized (night-PL is-PL dark-PL-partitive).\nExceptions.\nSometimes, grammatical number will not represent the actual quantity, a form-meaning mismatch. For example, in Ancient Greek neuter plurals took a singular verb. The plural form of a pronoun may also be applied to a single individual as a sign of importance, respect or generality, as in the \"pluralis majestatis\", the T\u2013V distinction, and the generic \"you\", found in many languages, or, in English, when using the singular \"they\" for gender-neutrality.\nIn Arabic, the plural of a non-human noun (one that refers to an animal or to an inanimate entity regardless of whether the noun is grammatically masculine or feminine in the singular) is treated as feminine singular\u2014this is called the inanimate plural. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nbut\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCollective nouns.\nA collective noun is a word that designates a group of objects or beings regarded as a whole, such as \"flock\", \"team\", or \"corporation\". Although many languages treat collective nouns as singular, in others they may be interpreted as plural. In British English, phrases such as \"the committee are meeting\" are common (the so-called agreement \"in sensu\" \"in meaning\"; with the meaning of a noun, rather than with its form, see constructio ad sensum). The use of this type of construction varies with dialect and level of formality.\nIn some cases, the number marking on a verb with a collective subject may express the degree of collectivity of action:\nSemantic versus grammatical number.\nAll languages are able to specify the quantity of referents. They may do so by lexical means with words such as English \"a few\", \"some\", \"one\", \"two\", \"five hundred\". However, not every language has a grammatical category of number. Grammatical number is expressed by morphological or syntactic means. That is, it is indicated by certain grammatical elements, such as through affixes or number words. Grammatical number may be thought of as the indication of semantic number through grammar.\nLanguages that express quantity only by lexical means lack a grammatical category of number. For instance, in Khmer, neither nouns nor verbs carry any grammatical information concerning number: such information can only be conveyed by lexical items such as 'some', 'a few', and so on.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42297", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42297", "title": "San Luis Valley", "text": "High-altitude basin in Colorado and New Mexico in the United States\nThe San Luis Valley is a region in south-central Colorado with a small portion overlapping into New Mexico. The valley is approximately long and wide, making it the largest alpine valley in the world. It extends from the Continental Divide on the northwest rim into New Mexico on the south. It contains 6\u00a0counties and portions of 3\u00a0others. It is an extensive high-elevation depositional basin of approximately with an average elevation of above sea level. The valley is a section of the Rio Grande Rift and is drained to the south by the Rio Grande, which rises in the San Juan Mountains to the west of the valley and flows south into New Mexico. The San Luis Valley has a cold desert climate but has substantial water resources from the Rio Grande and groundwater.\nThe San Luis Valley was ceded to the United States by Mexico following the Mexican\u2013American War. Hispanic settlers began moving north and settling in the valley after the United States made a treaty with the Utes and established a fort in the early 1850s. Prior to the Mexican war the Spanish and Mexican governments had reserved the valley to the Utes. Later in the 19th century Anglo settlers began to settle in the valley and engaged in mining, ranching, and irrigated agriculture. Today the valley has a diverse Anglo and Hispanic population.\nHistory.\nUtes.\nPrior to 1868 the Capote (Kapota) band of Ute Indians lived in the valley. The Utes made a treaty of peace with the United States in 1849 after the Mexican War. Shortly thereafter settlers from New Mexico established several small settlements in what is now Colorado and in 1868 the Utes were removed to a reservation in western Colorado. They continued to play a role in Saguache in the northwestern corner of the valley from the Los Pinos Agency to the west of Saguache until they lost their extensive reservation as the result of the Meeker Massacre in 1879.\nSpanish and Mexican administration.\nThe area was administered as part of the Spanish, later Mexican, province of Nuevo Mexico. In 1843, the government of New Mexico created the Sangre de Cristo Land Grant consisting of of the valley and granted the family of Carlos Beaubien. The area was ceded to the United States in 1848 after the Mexican\u2013American War in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.\nUnited States administration.\nExtensive settlement began in the San Luis Valley, primarily by Hispanic farmers and ranchers from New Mexico, in the 1850s.\nEarly settlers built a church in the village that is now called San Luis and dedicated it on the Feast of Saint Louis, 21\u00a0June 1851.\nAt present, the San Luis Valley has the largest native Hispanic population in Colorado; many families are directly descended from the original New Mexican settlers.\nThe surge of immigration followed the construction by the U.S. Army of Fort Massachusetts for protection against the Utes, who had previously barred settlers. The history of the U.S. military presence in the valley is preserved at Fort Garland and other historic preserves in the valley.\nThe San Luis Valley became part of the Territory of Colorado in 1861.\nThe original Ute population was confined to the Southern Ute and Ute Mountain Indian reservations in the late 19th\u00a0century.\nGeography.\nThe San Luis Valley is the broad, generally flat, valley at the headwaters of the Rio Grande in south central Colorado and far north central New Mexico. The northern portion of the San Luis Valley is an endorheic basin; surface water does not exit this area. Irrigated agriculture is possible in the area due to groundwater and streams fed by the average 100\u00a0inches of snow the surrounding mountain ranges receive. The southern portion is drained by the Rio Grande.\nThere is no clear southern boundary but the term is generally used to include the San Luis Hills of southern Colorado and the Taos Plateau of northern New Mexico. About 50\u00a0miles from east to west and about 150\u00a0miles from north to south, the valley is bounded on the east by the Sangre de Cristo Mountains and on the west by the San Juan Mountains.\nWithin Colorado the San Luis Valley is generally considered to comprise five Colorado counties: Saguache, Alamosa, Rio Grande, Conejos, and Costilla. The principal towns are: Alamosa, Monte Vista, Del Norte, South Fork, Saguache, Center, Moffat, Fort Garland, San Luis, Blanca, Antonito, La Jara, Capulin, Manassa, Sanford, Romeo, Crestone, Villa Grove, Hooper, Mosca, San Acacio and a number of smaller locations. A few other counties of Colorado have some land in the Rio Grande Basin including Archuleta, Mineral, Hinsdale, and San Juan.\nBlanca Peak is prominent in the Sierra Blanca at the southern end of the northernmost section of the mountains, which is known as the Sangre de Cristo Range. There are several passes, with elevations between , giving access to the valley. North La Veta Pass, through the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, is used by U.S. Highway\u00a0160 and by the Colorado Pacific Rio Grande Railroad (formerly a branch of the Denver &amp; Rio Grande Western) tracks. Other passes used historically were Medano, Mosca and Sangre de Cristo Passes.\nThe Great Sand Dunes are a famous feature of the valley. They lie directly to the west of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains. The dunes can reach high. The Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve is now in place to protect both the dunes and the numerous archeological sites found in the area. The natural valley aquifer is close to the surface in this part of the valley, and helps with maintenance of water levels in the San Luis Lakes, just to the west of the sand dunes.\nElevation rises as you go north in the valley to Poncha Pass, used now by U.S. Highway\u00a0285 and historically by the narrow gauge tracks of the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad. Otto Mears, then of Saguache, built and operated a historic toll road over Poncha Pass at the north end of the valley into the San Luis Valley during Colorado's 19th century mining era when the valley was the gateway to the San Juan and Gunnison country and the Ute agency was in the mountains west of Saguache. Mount Otto on the east side of the valley is named after him.\nCumbres Pass is a 10,015\u00a0ft. pass between Antonito, Colorado and Chama, New Mexico. The pass is traversed by State Highway\u00a017 and the Cumbres and Toltec Scenic Railroad (originally built as the San Juan Extension of the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad that ran to Durango, Colorado). From the headwaters of the Rio Grande Wolf Creek Pass is the route of U.S. Highway\u00a0160 between Del Norte, Colorado and Pagosa Springs, Colorado, while Spring Creek Pass is the route of State Highway\u00a0149 between U.S. Highway\u00a0160 and Lake City, Colorado. Stony Pass, sometimes spelled Stoney Pass, a historic wagon road to the mining camps of the San\u00a0Juans, is now a jeep trail. At the north end of the valley, North Pass is the route of State Highway\u00a0114 between Saguache, Colorado and Gunnison, Colorado, bypassing the original route over Cochetopa Pass, now a county road.\nThe Rio Grande follows a course through the southern valley from Del Norte southeastward via Alamosa to New Mexico. South of Alamosa it is joined by several streams from the west including the Alamosa River and the Conejos River and Culebra Creek from the east. Most of the northern valley is an endorheic basin called the San Luis Closed Basin. Generally, within the Closed Basin the major streams such as Saguache Creek, San Luis Creek, and the streams from the west face of the Sangre de Cristos flow only a short distance onto the valley floor as surface streams. Only in very wet years, perhaps every 20\u00a0years, does the stream system in the Closed Basin flow as a contiguous unit into San Luis Lake at the low point of the Closed Basin west of the Great Sand Dunes.\nLand ownership and management.\nAbout 50% of the in the San Luis Valley is privately owned. Much of the land in the south part of the Valley, in Conejos and Costilla counties, was originally part of large Mexican land grants and is private land.\n on the borders of the valley (generally adjacent to National Forest Lands) are managed by the Bureau of Land Management, BLM, a division of the United States Department of the Interior. This land is usually leased to neighboring ranches for grazing for a nominal fee. Part of the value of a ranch is its continuing lease of BLM or National Forest lands.\nPublic lands in the mountains surrounding the San Luis Valley are generally part of the Rio Grande National Forest and are managed by the United States Forest Service.\nLarge areas of private lands have either been subdivided into small \"ranch\" lots or have been sold or donated to the Federal government and make up portions of the Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve, other wildlife preserves, and various state wildlife sites.\nGeology.\nThe San Luis Valley contains an alluvial basin, the Alamosa Basin, which lies at the north end of the Rio Grande rift. Deposits include the deeper alluvial strata, overlying Precambrian basement rock, Eocene alluvial deposits from a shallow Laramide depression, the Blanco Basin Formation; and Oligocene ash and lava flows associated with the Conejos Formation, is the Santa Fe formation, mixed alluvium and lava outflows from the San Juan volcanic field to the west; later strata comprise the Alamosa formation, alternating layers of sand, gravel, and clay. The relatively impermeable clay layers trap ground water in the \"confined aquifer\" which, if tapped, supplies artesian wells. Surface waters, including the Rio Grande and other streams, are hydrologically connected to the \"unconfined aquifer\" a shallow ground water formation which underlies much of the valley. The deeper confined aquifers have sufficient hydrological connection with the surface waters of the valley that they are not considered for the purposes of Colorado water law \"nontributary\" waters which could legally be mined. Streams which flow into the valley, particularly the Rio Grande, have deposited alluvial fans where they emerge from higher terrain onto the valley floor. \nAncestral Rockies, the Central Colorado Trough, and the San Luis-Uncompahgre Highlands.\nThe gap between the Precambrian basement rock and the Eocene alluvial deposits in the San Luis Valley is considered evidence that much of southern Colorado, including the western portion of the San Luis Valley, was highlands in the period prior to the Eocene Epoch, 56 to 34\u00a0million years ago. There were lowlands to the north in central Colorado, the Colorado sag, an east\u2013west basin. It is from those highlands to the west, in Paleozoic, Pennsylvanian, and Permian times that the coarse alluvial deposits of the Sangre de Cristo Formation such as the Crestone Conglomerate originated. The Minturn Formation, a limestone formation exemplified at Marble Mountain on the crest of the Sangre de Cristos, is evidence of a sea in the Central Colorado Trough during the era of the Ancestral Rockies.\nWestern Interior Seaway.\nIn the middle and late Cretaceous Period, about 100\u00a0million years ago, the San Luis Valley lay on the shore of or beneath the Western Interior Seaway, a shallow sea which divided North America into two parts. As the sea deepened and expanded sand and gravel eroded from mountains in the west was deposited in the Dakota Formation; later, when the sea was deeper mud and sand were deposited in the Mancos Shale. The Lexam oil play near Crestone is based on the hypothesis that there is oil trapped in Dakota Formation sandstones lying beneath Mancos Shale to the west of the Sangre de Cristo fault at the western base of the Sangre de Cristo Range southwest of Crestone. Drilling at the base of the range during gold exploration in the vicinity showed small amounts of oil and evidence of the existence of those formations as well as the underlying Morrison Formation. Prior to this discovery it was assumed that these formations had eroded away during the Laramide orogeny.\nLaramide orogeny.\nBuilding of the Rocky Mountains by folding during the Laramide orogeny 80 to 55\u00a0million years ago created a highland, the San Luis-Brazos uplift, in the area of the San Luis Valley. This process over 30\u00a0million years resulted in an elevated and highly eroded peneplain where the San Luis Valley is today. There was a basin in its western portion which may have drained west through the course historically followed by the San Juan River. Sedimentary deposits formed in that basin during Eocene times remain in place beneath the western portion of the San Luis Valley. During the Pleistocene, parts of the valley were occupied by Lake Alamosa.\nAgriculture and wildlife.\nMuch of the land in the San Luis Valley is used for grazing. Farming is generally concentrated around the towns of Alamosa, Monte Vista and Center. Principal crops include potatoes, head lettuce, wheat, and barley. The barley grown here is the main supplier for Coors beer company. In 1982, quinoa was successfully grown for the first time outside of South America in the San Luis Valley of Colorado, and commercial growth has occurred since 1987. Less favored areas with a shorter growing season and less access to water rights tend to be devoted to alfalfa and grazing. Broad areas, especially in Saguache County, Colorado have a high water table or are even flooded part of the year. Uncultivated land is often covered with \"chico\", low brush such as rabbitbrush, greasewood and other woody species. Cropland is typically irrigated with large (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444\u00a0mile radius) center-pivot irrigation systems, and a common feature of the Rio Grande Delta area where the Rio Grande enters the valley are large piles of potato-sized rocks screened from the soil.\nThe area supports a wide variety of wildlife. Sandhill cranes migrate through the valley every spring and fall. The Monte Vista Crane Festival takes place in March, centering on the Monte Vista National Wildlife Refuge located south of town. The valley is a flyway for many migrating birds including avocets, bald eagles, goldfinches, and a plethora of hawk species.\nAgriculture in the San Luis Valley is enabled by irrigation, since average annual precipitation is just whereas most ag crop production requires at least twice that much water. Surface water rights in the Valley began to be allocated in 1852, with the People's Ditch, near San Luis. In the 1870s, some of the San Luis Valley were irrigated, which rose to in the 1880s. By the early 1900s, demand for surface water had outstripped the available supply and farmers began to use subsurface wells to supply water. Over 5,000 groundwater wells existed by the time of World War I. By the early 1970s, water availability began to be limited, with the State enforcing a moratorium on new wells in much of the valley in 1972, and then completely ending new appropriations of water throughout the valley in 1981. The 1980s and 90s saw relatively bountiful water years in the valley, with drought conditions becoming the norm in the 2010s. , water use cutbacks are anticipated due to a court order requiring the restoration of 400,000 acre-feet of water to the groundwater aquifer, as well as the forecast for reduced Rio Grande flows in future years.\nEconomy.\nPredominantly agricultural in nature, the area is also one of the poorest rural areas of Colorado, with a poverty rate estimated at between 20 and 25% in 2019. The San Luis Valley Regional Medical Center is the largest employer in the valley, with over 600\u00a0employees.\nTourism has become a more important part of the economy in recent years, coupled with attempts to develop the area as a retirement destination. \nThe arts are becoming an increasing force in expanding the economy of the San Luis Valley.\nTourist attractions.\nThe San Luis Valley is home to the Great Sand Dunes National Park. The National Park is Open 24/7 year round. There are no timed entries or reservations to visit. The tallest dunes in North America are the centerpiece in a diverse landscape of grasslands, wetlands, forests, alpine lakes, and tundra. Stay on a moonless night to experience countless stars in this International Dark Sky Park.\nTourist attractions suggested by \"National Geographic Traveler\" include the Monte Vista Crane Festival in March, Los Caminos Antiguos, a regional road network, the Luther Bean Museum at Adams State University. Multiple Hot springs the Sand Dunes Swimming Pool Hot Spring and Joyful Journey Hot Springs. The Firedworks Gallery on Main Street in Alamosa for regional history and art, and regional Mexican food. Also recommended near Alamosa for wildlife viewing are The Alamosa Ranch north of town and the Alamosa National Wildlife Refuge to the southeast. To the northeast of Alamosa lie the San Luis Lakes State Wildlife Area, the San Luis Lakes and the Great Sand Dunes National Park\nAt Fort Garland, Colorado south of the Great Sand Dunes on U.S. Highway\u00a0160 the Fort Garland Museum is recommended and further south on State Highway\u00a0159 at San Luis, Colorado, the oldest town in Colorado, the bronze sculptures by Huberto Maestas, depicting the Stations of the Cross. From San Luis, the National Geographic road trip suggests traveling west on State Highway\u00a0142 through Manassa, Colorado, then south on U.S. Highway\u00a0285 past Conejos, Colorado then west on State Highway\u00a017 over Cumbres Pass to Chama, New Mexico paralleling the route of the narrow gauge Cumbres &amp; Toltec Scenic Railroad.\nRock climbing and camping are available at Penitente Canyon and other locations. Rito Seco Park, located east of San Luis and named for a creek called Rito Seco, was established as a campground in the 1970s. However, it lacked hiking trails. Then in 2022, after more than a decade of planning, Costilla County and an organization called San Luis Valley Great Outdoors built three hiking trails and one single track mountain bike trail in the park.\nThe San Luis Valley is also home to the Colorado Gator Reptile Rescue. The Reptile rescue is open to the public to view and interact with many different types of reptiles from Gators to Tortoises. The rescue uses thermal hot springs water to maintain the gators through the winter months and is home to Morris the Movie Star Gator\nArt community.\nThere are over 500\u00a0known artists living in the San Luis Valley as evidenced by an ongoing directory maintained by Monte Vista artists' group, The Art Thing, The Art Thing's membership boasts several nationally recognized artists working in various media. Monte Vista is also home to the Monte Arts Council as well as several festivals and an art tour that attracts artists from as far away as California and North Carolina. The arts of the San Luis Valley draw from traditions of the early Utes, Apaches, and Comanches and the later Spanish-speaking immigrants.\nThe San Luis Valley is home to five active live theaters, two at Adams State University, The Creede Repertory Theater, The Old Spanish Trails Theatre Company and Rocky Mountain Stage in Monte Vista. In August there are two major Music Festivals, the Spanish Trails Music Festival and Mexican Rodeo, and Rhythms on the Rio. Music in the valley is sponsored by the South Fork Music Association and the Alamosa Live Music Association.\nSolar energy.\nThe San Luis Valley is an alpine desert environment which is conducive to solar energy production. It has the highest per capita concentration of home-based solar energy systems in the United States. Colorado law requires that 30% of the power used in the state be generated from renewable sources by 2020. It also requires that 3% of the power generated be used at or near where it is generated; i.e. distributed generation.\nThere are also a number of utility-scale photovoltaic power stations in the valley, and an active market in selling or leasing land to be used for solar facilities. In 2007, SunEdison constructed the 7.7\u00a0megawatt Alamosa Photovoltaic Power Plant on about 80\u00a0acres near the town of Mosca, Colorado. It was the largest grid-connected solar electric facility in the United States at that time. It was followed in 2010 by the 19\u00a0megawatt Greater Sandhill Solar Plant, in 2011 by the 30\u00a0megawatt San Luis Valley Solar Ranch, in 2012 by the 30\u00a0megawatt Alamosa Solar Generating Project, and in 2015 by the 50\u00a0megawatt Hooper Solar PV Power Plant. All are located on previously developed agricultural lands near Mosca.\nOn 11\u00a0December 2009, more than 125\u00a0people gathered to respond to a proposal by Tessera Solar (affiliated with Stirling Energy Systems) to install 8,000 parabolic mirrors, 40\u00a0feet each, on near Saguache, Colorado. At issue was the noise expected to be generated by the numerous stirling engine generators, and the wisdom of industrial solar facilities in general. The application for a permit was withdrawn on 11\u00a0July 2011. There has also been controversy regarding proposed transmission lines over both Poncha and La Veta passes, which would open the door to much more industrial solar development. Opposition to a proposed transmission line has resulted in possible delays in development of solar facilities by Xcel Energy which together with Tri-State Generation and Transmission Association serves the valley. In 2012, the United States Department of Interior designated several Solar Energy Zones on BLM lands in the valley, although no projects have yet been announced to be in development.\nDemography.\nA significant portion of the residents of the San Luis Valley are Hispanic with historic populations in Costilla and Conejos counties which were settled by early migrants from New Mexico. There are a few Native Americans in the valley. There are small Amish communities which were recently established.\nMuch of the grazing land on the floor of the valley is of little value. In Costilla County, large tracts of land have been subdivided into 5 acre plots. 35 acre plots are also common in the valley as a 35-acre plot allows drilling a well to water a garden and livestock. These have been sold to homesteaders who often live off-the-grid.\nLa Puente, headquartered in Alamosa offers social services to the homeless and others in the valley.\nHigher education.\nAdams State University, a four-year state college at Alamosa, with approximately 3,500 students, is the major educational institution in the Valley. It is supplemented by a campus of Trinidad State College in Alamosa.\nHealth.\nSan Luis Valley Regional Medical Center is a full service Acute-Care hospital and specialty physician clinic.\nA locally conducted survey of public health statistics showed a considerable deficiency with respect to most measures of public health. There is a deficiency of medical providers, for example, 106\u00a0physicians per 100,000 compared to the Colorado average of 278.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42298", "revid": "50505822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42298", "title": "Tbilisi", "text": "Capital and the largest city of Georgia (country)\nTbilisi ( ; Georgian: , ), Georgian: , romanized: ) is the capital and largest city of Georgia, located on the banks of the Kura River. With more than 1.3 million inhabitants, it contains almost one third of the country's population. Tbilisi was founded in the fifth century AD by Vakhtang I of Iberia and has since served as the capital of various Georgian kingdoms and republics. Between 1801 and 1917, then part of the Russian Empire, it was the seat of the Caucasus Viceroyalty, governing both the northern and the southern sides of the Caucasus.\nBecause of its location at the crossroads between Europe and Asia, and its proximity to the lucrative Silk Road, throughout history, Tbilisi has been a point of contention among various global powers. To this day, the city's location ensures its position as an important transit route for energy and trade projects. Tbilisi's history is reflected in its architecture, which is a mix of medieval, neoclassical, Beaux Arts, Art Nouveau, Stalinist, and Modern structures.\nHistorically, Tbilisi has been home to people of diverse cultural, ethnic, and religious backgrounds, though its population is overwhelmingly Eastern Orthodox Christian. Notable tourist destinations include cathedrals Sameba and Sioni, Freedom Square, Rustaveli Avenue and Aghmashenebeli Avenue, medieval Narikala Fortress, the pseudo-Moorish Opera Theater, and the Georgian National Museum. The climate in Tbilisi mostly ranges from in summer and in winter.\nNames and etymology.\nThe name \"Tbilisi\" derives from Old Georgian (Asomtavruli: , Mkhedruli: ), and further from (Modern Georgian: , warm, itself from Old Georgian: ). The name (the place of warmth) was therefore given to the city because of the area's numerous sulfuric hot springs.\nUntil 1936, the name of the city in English and most other languages followed the Persian pronunciation Tiflis, while the Georgian name was (). In some languages it is still known by its pre-1936 name Tiflis ( )\nOn 17 August 1936, by order of the Soviet leadership, the official Russian names of various cities were changed to more closely match the local language. In addition, the Georgian-language form was modernized on the basis of a proposal by Georgian linguists; the ancient Georgian component (, 'warm') was replaced by the newer (). That form was the basis for the new official Russian name ( ). Most other languages have subsequently adopted the new name form, but some languages, such as Turkish, Persian, Greek, Spanish, and German, have retained a variation of .\nSome of the traditional names of Tbilisi in other languages of the region have different roots. The Ossetian name () derives from the Georgian word () meaning simply city. Chechen and Ingush names for the city use a form similar to or the same as their names for the country of Georgia ( ) as does the historical Kabardian name ( ), while Abkhaz () is from the Mingrelian ().\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nArchaeologists discovered evidence of continuous habitation of the Tbilisi suburb of Dighomi since the early Bronze Age, and stone artifacts dating to the Paleolithic age.\nDuring the late Bronze Age to early Iron Age, it was the largest settlement in the Caucasus. According to legend, the present-day territory of Tbilisi was covered by forests as late as 458. One widely accepted variant of the Tbilisi foundation myth states that King Vakhtang I of Iberia (r.\u2009c. 447/49\u00a0\u2013\u00a0502/22) went hunting in the heavily wooded region with a falcon (sometimes the falcon is replaced with either a hawk or other small birds of prey in the legend). The king's falcon allegedly caught or injured a pheasant during the hunt, after which both birds fell into a nearby hot spring and died from burns. King Vakhtang became so impressed with the hot springs that he decided to clear the forest and build a city on the location.\nKing Dachi of Iberia (r.\u2009522\u00a0\u2013\u00a0534), the successor of Vakhtang I, moved the capital of Iberia from Mtskheta to Tbilisi and began construction of the fortress wall that lined the city's new boundaries. From the sixth century, Tbilisi grew at a steady pace due to the region's strategic location along with important trade and travel routes between Europe and Asia.\nForeign domination.\nTbilisi's favorable trade location, however, did not necessarily bode well for its survival. Located strategically in the heart of the Caucasus between Europe and Asia, Tbilisi became an object of rivalry among the region's various powers such as the Roman Empire, Parthia, Sassanid Persia, Muslim Arabs, the Byzantine Empire, and the Seljuk Turks. The cultural development of the city was somewhat dependent on who ruled the city at various times, although Tbilisi was fairly cosmopolitan.\nFrom 570 to 580, the Persians ruled the city until 627, when Tbilisi was sacked by the Byzantine/Khazar armies and later, in 736\u2013738, Arab armies entered the town under Marwan II. After this point, the Arabs established an emirate centered in Tbilisi. Arabic dirhams were brought to Georgia following the Arab conquest in the seventh century, and a mint was founded in Tbilisi that produced coins with inscriptions in both Arabic and Georgian. In 764, Tbilisi \u2013 still under Arab control \u2013 was once again sacked by the Khazars. In 852, the armies of Arab leader Bugha Al-Turki invaded Tbilisi in order to enforce its return to Abbasid allegiance. The Arab domination of Tbilisi continued until about 1050. In 1065, the Seljuk Sultan Alp Arslan campaigned against the Kingdom of Georgia, subjugated Tbilisi, and built a mosque in the city.\nCapital of Georgia.\nIn 1121, after the Battle of Didgori against the Seljuks, the troops of King David IV of Georgia besieged Tbilisi, taking it in 1122. David moved his residence from Kutaisi to Tbilisi, making it the capital of a unified Georgian State, thus inaugurating the Georgian Golden Age. From the 12\u201313th centuries, Tbilisi became a regional power with a thriving economy and astonishing cultural output. By the end of the 12th century, the population of Tbilisi had reached 100,000. The city also became an important literary and cultural center, not only for Georgia, but also for the Eastern Orthodox world of the time. During Queen Tamar's reign, Shota Rustaveli worked in Tbilisi while writing his legendary epic poem \"The Knight in the Panther's Skin\". This period is often referred to as \"Georgia's Golden Age\" or the Georgian Renaissance.\nMongol domination and other instability.\nTbilisi's \"Golden Age\" did not last for more than a century. In 1226, Tbilisi was captured by the Khwarezmian Empire under Shah Jalal al-Din, who massacred tens of thousands of Christians. The Khwarezmian occupation left Tbilisi's defenses severely devastated and prone to further attacks by Mongol armies. In 1236, after suffering crushing Mongol defeats, Georgia submitted to Mongol domination. The nation itself maintained a form of \"semi-independence\" and did not lose its statehood, but Tbilisi would be strongly influenced by the Mongols for the next century, both politically and culturally. In the 1320s, the Mongols retreated from Georgia, and Tbilisi became the capital of an independent Georgian state, once again. However, an outbreak of the Black Death struck the city in 1366.\nBetween the late 14th century and the late 18th century, Tbilisi would again be under the rule of various foreign powers. On several occasions, the city would even be completely burned and razed to the ground. On 22 November 1386, Tbilisi was sacked by the armies of Timur. Timur invaded the Kingdom of Georgia seven more times. In 1440, the city was invaded and looted by Jahan Shah of the Qara Qoyunlu. From 1477 to 1478, the city was held by the Aq Qoyunlu tribesmen of Uzun Hassan.\nIranian control.\nAs early as the 1510s, Tbilisi (and the kingdoms of Kartli and Kakheti) were made vassal territories of Safavid Iran. In 1522, Tbilisi was garrisoned for the first time by a large Safavid force. Following the death of king (\"shah\") Ismail I (r. 1501\u20131524), king David X of Kartli expelled the Iranians. During this period, many parts of Tbilisi were reconstructed and rebuilt. The four campaigns of the king Tahmasp I (r. 1524\u20131576) resulted in the reoccupation of Kartli and Kakheti, and a Safavid force was permanently stationed in Tbilisi from 1551 onwards. With the 1555 Treaty of Amasya, and more firmly from 1614 to 1747, with brief intermissions, Tbilisi was an important city under Iranian rule, and it functioned as a seat of the Iranian vassal kings of Kartli whom the shah conferred with the title of vali. In 1718, the Venetian senate implored the Safavid emperor Soltan Hoseyn to protect the Catholic Armenians and Capuchin missionaries in Tbilisi from the Gregorian Armenians. Under the later rules of Teimuraz II and Heraclius II, Tbilisi became a vibrant political and cultural center free of foreign rule\u2014but, fearful of the constant threat of invasion, Georgia's rulers sought Russian protection in the 1783 Treaty of Georgievsk. Despite this agreement, the city was captured and devastated in 1795 by the Iranian Qajar ruler Agha Mohammad Khan.\nRussian control.\nIn 1801, the Russian Empire annexed the Georgian Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti, of which Tbilisi was one of the most significant urban centers. Within Tsarist Russia, Tbilisi (known then as Tiflis) was included within the Tiflis Uyezd county in 1801, part of what was initially the Georgia Governorate. Following the establishment of the Tiflis Governorate (\"Gubernia\") in 1846, Tbilisi became its capital. Russian Imperial administrators implemented a new Western-style city plan and commissioned new buildings and infrastructure, including roads and railroads connecting Tbilisi to other important cities in the Russian Empire, such as Batumi and Poti. By the 1850s, Tbilisi once again emerged as a major trade and cultural center, with many foreign, including Western European, entrepreneurs operating.\nThe likes of Ilia Chavchavadze, Akaki Tsereteli, Mirza Fatali Akhundzade, Iakob Gogebashvili, Alexander Griboyedov and many other statesmen, poets and artists all found their home in Tbilisi. The city was visited on numerous occasions by and was the object of affection of Alexander Pushkin, Leo Tolstoy, Mikhail Lermontov, the Romanov family and others. The main new artery built under Russian administration was Golovin Avenue (present-day Rustaveli Avenue), on which the Viceroys of the Caucasus established their residence. For much of the early 19th century, Tbilisi's largest ethnic group was Armenian, at some point forming 74.3% of the population.\nBrief independence.\nAfter the Russian Revolution of 1917, the city served as a location of the Transcaucasus interim government which established, in the spring of 1918, the short-lived independent Transcaucasian Federation with the capital in Tbilisi. At this time, Tbilisi had roughly the same number of Armenians as Georgians, with Russians being the third largest ethnic group. It was in the former Viceroy of the Caucasus's palace where the independence of three Transcaucasus nations \u2013 Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan \u2013 was declared by their respective national councils on 26 to 28 May 1918. After this, Tbilisi functioned as the capital of the Democratic Republic of Georgia until 25 February 1921. From 1918 to 1919, the city also consecutively served as the headquarters of the country's German garrison and later the British 27th Division; Tbilisi was also the main office of the British Chief Commissioner in Transcaucasia, Oliver Wardrop and the High Commissioner to Armenia, Colonel William N. Haskell.\nUnder the national government, Tbilisi turned into the first Caucasian University City after the Tbilisi State University was founded in 1918. On 25 February 1921, the Bolshevist Russian 11th Red Army invaded Tbilisi and after bitter fighting at the outskirts of the city, declared Soviet rule.\nSoviet rule.\nIn 1921, the Democratic Republic of Georgia was occupied by the Soviet Bolshevik forces from Russia, and until 1936, Tbilisi functioned first as the capital city of the Transcaucasian SFSR (which included Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia), and afterward until 1991 as the capital of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic. During Soviet rule, Tbilisi's population grew significantly, the city became more industrialized, and it also came to be an important political, social, and cultural centre of the Soviet Union. In 1980, the city hosted the first state-sanctioned rock festival in the USSR. As a major tourist destination for both Soviet citizens and foreign visitors, Tbilisi's \"Old Town\" (the neighborhoods within the original city walls) was reconstructed in the 1970s and 1980s.\nTbilisi witnessed mass anti-Russian demonstrations during 1956 in the 9 March Massacre, in protest against the anti-Stalin policies of Nikita Khrushchev. Peaceful protests occurred in 1978, and in 1989 the April 9 tragedy was a peaceful protest that turned violent.\nPost-independence.\nSince the break-up of the Soviet Union, Tbilisi has experienced periods of significant instability and turmoil. After a brief civil war, which the city endured for two weeks from December 1991 to January 1992 (when pro-Gamsakhurdia and Opposition forces clashed), Tbilisi became the scene of frequent armed confrontations among various mafia clans and illegal business operators. During the Shevardnadze Era (1992\u20132003), crime and corruption were rampant. Many segments of society became impoverished because of unemployment caused by the crumbling economy. Average citizens of Tbilisi started to become increasingly disillusioned with the existing quality of life in the city (and in the nation in general). Mass protests took place in November 2003 after falsified parliamentary elections forced more than 100,000 people into the streets and concluded with the Rose Revolution. Since 2003, Tbilisi has experienced considerably more stability with decreasing crime rates, an improved economy, and a real estate boom. During the 2008 South Ossetia war, the Tbilisi area was hit by multiple Russian air attacks.\nAfter the war, several large-scale projects were started, including a streetcar system, a railway bypass and a relocation of the central station, and new urban highways. In June 2015, a flood killed at least twenty people and caused animals from the city's zoo to be released into the streets.\nPolitics and administration.\nThe status of Tbilisi, as the nation's capital, is defined by Article 10 of the Constitution of Georgia (1995) and the \"Law on Georgia's Capital\u00a0\u2013 Tbilisi\" (20 February 1998).\nTbilisi is governed by the Tbilisi City Assembly (Sakrebulo) and the Tbilisi City Hall (Meria). The City Assembly and mayor are elected once every four years by direct elections. The Mayor of Tbilisi is Kakha Kaladze and the Chairman of the Tbilisi city Assembly is Giorgi Alibegashvili.\nAdministratively, the city is divided into raions (districts), which have their own units of central and local government with jurisdiction over a limited scope of affairs. This subdivision was established under Soviet rule in the 1930s, following the general subdivision of the Soviet Union. After Georgia regained independence, the raion system was modified and reshuffled. According to the latest revision, Tbilisi raions include:\nMost of the raions are named after historic quarters of the city. The citizens of Tbilisi widely recognize an informal system of smaller historic neighborhoods. Such neighborhoods are several, however, constituting a kind of hierarchy, because most of them have lost their distinctive topographic limits. The natural first level of subdivision of the city is into the right and left banks of the Mtkvari river.\nThe names of the oldest neighborhoods go back to the early Middle Ages and sometimes pose a great linguistic interest. The newest whole-built developments bear chiefly residential marketing names.\nIn 19th-century Tbilisi, the Georgian quarter was confined to the southeastern part of the city; Baedeker describes the layout succinctly:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the north part of the town, on the left bank of the Kur\u00e1 and to the south of the railway station, stretches the clean German Quarter, formerly occupied by German immigrants from W\u00fcrttemberg (1818). To the south is the Gruzinian or Georgian Quarter (Avlab\u00e1r). On the right bank of the Kur\u00e1 is the Russian Quarter, the seat of the officials and of the larger business firms. This is adjoined on the south by the Armenian and Persian Bazaars.\u2014\u200a\nGeography.\nLocation.\nTbilisi is located in the South Caucasus at 41\u00b0 43' North and 44\u00b0 47' East. The city lies in Eastern Georgia on both banks of the Kura River (locally known as Mtkvari). The elevation of the city ranges from and has the shape of an amphitheatre surrounded by mountains on three sides. To the north, Tbilisi is bounded by the Saguramo Range, to the east and south-east by the Iori Plain, to the south and west by various endings (subranges) of the Trialeti Range.\nThe relief of Tbilisi is complex. The part of the city which lies on the left bank of the Kura River extends for more than from the Avchala District to River Lochini. The part of the city which lies on the right side of the river, though, is built along the foothills of the Trialeti Range, the slopes of which in many cases descend all the way to the edges of the river. The mountains, therefore, are a significant barrier to urban development on its right bank. This type of a geographic environment creates pockets of very densely developed areas, while other parts of the city are left undeveloped due to the complex topographic relief.\nTo the north of the city, a large reservoir (commonly known as the Tbilisi Sea) is fed by irrigation canals.\nClimate.\nTbilisi has a humid temperate climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfa,\" Trewartha: \"Do\") with considerable continental and semi-arid influences. The city experiences hot, humid summers and moderately cold dry winters. Like other regions of Georgia, Tbilisi receives significant rainfall throughout the year with no distinct dry period. The city's climate is influenced both by dry (Central Asian/Siberian) air masses from the east and oceanic (Atlantic/Black Sea) air masses from the west. Because the city is bounded on most sides by mountain ranges, the close proximity to large bodies of water (Black and Caspian Seas) and the fact that the Greater Caucasus Mountains Range (further to the north) blocks the intrusion of cold air masses from Russia, Tbilisi has a relatively mild microclimate compared to other cities that possess a similar climate along the same latitudes.\nThe average annual temperature in Tbilisi is . January is the coldest month with an average temperature of . July is the hottest month with an average temperature of . Daytime high temperatures reach or exceed on an average of 22 days during a typical year. The absolute minimum recorded temperature is in January 1883 and the absolute maximum is on 17 July 1882. Average annual precipitation is . May is the wettest month (averaging of precipitation) while January is the driest (averaging of precipitation). Snow falls on average 15\u201325 days per year. The surrounding mountains often trap the clouds within and around the city, mainly during the Spring and Autumn months, resulting in prolonged rainy and/or cloudy weather. Northwesterly winds dominate in most parts of Tbilisi throughout the year. Southeasterly winds are common as well.\nDemographics.\nAs a multiethnic city, Tbilisi is home to more than 100 ethnic groups. Around 90% of the population consists of ethnic Georgians, with significant populations of Armenians, Russians, and Azerbaijanis. Along with the above-mentioned groups, Tbilisi is home to other ethnic groups including Ossetians, Abkhazians, Ukrainians, Greeks, Jews, Assyrians, Yazidis, and others.\nReligion.\nMore than 95% of the residents of Tbilisi practise some form of Christianity, the majority being followers of the Georgian Orthodox Church. The Russian Orthodox Church and the Armenian Apostolic Church also have significant communities in the city. About 1.5% of the population identifies as Muslim, primarily of the Shia branch, while approximately 0.1% practise Judaism. The city is also home to a Roman Catholic community and a Yazidi minority, who worship at the Sultan Ezid Temple.\nSports.\nThe largest stadium is the Dinamo Arena (capacity 55,000), followed by the Mikheil Meskhi Stadium (capacity 24,680). The Sports Palace hosts basketball games and tennis tournaments, with a seating capacity of about 11,000. Vere Basketball Hall is a smaller indoor sports arena seating 2,500.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Tbilisi, followed by rugby union and basketball. Other popular sports include wrestling, tennis, swimming, and water polo. \nTbilisi has several professional football and rugby teams, as well as wrestling clubs. Two U.S. National Basketball Association players, Zaza Pachulia and Nikoloz Tskitishvili, are Tbilisi natives.\nTbilisi's signature football club, Dinamo Tbilisi, won the 1980\u201381 European Cup Winners' Cup, becoming the easternmost team to win a major European football tournament. The basketball club Dinamo Tbilisi also won the 1962 EuroLeague title.\nTbilisi co-hosted Group A matches of the EuroBasket 2022 tournament at the new 10,000-seat Tbilisi Arena, along with Czech Republic (Prague), Germany (Berlin, Cologne), and Italy (Milan).\nMedia.\nThe majority of Georgia's media companies (including television, newspapers, and radio) are headquartered in Tbilisi. The city is home to major television channels such as Rustavi 2, Imedi, , Mtavari Arkhi, , Maestro, and the Public Broadcasting Channel, among others. \nSince 2019, Tbilisi's television market has undergone notable changes, particularly following ownership changes at Rustavi 2, which led to the creation of new television channels like Mtavari Arkhi and TV Formula.\nTbilisi has numerous newspaper publishing houses. Prominent newspapers include the daily \"24 Saati\" (\"24 Hours\"), \"Rezonansi\" (\"Resonance\"), \"Alia\", the English-language daily \"The Messenger\", weekly publications like \"FINANCIAL, Georgia Today\", and \"The Georgian Times\".\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nThe architecture of Tbilisi is a blend of Georgian, Byzantine, Neoclassical, Art Nouveau, Beaux-Arts, Middle Eastern, and Soviet modern influences. Few buildings survived the 1795 destruction of the city, so most historic structures date to the Russian Imperial period (1801\u20131917). \nTbilisi's old quarters (Kala, Abanotubani, Avlabari) were largely rebuilt following their medieval street plans. Downtown areas developed by Russian authorities, like Sololaki, Rustaveli Avenue, and Vera, show a European-style layout with Beaux-Arts, Orientalist, and revivalist architecture.\nTbilisi is particularly noted for its Art Nouveau buildings, especially in Sololaki and Chughureti, which flourished from the 1890s until the early Soviet era. Stalinist architecture, such as the 1938 Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute building (now the Biltmore Hotel Tbilisi), also left a mark on the city's landscape.\nPost-World War II architecture introduced mass housing blocks in neighbourhoods like Saburtalo and Dighomi. Notable Soviet-era landmarks include the 1975 Ministry of Roads building and the 1984 Wedding Palace.\nSince independence, Tbilisi has experienced both rapid skyscraper development (e.g., Axis Towers, Holiday Inn Tbilisi, King David Residences) and challenges with unregulated construction.\nArt museums and galleries.\nTbilisi is home to several important museums and art spaces:\nOther cultural institutions include the Giorgi Leonidze State Museum of Literature and the Writer's House of Georgia.\nPerforming arts.\nTbilisi hosts major cultural institutions such as:\nFilm Festival.\nThe Tbilisi International Film Festival (TIFF) is organized annually by the Cinema Art Center Prometheus. It began in 2000 as part of a larger \"Gift\" festival, then became an independent event in 2002. The main venue is located at 164 Agmashenebeli Avenue.\nWorld Book Capital.\nTbilisi was designated as World Book Capital for 2021 by UNESCO, recognizing the city's efforts to promote books and reading.\nTourism.\nGeorgia's rising popularity as a travel destination has positioned Tbilisi as a major regional tourism hub. In 2019, the country welcomed over 9 million international visitors, significantly boosting Tbilisi's hospitality and service sectors.\nMain sights.\nNotable landmarks and attractions include:\nDuring Soviet times, Tbilisi was ranked among the top cities for the number of museums within the USSR.\nNightlife.\nTbilisi has developed a thriving and internationally recognized nightlife scene since the 2010s. Notable clubs include:\nThese venues attract world-renowned DJs and have helped position Tbilisi on the global electronic music map. The city also hosts a growing underground queer nightlife scene, gaining international media attention.\nEconomy.\nWith a nominal GDP of 32\u00a0billion Georgian lari (\u20ac10\u00a0billion) as of 2022, Tbilisi is Georgia's economic powerhouse, generating more than half of the country's total GDP. Its GDP per capita is 26,769 lari (\u20ac8,700), exceeding the national average by more than 50 percent.\nThe economy of Tbilisi is dominated by the service sector, particularly:\nReflecting its position as a regional hub, the city hosts the headquarters of most Georgian banks, major companies, and international organizations operating in the South Caucasus region.\nThe unemployment rate in Tbilisi stands at 22.5%, which is significantly higher than the national average.\nTransport.\nTbilisi's public transport system is managed by the Transport and Urban Development Agency. After years of prioritizing private vehicles, the city has invested heavily in developing a green, accessible, and extensive public transit network since the 2010s. Today, the city is served by an international airport, metro, national rail, municipal buses, minibuses, cabs, aerial tramways, bike lanes, and a funicular railway.\nAirport.\nShota Rustaveli Tbilisi International Airport is the city's only international airport, located about southeast of the city centre. Handling nearly 3 million passengers in 2022, it is the busiest airport in Georgia and a regional hub. It is a hub for Georgian Airways and other international carriers, offering direct flights to Europe, the Middle East, and Central Asia.\nA secondary domestic airport at Natakhtari Airfield connects Tbilisi with Batumi, Mestia, and Ambrolauri.\nMetro.\nThe Tbilisi Metro operates two lines \u2014 the Akhmeteli\u2013Varketili Line and the Saburtalo Line \u2014 with 23 stations and around 400,000 daily rides. Opened in 1966, it was the fourth metro system in the former Soviet Union. The system is known for its depth and ornate station designs.\nThe metro is undergoing major upgrades, including full station renovations, better accessibility for people with disabilities, and new rolling stock acquisitions.\nA third overground metro line connecting central Tbilisi to Tbilisi International Airport and Rustavi is under planning.\nRail.\nTbilisi is the main hub of Georgian Railways, with inter-city trains connecting it to Batumi, Zugdidi, Poti, Kutaisi, and other cities from Tbilisi Central Railway Station.\nBuses and Bus Rapid Transit.\nTbilisi's bus network forms the backbone of urban transit. A major reorganisation launched in 2020 introduced Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) corridors (TBT lines 300\u2013310) served by articulated 18-metre-long buses, alongside more than 200 other city and local routes.\nNew environmentally friendly buses \u2014 including MAN Lion's City CNG and ISUZU models \u2014 have replaced the ageing fleet since 2017.\nCycling.\nCycling is gaining popularity, supported by a growing network of bike lanes. During the COVID-19 pandemic, temporary cycle lanes were introduced, increasing the city's cycling network to over 20\u00a0km. The long-term plan aims to expand it to 350\u00a0km.\nTrams.\nTbilisi had an electric tram network from 1904 until 2006, when it was dismantled. Projects to reintroduce modern trams have been proposed but remain unrealized.\nMinibuses.\nPrivate minibuses (marshrutka) continue to supplement the bus network, although their share is gradually decreasing following municipal reforms. In 2019, a new tender introduced modern minibuses with stricter safety and comfort standards.\nAerial Tramways.\nTbilisi operates three gondola lift systems:\nThe Soviet-era tram between Rustaveli Avenue and Mtatsminda was dismantled after the tragic 1990 Tbilisi aerial tramway accident, but reconstruction plans are underway.\nFunicular.\nThe Tbilisi Funicular, originally opened in 1905 and restored in 2012, connects Chonkadze Street to Mtatsminda Park at the highest point of the city. The line provides access to panoramic views, the Tbilisi TV Broadcasting Tower, and various recreational facilities.\nEducation.\nTbilisi is the principal centre of higher education in Georgia and the Caucasus region. It hosts many major universities and research institutions, drawing both local and international students.\nThe largest and oldest university in the Caucasus is Tbilisi State University (TSU), founded on 8 February 1918. TSU has about 25,000 students and more than 5,000 faculty and staff.\nOther prominent public institutions include:\nSeveral private universities are also notable:\nOther significant institutions include:\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nTbilisi is twinned with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42301", "revid": "1174762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42301", "title": "Arity", "text": "Number of arguments required by a function\nIn logic, mathematics, and computer science, arity () is the number of arguments or operands taken by a function, operation or relation. In mathematics, arity may also be called rank, but this word can have many other meanings. In logic and philosophy, arity may also be called adicity and degree. In linguistics, it is usually named valency.\nExamples.\nIn general, functions or operators with a given arity follow the naming conventions of \"n\"-based numeral systems, such as binary and hexadecimal. A Latin prefix is combined with the -ary suffix. For example:\nNullary.\nA constant can be treated as the output of an operation of arity 0, called a \"nullary operation\".\nAlso, outside of functional programming, a function without arguments can be meaningful and not necessarily constant (due to side effects). Such functions may have some \"hidden input\", such as global variables or the whole state of the system (time, free memory, etc.).\nUnary.\nExamples of unary operators in mathematics and in programming include the unary minus and plus, the increment and decrement operators in C-style languages (not in logical languages), and the successor, factorial, reciprocal, floor, ceiling, fractional part, sign, absolute value, square root (the principal square root), complex conjugate (unary of \"one\" complex number, that however has two parts at a lower level of abstraction), and norm functions in mathematics. In programming the two's complement, address reference, and the logical NOT operators are examples of unary operators.\nAll functions in lambda calculus and in some functional programming languages (especially those descended from ML) are technically unary, but see n-ary below.\nAccording to Quine, the Latin distributives being \"singuli\", \"bini\", \"terni\", and so forth, the term \"singulary\" is the correct adjective, rather than \"unary\". Abraham Robinson follows Quine's usage.\nIn philosophy, the adjective \"monadic\" is sometimes used to describe a one-place relation such as 'is square-shaped' as opposed to a two-place relation such as 'is the sister of'.\nBinary.\nMost operators encountered in programming and mathematics are of the binary form. For both programming and mathematics, these include the multiplication operator, the radix operator, the often omitted exponentiation operator, the logarithm operator, the addition operator, and the division operator. Logical predicates such as \"OR\", \"XOR\", \"AND\", \"IMP\" are typically used as binary operators with two distinct operands. In CISC architectures, it is common to have two source operands (and store result in one of them).\nTernary.\nThe computer programming language C and its various descendants (including C++, C#, Java, Julia, Perl, and others) provide the ternary conditional operator codice_1. The first operand (the condition) is evaluated, and if it is true, the result of the entire expression is the value of the second operand, otherwise it is the value of the third operand. This operator has a lazy or 'shortcut' evaluation strategy that does not evaluate whichever of the second and third arguments is not used. Some functional programming languages, such as Agda, have such an evaluation strategy for all functions and consequently implement as an ordinary function; several others, such as Haskell, can do this but for syntactic, performance or historical reasons choose to define keywords instead.\nThe Python language has a ternary conditional expression, . In Elixir the equivalent would be .\nThe Forth language also contains a ternary operator, codice_2, which multiplies the first two (one-cell) numbers, dividing by the third, with the intermediate result being a double cell number. This is used when the intermediate result would overflow a single cell.\nThe Unix dc calculator has several ternary operators, such as codice_3, which will pop three values from the stack and efficiently compute formula_6 with arbitrary precision.\nMany (RISC) assembly language instructions are ternary (as opposed to only two operands specified in CISC); or higher, such as MOV %AX, (%BX, %CX), which will load (MOV) into register AX the contents of a calculated memory location that is the sum (parenthesis) of the registers BX and CX.\n\"n\"-ary.\nThe arithmetic mean of \"n\" real numbers is an \"n\"-ary function: formula_7\nSimilarly, the geometric mean of \"n\" positive real numbers is an \"n\"-ary function: formula_8 Note that a logarithm of the geometric mean is the arithmetic mean of the logarithms of its \"n\" arguments\nFrom a mathematical point of view, a function of \"n\" arguments can always be considered as a function of a single argument that is an element of some product space. However, it may be convenient for notation to consider \"n\"-ary functions, as for example multilinear maps (which are not linear maps on the product space, if \"n\" \u2260 1).\nThe same is true for programming languages, where functions taking several arguments could always be defined as functions taking a single argument of some composite type such as a tuple, or in languages with higher-order functions, by currying.\nVarying arity.\nIn computer science, a function that accepts a variable number of arguments is called \"variadic\". In logic and philosophy, predicates or relations accepting a variable number of arguments are called \"multigrade\", anadic, or variably polyadic.\nTerminology.\nLatinate names are commonly used for specific arities, primarily based on Latin distributive numbers meaning \"in group of \"n\"\", though some are based on Latin cardinal numbers or ordinal numbers. For example, 1-ary is based on cardinal \"unus\", rather than from distributive \"singul\u012b\" that would result in \"singulary\". \n\"n\"-\"ary\" means having \"n\" operands (or parameters), but is often used as a synonym of \"polyadic\".\nThese words are often used to describe anything related to that number (e.g., undenary chess is a chess variant with an 11\u00d711 board, or the Millenary Petition of 1603).\nThe arity of a relation (or predicate) is the dimension of the domain in the corresponding Cartesian product. (A function of arity \"n\" thus has arity \"n\"+1 considered as a relation.) \nIn computer programming, there is often a syntactical distinction between operators and functions; syntactical operators usually have arity 1, 2, or 3 (the ternary operator is also common). Functions vary widely in the number of arguments, though large numbers can become unwieldy. Some programming languages also offer support for variadic functions, i.e., functions syntactically accepting a variable number of arguments.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nA monograph available free online:"}
{"id": "42302", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42302", "title": "Caroline Matilda of Hanover", "text": ""}
{"id": "42307", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42307", "title": "Augusto Boal", "text": "Brazilian dramatist and political activist\nAugusto Boal (; 16 March 1931 \u2013 2 May 2009) was a Brazilian theatre practitioner, drama theorist, and political activist. He was the founder of Theatre of the Oppressed, a theatrical form originally used in radical left popular education movements. Boal served one term as a \"Vereador\" (the Brazilian equivalent of a city councillor) in Rio de Janeiro from 1993 to 1997, where he developed legislative theatre.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nAugusto Boal studied at Columbia University in New York with the critic John Gassner. Gassner introduced Boal to the techniques of both Bertolt Brecht and Konstantin Stanislavski, and encouraged Boal to form links with theatre groups like the Black Experimental Theatre. In 1955 Boal staged productions of two of his own plays, \"The Horse and the Saint\" and \"The House Across the Street\". In 1956, shortly after graduating, Boal was asked to work with the Arena Theatre in S\u00e3o Paulo, southeast Brazil. Boal was in charge of directing plays along with other dramaturgs such as Jos\u00e9 Renato, who was also the founder of the Arena Theatre. It was here that he began to experiment with new forms of theatre never before seen in Brazil, such as Stanislavski's 'system' for actors, with which he became familiar during his time at Columbia and when involved with the Actors Studio in New York. Boal adapted these methods to social conditions in Brazil, taking a leftist approach on issues concerning nationalism, which were very much in vogue at that time period since the country had just undergone a long period of military dictatorship.\nWork at the Arena Theatre of S\u00e3o Paulo.\nWhile working at the Arena Theatre in S\u00e3o Paulo, Boal directed a number of classical dramas, which he transformed to make them more pertinent to Brazilian society and its economy. Among these plays was John Steinbeck's \"Of Mice and Men\", known in Brazil as \"Ratos e Homens.\" This was Boal's first performance as a director at the Arena Theatre of S\u00e3o Paulo. Critics acclaimed this piece and Boal won the \"Pr\u00eamio de Revela\u00e7\u00e3o de Dire\u00e7\u00e3o\" (Direction Revelation Award) from the Association of Art Critics of S\u00e3o Paulo, in 1956. In the early sixties, the ratings at the Arena Theatre of S\u00e3o Paulo started to drop, almost causing the theatre to go bankrupt. Consequently, the company decided to start investing in national theatre (pieces written by Brazilian dramaturgs) as a move that could possibly save it from bankruptcy. The new investment proved to be a success, opening up the path for a national theatre scene. Boal then suggested the creation of a Seminar in Dramaturgy at the Arena Theatre, which was quickly implemented and soon became a national platform for many young playwrights. Many successful productions were born from this Seminar and now form part of the Arena Theatre of S\u00e3o Paulo's nationalist phase repertoire. One of these productions was \"Chapetuba Futebol Clube\", written by Oduvaldo Vianna Filho in 1959 and directed by Augusto Boal.\nExile.\nA new military regime started in Brazil in 1964 with a coup d'\u00e9tat supported by the Brazilian elite, the industrialists, the military, as well as by the United States, Boal's teachings were controversial, and as a cultural activist he was seen as a threat by the Brazilian military regime. In 1971, Boal was kidnapped off the street, arrested, tortured, and eventually exiled to Argentina, where he stayed for five years. During those five years, Boal published two books: \"Torquemada\" (1971) and his much acclaimed \"Theatre of the Oppressed\" (1973). \"Torquemada\" is about the Brazilian military regime's systematic use of torture in prison. Boal takes the name of the leading figure of the Spanish Inquisition, Tomas de Torquemada, as an example of historical forms of systematic torture. In \"Theatre of the Oppressed\" Boal develops a theatrical method based on \"Pedagogy of the Oppressed\", a book by the Brazilian educator and writer Paulo Freire (who was also a good friend of Boal).\nBoal's method (which has been implemented in various communities around the world) seeks to transform audiences into active participants in the theatrical experience. Boal argues that traditional theatre is oppressive since spectators usually do not get a chance to express themselves and that a collaboration between both parties, in contrast, allows spectators to perform actions that are socially liberating. The method, as Boal liked to explain, seeks to transform spectators into \"spect-actors.\" When the political climate in Brazil forced Boal into exile in 1971, he initially went to Peru and then Argentina, where he completed and published his seminal theoretical work \"The Theatre of the Oppressed\" and consolidated his conscientiza\u00e7\u00e3o (consciousness-raising) theatre work based on the idea of Brazilian educationalist Paulo Freire. Freire's methods were a revolt against the elitist \"top-down\" approach to education and he advocated critical-awareness-based education models. Boal's work in Peru with the ALFIN project, a movement which sought to use a range of languages including \"artistic languages\" to eradicate illiteracy, developed his ideas and methodology away from the agit-prop of his Brazilian Arena Theatre days and sought to engage theatre as a pedagogical tool. Crucial to this time was Boal's attempts to break down the divisions between spectator and actor. It is around this time that invented the term \"spect-actor\", a term that he saw as establishing the frameworks within which he wished to work. He saw that the passivity of the spectator could be broken down by the following steps by which the spectator becomes the spect-actor:\nAfter living in Argentina, Boal travelled to other countries in South America such as Peru and Ecuador, where he worked with people in small and usually poor communities that dealt with conflicts such as civil wars and lack of government attention. Boal was of the opinion that only the oppressed are able to free the oppressed. In Peru, Boal practiced his Forum theatre method, in which spectator replaces actor to determine the solution to a given problem presented by the actor, which can also be a real problem someone in the community is facing. Boal also lived in Paris, France, for a number of years, where he created several Centers for the Theatre of the Oppressed, directed plays, and also taught classes at the Sorbonne University. Boal created the first International Festival for the Theatre of the Oppressed in 1981.\nWhile Boal was in exile, his very close friend and Brazilian musician Chico Buarque wrote him a letter that would later result in the Chorinho hit called \"Meu Caro Amigo\" or \"My Dear Friend\" (1976). In this song, Buarque tells his friend about the situation in Brazil at the time, addressing the military dictatorship in a very subtle but clever way (due to censorship issues, many artists could not express themselves freely). The melody of the song is very happy and upbeat while the lyrics explain:\nMy dear friend, please forgive me, if I can\u2019t pay you a visit, but since I found someone to carry a message, I\u2019m sending you news on this tape. Here we play football, there\u2019s lots of samba, lots of choro and rock\u2019n'roll. Some days it rains, some days it\u2019s sunny but I want to tell you that things here are pretty dark. Here, we\u2019re wheeling and dealing for survival, and we\u2019re only surviving because we\u2019re stubborn. And everyone\u2019s drinking because without cacha\u00e7a, nobody survives this squeeze.\nCenter for the Theatre of the Oppressed-CTO-Brazil.\nAfter the fall of the military dictatorship, Boal returned to Brazil after 14 years of exile in 1986. He established a major Center for the Theatre of the Oppressed in Rio de Janeiro (CTO), whose objective was to study, discuss and express issues concerning citizenship, culture and various forms of oppression using theatrical language. Boal's work in the CTO made way for the approval of a new law that protects crime victims and witnesses in Brazil. Boal's group has worked next to numerous organizations that fight for human rights. In 1992, Boal ran for city councillor in Rio de Janeiro as a theatrical act, and he was elected. Boal's support staff was his theatre group, with whom he quickly developed various legislative proposals. His objective was to work out issues citizens might be facing in their communities through theatre and also to discuss the laws of the city of Rio with people on the streets. After having worked to transform spectator into author in Theatre of the Oppressed, Boal initiates the legislative theatre movement process, in which voter becomes legislator. Boal is known to say that he did not create laws arbitrarily while he was city councillor. Instead, he asked people what they wanted. Other politicians were not very fond of this. Out of 40 of Boal's proposed laws, only 13 got approved during his term as councillor of Rio de Janeiro. His term ended in 1996, but he continued performing legislative theatre acts with different groups in Bras\u00edlia, where four more laws got approved even after Boal had left. Boal also worked with prisoners in Rio and S\u00e3o Paulo. Boal argued that people in prison are not free in space, but that they are in time, and that the Theatre of the Oppressed strives to create different types of freedom so that people are able to imagine and think about the past, the present, and invent the future instead of having to wait for it. All this was in order for prisoners to have \"a healthier and more creative lifestyle.\" People in the Movimento sem Terra or Landless Workers Movement of Brazil also experienced working with Boal's theatre methods. Boal's son Juli\u00e1n worked along with his father and now continues to take the Theatre of the Oppressed to various communities in Brazil and around the world. In March 2009, he received the title of \"World Theatre Ambassador\" from UNESCO.\nDeath.\nAugusto Boal died on 2 May 2009 at the age of 78 in Rio de Janeiro. Critic Yan Michalski argues that Augusto Boal is the best-known and most respected Brazilian theatre practitioner abroad.\nInfluences.\nMost of Augusto Boal's techniques were created after he realized the limitations of didactic, politically motivated theatre in the poor areas where he worked. He found that his attempts to inspire the people living in poor or \"slum\" areas to rise up against racial and class inequality were inhibited by his own racial and class background, since he was white and comparatively financially comfortable, as well as his and his colleagues' inhibitions to perform violence themselves. His new techniques allowed the idea of rebellion and the impetus for change to come from within the target group. Much of his early work and teaching was inspired by Marxist philosophy, although much of his work now falls within the boundaries of a center-left ideology.\nPaulo Freire was a major influence on Boal's teachings. He and Freire became close in later years. When Freire died, Boal said: \"I am very sad. I have lost my last father. Now all I have are brothers and sisters\".\nBoal was also known to quote William Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\", in which Hamlet argues that theatre is like a mirror that reflects our virtues and defects equally. Although Boal found this quote beautiful, he liked to think of theatre as a mirror in which one can reach in to change reality and to transform it.\nPublished works.\n\"Theatre of the Oppressed\" (London: Pluto Press, 1979).\nArguably Augusto Boal's most academically influential work is the \"Theatre of the Oppressed,\" in which the reader follows Boal's detailed analysis of the \"Poetics\" of Aristotle and the early history of Western theatre. Boal contends that the Aristotelian ethic means oppressing the masses, the people, the workers and the spectators in favour of stability and the continued dominance of a privileged few. He argues that the \"Tragi-drama\", a formulaic drama style that today could be considered similar to that of soap operas, helps the State promote its continued existence. He sees the Brazilian government as an example of an oppressive state using theatre to propagate its oppressive system. He then outlines his early theories and practices for attempting to reverse the paradigm. It also talks about Newspaper Theatre, attempting to talk about local problems and present it to the audiences, Forum Theatre, currently used in over 70 countries, Invisible Theatre, used to discuss political activity and Image Theatre. Theatre of the Oppressed has been translated to more than 25 languages over the years. \nBoal also talks about Invisible theatre in which an event is planned and scripted but does not allow the spectators to know that the event is happening. Actors perform out of the ordinary roles which invite spectators to join in or sit back and watch. One example was in a restaurant at the Chiclayo hotel, actors sat at separate tables and informed the waiters in loud voices that they could not eat the food. The actor stated that the food was not good. The waiter says the diner could pick something else to eat. So the actor chose a rather expensive item off the menu and says he will be able to pay for it. The actor mentions he has no money and he would be willing to work for it. This display made other diners start discussing the price and treatment of workers at this hotel. This act allowed spectators to think about issues that were going on but was brushed over because the issue did not directly involve them.\nAnalytical theatre is when a participant tells a story and the actors improvise it. Each character is broken down into all the social roles they could follow and the participants choose an object to symbolize the role. This aspect of theatre allows the participants to see how there are multiple roles a person could follow.\n\"Games For Actors and Non-Actors\" (London: Routledge, 1992; Second Edition 2002).\nThis is probably Augusto Boal's most practically influential book, in which he sets down a brief explanation of his theories, mostly through stories and examples of his work in Europe, and then explains every drama exercise that he has found useful in his practice. In contrast to \"Theatre of the Oppressed\", it contains little academic theory and many practical examples for drama practitioners to use even if not practising theatre that is related to Boal's academic or political ideas. Boal refers to many of these as \"gamesercises\", as they combine the training and \"introversion\" of exercises with the fun and \"extroversion\" of games. It has been influential in the development of Community Theatre and Theatre in Education (T.I.E.) practices worldwide, especially in Europe and South America. These games include \"Carnival in Rio\" and \"Your Friend is Dead\".\n\"The Rainbow of Desire: The Boal Method of Theatre and Therapy\". (London: Routledge, 1995).\nThis book re-evaluates the practices commonly associated with the Theatre of the Oppressed for a new purpose. It has been argued that Boal contradicts himself with this take on his work, as it mostly concerns itself with creating harmony within society, whereas his early work was concerned with rebellion and upheaval. Boal states that, \"Theatre is the passionate combat of two human beings on a platform.\" However, Boal's works can be seen as a progression and exploration of a Left Wing world view rather than a unified theory. In the context of those under-represented in a society, his methodology can be used as a weapon against oppressors. In the context of those in a society who are in need of catharsis for the sake of their own integration into it, it can be switched round to empower that individual to break down internal oppressions that separate that individual from society.\nThrough his work at French institutions for the mentally ill and elsewhere in Europe, where he discovered concepts such as the \"Cop in the Head\", the theories presented in this book have been useful in the pioneering field of drama therapy and have been applied by drama practitioners.\nBoal states in his work that there are three properties of the aesthetic space. First, is plasticity. He says that one can be without being. Objects can acquire different meaning such as an old chair representing a king's throne. He states that only duration counts and location can be changed. Second, is that the aesthetic space is dichotomic and it creates dichotomy. This idea suggests that there is a space within a space. The stage is in front of the audience and the actor is creating his own space. Third, is telemicroscopic. This idea creates the idea that it is impossible to hide on stage. Every aspect of the space is seen and it makes the far away close-up.\nRecognition.\nIn 1994, Boal won the UNESCO Pablo Picasso Medal, and in August 1997, he was awarded the \"Career Achievement Award\" by the Association of Theatre in Higher Education at their national conference in Chicago, Illinois. Boal is also seen as the inspiration behind 21st-century forms of performance-activism, such as the \"Optative Theatrical Laboratories\".\nBoal received The Cross Border Award for Peace and Democracy by Dundalk Institute of Technology in 2008. Boal has in many ways influenced many artists in new media with his participatory modes of expression, especially as the World Wide Web has become such a powerful tool for participation and communication. Notable examples include \"Learning to Love You More\", happenings, and Steve Lambert's Why They Hate US.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42309", "revid": "39177298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42309", "title": "Closure (topology)", "text": "All points and limit points in a subset of a topological space\nIn topology, the closure of a subset S of points in a topological space consists of all points in S together with all limit points of S. The closure of S may equivalently be defined as the union of S and its boundary, and also as the intersection of all closed sets containing S. Intuitively, the closure can be thought of as all the points that are either in S or \"very near\" S. A point which is in the closure of S is a point of closure of S. The notion of closure is in many ways dual to the notion of interior.\nDefinitions.\nPoint of closure.\nFor formula_1 as a subset of a Euclidean space, formula_2 is a point of closure of formula_1 if every open ball centered at formula_2 contains a point of formula_1 (this point can be formula_2 itself).\nThis definition generalizes to any subset formula_1 of a metric space formula_8 Fully expressed, for formula_9 as a metric space with metric formula_10 formula_2 is a point of closure of formula_1 if for every formula_13 there exists some formula_14 such that the distance formula_15 (formula_16 is allowed). Another way to express this is to say that formula_2 is a point of closure of formula_1 if the distance formula_19 where formula_20 is the infimum. \nThis definition generalizes to topological spaces by replacing \"open ball\" or \"ball\" with \"neighbourhood\". Let formula_1 be a subset of a topological space formula_8 Then formula_2 is a point of closure or adherent point of formula_1 if every neighbourhood of formula_2 contains a point of formula_1 (again, formula_16 for formula_14 is allowed). Note that this definition does not depend upon whether neighbourhoods are required to be open.\nLimit point.\nThe definition of a point of closure of a set is closely related to the definition of a limit point of a set. The difference between the two definitions is subtle but important \u2013 namely, in the definition of a limit point formula_2 of a set formula_1, every neighbourhood of formula_2 must contain a point of formula_1 other than formula_2 itself, i.e., each neighbourhood of formula_2 obviously has formula_2 but it also must have a point of formula_1 that is not equal to formula_2 in order for formula_2 to be a limit point of formula_1. A limit point of formula_1 has more strict condition than a point of closure of formula_1 in the definitions. The set of all limit points of a set formula_1 is called the derived set of formula_1. A limit point of a set is also called \"cluster point\" or \"accumulation point\" of the set. \nThus, \"every limit point is a point of closure, but not every point of closure is a limit point\". A point of closure which is not a limit point is an isolated point. In other words, a point formula_2 is an isolated point of formula_1 if it is an element of formula_1 and there is a neighbourhood of formula_2 which contains no other points of formula_1 than formula_2 itself.\nFor a given set formula_1 and point formula_51 formula_2 is a point of closure of formula_1 if and only if formula_2 is an element of formula_1 or formula_2 is a limit point of formula_1 (or both).\nClosure of a set.\nThe closure of a subset formula_1 of a topological space formula_59 denoted by formula_60 or possibly by formula_61 (if formula_62 is understood), where if both formula_9 and formula_62 are clear from context then it may also be denoted by formula_65 formula_66 or formula_67 (Moreover, formula_68 is sometimes capitalized to formula_69.) can be defined using any of the following equivalent definitions:\nThe closure of a set has the following properties.\nSometimes the second or third property above is taken as the definition of the topological closure, which still make sense when applied to other types of closures (see below).\nIn a first-countable space (such as a metric space), formula_70 is the set of all limits of all convergent sequences of points in formula_71 For a general topological space, this statement remains true if one replaces \"sequence\" by \"net\" or \"filter\" (as described in the article on filters in topology).\nNote that these properties are also satisfied if \"closure\", \"superset\", \"intersection\", \"contains/containing\", \"smallest\" and \"closed\" are replaced by \"interior\", \"subset\", \"union\", \"contained in\", \"largest\", and \"open\". For more on this matter, see closure operator below.\nExamples.\nConsider a sphere in a 3 dimensional space. Implicitly there are two regions of interest created by this sphere; the sphere itself and its interior (which is called an open 3-ball). It is useful to distinguish between the interior and the surface of the sphere, so we distinguish between the open 3-ball (the interior of the sphere), and the closed 3-ball \u2013 the closure of the open 3-ball that is the open 3-ball plus the surface (the surface as the sphere itself).\nIn topological space:\nGiving formula_109 and formula_110 the standard (metric) topology:\nOn the set of real numbers one can put other topologies rather than the standard one.\nThese examples show that the closure of a set depends upon the topology of the underlying space. The last two examples are special cases of the following.\nThe closure of a set also depends upon in which space we are taking the closure. For example, if formula_9 is the set of rational numbers, with the usual relative topology induced by the Euclidean space formula_142 and if formula_143 then formula_1 is both closed and open in formula_119 because neither formula_1 nor its complement can contain formula_147, which would be the lower bound of formula_1, but cannot be in formula_1 because formula_147 is irrational. So, formula_1 has no well defined closure due to boundary elements not being in formula_119. However, if we instead define formula_9 to be the set of real numbers and define the interval in the same way then the closure of that interval is well defined and would be the set of all real numbers greater than or equal to formula_147.\nClosure operator.\nA closure operator on a set formula_9 is a mapping of the power set of formula_107 formula_157, into itself which satisfies the Kuratowski closure axioms. \nGiven a topological space formula_158, the topological closure induces a function formula_159 that is defined by sending a subset formula_160 to formula_161 where the notation formula_162 or formula_163 may be used instead. Conversely, if formula_164 is a closure operator on a set formula_107 then a topological space is obtained by defining the closed sets as being exactly those subsets formula_160 that satisfy formula_167 (so complements in formula_9 of these subsets form the open sets of the topology).\nThe closure operator formula_169 is dual to the interior operator, which is denoted by formula_170 in the sense that\nformula_171\nand also\nformula_172\nTherefore, the abstract theory of closure operators and the Kuratowski closure axioms can be readily translated into the language of interior operators by replacing sets with their complements in formula_8\nIn general, the closure operator does not commute with intersections. However, in a complete metric space the following result does hold:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u00a0(C. Ursescu)\u2014\nLet formula_174 be a sequence of subsets of a complete metric space formula_8\nFacts about closures.\nA subset formula_1 is closed in formula_9 if and only if formula_128 In particular:\nIf formula_190 and if formula_191 is a subspace of formula_9 (meaning that formula_191 is endowed with the subspace topology that formula_9 induces on it), then formula_195 and the closure of formula_1 computed in formula_191 is equal to the intersection of formula_191 and the closure of formula_1 computed in formula_9: \nformula_201\nIt follows that formula_94 is a dense subset of formula_191 if and only if formula_191 is a subset of formula_205 \nIt is possible for formula_206 to be a proper subset of formula_207 for example, take formula_208 formula_209 and formula_210\nIf formula_211 but formula_1 is not necessarily a subset of formula_191 then only \nformula_214\nis always guaranteed, where this containment could be strict (consider for instance formula_215 with the usual topology, formula_216 and formula_217), although if formula_191 happens to an open subset of formula_9 then the equality formula_220 will hold (no matter the relationship between formula_1 and formula_191). \nConsequently, if formula_223 is any open cover of formula_9 and if formula_160 is any subset then:\nformula_226 \nbecause formula_227 for every formula_228 (where every formula_228 is endowed with the subspace topology induced on it by formula_9). \nThis equality is particularly useful when formula_9 is a manifold and the sets in the open cover formula_223 are domains of coordinate charts. \nIn words, this result shows that the closure in formula_9 of any subset formula_160 can be computed \"locally\" in the sets of any open cover of formula_9 and then unioned together.\nIn this way, this result can be viewed as the analogue of the well-known fact that a subset formula_160 is closed in formula_9 if and only if it is \"locally closed in formula_9\", meaning that if formula_223 is any open cover of formula_9 then formula_1 is closed in formula_9 if and only if formula_243 is closed in formula_244 for every formula_245\nFunctions and closure.\nContinuity.\nA function formula_246 between topological spaces is continuous if and only if the preimage of every closed subset of the codomain is closed in the domain; explicitly, this means: formula_247 is closed in formula_9 whenever formula_249 is a closed subset of formula_250 \nIn terms of the closure operator, formula_246 is continuous if and only if for every subset formula_252 \nformula_253\nThat is to say, given any element formula_86 that belongs to the closure of a subset formula_252 formula_256 necessarily belongs to the closure of formula_257 in formula_250 If we declare that a point formula_2 is close to a subset formula_260 if formula_261 then this terminology allows for a plain English description of continuity: formula_262 is continuous if and only if for every subset formula_252 formula_262 maps points that are close to formula_97 to points that are close to formula_266 Thus continuous functions are exactly those functions that preserve (in the forward direction) the \"closeness\" relationship between points and sets: a function is continuous if and only if whenever a point is close to a set then the image of that point is close to the image of that set. \nSimilarly, formula_262 is continuous at a fixed given point formula_86 if and only if whenever formula_2 is close to a subset formula_252 then formula_256 is close to formula_266\nClosed maps.\nA function formula_246 is a (strongly) closed map if and only if whenever formula_249 is a closed subset of formula_9 then formula_276 is a closed subset of formula_250 \nIn terms of the closure operator, formula_246 is a (strongly) closed map if and only if formula_279 for every subset formula_280 \nEquivalently, formula_246 is a (strongly) closed map if and only if formula_282 for every closed subset formula_283\nCategorical interpretation.\nOne may define the closure operator in terms of universal arrows, as follows.\nThe powerset of a set formula_9 may be realized as a partial order category formula_285 in which the objects are subsets and the morphisms are inclusion maps formula_286 whenever formula_97 is a subset of formula_288 Furthermore, a topology formula_191 on formula_9 is a subcategory of formula_285 with inclusion functor formula_292 The set of closed subsets containing a fixed subset formula_260 can be identified with the comma category formula_294 This category \u2014 also a partial order \u2014 then has initial object formula_295 Thus there is a universal arrow from formula_97 to formula_297 given by the inclusion formula_298\nSimilarly, since every closed set containing formula_299 corresponds with an open set contained in formula_97 we can interpret the category formula_301 as the set of open subsets contained in formula_302 with terminal object formula_303 the interior of formula_304\nAll properties of the closure can be derived from this definition and a few properties of the above categories. Moreover, this definition makes precise the analogy between the topological closure and other types of closures (for example algebraic closure), since all are examples of universal arrows.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42311", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42311", "title": "Marien Ngouabi", "text": "President of Congo-Brazzaville from 1969 to 1977\nMarien Ngouabi (December 31, 1938 \u2013 March 18, 1977) was a Congolese politician and military officer who served as the fourth President of the People's Republic of the Congo from 1969 until his assassination in 1977.\nBiography.\nOrigins.\nMarien Ngouabi was born on December 31, 1938, at the village of Ombell\u00e9, Cuvette Department, in Kouyou territory to Dominique Oss\u00e9r\u00e9 m'Opoma and Antoinette Mboual\u00e9-Abemba. He is originally from a kuyu humble family. From 1947 to 1953, he went to primary school in Owando. On 14 September 1953, he went to study at the \"Ecole des enfants de troupes G\u00e9n\u00e9ral Leclerc\" in Brazzaville and in 1957, he was sent to Bouar, Oubangui-Chari (now the Central African Republic).\nAfter serving in Cameroon as a member of the second battalion of the tirailleurs with the rank of Sergeant (1958\u20131960), Ngouabi went to the \"Ecole Militaire Pr\u00e9paratoire\" in Strasbourg, France in September 1960 and then to the \"Ecole Inter-armes\" at Co\u00ebtquidan Saint-Cyr in 1961. He returned to Congo in 1962 as Second Lieutenant and was stationed at the Pointe-Noire garrison. He was assigned to the Pointe-Noire garrison as a deputy commander of an infantry battalion. In 1963, Ngouabi was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant.\nRise to power.\nIn 1965, he created the first battalion of paratroopers in the Congo Republic. Known for his leftist views, in April 1966 Ngouabi was demoted to the rank of soldier second class when he refused to be posted again at Pointe-Noire, after rebelling against the army's inflexibility in politics and voicing strong criticism to the president. President Alphonse Massamba-D\u00e9bat had Ngouabi and Second Lieutenant Eyabo arrested on July 29, 1968.\nNgouabi's arrest provoked discontent among the military, and on July 31, Ngouabi was freed by soldiers from the Civil Defense. The National Revolutionary Council (CNR), headed by Ngouabi, was created on August 5, 1968. On 1 October 1968, he was promoted to the rank of Commanding Officer, a rank he held until his death. Massamba-D\u00e9bat, whose powers had been curtailed by the CNR, resigned on September 4, and Prime Minister Alfred Raoul served as acting head of state until December 31, 1968, when the CNR formally became the country's supreme authority and Ngouabi, as head of the CNR, assumed the presidency.\nHead of state.\nOnce in power, President Ngouabi changed the country's name to the People's Republic of the Congo, declaring it to be Africa's first Marxist\u2013Leninist state, and founded the Congolese Workers' Party (\"Parti Congolais du Travail\", PCT) as the country's only legal political party.\nNgouabi was a Mbochi from the north and his regime shifted control of the country away from the south. Such moves created opposition among the population in the highly politicized environment of Brazzaville. Bureaucratic centralism, repression, the \"mechanism\" of the party apparatus, and Ngouabi's tribalist orientation towards Mbochi and La Cuvette immigrants created opposition within the Communist Party itself, especially its youth organization. In the fall of 1971, students that went on strike in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire were severely repressed by the authorities. The situation in the country was severely destabilized. There was an attempted coup in February 1972 that triggered a series of 'purges' of the opposition. It is claimed that Ngouabi was under French pressure to annex the oil-rich Cabinda enclave, a part of Portuguese Angola, and his refusal to act cost him the French support. There is some speculation that the French financed several coups in order to remove Ngouabi in power. Starting in February 1973, the army began military operations in the Goma Tse-tse region to dismantle the M22 insurgency led by former army members led by Vice President Ange Diawara. During the same month, Ngouabi denounced another attempted Diawara coup and arrested 45 people, including Pascal Lissouba and Sylvain Bemba, Minister of Information. His trial took place from March 16 to 23. Several sentences were pronounced, while Lissouba was acquitted.\nThe M22 business abruptly ended on April 24, 1973, with the capture and execution of the maquis. The bodies of Diawara, Ikoko and Bakekolo were toured around Brazzaville and exhibited by Ngouabi in person during a popular gathering held at the Stade de la R\u00e9volution. The lack of consideration for the lifeless bodies of the Maquis caused considerable disapproval nationally due to the cultural sensitivity surrounding the reverential treatment of dead bodies. He visited the People's Republic of China in July 1973.\nNgouabi was re-elected to his post as Chairman of the PCT Central Committee on December 30, 1974; he was additionally elected as Permanent Secretary of the PCT. He was then sworn in as president for another term on January 9, 1975. Also in 1975, he signed an economic aid pact with the Soviet Union.\nOn March 23, Lieutenant General Pierre Kinganga, in exile in Kinshasa in neighbouring Zaire since his alleged June 1969 coup attempt, disembarked in Brazzaville at the head of a commando attempting to overthrow the regime. His attempt failed and he was shot dead near the national radio station he had just taken. His body and that of his command members who fell with him remained exposed for a long time in front of the radio building. Several enthusiastic young supporters who had joined Kinganga's column were also armed. Captain Augustin Poignet, also involved, managed to escape to Kinshasa. A week later, 3 accomplices (Miawouama, Nkoutou and Mengo), sentenced by a court-martial, were executed. The command members and accomplices in the army and gendarmerie were convicted by the revolutionary court. After the events, Marien Ngouabi denounced the involvement of the CIA and President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire (now Democratic Republic of the Congo) in the coup.\nFollowing this attempt, the PCT met in an extraordinary congress from March 30 to April 2, 1970. The Political Bureau was expanded to 10 members, to the benefit of Ambroise Noumazalaye and Captain Sassou N'Guesso. The Gendarmerie, whose loyalty was not complete during the events, was dissolved and its members joined the army. The Council of State was reorganized.\nOn August 29, 1970, former Minister St\u00e9phane-Maurice Bongo-Nouarra was arrested for a counter-revolutionary conspiracy. He was sentenced to 10 years of forced labour.\nAssassination.\nOn March 18, 1977, at 14:30 hours, President Ngouabi was assassinated. Those accused of taking part in the assassination were tried and some were executed, including Massamba-D\u00e9bat and Barth\u00e9lemy Kikadidi.\nIn the aftermath of the assassination, the Military Committee of the Party (CMP) was named to head an interim government with the conservative Colonel Joachim Yhombi-Opango to serve as Head of State.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42312", "revid": "27133080", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42312", "title": "Antanas Valionis", "text": "Lithuanian politician\nAntanas Valionis (born September 21, 1950) is a Lithuanian politician, currently a member of the New Union party.\nHe was appointed the Lithuanian Minister of Foreign Affairs on October 30, 2000, and reappointed on July 5, 2001. He resigned on August 31, 2006.\nFrom 1981 he served in the Soviet secret police KGB in Riga reaching the rank of captain. Afterwards he served in the KGB active reserve.\nBetween 1994 and 2000, he was accredited Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Lithuania to the Republic of Poland. From 1996 to 2000, he was also accredited to Romania and the Republic of Bulgaria. \nSince November 9th 2000, he was minister of Foreign Affairs in the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth governments. \nFrom 2004 to 2008, he was member of the Seimas.\nIn 2006, after a change in the balance of political forces, he resigned from the post of minister.\nBetween November 20, 2008 to June 19, 2011, Lithuanian Ambassador to Latvia.\nFrom 2011 to 2017 Ambassador for Special Assignments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42313", "revid": "45330940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42313", "title": "The Wicker Man", "text": "1973 film by Robin Hardy\nThe Wicker Man is a 1973 British folk horror film directed by Robin Hardy and starring Edward Woodward, Britt Ekland, Diane Cilento, Ingrid Pitt and Christopher Lee. The screenplay is by Anthony Shaffer, inspired by David Pinner's 1967 novel \"Ritual\", and Paul Giovanni composed the film score.\nThe plot centres on the visit of a police officer, Sergeant Neil Howie, to the fictional, isolated Scottish island of Summerisle in search of a missing girl. Howie, a devout Christian, is appalled to find that the inhabitants of the island have abandoned Christianity and now practise a form of Celtic paganism.\n\"The Wicker Man\" is well regarded by critics. Film magazine \"Cinefantastique\" described it as \"The \"Citizen Kane\" of horror movies\", and in 2004, \"Total Film\" magazine named \"The Wicker Man\" the sixth-greatest British film of all time. It also won the 1978 Saturn Award for Best Horror Film. The final scene was number 45 on Bravo's 100 Scariest Movie Moments, and during the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony, it was included as part of a sequence that celebrated British cinema. The film brought the wicker man into modern popular culture.\nIn 1989, Shaffer wrote a script treatment for \"The Loathsome Lambton Worm\", a direct sequel with fantasy elements. Hardy had no interest in the project, and it went unproduced. In 2006, a poorly received American remake starring Nicolas Cage was released, from which Hardy and others involved with the original have dissociated themselves. In 2011, a spiritual sequel written and directed by Hardy, \"The Wicker Tree\", was released; it featured Lee in a cameo appearance. In 2013, the original U.S. theatrical version of \"The Wicker Man\" was digitally restored and released.\nPlot.\nOn 29 April, Sergeant Neil Howie of the West Highlands Constabulary journeys by seaplane to the remote, verdant Hebridean island of Summerisle to investigate the disappearance of a young girl, Rowan Morrison, about whom he has received an anonymous letter. Howie, a devout Christian, is disturbed to find the islanders paying homage to the pagan Celtic gods of their ancestors, with churches having fallen into disuse. They copulate openly in the fields, include children as part of the May Day celebrations, teach children of the phallic association of the maypole, and one places a toad in a child's mouth to cure a sore throat. The islanders appear to be trying to thwart his investigation by claiming that Rowan never existed.\nWhile Howie is staying at the Green Man Inn, the landlord's daughter attempts to seduce him, but he resists, explaining that he is engaged and must reserve sex for marriage. He notices a series of photographs celebrating the annual harvest, each featuring a young girl as the May Queen. The photograph of the most recent celebration is missing and the landlord tells him it was broken. At the local school, Howie asks the students about Rowan, but all deny her existence. He checks the school register and finds Rowan's name. He questions the schoolteacher, who directs him to Rowan's grave.\nThe next day, 30 April, Howie meets the island's leader, Lord Summerisle, grandson of a Victorian agronomist, to get permission to exhume Rowan's body. Summerisle explains that in 1868, his grandfather developed strains of fruit trees that would prosper in Scotland's climate and encouraged the belief that returning to the old gods would bring prosperity to the island among the previously Christian population. Due to the bountiful harvests, the island's other inhabitants gradually embraced paganism, and the Christian ministers fled to the mainland.\nExhuming Rowan's grave, Howie finds that the coffin contains only the body of a hare. He also finds the missing harvest photograph, showing Rowan standing amidst empty boxes; the harvest had failed for the first time since the orchards were established. His research reveals that a human sacrifice is offered to the gods in the event of crop failure. He concludes that Rowan is alive and will soon be sacrificed to ensure a successful harvest this season.\nThe following morning, on May Day, Howie seeks assistance from the mainland and returns to his seaplane, only to discover it no longer functions and its radio is damaged; he cannot leave or call for help. Later that day, during the May Day celebration, Howie subdues the innkeeper and steals his costume and mask of Punch (the Fool) to infiltrate the parade. Rowan is eventually revealed. Howie sets her free and flees with her into a cave. Exiting it, they are intercepted by the islanders, to whom Rowan happily returns.\nSummerisle tells Howie that Rowan was never the intended sacrifice \u2014 Howie is. He fits their gods' four requirements: he came of his own free will, he has \"the power of a king\" by representing the law, he is a virgin, and he is a \"fool\" by falling for their deception. Howie warns Summerisle and the islanders that the crops are failing due to the unsuitability of the climate, and that the villagers will turn on Summerisle and sacrifice him next summer when the harvest fails again, but his pleas are ignored.\nThe villagers force Howie inside a giant wicker man statue along with various animals, set it ablaze, and surround it, singing the Middle English folk song \"Sumer Is Icumen In\". Inside the wicker man, Howie recites Psalm 23 and prays to God. Howie and the animals burn to death as the head of the wicker man collapses in flames, revealing the setting sun.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nBackground.\nIn the early 1970s, Christopher Lee was a Hammer Horror regular, best known for his roles in a series of successful films, beginning with \"The Curse of Frankenstein\" (as the monster, 1957). Lee wanted to break free of this image and take on more interesting acting roles. The idea for \"The Wicker Man\" film began in 1971 when Lee met with screenwriter Anthony Shaffer, and they agreed to work together. Film director Robin Hardy and British Lion head Peter Snell became involved in the project. Shaffer had a series of conversations with Hardy, and the two decided that making a horror film centring on \"old religion\" would be fun, in sharp contrast to the Hammer films they had both seen as horror film fans.\nShaffer read the David Pinner novel \"Ritual\", in which a devout Christian policeman is called to investigate what appears to be the ritual murder of a young girl in a rural village, and decided that it would serve well as the source material for the project. Pinner had originally written \"Ritual\" as a film treatment for director Michael Winner, who had John Hurt in mind as a possible star. Winner eventually declined the project, so Pinner's agent persuaded him to write \"Ritual\" as a novel instead. Shaffer and Lee paid Pinner \u00a315,000 () for the rights to the novel, and Shaffer set to work on the screenplay. He soon decided that a direct adaptation would not work well, so drafted a new story based only loosely on the story of the novel.\nShaffer wanted the film to be \"a little more literate\" than the average horror picture. He specifically wanted a film with a minimum of violence and gore. He was tired of seeing horror films that relied almost entirely on viscera to be scary. The focus of the film was crystallised when he \"finally hit upon the abstract concept of sacrifice.\" The image of the wicker man, which gave the filmmakers their title, was taken from the description of the practice of human sacrifice by the Gauls in Julius Caesar's \"Commentaries on the Gallic War\": \"Others have figures of vast size, the limbs of which formed of osiers they fill with living men, which being set on fire, the men perish enveloped in the flames.\" For Shaffer, this was \"the most alarming and imposing image that I had ever seen.\" The idea of a confrontation between a modern Christian and a remote, pagan community continued to intrigue Shaffer, who performed painstaking research on paganism. Brainstorming with Hardy, they conceived the film as presenting the pagan elements objectively and accurately, accompanied by authentic music and a believable, contemporary setting. One of their main resources was \"The Golden Bough\", a study of mythology and religion written by Scottish anthropologist James Frazer.\nCasting.\nTelevision actor Edward Woodward was cast in the role of Sergeant Neil Howie after the part was declined by both Michael York and David Hemmings. In Britain, Woodward was best known for the role of \"Callan\", which he played from 1967 to 1972. After \"The Wicker Man\", Woodward went on to receive international attention for his roles in the 1980 film \"Breaker Morant\" and the 1980s TV series \"The Equalizer\".\nAfter Shaffer saw her on the stage, he lured Diane Cilento out of semi-retirement to play the town's schoolmistress. (They lived together in Queensland from 1975, and married in 1985). Ingrid Pitt, another British horror film veteran, was cast as the town librarian and registrar; she had an affair with Peter Snell during filming which reportedly upset her husband George Pinches head of cinema bookings for the Rank Organisation and led to the film struggling to find distribution. Swedish actress Britt Ekland was cast as the innkeeper's lascivious daughter, although two body doubles were used for her naked scenes below the waist. Ekland found out that she was three months pregnant with her son Nic, to Lou Adler, two weeks into filming. Stuart Hopps (the film's choreographer) called upon Lorraine Peters, a nightclub dancer from Glasgow, who gyrated at the doorway and against the wall of a bedroom in the fully nude \"wall\" scenes. Ekland's speaking and singing voices were dubbed by Annie Ross and Rachel Verney respectively.\nLocal girl Jane Jackson was employed as Ekland's stand-in for camera setups. Jackson was blonde-haired and bore a resemblance to Ekland but was otherwise not involved in any filming.\nFilming.\nThe film was produced at a time of crisis for the British film industry. The studio in charge of production, British Lion Films, was in financial trouble and was bought by wealthy businessman John Bentley. To convince the unions that he was not about to asset strip the company, Bentley needed to get a film into production quickly. This meant that although \"The Wicker Man\" was set in spring, filming actually began in October 1972; artificial leaves and blossoms had to be glued to trees in many scenes. The production was kept on a small budget. Christopher Lee was extremely keen to get the film made; he and others worked on the production without pay. While filming took place, British Lion was bought by EMI Films.\nThe film was shot almost entirely in the small Scottish towns of Stranraer, Gatehouse of Fleet, Newton Stewart, Kirkcudbright, Anwoth and Creetown in Galloway, as well as Plockton in Ross-shire. Some scenes were filmed in and around the Isle of Whithorn, where the owners of the castle, Elizabeth McAdam McLaughland and David Wheatley, plus several other local people, featured in various scenes. Culzean Castle in Ayrshire and its grounds and Floors Castle in Roxburghshire were also used for the shooting. Some of the opening flying shots feature the Isle of Skye, including the pinnacles of The Storr and the Quiraing. The interior cave scenes were filmed inside Wookey Hole in Somerset. Hush Heath Estate in Staplehurst, Kent, makes a brief appearance in the film, doubling as Lord Summerisle's orchard and gardens. The climax of the film was shot at St Ninian's Cave and on the clifftops at Burrow Head in Wigtownshire.\nThe amphibious aircraft that carries Sergeant Howie was a Thurston Teal, owned and flown in the aerial sequences by Christopher Murphy.\nAccording to Britt Ekland, some animals perished in \"The Wicker Man\", whereas Robin Hardy said in an interview that great care was taken to ensure that the animals were in no danger of being hurt during this scene, and that they were not inside the wicker man when it was set on fire.\nMusic.\nThe score was arranged, recorded and part composed by Paul Giovanni. According to Seamus Flannery in a subsequent documentary, director Robin Hardy surprised the cast by suddenly announcing midway through filming that they were making a \"musical\"; performed by Magnet (in some versions of the film credited as \"Lodestone\"), the soundtrack contains 13 folk songs performed by characters in the film. Included are traditional songs, original compositions by Giovanni, and even a nursery rhyme, \"Baa, Baa, Black Sheep\".\n\"Willow's Song\" has been covered or sampled by various rock music bands. It was first covered by an English musical project known as Nature and Organisation on their 1994 release \"Beauty Reaps the Blood of Solitude\". It was covered by Sneaker Pimps as \"How Do\", and is included on their 1996 release \"Becoming X\". \"How Do\" can be heard in the movie \"Hostel\" (2005); credited in the end titles as being composed by Sneaker Pimps. Additionally, the band has covered \"Gently Johnny\" as \"Johnny\"; it is featured as a B-side on their single \"Roll On\" (1996). It also was covered by Faith and the Muse on their 2003 album \"The Burning Season\", and The Mock Turtles on their album \"Turtle Soup\".\nThe songs on the soundtrack were composed or arranged by Giovanni under the direction of Hardy and Shaffer, whose research into the oral folk tradition in England and Scotland was based largely on the work of Cecil Sharp, a \"founding father\" of the folk-revival movement of the early 20th century. Using Sharp's collections as a template, Shaffer noted to Giovanni which scenes were to have music, and in some cases provided lyrics, which would be appropriate to spring pagan festivals. Other songs on the soundtrack come from a later folk tradition; for example, \"Corn Riggs\", by Scotland's national bard, Robert Burns, accompanies Howie's arrival on Summerisle. The lyrics of this song were taken directly from the Burns song \"The Rigs of Barley\", but Giovanni used a very different tune. Burns' tune was based on \"Corn Riggs\", and altered to match his lyrics. The song sung by the cultists of Summerisle at the end of the film, \"Sumer Is Icumen In\", is a mid-13th-century song about nature in spring.\nThe film also gave its name to the Wickerman Festival, an annual music festival held near Auchencairn in Galloway. Dubbed \"Scotland's Alternative Music festival\", it began in 2001 when the festival's artistic director Sid Ambrose hit upon the idea of a local counterculture-based family-friendly festival due to the surrounding area being inextricably linked with various locations used within \"The Wicker Man\". It was held annually until 2015 at East Kirkcarswell Farm, Dundrennan.\nDistribution.\nBy the time of the film's completion, British Lion was managed by Michael Deeley. The DVD commentary track states that studio executives suggested a more \"upbeat\" ending to the film, in which a sudden rain puts the flames of the wicker man out and spares Howie's life, but this suggestion was refused. Hardy subsequently had to remove about 20\u00a0minutes of scenes on the mainland, early investigations, and (to Lee's disappointment) some of Lord Summerisle's initial meeting with Howie.\nOriginal release.\nThe first screening of the film was to trade and cinema distributors on 3 December 1973. The first public theatrical release was a week of test screenings at the Metropole Cinema London on 6 December 1973 ahead of the official public release in January 1974. It runs 87 minutes.\nA copy of a finished, 99-minute version was sent to American film producer Roger Corman in Hollywood to make a judgment of how to market the film in the U.S. Corman recommended an additional 13\u00a0minutes be cut from the film. Corman did not acquire U.S. release rights, and eventually Warner Bros. test-marketed the film in drive-ins. It screened in the greater Atlanta area in May 1974.\nIn Britain, the film was cut to roughly 87\u00a0minutes, with some narrative restructuring, and released as the \"B\" picture on a double bill with \"Don't Look Now\". According to Lee, the cuts adversely affected the film's continuity.\nFirst restoration.\nDuring the mid-1970s, Hardy made inquiries about the film, hoping to restore it to his original vision. Along with Lee and Shaffer, Hardy searched for his original cut, or raw footage. Both of these appeared to have been lost. Director Alex Cox said in his \"Moviedrome\" introduction in 1988 that the negative had \"ended up in the pylons that support the M4 motorway.\" Hardy recalled that a copy of the film made prior to Deeley's cuts was sent to Roger Corman, who, it turned out, still had it, possibly the only existing print of Hardy's original cut. The US rights had been sold by Warner Bros. to a small firm called Abraxas, managed by film buff Stirling Smith and critic John Alan Simon. Stirling agreed to an American release of a reconstruction by Hardy. Hardy restored the narrative structure, some of the erotic elements which had been excised, and a very brief pretitle segment of Howie on the mainland (appearing at a church with his fianc\u00e9e). A 96-minute restored version was released in January 1979, again to critical acclaim.\nUS VHS versions.\nThe original 99-minute version was available in the US on VHS home video from Media Home Entertainment (and later Magnum) during the 1980s and 1990s. This video includes additional early scenes set inside Howie's police station, which Hardy had left out of the 1979 restoration. In 2001, a remaster of the 88-minute cut was released on VHS, labelled as the \"Theatrical Version\".\nDirector's cut.\nIn 2001, the film's new world rights owners, Canal+, tried to release the full-length film. Corman's copy had been lost, but a telecine transfer to 1-inch videotape existed. Missing elements were combined with film elements from the previous versions (in particular, additional scenes of Howie on the mainland were restored, showing him to be the object of gossip at his police station, establishing his devout religiosity). The extended DVD cut was released by Canal+ (Anchor Bay Entertainment handling US DVD distribution) in this 99-minute hybrid, considered the longest and closest version to Hardy's original 100-odd minute version. A two-disc limited edition set was sold with the shortened theatrical release, the new extended version and a documentary, \"The Wicker Man Enigma\". In 2005, \"Inside the Wicker Man\" author Allan Brown revealed he had discovered stills taken on the set showing sequences from the script that had never been seen; it had never been certain that the scenes had been filmed. They include scenes where Howie closes a mainland pub open after hours, encounters a prostitute, has a massage from Willow McGregor, and sees a brutal confrontation between Oak and a villager in The Green Man, which were featured in a revised edition of \"Inside the Wicker Man\". Anchor Bay released a limited-edition wooden box of \"The Wicker Man\". About 50,000 two-disc sets were made, of which 20 were signed by Lee and Woodward, Shaffer, Snell, and Hardy. In March 2002, Lee discussed the lost original cut, \"I still believe it exists somewhere, in cans with no name. I still believe that. But nobody's ever seen it since, so we couldn't re-cut it, re-edit it, which was what I wanted to do. It would have been ten times as good\".\n\"The Final Cut\".\nEuropean distributors of the film StudioCanal began a Facebook campaign in 2013 to find missing material, which culminated in the discovery of a 92-minute 35\u00a0mm print at the Harvard Film Archive. This print had previously been known as the \"Middle Version\" and was itself assembled from a 35\u00a0mm print of the original edit Robin Hardy had made in the United Kingdom in 1973, but which was never released. Robin Hardy believed that the original edit will probably never be found, saying, \"Sadly, it seems as though this has been lost forever. However, I am delighted that a 1979 Abraxas print has been found as I also put together this cut myself, and it crucially restores the story order to that which I had originally intended.\"\nHardy reported in July 2013 that Studiocanal intended to restore and release the most complete version possible of the film. Rialto Pictures announced that it was to release the new digital restoration in North American cinemas on 27 September 2013. This new version was also released on DVD on 13 October 2013. It is 91 minutes long, shorter than the director's cut but longer than the theatrical cut, and is known as \"The Wicker Man: The Final Cut\".\n\"The Final Cut\" (UK) Blu-ray (2013) features short documentaries \"Burnt Offering: The Cult of the Wicker Man\", \"Worshipping the Wicker Man\", \"The Music of the Wicker Man\", interviews with director Robin Hardy and actor Christopher Lee, a restoration comparison, and the theatrical trailer. The second disc features both the UK 87-minute theatrical cut and the 95-minute 2013 director's cut, along with an audio commentary on the director's cut and a making-of for the commentary. The third disc is the soundtrack to the film.\n50th Anniversary: 4K restorations, Final Cut screenings and 'Musics from Summerisle'.\nIn 2023, for the 50th anniversary of the film's release, StudioCanal announced 4K resolution restoration of existing footage, and remastering of the existing three cuts for a \"4K Ultra HD Collector's Edition\" release on 25 September 2023.\nOn 21 June, the 4K restoration Final Cut was screened in cinemas across the UK along with a Q&amp;A filmed in London, hosted by Edith Bowman with guests including Britt Ekland, and Robin Hardy's sons Julian and Dominic promoting their \"Wickermania!\" documentary.\nOn 24 June, the Barbican Centre held \"Musics from Summerisle\", a live performance celebration of the anniversary.\nReception.\nCritical reception.\nDavid McGillivray of \"The Monthly Film Bulletin\" praised the film as \"an immensely enjoyable piece of hokum, thoroughly well researched, performed and directed.\" \"Variety\" wrote that Anthony Shaffer's screenplay \"for sheer imagination and near-terror, has seldom been equalled.\" Kevin Thomas of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called it \"a witty work of the macabre\" with \"the splendid performances typical of British films.\" Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" was more negative, calling it \"handsomely photographed\" with \"good performances,\" but \"something of a howl\" even though \"it seems to have been made in all seriousness.\"\n\"The Wicker Man\" initially had moderate success and won the Golden Licorn for Best Film at the 1974 Paris International Festival of Fantastic and Science-Fiction Film, but largely slipped into obscurity. In 1977, the American film magazine \"Cinefantastique\" devoted a commemorative issue to the film, asserting that the film is \"the \"Citizen Kane\" of horror movies\" \u2014 an oft-quoted phrase attributed to this issue.\nDecades after its release, the film still receives positive reviews from critics and is considered one of the best films of 1973. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 66 critics' reviews are positive. The website's consensus reads: \"This intelligent horror film is subtle in its thrills and chills, with an ending that is both shocking and truly memorable.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 87 out of 100, based on 16 critics, indicating .\nIn 2008, \"The Wicker Man\" was ranked by \"Empire\" at No. 485 of \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\". Christopher Lee considered \"The Wicker Man\" his best film. Similarly, Edward Woodward said that \"The Wicker Man\" was one of his favourite films and that the character of Howie was the best part he ever played. In addition to Lee's admiration of the final shot of the film (of the collapsing wicker man), Woodward said that it is the best final shot of any film ever made. In 2010 \"The Guardian\" newspaper ranked it as No 4 in its \"25 best horror films of all time\" listings.\nIn his 2010 BBC documentary series \"A History of Horror\", writer and actor Mark Gatiss referred to the film as a prime example of a short-lived subgenre he called \"folk horror\", grouping it with 1968's \"Witchfinder General\" and 1971's \"The Blood on Satan's Claw\". In 2003, the Crichton Campus of the University of Glasgow in Dumfries hosted a three-day conference on \"The Wicker Man\", which resulted in the publication of two collections of papers about the film. In 2004, \"The Wicker Man\" ranked No, 45 on Bravo's \"100 Scariest Movie Moments\".\nPopular culture.\nThe film brought the wicker man into modern popular culture. In recent times, a wicker man has been burnt at festivals such as Burning Man in the United States, and the former Wickerman Festival in Scotland.\nIn 1998, Swedish black metal band Marduk used a line from this film on the introduction to the track \"Slay the Nazarene\" from the album \"Nightwing\".\nIn 2000, English heavy metal band Iron Maiden released a single called \"The Wicker Man\" in tribute to the film.\nIn 2016, English band Radiohead released the music video for the song \"Burn the Witch\", made in stop-motion animation and whose storyline greatly resembles that of \"The Wicker Man\".\nIn 2001, English band Pulp released \"Wickerman\" on their \"We Love Life\" album, which features a sample of Willow's Song.\n\"The White\", a 2008 EP by American extreme metal band Agalloch, included three tracks featuring samples of dialogue from the film: \"The Isle of Summer\", \"Summerisle Reprise\", and \"Sowilo Rune\".\nIn the film \"Shallow Grave\", Ewan McGregor's character is shown watching the final scene, representing the building sense of doom the character is experiencing.\nThe creators of \"The League of Gentlemen\" television series often reference the film in their work, particularly in the \"Inside No. 9\" episode \"Mr King\".\nFor Record Store Day 2024 'Katy J Pearson &amp; Friends' released a 9 track EP \"The Wicker Man\" with covers of songs from the film. The EP, on Heavenly Recordings, (HVN72412) features collaborations with Broadside Hacks, Drug Store Romeos, Sarah Meth, Orbury Common, Evie Hilyer-Zietler, Bert Ussher, H.Hawkline plus special guests as well as remixes by Richard Norris and Stone Club.\nA yearly Wicker Man festival is held in Fishtoft, Lincolnshire, featuring live music from Ian Cutler, who featured in the original film as the fiddle player.\nRelated works.\nNovelisation.\nA novelisation, which expands on the story and bears the same title, was released in 1978. It was written by Hardy and Shaffer.\nPossible sequel.\nIn 1989, Shaffer wrote a 30-page film script treatment entitled \"The Loathsome Lambton Worm\", a direct sequel to \"The Wicker Man\", for producer Lance Reynolds. It would have been more fantastical in subject matter than the original film, and relied more heavily on special effects. In this continuation of the story, which begins immediately after the ending of the first film, Sergeant Neil Howie is rescued from the burning Wicker Man by a group of police officers from the mainland. Howie sets out to bring Lord Summerisle and his pagan followers to justice, but becomes embroiled in a series of challenges which pit the old gods against his own Christian faith. The script culminates in a climactic battle between Howie and a fire-breathing dragon \u2013 the titular Lambton Worm \u2013 and ends with a suicidal Howie plunging to his death from a cliff while tied to two large eagles. Shaffer's sequel was never produced, but his treatment, complete with illustrations, was eventually published in the companion book \"Inside The Wicker Man\".\nHardy was not asked to direct the sequel, and never read the script, as he did not like the idea of Howie surviving the sacrifice, or the fact that the actors would have aged by 20 to 30 years between the two films. In May 2010, Hardy discussed \"The Loathsome Lambton Worm\". \"I know Tony did write that, but I don't think anyone particularly liked it, or it would have been made.\"\nA fan-made full-cast audio drama adaptation of Shaffer's \"The Loathsome Lambton Worm\" treatment was eventually released in 2020.\nRemake.\nAn American remake of the same name, starring Nicolas Cage and Ellen Burstyn, and directed by Neil LaBute, was released in 2006. Hardy expressed concern about the remake.\nStage production.\nA stage adaptation was announced for the 2009 Edinburgh Festival Fringe, and was directed by Andrew Steggall. The production was based jointly upon Anthony Shaffer's original \"The Wicker Man\" script and David Pinner's novel \"Ritual\". Robin Hardy gave input on the project, and original songs and music from the film were supervised by Gary Carpenter, the original music director. Workshop rehearsals were held at The Drill Hall in London in March 2008, and a casting call was held in Glasgow in May 2009. After three weeks at the Pleasance in Edinburgh in August 2009, the production was to visit the Perth Rep, Eden Court Theatre in Inverness, and then have a short run at Citizen's Theatre in Glasgow, with hopes for a run in London in 2010. However, in July 2009 it was announced that the production had been cancelled, three weeks before it had been due to preview.\nIn 2011, the National Theatre of Scotland produced \"An Appointment with the Wicker Man\" written by Greg Hemphill and Donald McCleary. The production has an amateur theatre company attempting to stage a \"Wicker Man\" musical.\nSpiritual sequel.\nIn 2011, a spiritual successor entitled \"The Wicker Tree\" was released. It was directed by Hardy and featured an appearance by Lee. Hardy first published the story as a novel, under the name \"Cowboys for Christ\". First announced in April 2000, filming on the project began on 19 July 2009 according to IMDb. It follows two young American Christian evangelists who travel to Scotland; like Woodward's character in \"The Wicker Man\", the two Americans are virgins who encounter a pagan laird and his followers. The film received mixed reviews.\nThose involved in the production of the film have given conflicting statements regarding the identity of Christopher Lee's character, referred to only as Old Gentleman in the credits. Writer/director Robin Hardy said that the ambiguity was intentional. Fans would immediately recognise Lee's character as Lord Summerisle. Lee himself has contradicted this, stating that the two are not meant to be the same character, and that \"The Wicker Tree\" is not a sequel in any way.\nAudio adaptation.\nA radio adaptation by Anthony D. P. Mann was produced by Bleak December Inc. in an arrangement with StudioCanal and broadcast on BBC Radio 4 Extra on 2 December 2023 as part of a \"Wicker Man\"-themed evening of programmes. The cast included Mann as Sergeant Howie, Brian Blessed as Lord Summerisle, Laurence R. Harvey as MacGregor, Anne-Marie Bergman as Miss Rose, Melissa Radford as Willow and Mei Kiera as Rowan Morrison/Heather.\nPotential graphic novel and third film.\nAs a former artist, Hardy expressed great interest in the medium of comics, and planned a comic book which would retell the story of \"The Wicker Man\", based on his own storyboards for the film. Hardy was in talks with yet unnamed artists to work on the project, as he found it too difficult to make the characters look consistent from one panel to the next. Hardy was working on his next film, \"The Wrath of the Gods\", at the time of his death on 1 July 2016. He intended the graphic novel and the new film to be released at the same time in autumn 2013; however as of autumn 2014 neither had been released, and the film never started production.\n\"Wickermania!\" documentary.\nIn 2023, two of Robin Hardy's sons, Justin and Dominic, announced that they had created a documentary about \"The Wicker Man\", called \"Wickermania!\". They had already received permission and a discount from Canal+ to use existing film footage, and had a number of original documents related to the production. They were seeking to fund the release of the documentary, subsequently renamed \"Children of the Wicker Man\", via Kickstarter.\n\"The Wicker Man: The Official Story of the Film\" book.\nOn 24 October 2023, a new behind-the-scenes book \"\" was published by Titan Books and written by John Walsh, containing new interviews, photos and others materials from the film. It was licensed by the film's rights holder StudioCanal.\n\"Sing-along-a-Wickerman\".\nBritish performers David Bramwell and Eliza Skelton host a travelling show entitled \"Sing-along-a-Wickerman\", which includes many \"Wicker Man\"-themed activities culminating in a sing-along screening of the film. The show has been going since at least 2011, and has received positive reviews from news outlets such as \"The Guardian\" and \"Time Out\". Director of the film Robin Hardy has attended and has been a part of several shows, calling it \"terrific fun.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42314", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42314", "title": "Naturalization", "text": "Citizenship acquisition by non-nationals\nNaturalization (or naturalisation) is the legal act or process by which a non-national of a country acquires the nationality of that country after birth. The definition of naturalization by the International Organization for Migration of the United Nations excludes citizenship that is automatically acquired (e.g. at birth) or is acquired by declaration. Naturalization usually involves an application or a motion and approval by legal authorities. The rules of naturalization vary from country to country but typically include a promise to obey and uphold that country's laws and taking and subscribing to an oath of allegiance, and may specify other requirements such as a minimum legal residency and adequate knowledge of the national dominant language or culture. To counter multiple citizenship, some countries require that applicants for naturalization renounce any other citizenship that they currently hold, but whether this renunciation actually causes loss of original citizenship, as seen by the host country and by the original country, will depend on the laws of the countries involved. Naturalization is politicized due to the reshaping of the electorate of the country.\nHistory.\nThe massive increase in population flux due to globalization and the sharp increase in the numbers of refugees following World War I created many stateless persons, people who were not citizens of any state. In some rare cases, laws for mass naturalization were passed. As naturalization laws had been designed to cater for the relatively few people who had voluntarily moved from one country to another (expatriates), many western democracies were not ready to naturalize large numbers of people. This included the massive influx of stateless people which followed massive denationalizations and the expulsion of ethnic minorities from newly created nation states in the first part of the 20th century.\nSince World War II, the increase in international migrations created a new category of migrants, most of them economic migrants. For economic, political, humanitarian and pragmatic reasons, many states passed laws allowing a person to acquire their citizenship after birth, such as by marriage to a national \u2013 \"jus matrimonii\" \u2013 or by having ancestors who are nationals of that country, in order to reduce the scope of this category. However, in some countries this system still maintains a large part of the immigrant population in an illegal status, albeit with some massive regularizations. Examples include Spain under Jos\u00e9 Luis Rodr\u00edguez Zapatero's government, and Italy under Silvio Berlusconi's government. Some countries allow naturalization due to military service.\nCountries without a path to naturalization.\nMyanmar and Uruguay are currently the only countries in the world that deny immigrants any path to naturalization. Uruguayan legal citizenship has special characteristics. A person who acquires it retains their nationality of origin, which is determined by Uruguayan law to be that of their country of birth and is therefore immutable. Legal citizens acquire political rights but do not acquire Uruguayan nationality as natural citizens do. According to Uruguayan law, those born in Uruguay or whose parents or grandparents are Uruguayan natural citizens are considered to be Uruguayan nationals.\nAs a result of Uruguay's unusual distinction between citizenship and nationality (it is the only country in the world that recognizes the right to citizenship without being a national), legal citizens have encountered problems with their Uruguayan passports at airports around the world since 2015. This is due to recommendations in the seventh edition of Doc. 9303 of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), which requires that travel documents issued by participating states include the \"Nationality\" field. The lack of a naturalization path means that the Nationality field in legal citizens' passports indicates their country of birth, which Uruguay assumes to be their nationality of origin. Many countries do not accept passports issued by a country that declares the holder to be a national of another country. As a consequence, it has severely curtailed legal citizens' exercise of the right to free movement, as their travel abroad is often difficult or downright impossible.\nMass naturalizations.\nA few rare mass naturalization processes have been implemented by nation states. In 1891, Brazil granted naturalization to all aliens living in the country. In accordance with the 1923 population exchange agreement between Greece and Turkey following the Armistice of Mudanya and end of World War in Anatolia, Greece rapidly naturalized all Greek, Roman or Orthodox Christian people fled from Turkey after the defeat of Greek Army in Turkey. Reciprocally, the Republic of Turkey naturalized all Turk or Muslim refugees and deportees (Bosniaks, Pomaks, Macedons, Muslim Greeks) from Balkans (after Balkan Wars), Greece and other former regions of Ottoman Empire during redemption period. Another massive naturalization process was in favor of Armenian people coming from Anatolia, who went to Syria, Lebanon or other territorries of former Ottoman Empire. In 1980s and 1990s Turks and Muslims living in Bulgaria were forced to leave Bulgaria in a massive campaign. Republic of Turkey accepted almost all refugees and deportees from Bulgaria and naturalized them. A significant refugee from that era was the athlete Naim S\u00fcleymano\u011flu.\nCanada instituted a mass naturalization by Act of Parliament with the enactment of the Canadian Citizenship Act 1946.\nAfter annexation of the territories east of the Curzon line by the Soviet Union in 1945, Soviets naturalized \"en masse\" all the inhabitants of those territories\u2014including ethnic Poles, as well as its other citizens who had been deported into the Soviet Union, mainly to Kazakhstan. Later on, Germany granted to the ethnic German population in Russia and Kazakhstan full citizenship rights. Poland has a limited repatriation program in place.\nIn the late 1970s, President Ferdinand Marcos facilitated the mass naturalization of ethnic Chinese in the Philippines.\nThe most recent massive naturalization case resulted from the Argentine economic crisis in the beginning of the 21st century. Existing or slightly updated right of return laws in Spain and Italy allowed many of their diasporic descendants to obtain\u2014in many cases to regain\u2014naturalization in virtue of \"jus sanguinis\", as in the Greek case. Hence, many Argentines acquired European nationality.\nSince the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution grants citizenship only to those \"born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof\", and the original United States Constitution only grants Congress the power of naturalization, it could be argued that all acts of Congress that expand the right of citizenship are cases of mass naturalization. This includes the acts that extended U.S. citizenship to citizens of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands, as well as the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 which made all Native Americans citizens (most of them were previously excluded under the \"jurisdiction\" clause of the 14th Amendment).\nIn the eastern Malaysian state of Sabah, mass naturalization also occurred during the administration of United Sabah National Organisation (USNO) and Sabah People's United Front (BERJAYA's) Muslim-dominated political parties to increase the Muslim population in the territory by naturalising immigrants and refugees from the mainly-Muslim dominated areas of Mindanao and Sulu Archipelago of the Philippines and Sulawesi of Indonesia.\nIllegal naturalization.\nNaturalization can be declared illegal.\nIn occupied territories.\nThe mass naturalization of native people in occupied territories is illegal under the laws of war (Hague and Geneva Conventions). However, there have been many instances of such illegal mass naturalizations in the 20th century.\nSummary by country.\nThe following list is a brief summary of the duration of legal residence before a national of a foreign state, without any cultural, historical, or marriage ties or connections to the state in question, can request citizenship under that state's naturalization laws.\nLaws by country.\nAustralia.\nThe \"Australian Citizenship Act 1973\" ended the preferential treatment for British subjects from 1 December 1973. People who became permanent residents from 1 July 2007 must have been lawfully resident in Australia for four years before applying for citizenship by conferral. Those who were present in Australia as permanent residents before 1 July 2007 remain subject to the previous residence requirement (in force since 1984, e.g. resident for two years).\nPeople's Republic of China.\nThe People's Republic of China gives citizenship to people with one or two parents with Chinese nationality who have not taken residence in other countries. The country also gives citizenship to people born on its territory to stateless people who have settled there. Furthermore, individuals may apply for nationality if they have a near relative with Chinese nationality, if they have settled in China, or if they present another legitimate reason. In practice, few people gain Chinese citizenship; as of 2010, China had only 1,448 naturalised Chinese in total.\nThe naturalization process starts with a written application. Applicants must submit three copies, written with a ball-point or fountain pen, to national authorities, and to provincial authorities in the Ministry of Public Security and the Public Security Bureau. Applicants must also submit original copies of a foreign passport, a residence permit, a permanent residence permit, and four two-and-a-half inch long pictures. According to the conditions outlined in the Nationality Law of the People's Republic of China, authorities may also require \"any other material that the authority believes are related to the nationality application\".\nFrance.\nPeople who fulfil all of the following criteria can obtain French citizenship through naturalisation:\nThe fee for naturalisation is \u20ac55, except in French Guiana, where it is \u20ac27.50.\nGermany.\nPeople who fulfil all of the following criteria can obtain German citizenship through naturalisation:\nThe dependent minor children of an applicant for naturalisation may also themselves become naturalised German citizens.\nThe fee for standard naturalisation is \u20ac255, while it is \u20ac51 per dependent minor child naturalised along with their parent. The fee may be waived in cases of extreme hardship or public interest.\nPrior to 27 June 2024, people naturalising as German citizens were generally required give up their previous nationality, with exceptions made for EU and Swiss citizens (provided that the law of their country of origin did not prohibit the acquisition of another citizenship) and citizens of countries where renouncing one's citizenship was too difficult or humiliating (e.g. Afghanistan), prohibitively expensive (e.g. the United States) or legally impossible (e.g. Argentina). The Act on the Modernization of Citizenship Law that came into force in 2024 made multiple citizenship possible.\nGrenada.\nThe Grenadian Government grants citizenship of Grenada for the following reasons:\nIndia.\nThe Indian citizenship and nationality law and the Constitution of India provides single citizenship for the entire country. The provisions relating to citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution are contained in Articles 5 to 11 in Part\u00a0II of the Constitution of India. Relevant Indian legislation is the Citizenship Act 1955, which has been amended by the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 1986, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 1992, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2003, and Citizenship (Amendment) Ordinance 2005. The Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2003 received the assent of the President of India on 7 January 2004 and came into force on 3 December 2004. The Citizenship (Amendment) Ordinance 2005 was promulgated by the President of India and came into force on 28 June 2005.\nFollowing these reforms, Indian nationality law largely follows the \"jus sanguinis\" (citizenship by right of blood) as opposed to the \"jus soli\" (citizenship by right of birth within the territory).\nIn 2019, a Citizenship Amendment Act was passed by the Parliament of India. This Act aims at fast tracking citizenship for illegal immigrants and refugees fleeing religious persecution for people of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian faiths who have entered India on or before 31 December 2014 from the neighbouring countries of Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.\nItaly.\nThe Italian Government grants Italian citizenship for the following reasons.\nIndonesia.\nIndonesian nationality is regulated by Law No. 12/2006 (UU No. 12 Tahun 2006). The Indonesian nationality law is based on jus sanguinis and jus soli. The Indonesian nationality law does not recognize dual citizenship except for people under the age of 18 (limited double citizenship principle). After reaching 18 years of age individuals are forced to choose one citizenship (single citizenship principle).\nA foreign citizen can apply to become an Indonesian citizen with the following requirements:\nAny application for citizenship is granted by the President of Indonesia.\nIsrael.\nIsrael's Declaration of Independence was made on 14 May 1948, the day before the British Mandate was due to expire as a result of the United Nations Partition Plan. The Israeli parliament created two laws regarding immigration, citizenship and naturalization: the Law of Return and the Israeli citizenship law. The Law of Return, enacted on July 15, 1950, gives Jews living anywhere in the world the right to immigrate to Israel. This right to immigrate did not and still does not grant citizenship. In fact, for four years after Israel gained independence, there were no Israeli citizens.\nOn July 14, 1952, the Israeli parliament enacted the Israeli Nationality Law. The Nationality Law naturalized all citizens of Mandated Palestine, the inhabitants of Israel on July 15, 1952, and those who had legally resided in Israel between May 14, 1948, and July 14, 1952. The law further clarified that naturalization was available to immigrants who had arrived before Israel's creation, immigrants who arrived after statehood was granted, and those who did not come to Israel as immigrants but have since expressed desire to settle in Israel, with restriction. Naturalization applicants must also meet the following requirements: be over 18 years of age, have resided in Israel for three out of the five preceding years, have settled or intend to settle permanently in Israel, have some knowledge of Hebrew, and have renounced prior nationality or demonstrated ability to renounce nationality after becoming a citizen of Israel.\nBecause of Israel's relatively new and culturally mixed identity, Israel does not grant citizenship to people born on Israeli soil. Instead, the government chose to enact a jus sanguinis system, with the naturalization restrictions listed above. There is currently no legislation on second-generation immigrants (those born in Israel to immigrant parents). Furthermore, foreign spouses can apply for citizenship through the Minister of the Interior, but have a variety of restrictions and are not guaranteed citizenship.\nLuxembourg.\nPeople who fulfill all of the following criteria can obtain Luxembourg citizenship through naturalisation:\nMalaysia.\nNaturalisation in Malaysia is guided by the 1964 Malaysian Constitution. According to the law, those who want to be the country citizen should live in the country for a period of 10\u201312 years. The would-be-citizens are required to speak the Malay language as well submitting the identity cards of two Malaysians who recommend the applicant for citizenship. As the Government of Malaysia does not recognise dual citizenship, those who seek naturalisation are needed to reside permanently in the country and renouncing their former country citizenship.\nThe requirements are as follows:\nThe Article 16 of 1957 Malaysian Constitution also stated a similar condition previously.\nPhilippines.\nCommonwealth Act No. 473, the Revised Naturalization Law, approved June 17, 1939, provided that people having certain specified qualifications may become a citizen of the Philippines by naturalization. Republic Act No. 9139, approved June 8, 2001, provided that aliens under the age of 18 who were born in the Philippines, who have resided in the Philippines since birth, and who possess other specified qualifications may be granted Philippines citizenship by administrative proceeding subject to certain requirements.\nRussia.\nNaturalization in Russia is guided by articles 13 and 14 of the federal law \"About Citizenship of Russian Federation\" passed on May 31, 2002. Citizenship of Russia can be obtained in general or simplified order. To become a citizen in general order, one must be 18 years of age or older, continuously live in Russia as a permanent resident for at least five years (this term is limited to one year for valued specialists, political asylum seekers and refugees), have legal means of existence, promise to obey the laws and Constitution of Russia and be fluent in the Russian language.\nThere is also a possibility to naturalize in a simplified order, in which certain requirements will be waived. Eligible for that are people, at least one parent of whom is a Russian citizen living on Russian territory; people, who lived on the territories of the former Soviet republics but never obtained citizenships of those nations after they gained independence; people, who were born on the territory of RSFSR and formerly held Soviet citizenship; people married to Russian citizens for at least 3 years; people, who served in Russian Armed Forces under contract for at least 3 years; parents of mentally incapacitated children over 18 who are Russian citizens; participants of the State Program for Assisting Compatriots Residing Abroad; and some other categories.\nSpain.\nPeople who fulfill all of the following criteria can obtain Spanish citizenship through naturalisation\nPeople who naturalise as Spanish citizens must usually give up their previous nationality, as Spanish law takes a restrictive approach to multiple citizenship.\nSouth Africa.\nChapter 2 of the South African Citizenship Act, enacted on October 6, 1995, defines who is considered a naturalized citizen at the time of the act and also outlines the naturalization process for future immigrants.\nAny person who immediately prior to the commencement of the act had been a South African citizen via naturalization, had been deemed to be a South African citizen by registration, or had been a citizen via naturalization of any of the former states now composing South Africa is now considered to be a naturalized citizen of South Africa.\nThose wishing to apply for naturalization in the future must apply to the Minister of Home Affairs and must meet a slew of requirements. First, naturalization applicants must be over the age of 18 and must have been a permanent resident of South Africa for five years prior to application (prior to 2010, the permanent residence requirement was one year prior to application and for four out of the eight years prior to application). Applicants must also demonstrate good character and knowledge of the basic responsibilities and privileges of a South African citizen. The ability to communicate in one of the official languages of South Africa is also required. Applicants must show the intention to reside in South Africa after naturalization, and they are required to make a declaration of allegiance. The Constitution of South Africa states that national legislation must provide for the acquisition, loss and restoration of citizenship.\nBeing a naturalized South African citizen is a privilege, not a right. Even after meeting all the requirements and going through the naturalization process, the minister holds the right to deny citizenship. Foreign spouses of South African citizens can apply for naturalization after two years of marriage, but is subject to potential denial of the minister. The minister can also grant citizenship to minors, if their parent applies for them.\nThe minister also holds the power to revoke naturalization at any time for specific reasons listed in the Act. Reasons for revoking the naturalization certificate include marrying someone who is a citizen of another country and holding citizenship in another country, or applying for citizenship of another country without prior authorization for retention of citizenship. If a permanent resident is denied naturalization, he or she must wait at least one year before reapplying.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThere has always been a distinction in the law of England and Wales between the subjects of the monarch and aliens: the monarch's subjects owed the monarch allegiance, and included those born in his or her dominions (natural-born subjects) and those who later gave him or her their allegiance (naturalised subjects). Today, the requirements for naturalisation as a citizen of the United Kingdom depend on whether or not one is the spouse or civil partner of a citizen. An applicant who is a spouse or civil partner of a British citizen must:\nFor those not married to or in a civil partnership with a British citizen, the requirements are:\nUnited States.\nPersons who are not US citizens may receive citizenship through the process of naturalization, following the Congressional requirements in the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA). Naturalized citizens have the same rights as those who acquired citizenship at birth.\nThe INA states the following:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Naturalization Act of 1795 set the initial rules on naturalization: \"free, White persons\" who had been resident for five years or more. An 1862 law allowed honorably discharged Army veterans of any war to petition for naturalization after only one year of residence in the United States. An 1894 law extended the same privilege to honorably discharged five-year veterans of the Navy or Marine Corps. Laws enacted in 1919, 1926, 1940, and 1952 continued preferential treatment provisions for veterans.\nFollowing the Spanish\u2013American War in 1898, Philippine citizens were classified as US nationals, and the 1917 Jones\u2013Shafroth Act granted US citizenship to natives of Puerto Rico. But the 1934 Tydings\u2013McDuffie Act reclassified Filipinos as aliens, and set a quota of 50 immigrants per year, and otherwise applying the Immigration Act of 1924 to them.\nThe Magnuson Act repealed the Chinese Exclusion Act. During the 1940s, 100 annual immigrants from British India and the Philippines were allowed. The War Brides Act of 1945 permitted soldiers to bring back their foreign wives and established precedent in naturalization through marriage. The Immigration Act of 1965 finally allowed people from all nations to be given equal access to immigration and naturalization.\nIllegal immigration became a major issue in the United States at the end of the 20th century. The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, while tightening border controls, also provided the opportunity of naturalization for illegal aliens who had been in the country for at least four years. Today, lawful permanent residents of the United States are eligible to apply for US citizenship after five years, unless they continue to be married to a US citizen, in which case they can apply after only three years of permanent residency.\nThe Child Citizenship Act of 2000 streamlined the naturalization process for children adopted internationally. A child under age 18 who is adopted by at least one US citizen parent, and is in the custody of the citizen parent(s), is now automatically naturalized once admitted to the United States as an immigrant or when legally adopted in the United States, depending on the visa under which the child was admitted to the United States. The Act also provides that the non-citizen minor child of a newly naturalized US citizen, whether by birth or adoption, also automatically receives US citizenship.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42315", "revid": "50664873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42315", "title": "Topological group", "text": "Group that is a topological space with continuous group action\nIn mathematics, topological groups are the combination of groups and topological spaces, i.e. they are groups and topological spaces at the same time, such that the continuity condition for the group operations connects these two structures together and consequently they are not independent from each other.\nTopological groups were studied extensively in the period of 1925 to 1940. Haar and Weil (respectively in 1933 and 1940) showed that the integrals and Fourier series are special cases of a construct that can be defined on a very wide class of topological groups.\nTopological groups, along with continuous group actions, are used to study continuous symmetries, which have many applications, for example, in physics. In functional analysis, every topological vector space is an additive topological group with the additional property that scalar multiplication is continuous; consequently, many results from the theory of topological groups can be applied to functional analysis.\nFormal definition.\nA topological group, G, is a topological space that is also a group such that the group operation (in this case product):\nformula_1\nand the inversion map:\nformula_2\nare continuous. \nHere formula_3 is viewed as a topological space with the product topology. \nSuch a topology is said to be compatible with the group operations and is called a group topology.\nThe product map is continuous if and only if for any formula_4 and any neighborhood W of formula_5 in G, there exist neighborhoods U of x and V of y in G such that formula_6, where formula_7. \nThe inversion map is continuous if and only if for any formula_8 and any neighborhood V of formula_9 in G, there exists a neighborhood U of x in G such that formula_10 where formula_11\nTo show that a topology is compatible with the group operations, it suffices to check that the map\nformula_12\nis continuous. \nExplicitly, this means that for any formula_4 and any neighborhood W in G of formula_14, there exist neighborhoods U of x and V of y in G such that formula_15.\nThis definition used notation for multiplicative groups; \nthe equivalent for additive groups would be that the following two operations are continuous:\nformula_16\nformula_17\nAlthough not part of this definition, many authors require that the topology on G be Hausdorff. \nOne reason for this is that any topological group can be canonically associated with a Hausdorff topological group by taking an appropriate canonical quotient; \nthis however, often still requires working with the original non-Hausdorff topological group.\nOther reasons, and some equivalent conditions, are discussed below.\nThis article will not assume that topological groups are necessarily Hausdorff.\nIn the language of category theory, topological groups can be defined concisely as group objects in the category of topological spaces, in the same way that ordinary groups are group objects in the category of sets. \nNote that the axioms are given in terms of the maps (binary product, unary inverse, and nullary identity), hence are categorical definitions.\nHomomorphisms.\nA homomorphism of topological groups means a continuous group homomorphism formula_18. \nTopological groups, together with their homomorphisms, form a category. \nA group homomorphism between topological groups is continuous if and only if it is continuous at \"some\" point.\nAn isomorphism of topological groups is a group isomorphism that is also a homeomorphism of the underlying topological spaces. \nThis is stronger than simply requiring a continuous group isomorphism\u2014the inverse must also be continuous. \nThere are examples of topological groups that are isomorphic as ordinary groups but not as topological groups. \nIndeed, any non-discrete topological group is also a topological group when considered with the discrete topology. \nThe underlying groups are the same, but as topological groups there is not an isomorphism.\nExamples.\nEvery group can be trivially made into a topological group by considering it with the discrete topology; such groups are called discrete groups. \nIn this sense, the theory of topological groups subsumes that of ordinary groups. \nThe indiscrete topology (i.e. the trivial topology) also makes every group into a topological group.\nThe real numbers, formula_19 with the usual topology form a topological group under addition. \nEuclidean n-space formula_20 is also a topological group under addition, and more generally, every topological vector space forms an (abelian) topological group. \nSome other examples of abelian topological groups are the circle group formula_21, or the torus formula_22 for any natural number n.\nThe classical groups are important examples of non-abelian topological groups. For instance, the general linear group formula_23 of all invertible n-by-n matrices with real entries can be viewed as a topological group with the topology defined by viewing formula_23 as a subspace of Euclidean space formula_25. \nAnother classical group is the orthogonal group formula_26, the group of all linear maps from formula_20 to itself that preserve the length of all vectors. \nThe orthogonal group is compact as a topological space. Much of Euclidean geometry can be viewed as studying the structure of the orthogonal group, or the closely related group formula_28 of isometries of formula_20.\nThe groups mentioned so far are all Lie groups, meaning that they are smooth manifolds in such a way that the group operations are smooth, not just continuous. \nLie groups are the best-understood topological groups; many questions about Lie groups can be converted to purely algebraic questions about Lie algebras and then solved.\nAn example of a topological group that is not a Lie group is the additive group formula_30 of rational numbers, with the topology inherited from formula_19. \nThis is a countable space, and it does not have the discrete topology. \nAn important example for number theory is the group formula_32 of \"p\"-adic integers, for a prime number p, meaning the inverse limit of the finite groups formula_33 as \"n\" goes to infinity. \nThe group formula_32 is well behaved in that it is compact (in fact, homeomorphic to the Cantor set), but it differs from (real) Lie groups in that it is totally disconnected. \nMore generally, there is a theory of \"p\"-adic Lie groups, including compact groups such as formula_35 as well as locally compact groups such as formula_36 , where formula_37 the locally compact field of \"p\"-adic numbers.\nThe group formula_32 is a profinite group; it is isomorphic to a subgroup of the product formula_39 in such a way that its topology is induced by the product topology, where the finite groups formula_33 are given the discrete topology. \nAnother large class of profinite groups important in number theory are absolute Galois groups.\nSome topological groups can be viewed as infinite dimensional Lie groups; this phrase is best understood informally, to include several different families of examples. \nFor example, a topological vector space, such as a Banach space or Hilbert space, is an abelian topological group under addition. Some other infinite-dimensional groups that have been studied, with varying degrees of success, are loop groups, Kac\u2013Moody groups, Diffeomorphism groups, homeomorphism groups, and gauge groups.\nIn every Banach algebra with multiplicative identity, the set of invertible elements forms a topological group under multiplication. \nFor example, the group of invertible bounded operators on a Hilbert space arises this way.\nProperties.\nTranslation invariance.\nEvery topological group's topology is , which by definition means that if for any formula_41 left or right multiplication by this element yields a homeomorphism formula_42 \nConsequently, for any formula_43 and formula_44 the subset formula_45 is open (resp. closed) in formula_46 if and only if this is true of its left translation formula_47 and right translation formula_48\nIf formula_49 is a neighborhood basis of the identity element in a topological group formula_46 then for all formula_51\nformula_52\nis a neighborhood basis of formula_53 in formula_54 \nIn particular, any group topology on a topological group is completely determined by any neighborhood basis at the identity element. \nIf formula_45 is any subset of formula_46 and formula_57 is an open subset of formula_58 then formula_59 is an open subset of formula_54\nSymmetric neighborhoods.\nThe inversion operation formula_61 on a topological group formula_46 is a homeomorphism from formula_46 to itself. \nA subset formula_64 is said to be symmetric if formula_65 where formula_66 \nThe closure of every symmetric set in a commutative topological group is symmetric. \nIf S is any subset of a commutative topological group G, then the following sets are also symmetric: \"S\"\u22121 \u2229 \"S\", \"S\"\u22121 \u222a \"S\", and \"S\"\u22121 \"S\".\nFor any neighborhood N in a commutative topological group G of the identity element, there exists a symmetric neighborhood M of the identity element such that \"M\"\u22121 \"M\" \u2286 \"N\", where note that \"M\"\u22121 \"M\" is necessarily a symmetric neighborhood of the identity element. \nThus every topological group has a neighborhood basis at the identity element consisting of symmetric sets.\nIf G is a locally compact commutative group, then for any neighborhood N in G of the identity element, there exists a symmetric relatively compact neighborhood M of the identity element such that cl \"M\" \u2286 \"N\" (where cl \"M\" is symmetric as well).\nUniform space.\nEvery topological group can be viewed as a uniform space in two ways; the \"left uniformity\" turns all left multiplications into uniformly continuous maps while the \"right uniformity\" turns all right multiplications into uniformly continuous maps.\nIf G is not abelian, then these two need not coincide. \nThe uniform structures allow one to talk about notions such as completeness, uniform continuity and uniform convergence on topological groups.\nSeparation properties.\nIf U is an open subset of a commutative topological group G and U contains a compact set K, then there exists a neighborhood N of the identity element such that \"KN\" \u2286 \"U\".\nAs a uniform space, every commutative topological group is completely regular. \nConsequently, for a multiplicative topological group G with identity element 1, the following are equivalent: \nA subgroup of a commutative topological group is discrete if and only if it has an isolated point.\nIf G is not Hausdorff, then one can obtain a Hausdorff group by passing to the quotient group \"G\"/\"K\", where K is the closure of the identity. \nThis is equivalent to taking the Kolmogorov quotient of G.\nMetrisability.\nLet formula_46 be a topological group. As with any topological space, we say that formula_46 is metrisable if and only if there exists a metric formula_69 on formula_46, which induces the same topology on formula_46. A metric formula_69 on formula_46 is called\nThe Birkhoff\u2013Kakutani theorem (named after mathematicians Garrett Birkhoff and Shizuo Kakutani) states that the following three conditions on a topological group formula_46 are equivalent:\nFurthermore, the following are equivalent for any topological group formula_46:\nNote: As with the rest of the article we of assume here a Hausdorff topology.\nThe implications 4 formula_100 3 formula_100 2 formula_100 1 hold in any topological space. In particular 3 formula_100 2 holds, since in particular any properly metrisable space is countable union of compact metrisable and thus separable (\"cf.\" properties of compact metric spaces) subsets.\nThe non-trivial implication 1 formula_100 4 was first proved by Raimond Struble in 1974. An alternative approach was made by Uffe Haagerup and Agata Przybyszewska in 2006,\nthe idea of the which is as follows:\nOne relies on the construction of a left-invariant metric, formula_105, as in the case of first countable spaces. By local compactness, closed balls of sufficiently small radii are compact, and by normalising we can assume this holds for radius formula_106. Closing the open ball, formula_57, of radius formula_106 under multiplication yields a clopen subgroup, formula_109, of formula_46, on which the metric formula_105 is proper. Since formula_109 is open and formula_46 is second countable, the subgroup has at most countably many cosets. One now uses this sequence of cosets and the metric on formula_109 to construct a proper metric on formula_46.\nSubgroups.\nEvery subgroup of a topological group is itself a topological group when given the subspace topology. \nEvery open subgroup H is also closed in G, since the complement of H is the open set given by the union of open sets \"gH\" for \"g\" \u2208 \"G\" \\ \"H\". \nIf H is a subgroup of G then the closure of H is also a subgroup. \nLikewise, if H is a normal subgroup of G, the closure of H is normal in G.\nQuotients and normal subgroups.\nIf H is a subgroup of G, the set of left cosets \"G\"/\"H\" with the quotient topology is called a homogeneous space for G. \nThe quotient map formula_116 is always open. \nFor example, for a positive integer n, the sphere \"S\"\"n\" is a homogeneous space for the rotation group SO(\"n\"+1) in formula_117\"n\"+1, with \"S\"\"n\" \n SO(\"n\"+1)/SO(\"n\"). \nA homogeneous space \"G\"/\"H\" is Hausdorff if and only if H is closed in G. \nPartly for this reason, it is natural to concentrate on closed subgroups when studying topological groups.\nIf H is a normal subgroup of G, then the quotient group \"G\"/\"H\" becomes a topological group when given the quotient topology. \nIt is Hausdorff if and only if H is closed in G. \nFor example, the quotient group formula_118 is isomorphic to the circle group \"S\"1.\nIn any topological group, the identity component (i.e., the connected component containing the identity element) is a closed normal subgroup. \nIf C is the identity component and \"a\" is any point of G, then the left coset \"aC\" is the component of G containing \"a\". \nSo the collection of all left cosets (or right cosets) of C in G is equal to the collection of all components of G. \nIt follows that the quotient group \"G\"/\"C\" is totally disconnected.\nClosure and compactness.\nIn any commutative topological group, the product (assuming the group is multiplicative) \"KC\" of a compact set K and a closed set C is a closed set. \nFurthermore, for any subsets R and S of G, (cl \"R\")(cl \"S\") \u2286 cl (\"RS\").\nIf H is a subgroup of a commutative topological group G and if N is a neighborhood in G of the identity element such that \"H\" \u2229 cl \"N\" is closed, then H is closed. \nEvery discrete subgroup of a Hausdorff commutative topological group is closed.\nIsomorphism theorems.\nThe isomorphism theorems from ordinary group theory are not always true in the topological setting. \nThis is because a bijective homomorphism need not be an isomorphism of topological groups. \nFor example, a native version of the first isomorphism theorem is false for topological groups: if formula_119 is a morphism of topological groups (that is, a continuous homomorphism), it is not necessarily true that the induced homomorphism formula_120 is an isomorphism of topological groups; it will be a bijective, continuous homomorphism, but it will not necessarily be a homeomorphism. In other words, it will not necessarily admit an inverse in the category of topological groups. For example, consider the identity map from the set of real numbers equipped with the discrete topology to the set of real numbers equipped with the Euclidean topology. This is a group homomorphism, and it is continuous because any function out of a discrete space is continuous, but it is not an isomorphism of topological groups because its inverse is not continuous.\nThere is a version of the first isomorphism theorem for topological groups, which may be stated as follows: if formula_121 is a continuous homomorphism, then the induced homomorphism from \"G\"/ker(\"f\") to im(\"f\") is an isomorphism if and only if the map f is open onto its image.\nThe third isomorphism theorem, however, is true more or less verbatim for topological groups, as one may easily check.\nHilbert's fifth problem.\nThere are several strong results on the relation between topological groups and Lie groups. \nFirst, every continuous homomorphism of Lie groups formula_18 is smooth. \nIt follows that a topological group has a unique structure of a Lie group if one exists. \nAlso, Cartan's theorem says that every closed subgroup of a Lie group is a Lie subgroup, in particular a smooth submanifold.\nHilbert's fifth problem asked whether a topological group G that is a topological manifold must be a Lie group. \nIn other words, does G have the structure of a smooth manifold, making the group operations smooth? \nAs shown by Andrew Gleason, Deane Montgomery, and Leo Zippin, the answer to this problem is yes. \nIn fact, G has a real analytic structure. \nUsing the smooth structure, one can define the Lie algebra of G, an object of linear algebra that determines a connected group G up to covering spaces. \nAs a result, the solution to Hilbert's fifth problem reduces the classification of topological groups that are topological manifolds to an algebraic problem, albeit a complicated problem in general.\nThe theorem also has consequences for broader classes of topological groups. First, every compact group (understood to be Hausdorff) is an inverse limit of compact Lie groups. \n(One important case is an inverse limit of finite groups, called a profinite group. For example, the group formula_32 of \"p\"-adic integers and the absolute Galois group of a field are profinite groups.) \nFurthermore, every connected locally compact group is an inverse limit of connected Lie groups. \nAt the other extreme, a totally disconnected locally compact group always contains a compact open subgroup, which is necessarily a profinite group. \nRepresentations of compact or locally compact groups.\nAn action of a topological group G on a topological space \"X\" is a group action of G on \"X\" such that the corresponding function formula_127 is continuous. \nLikewise, a representation of a topological group G on a real or complex topological vector space V is a continuous action of G on V such that for each formula_128, the map formula_129 from V to itself is linear.\nGroup actions and representation theory are particularly well understood for compact groups, generalizing what happens for finite groups. \nFor example, every finite-dimensional (real or complex) representation of a compact group is a direct sum of irreducible representations. \nAn infinite-dimensional unitary representation of a compact group can be decomposed as a Hilbert-space direct sum of irreducible representations, which are all finite-dimensional; this is part of the Peter\u2013Weyl theorem. \nFor example, the theory of Fourier series describes the decomposition of the unitary representation of the circle group formula_21 on the complex Hilbert space formula_131. \nThe irreducible representations of formula_21 are all 1-dimensional, of the form formula_133 for integers n (where formula_21 is viewed as a subgroup of the multiplicative group formula_135). \nEach of these representations occurs with multiplicity 1 in formula_131.\nThe irreducible representations of all compact connected Lie groups have been classified. \nIn particular, the character of each irreducible representation is given by the Weyl character formula.\nMore generally, locally compact groups have a rich theory of harmonic analysis, because they admit a natural notion of measure and integral, given by the Haar measure. \nEvery unitary representation of a locally compact group can be described as a direct integral of irreducible unitary representations. \n(The decomposition is essentially unique if G is of Type I, which includes the most important examples such as abelian groups and semisimple Lie groups.) \nA basic example is the Fourier transform, which decomposes the action of the additive group formula_19 on the Hilbert space formula_138 as a direct integral of the irreducible unitary representations of formula_19. \nThe irreducible unitary representations of formula_19 are all 1-dimensional, of the form formula_141 for formula_142.\nThe irreducible unitary representations of a locally compact group may be infinite-dimensional. \nA major goal of representation theory, related to the Langlands classification of admissible representations, is to find the unitary dual (the space of all irreducible unitary representations) for the semisimple Lie groups. \nThe unitary dual is known in many cases, such as for the special linear group of degree 2 over the real numbers formula_143, but not all.\nFor a locally compact abelian group G, every irreducible unitary representation has dimension 1. \nIn this case, the unitary dual formula_144 is a group, in fact another locally compact abelian group. \nPontryagin duality states that for a locally compact abelian group G, the dual of formula_144 is the original group G. \nFor example, the dual group of the integers formula_146 is the circle group formula_21, while the group formula_19 of real numbers is isomorphic to its own dual.\nEvery locally compact group G has a good supply of irreducible unitary representations; for example, enough representations to distinguish the points of G (the Gelfand\u2013Raikov theorem). \nBy contrast, representation theory for topological groups that are not locally compact has so far been developed only in special situations, and it may not be reasonable to expect a general theory. \nFor example, there are many abelian Banach\u2013Lie groups for which every representation on Hilbert space is trivial.\nHomotopy theory of topological groups.\nTopological groups are special among all topological spaces, even in terms of their homotopy type. \nOne basic point is that a topological group G determines a path-connected topological space, the classifying space formula_149 (which classifies principal G-bundles over topological spaces, under mild hypotheses). \nThe group G is isomorphic in the homotopy category to the loop space of formula_149; that implies various restrictions on the homotopy type of G. \nSome of these restrictions hold in the broader context of H-spaces.\nFor example, the fundamental group of a topological group G is abelian. \n(More generally, the Whitehead product on the homotopy groups of G is zero.) \nAlso, for any field k, the cohomology ring formula_151 has the structure of a Hopf algebra. \nIn view of structure theorems on Hopf algebras by Heinz Hopf and Armand Borel, this puts strong restrictions on the possible cohomology rings of topological groups. \nIn particular, if G is a path-connected topological group whose rational cohomology ring formula_152 is finite-dimensional in each degree, then this ring must be a free graded-commutative algebra over formula_30, that is, the tensor product of a polynomial ring on generators of even degree with an exterior algebra on generators of odd degree.\nIn particular, for a connected Lie group G, the rational cohomology ring of G is an exterior algebra on generators of odd degree. \nMoreover, a connected Lie group G has a maximal compact subgroup \"K\", which is unique up to conjugation, and the inclusion of \"K\" into G is a homotopy equivalence. \nSo describing the homotopy types of Lie groups reduces to the case of compact Lie groups. \nFor example, the maximal compact subgroup of formula_143 is the circle group formula_155, and the homogeneous space formula_156 can be identified with the hyperbolic plane. \nSince the hyperbolic plane is contractible, the inclusion of the circle group into formula_143 is a homotopy equivalence.\nFinally, compact connected Lie groups have been classified by Wilhelm Killing, \u00c9lie Cartan, and Hermann Weyl. \nAs a result, there is an essentially complete description of the possible homotopy types of Lie groups. \nFor example, a compact connected Lie group of dimension at most 3 is either a torus, the group SU(2) (diffeomorphic to the 3-sphere formula_158), or its quotient group SU(2)/{\u00b11} \u2245 SO(3) (diffeomorphic to RP3).\nComplete topological group.\nInformation about convergence of nets and filters, such as definitions and properties, can be found in the article about filters in topology.\nCanonical uniformity on a commutative topological group.\nThis article will henceforth assume that any topological group that we consider is an additive commutative topological group with identity element formula_159\nThe diagonal of formula_160 is the set\nformula_161\nand for any formula_162 containing formula_163 the canonical entourage or canonical vicinities around formula_164 is the set\nformula_165\nFor a topological group formula_166 the canonical uniformity on formula_160 is the uniform structure induced by the set of all canonical entourages formula_168 as formula_164 ranges over all neighborhoods of formula_170 in formula_171\nThat is, it is the upward closure of the following prefilter on formula_172 \nformula_173\nwhere this prefilter forms what is known as a base of entourages of the canonical uniformity. \nFor a commutative additive group formula_174 a fundamental system of entourages formula_175 is called a translation-invariant uniformity if for every formula_176 formula_177 if and only if formula_178 for all formula_179 A uniformity formula_175 is called translation-invariant if it has a base of entourages that is translation-invariant.\nCauchy prefilters and nets.\nThe general theory of uniform spaces has its own definition of a \"Cauchy prefilter\" and \"Cauchy net.\" For the canonical uniformity on formula_174 these reduces down to the definition described below.\nSuppose formula_182 is a net in formula_160 and formula_184 is a net in formula_185 Make formula_186 into a directed set by declaring formula_187 if and only if formula_188 Then formula_189 denotes the product net. If formula_190 then the image of this net under the addition map formula_191 denotes the sum of these two nets:\nformula_192\nand similarly their difference is defined to be the image of the product net under the subtraction map:\nformula_193\nA net formula_182 in an additive topological group formula_160 is called a Cauchy net if\nformula_196\nor equivalently, if for every neighborhood formula_164 of formula_170 in formula_174 there exists some formula_200 such that \nformula_201 for all indices formula_202 \nA Cauchy sequence is a Cauchy net that is a sequence.\nIf formula_203 is a subset of an additive group formula_160 and formula_164 is a set containing formula_163 thenformula_203 is said to be an formula_164-small set or small of order formula_164 if formula_210\nA prefilter formula_175 on an additive topological group formula_160 called a Cauchy prefilter if it satisfies any of the following equivalent conditions: \nand if formula_160 is commutative then also:\nSuppose formula_175 is a prefilter on a commutative topological group formula_160 and formula_218 Then formula_219 in formula_160 if and only if formula_221 and formula_175 is Cauchy.\nComplete commutative topological group.\nRecall that for any formula_223 a prefilter formula_224 on formula_45 is necessarily a subset of formula_226; that is, formula_227\nA subset formula_45 of a topological group formula_160 is called a complete subset if it satisfies any of the following equivalent conditions: \nA subset formula_45 is called a sequentially complete subset if every Cauchy sequence in formula_45 (or equivalently, every elementary Cauchy filter/prefilter on formula_45) converges to at least one point of formula_233\nA commutative topological group formula_160 is called a complete group if any of the following equivalent conditions hold:\nA topological group is called sequentially complete if it is a sequentially complete subset of itself.\nNeighborhood basis: Suppose formula_260 is a completion of a commutative topological group formula_160 with formula_262 and that formula_49 is a neighborhood base of the origin in formula_171 Then the family of sets \nformula_265\nis a neighborhood basis at the origin in formula_266\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Uniform continuity\nLet formula_160 and formula_268 be topological groups, formula_269 and formula_270 be a map. Then formula_270 is uniformly continuous if for every neighborhood formula_57 of the origin in formula_174 there exists a neighborhood formula_274 of the origin in formula_268 such that for all formula_276 if formula_277 then formula_278\nGeneralizations.\nVarious generalizations of topological groups can be obtained by weakening the continuity conditions:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42317", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42317", "title": "United Press International", "text": "American international news agency\nUnited Press International (UPI) is an American international news agency whose newswires, photo, news film, and audio services provided news material to thousands of newspapers, magazines, radio and television stations for most of the 20th century until its eventual decline beginning in the early 1980s. At its peak, it had more than 6,000 media subscribers. Since the first of several sales and staff cutbacks in 1982, and the 1999 sale of its broadcast client list to its main U.S. rival, the Associated Press, UPI has concentrated on smaller information-market niches.\nHistory.\nFormally named United Press Associations for incorporation and legal purposes but publicly known and identified as United Press or UP, the news agency was created by the 1907 uniting of three smaller news syndicates by the Midwest newspaper publisher E. W. Scripps. It was headed by Hugh Baillie (1890\u20131966) from 1935 to 1955. At the time of his retirement, UP had 2,900 clients in the United States, and 1,500 abroad.\nIn 1958, it became United Press International after absorbing the International News Service (INS) As either UP or UPI, the agency was among the largest newswire services in the world, competing domestically for about 90 years with the Associated Press (AP) and internationally with AP, Reuters and Agence France-Presse (AFP).\nAt its peak, UPI had more than 2,000 full-time employees and 200 news bureaus in 92 countries; it had more than 6,000 media subscribers. With the rising popularity of television news, the business of UPI began to decline as the circulation of afternoon newspapers, its chief client category, began to fall. Its decline accelerated after the 1982 sale of UPI by the Scripps company.\nThe E.W. Scripps Company controlled United Press until its absorption of William Randolph Hearst's smaller competing agency, INS, in 1958 to form UPI. With the Hearst Corporation as a minority partner, UPI continued under Scripps management until 1982.\nSince its sale in 1982, UPI has changed ownership several times and was twice in Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization. With each change in ownership came deeper service and staff cutbacks and changes of focus and a corresponding shrinkage of its traditional media customer base. Since the 1999 sale of its broadcast client list to its one-time major rival, the AP, UPI has concentrated on smaller information market niches. It no longer services media organizations in a major way.\nIn 2000, UPI was purchased by News World Communications, an international news media company founded in 1976 by Unification Church leader Sun Myung Moon.\nIt now maintains a news website and photo service and electronically publishes several information product packages. Based mostly on aggregation from other sources on the Web and gathered by a small editorial staff and stringers, UPI's daily content consists of a newsbrief summary service called \"NewsTrack,\" which includes general, business, sports, science, health and entertainment reports, and \"Quirks in the News.\" It also sells a premium service, which has deeper coverage and analysis of emerging threats, the security industry, and energy resources. UPI's content is presented in text, video and photo formats, in English, Spanish, and Arabic.\nUPI's main office is in the Miami metropolitan area and it maintains office locations in five other countries and uses freelance journalists in other major cities.\nBritish United Press.\nIn 1923, UP founded British United Press as its Canadian subsidiary with headquarters in Montreal. It soon expanded to the United Kingdom and India, and was one of several news agencies supplying news bulletins to the BBC until the broadcaster began hiring its own reporters. The BBC's decision in 1936 to use BUP as a supplier of international news reports engendered opposition from other news agencies and the Foreign Office as BUP was seen as a front group for the American-based United Press and thus represented American rather than British news values. BUP correspondents included future anchors Knowlton Nash and Walter Cronkite. In 1936, BUP launched Canada's first coast-to-coast radio newswire service providing news copy to private radio stations across the country.\nIn 1940, the Canadian government suspended the broadcast licenses of BUP and Transradio Press Service both of whom, unlike Canadian Press, sold commercial sponsorships for its news bulletins in violation of government policy. Transport minister C.D. Howe, who was responsible for broadcasting policy, announced that the two wire services must \u201cshow their news source is accurate\u201d in order to retain their licenses. After complaints by Transradio that the move was an attempt by \u201cselfish publishing and monopolistic interests \u2026 to destroy independent news services throughout the Dominion\u201d, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, which at the time was also responsible for regulating private radio broadcasters, agreed to reinstate Transradio's and BUP's licenses while also announcing a plan to enforce the ban on commercial news broadcasts by editing dispatches by the wire services before they were distributed to radio stations.\nIn 1958, when United Press merged with the International News Service to become UPI, British United Press was renamed United Press International of Canada. In 1979, 80% of UPI Canada was sold to the \"Toronto Sun\" newspaper chain and renamed United Press Canada. In 1985, UPC was sold to Canadian Press, which absorbed it.\nUnited Press Associations.\nBeginning with the \"Cleveland Press\", publisher E. W. Scripps (1854\u20131926) created the first chain of newspapers in the United States. Because the then-recently reorganized Associated Press refused to sell its services to several of his papers, most of them evening dailies in competition with existing AP franchise holders, in 1907 Scripps merged three smaller syndicates under his ownership or control, the Publishers Press Association, the Scripps-McRae Press Association, and the Scripps News Association, to form United Press Associations, with headquarters in New York City.\nScripps had been a subscriber to an earlier news agency, also named United Press, that existed in the late 1800s, partly in cooperation with the management of the original New York-based AP and partly in existential competition with two Chicago-based organizations also using the AP name (as detailed at Associated Press and in AP's 2007 history, \"Breaking News: How the Associated Press Has Covered War, Peace, and Everything Else\", cited in Notes).\nDrawing lessons from the battles between the earlier United Press and the various AP's, Scripps required that there be no restrictions on who could buy news from his news service, and he made the new UP service available to anyone, including his competitors. Scripps also hoped to make a profit from selling that news to papers owned by others. At that time and until World War II, most newspapers relied on news agencies for stories outside their immediate geographic areas.\nDespite strong newspaper industry opposition, UP started to sell news to the new and competitive radio medium in 1935, years before competitor AP, controlled by the newspaper industry, did likewise.\nScripps' United Press was considered \"a scrappy alternative\" news source to the AP. UP reporters were called \"Unipressers\" and were noted for their fiercely aggressive and competitive streak. Another hallmark of the company's culture was little formal training of reporters; new hires were often thrust into a \"sink-or-swim\" situation of reporting on an unfamiliar subject. They were weaned on UP's famous and well-documented (though frequently misappropriated and misquoted) slogan of \"Get it first, but FIRST, get it RIGHT.\" Despite controversy, UP (and later UPI) became a common training ground for generations of journalists.\nWalter Cronkite, who started with United Press in Kansas City, gained fame for his coverage of World War II in Europe and turned down Edward R. Murrow's first offer of a CBS job to stay with UP, but who later went on to anchor the \"CBS Evening News\", once said, \"I felt every Unipresser got up in the morning saying, 'This is the day I'm going to beat the hell out of AP.' That was part of the spirit. We knew we were undermanned. But we knew we could do a darn good job despite that, and so many times, we did.\"\nDespite that, like all agencies that deal with huge volumes of timely information, UP and later UPI had its share of remembered mistakes. As recounted in the various printed histories of UPI cited in Notes, the most famous one came early in its history. UP's president, Roy W. Howard, then traveling in France, telegraphed that the 1918 armistice ending World War I had been declared four days before it happened. Howard's reputation survived and he later became a Scripps partner, whose name appeared in one of the Scripps subsidiary companies, Scripps-Howard. But the mistake dogged UP/UPI for generations. Still, the agency's reporters were often able to tell stories more quickly and accurately although they were usually outnumbered by the competition. In 1950, for example, UP reported the invasion of South Korea by North Korea two hours and forty minutes before its archrival, the AP. \"The New York Times\" later apologized to UP for refusing to print information on the invasion until the AP had confirmed it.\nUnited Press International.\nFrank Bartholomew, the last UP president to ascend to the agency's top job directly from its news, rather than sales ranks, took over in 1955, and according to his memoirs cited in Notes, was obsessed with merging UP with the International News Service, a news agency that had been founded by William Randolph Hearst in 1909 following Scripps' lead.\nBartholomew succeeded in putting the \"I\" in UPI in 1958 when UP and INS merged to become United Press International The new UPI now had 6,000 employees and 5,000 subscribers, about a thousand of them newspapers.\nThe merger was aimed at creating a stronger competitor for the Associated Press and a stronger economic entity than either UP or INS. The newly formed United Press International (UPI) had 950 client newspapers. Fearing possible antitrust issues with the Eisenhower Administration Justice Department, Scripps and Hearst rushed the merger through with unusual speed and secrecy.\nAlthough all UP employees were retained, most INS employees lost their jobs with practically no warning. A relative few did join the new UPI and the columns of popular INS writers, such as Bob Considine, Louella Parsons and Ruth Montgomery, were carried by UPI.\nRival AP was a publishers' cooperative and could assess its members to help pay the extraordinary costs of covering major news\u2014wars, the Olympic Games, national political conventions. UPI clients, in contrast, paid a fixed annual rate; depending on individual contracts, UPI could not always ask them to help shoulder the extraordinary coverage costs. In its heyday, newspapers typically paid UPI about half what they paid AP in the same cities for the same services: At one point, for example, the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" paid AP $12,500 a week, but UPI only $5,000; the Wall Street Journal paid AP $36,000 a week, but UPI only $19,300. The AP, which serviced 1,243 newspapers at the time, remained UPI's main competitor. In 1959, UPI had 6,208 clients in 92 countries and territories, 234 news and picture bureaus, and an annual payroll of $34,000,000, ($ in today's dollars).\nBut the UP-INS merger involved another business component that was to hurt the new UPI company badly in later years. Because INS had been a subsidiary of Hearst's King Features Syndicate and Scripps controlled several other newspaper syndicates, both companies feared possible antitrust issues. So they deliberately kept their respective syndicates out of the combined UPI company. That move cost UPI the revenues of its previous United Feature Syndicate subsidiary, which in later years made large profits on the syndication of \"Peanuts\" and other popular comic strips and columns.\nUPI had an advantage of independence over the AP in reporting on the Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and 1960s. Because the AP was a cooperative essentially owned by the newspapers, those in the South influenced its coverage of the racial unrest and protests, often ignoring, minimizing, or slanting the reporting. UPI did not have that sort of pressure, and management, according to UPI reporters and photographers of the day, allowed them much freedom in chronicling the events of the civil rights struggle.\nWhite House reporter Helen Thomas became the public face of UPI, as she was seen at televised press conferences beginning in the early 1960s. UPI famously scooped the AP in reporting the assassination of US President John Kennedy on Friday, November 22, 1963. UPI White House reporter Merriman Smith was an eyewitness, and he commandeered the press car's only phone to dictate the story to UPI as AP reporter Jack Bell tried\u2014without success\u2014to wrest the phone away so he could call his office. Smith and UPI won a Pulitzer Prize for this reporting.\nUP/UPI Newspictures, Newsfilm and Audio/Radio Network.\nUnited Press had no direct wirephoto service until 1952, when it absorbed co-owned ACME Newspictures, under pressure from parent company Scripps to better compete with AP's news and photo services.\nBy that time, UP was also deeply involved with the newer visual medium of television. In 1948, it entered into a partnership with 20th Century Fox subsidiary Fox Movietone News to shoot newsfilm for television stations. That service, United Press Movietone, or UPMT, was a pioneer in newsfilm syndication and numbered among its clients major US and foreign networks and local stations, including for many years the early TV operation of ABC News. In subsequent decades, it underwent several changes in partnerships and names, becoming best known as United Press International Television News (UPITN). Senior UPITN executives later helped Ted Turner create CNN, with its first two presidents, Reese Schonfeld and Burt Reinhardt, coming from UPITN ranks.\nThe UPI Audio actuality service for radio stations, created in 1958 and later renamed the United Press International Radio Network, was a spinoff from the newsfilm service and eventually provided news material to more than a thousand radio stations and US and foreign networks, including NPR.\nDecline.\nUPI came close to the size of the AP in the early 1960s, but as publishing companies began to pare their evening newspapers, it was dropped by papers that could no longer afford to subscribe to both UPI and the AP. UPI's failure to develop a television presence or subsidiary television news service has also been cited as one of the causes of its decline. By the early 1980s, the number of staffers was down to 1,800 and there were just 100 news bureaus.\nUnder pressure from some of E. W. Scripps' heirs, the Scripps company, which had been underwriting UPI's expenses at a loss for at least two decades, began trying to transfer control of UPI in the early 1980s. It tried to bring in additional newspaper industry partners and when that failed, engaged in serious negotiations with British competitor Reuters, which wanted to increase its US presence. As detailed in \"Down to the Wire\", by Gordon and Cohen, cited in Notes, Reuters did extensive due diligence and expressed an interest in parts of the UPI service, but did not wish to maintain it in full.\nScripps wound up giving the agency away to two inexperienced businessmen, Douglas Ruhe (son of David Ruhe, a member of the Universal House of Justice, the supreme governing body of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith) and William Geissler, originally associated with two better-known partners, who soon departed. Ruhe and Geissler obtained UPI for $1. Under the terms of the purchase agreement, Scripps first injected UPI with a $5 million cash balance, in acknowledgement of the $1.0\u00a0\u2013 $1.5 million per month that UPI was already losing. Facing news industry skepticism about their background and qualifications to run an international news agency, Ruhe and Geissler watched an increase in contract cancellations. Despite serious cash flow problems, they moved UPI's headquarters from New York City to Washington, DC, incurring significant additional costs due to construction cost overruns.\nDuring this period, UPI's 25-year-old audio news actuality service for radio stations was renamed the United Press International Radio Network. But faced with recurring cash shortages and difficulty meeting payroll, the Ruhe-Geissler management sold UPI's foreign photo service and some rights to its US and foreign photos to the Reuters news agency. In 1995, UPI's U.S. photo library, which included the archives of predecessor Scripps photo agency Acme and the pictures and negatives of International News Photos, the picture component of Hearst's INS, was sold to the Bettmann Archive.\nBettmann was sold to Microsoft founder Bill Gates's separate Corbis Corporation, storing them underground in Pennsylvania and digitizing them for licensing, frequently without any notation of their UPI origins.\nIn August 2011, Corbis and AP agreed to distribute each other's photos to their clients, effectively combining the pre-1983 UPI library with that of its former main rival for some marketing purposes.\nIn 2016, Corbis was sold to the Visual China Group.\nUPI's remaining minority stake in UPITN was also sold and the agency was renamed Worldwide Television News (WTN). As with its photographs, UPI thereby lost all control of its newsfilm and video library, which is now held by WTN-successor Associated Press Television News, which entered the video news field long after UPI left it.\nYears of mismanagement, missed opportunities and continual wage and staff cuts followed. By 1984, UPI had descended into the first of two Chapter 11 Mario V\u00e1zquez Ra\u00f1a, a Mexican media magnate, with a nominal American minority partner, Houston real estate developer Joseph Russo, purchased UPI out of bankruptcy for $40 million, losing millions during his short tenure, and firing numerous high-level staff.\nIn 1988, V\u00e1zquez Ra\u00f1a sold UPI to Infotechnology, Inc., an information technology and venture capital company and parent company of cable TV's Financial News Network, both headed by Earl Brian, who also became UPI chairman. In early 1991, Infotechnology itself filed for bankruptcy, announced layoffs at UPI and sought to terminate certain employee benefits in an attempt to keep UPI afloat. At that point, UPI was down to 585 employees. Later that year, UPI filed for bankruptcy for the second time, asking for relief from $50 million in debt so that it could be sale-able. In 1992, a group of Saudi investors, ARA Group International (AGI), bought the bankrupt UPI for $4 million.\nBy 1998, UPI had fewer than 250 employees and 12 offices. Although the Saudi-based investors claimed to have poured more than $120 million into UPI, it had failed to turn a profit. The company had begun to sell Internet-adapted products to such websites as Excite and Yahoo. At that point, UPI CEO Arnaud de Borchgrave orchestrated UPI's exit from its last major media niche, the broadcast news business that United Press had initiated in the 1930s. De Borchgrave maintained that \"what was brilliant pioneering work on the part of UPI prior to World War II, with radio news, is now a static quantity and so far as I'm concerned, certainly doesn't fit into my plans for the future\". He sought to shift UPI's dwindling resources into Internet-based delivery of newsletter services, focusing more on technical and diplomatic specialties than on general news. The rump UPI thus sold the client list of its still-significant radio network and broadcast wire to its former rival, the AP.\nCurrent ownership.\nUPI was purchased in May 2000 by News World Communications, a media conglomerate founded by Unification Church founder Sun Myung Moon, which also owned \"The Washington Times\" and newspapers in South Korea, Japan, and South America. The next day, UPI's White House correspondent, Helen Thomas, resigned her position, after working for UPI for 57 years.\nIn 2007, as part of a restructuring to keep UPI in business and profitable, management cut 11 staff from its Washington, D.C. office and no longer had a reporter in the White House press corps or a bureau covering the United Nations. UPI spokespersons and press releases said the company would be focusing instead on expanding operations in the Middle East, Central Asia and Africa, and reporting on security threats, intelligence and energy issues. In 2008, UPI began UPIU, a journalism mentoring platform for students and journalism schools, that allowed recent college graduates to post their work on the site but did not pay for stories.\nUPI sports awards.\nUnited Press International conferred sports awards annually until 1996. The awards were given to basketball players, basketball coaches, football players and athletes in general. The different awards were:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nCurrent\nHistory"}
{"id": "42318", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42318", "title": "Pascal Lissouba", "text": "Congolese politician (1931\u20132020)\nPascal Lissouba (15 November 1931 \u2013 24 August 2020) was a Congolese politician who was the first democratically elected President of the Republic of the Congo and served from 31 August 1992 until 25 October 1997. He was overthrown by his predecessor and current president Denis Sassou Nguesso in the 1997 civil war.\nEarly life and education.\nLissouba was born in Tsinguidi, south-west Congo, to Bandjabi parents. He attended primary school in Mossendjo and Boko. He began his secondary studies in Brazzaville and gained his education at the Lyc\u00e9e F\u00e9lix Faure in Nice (1948\u201352), where he obtained a baccalaureate. He then studied Agronomy at the \"\u00c9cole Sup\u00e9rieure d'Agriculture\" in Tunis and secured a diploma in agricultural engineering in 1956. At the University of Paris (1958\u201361) he received a doctoral degree in biology. He was also a fellow trainee at the National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS) in Paris and at ORSTOM. In June 1961, he worked as a researcher at ORSTOM. He was appointed lecturer in plant biology by decree of the French Ministry of National Education on 3 November 1961.\nPolitical career.\nInitially he was a civil servant, working as a managing director in the Department of Agriculture (1962\u201363), having returned in 1962. But his abilities advanced him to become Minister of Agriculture, Livestock, Water, and Forestry on 16 August 1963 until 1966 and then Prime Minister (1963\u201366) under President Alphonse Massamba-D\u00e9bat. He was appointed Minister of State for Planning, then for Agriculture (1968\u20131969), before being sacked by the government. Afterwards, he became a genetics professor at the University of Brazzaville (1966\u20131971) and later director of the Ecole Sup\u00e9rieure des Sciences in 1970. When Massamba-D\u00e9bat was overthrown in 1968 Lissouba remained in government under Marien Ngouabi and although he was suspended from political activity from 1969 to 1971 he was on the Central Committee of the Congolese Workers Party in 1973.\nIn 1977, he was implicated for involvement in the assassination of Ngouabi and was arrested. He was sentenced to life imprisonment and hard labour in 1977. He was released in 1979 but had to live in exile in France from 1979 to 1990. In France, he was a professor of genetics at the University of Paris and then worked for UNESCO in Paris and Nairobi. When President Denis Sassou Nguesso was forced to move the Congo towards democracy in 1991, Lissouba returned in February 1992 and was elected president in the August 1992 elections. He secured 36% of the vote as head of the left-wing Pan-African Union for Social Democracy (\"Union panafricaine pour la d\u00e9mocratie sociale\", UPADS). In the run-off with second-placed Bernard Kolelas, Lissouba got 61% of the vote.\nUnrest and civil war.\nConflict soon broke out however. A coalition of opposition groups and their militias accused Lissouba of rigging the elections. \nFighting broke out again in June 1997 when Lissouba engaged militias loyal to former President Col. Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Congolese Labor Party (PCT) in Brazzaville, accusing the former president of an attempted coup. Sassou Nguesso, however, was able to escape and stage a counterattack. Thus began a 4-month civil war that destroyed or damaged much of the capital. In early October 1997, Angolan troops invaded Congo on the side of Sassou. Most of Brazzaville fell to rebel and Angolan forces on 14 October 1997, and Lissouba fled; within two days the capital was under the control of forces loyal to Sassou Nguesso, and Pointe-Noire fell with little resistance. \nExile and trial.\nFollowing his overthrow, Lissouba lived in exile in London. He intended to return to the Congo for the 2002 elections, but in December 2001 he was tried \"in absentia\" in Brazzaville, and sentenced to 30 years forced labor for treason and corruption, related to a $150 million oil deal with the American company Occidental Petroleum. Since 2004, he had been living in Paris in exile.\nPersonal life.\nHe was first married to Annette Chantegreil (1933-2019), then to Jocelyne Rosdam, a French national and is the father of eleven children. His eldest daughter, Mireille Lissouba, was his chief of staff from 1993 to 1996, while his younger daughter, Danielle Bineka is a university professor and writer, both currently exiled in Canada. His mother, Marie Bouanga died in 1996.\nDeath.\nLissouba died in Perpignan, France, on 24 August 2020, due to complications from Alzheimer's disease, aged 88.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42320", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42320", "title": "1286", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 1286 (MCCLXXXVI) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArt and Culture.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42321", "revid": "6707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42321", "title": "Educational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "42323", "revid": "50629063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42323", "title": "Lincoln Park (disambiguation)", "text": "Lincoln Park is an urban park in Chicago, which gave its name to the Lincoln Park, Chicago community area.\nLincoln Park may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "42324", "revid": "16495000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42324", "title": "Whole language", "text": "Approach to teaching children to read\nWhole language is a philosophy of reading and a discredited educational method originally developed for teaching literacy in English to young children. The method became a major model for education in the United States, Canada, New Zealand, and the UK in the 1980s and 1990s, despite there being no scientific support for the method's effectiveness. It is based on the premise that learning to read English comes naturally to humans, especially young children, in the same way that learning to speak develops naturally. However, researchers such as Reid Lyon say reading is \"not a natural process\", and many students, when learning to read, require direct instruction in , phonemic awareness, phonics, spelling, and comprehension skills.\nWhole-language approaches to reading instruction are typically contrasted with the more effective phonics-based methods of teaching reading and writing. Phonics-based methods emphasize instruction for decoding and spelling. Whole-language practitioners disagree with that view and instead focus on teaching meaning and making students read more. The scientific consensus is that whole-language-based methods of reading instruction (e.g., teaching children to use context cues to guess the meaning of a printed word) are not as effective as phonics-based approaches. Rejection of whole language (and its offshoot, balanced literacy) was a key component in the Mississippi Miracle of increased academic performance across the Southern United States in the 2010s and 2020s.\nOverview.\nWhole language is an educational philosophy that is complex to describe, particularly because it is informed by multiple research fields, including but not limited to education, linguistics, psychology, sociology, and anthropology (see also Language Experience Approach). It can be viewed as being founded on the educational philosophy of John Amos Comenius in the early 17th century. Yetta Goodman has also cited the contributions of John Dewey, Lev Vygotsky, Louise Rosenblatt, and Ashton Warner, among other writers, in the development of the whole language movement. One description of whole language is \"a concept that embodies both a philosophy of language development as well as the instructional approaches embedded within, and supportive of that philosophy\".\nSeveral strands run through descriptions of whole language. These include:\nAttempts to empirically verify the benefits of whole language have repeatedly resulted in evidence that whole language is less effective than phonics-based reading instruction. Research psychologist Keith Stanovich has asserted, \"The idea that learning to read is just like learning to speak is accepted by no responsible linguist, psychologist, or cognitive scientist in the research community\", while in a systematic review of the reading research literature, Louisa Moats, a researcher on children's education, concluded that \"Almost every premise advanced by whole language about how reading is learned has been contradicted by scientific investigations\". Harvard professor Jeanne Chall surveyed the research on literacy and conducted her own classroom observations and found that the \"code-emphasis method\" (phonics) produces substantially better readers, not only in the mechanical aspects of reading but also in terms of reading for meaning and reading for enjoyment, contrary to the claims of whole-language theorists.\nUnderlying premises.\nCognitive skills of reading.\nSub-lexical reading\nSub-lexical reading involves teaching reading by associating characters or groups of characters with sounds or by using phonics learning and teaching methodology.\nLexical reading\nLexical reading involves acquiring words or phrases without attention to the characters or groups of characters that compose them or by using whole language learning and teaching methodology.\nLearning theory.\nAccording to the Cambridge University Press, the idea of whole language has its basis in holism, the belief that a system should be viewed as a whole, not merely as a collection of parts.\nKen Goodman's linguistic theory.\nGregory Shafer, a professor of English at Mott Community College, has claimed that \"the seeds\" of the whole language movement were \"firmly rooted\" in the theories of linguist Noam Chomsky. In 1967, Ken Goodman had an idea about reading that he considered similar to Chomsky's, and he wrote a widely cited article called \"Reading: A psycholinguistic guessing game\". Goodman set out to determine whether the views of Chomsky could serve as psychological models of the reading process. He chided educators for attempting to apply what he saw as unnecessary orthographic order to a process that relied on holistic examination of words. Whether Goodman was indeed inspired by Chomsky, neither Chomsky himself nor his followers have ever accepted Goodman's views.\nGoodman thought that there are four \"cueing systems\" for reading, four things that readers have to guess what word comes next:\nThe \"graph\" part of the word \"graphophonemic\" means the shape or symbol of the graphic input, i.e., the text. According to Goodman, these systems work together to help readers guess the right word. He emphasized that pronouncing individual words will involve the use of all three systems (letter clues, meaning clues from context, and syntactical structure of the sentence).\nThe graphophonemic cues are related to the sounds we hear (the phonological system including individual letters and letter combinations), the letters of the alphabet, and the conventions of spelling, punctuation, and print. Students who are emerging readers use these cues considerably. However, in the English language, there is a very imprecise relationship between written symbols and sound symbols. Sometimes the relationships and their patterns do not work, as in the example of \"great\" and \"head\". Proficient readers and writers draw on their prior experiences with text and the other cueing systems, as well as the phonological system, as their reading and writing develops. Ken Goodman writes that, \"The cue systems are used simultaneously and interdependently. What constitutes useful graphic information depends on how much syntactic and semantic information is available. Within high contextual constraints an initial consonant may be all that is needed to identify an element and make possible the prediction of an ensuing sequence or the confirmation of prior predictions.\" He continues with, \"Reading requires not so much skills as strategies that make it possible to select the most productive cues.\" He believes that reading involves the interrelationship of all the language systems. Readers sample and make judgments about which cues from each system will provide the most useful information in making predictions that will get them to meaning. Goodman provides a partial list of the various systems readers use as they interact with text. Within the graphophonemic system there are:\nThe semantic cuing system is the one in which meaning is constructed. \"So focused is reading on making sense that the visual input, the perceptions we form, and the syntactic patterns we assign are all directed by our meaning construction.\" The key component of the semantic system is context. A reader must be able to attach meaning to words and have some prior knowledge to use as a context for understanding the word. They must be able to relate the newly learned word to prior knowledge through personal associations with text and the structure of text.\nThe semantic system is developed from the beginning through early interactions with adults. At first, this usually involves labeling (e.g., \"This is a dog\"). Then labeling becomes more detailed (e.g., \"It is a Labrador dog. Its coat is black.\") The child learns that there is a set of \"dog attributes\" and that within the category \"dog\", there are subsets of \"dog\" (e.g., long-hair, short-hair). The development of this system and the development of the important concepts that relate to the system are largely accomplished as children begin to explore language independently. As children speak about what they've done and play out their experiences, they are making personal associations between their experiences and language. This is critical to success in later literacy practices, such as reading comprehension and writing. The meaning people bring to the reading is available to them through every cuing system, but it's particularly influential as we move from our sense of the syntactic patterns to the semantic structures.\nThe syntactic system, according to Goodman and Watson, includes the interrelation of words and sentences within connected text. In the English language, syntactic relations include word order, tense, number, and gender. The syntactic system is also concerned with word parts that change the meaning of a word, called morphemes. For example, adding the suffix \"less\" or adding \"s\" to the end of a word changes its meaning or tense. As speakers of English, people know where to place subjects, which pronoun to use, and where adjectives occur. Individual word meaning is determined by the place of the word in the sentence and the particular semantic or syntactic role it occupies.\nFor example:\n\"T\"he mayor was present when he received a beautiful present from the present members of the board\".\"\nThe syntactic system is usually in place when children begin school. Immersed in language, children begin to recognize that phrases and sentences are usually ordered in certain ways. This notion of ordering is the development of syntax. Like all the cuing systems, syntax provides the possibility of correct prediction when trying to make sense or meaning of written language. Goodman notes the cues found in the flow of language are:\nThe pragmatic system is also involved in the construction of meaning while reading. This brings into play the socio-cultural knowledge of the reader. It provides information about the purposes and needs the reader has while reading. Yetta Goodman and Dorothy Watson state that, \"Language has different meaning depending on the reason for use, the circumstances in which the language is used, and the ideas writers and readers have about the contextual relations with the language users. Language cannot exist outside a sociocultural context, which includes the prior knowledge of the language user. For example, shopping lists, menus, reports and plays are arranged uniquely and are dependent on the message, the intent, the audience, and the context.\"\nBy the time children begin school, they may have developed an inferred understanding of some of the pragmatics of a particular situation. For example, turn-taking in conversation, reading poetry, or a shopping list. \"While different materials may share common semantic, syntactic, and graphophonic features, each genre has its own organization and each requires certain experiences by the reader.\"\nGoodman performed a study where children first read words individually and then read the same words in connected text. He found that the children did better when they read the words in connected text. Later replications of the experiment failed to find effects, however, when children did not read the same words in connected text immediately after reading them individually, as they had in Goodman's experiment.\nGoodman's theory has been criticized by other researchers who favor a phonics-based approach, and present research to support their viewpoint. Critics argue that good readers use decoding as their primary approach to reading, and use context to confirm that what they have read makes sense.\nApplication of Goodman's theory.\nGoodman's argument was compelling to educators as a way of thinking about beginning reading and literacy more broadly. This led to the idea that reading and writing were concepts that should be considered as wholes, learned by experience and exposure more than analysis and didactic instruction. This largely accounts for the focus on time spent reading, especially independent reading. Many classrooms (whole-language or otherwise) include silent reading time, sometimes called DEAR (\"Drop Everything And Read\") time or SSR (sustained silent reading). Some versions of this independent reading time include a structured role for the teacher, especially Reader's Workshop. Despite the popularity of the extension of Chomsky's linguistic ideas to literacy, it is based on a misunderstanding of those theories as, unlike language, literacy is not a human universal but a human invention (much as children learn to walk without being taught, but not how to drive a car or fly a helicopter). All experimental research shows that reading, unlike language in the Chomskyan view, is not a pre-programmed human skill; it must be learned. Sally Shaywitz, a neurologist at Yale University, is credited with much of the research on the neurological structures of reading.\nContrasts with phonics.\nBecause of this holistic emphasis, whole language is contrasted with skill-based areas of instruction, especially phonics and synthetic phonics. Phonics instruction is a commonly used technique for teaching students to read. It tends to emphasize attention to the individual components of words, for example, the sounds (phonemes) /k/, /\u00e6/, and /t/ are represented by the letters (graphemes) \"c\", \"a\", and \"t\". Because whole language proponents do not focus exclusively on the individual parts, tending to focus on the relationship of parts to and within the larger context, they do not favor some types of phonics instruction. Whole language advocates state that they do teach and believe in phonics, especially a type of phonics known as embedded phonics. In embedded phonics, letters are taught during other lessons focused on meaning and the phonics component is considered a \"mini lesson\". Instruction in embedded phonics typically emphasizes the consonants and the short vowels, as well as letter combinations called rimes or phonograms. The use of this embedded phonics model is called a \"whole-part-whole\" approach because, consistent with holistic thinking, students read the text for meaning first (whole), then examine features of the phonics system (part), and finally use their new knowledge while reading the text again (whole).\nThis mixed approach is a development from the practice employed in the 1970s and 1980s, when virtually no phonics was included in the curriculum at all. Theorists such as Ken Goodman and Frank Smith at that time advocated a \"guessing game\" approach, entirely based on context and whole-word analysis. It is worth noting that neuroscientist Mark Seidenberg, one of the many critics of whole language and Balance Literacy, writes that Ken Goodman's \"guessing game theory\" had no supporting evidence and \"was grievously wrong\". In addition, in his 2009 book, \"Reading in the brain\", cognitive neuroscientist Stanislas Dehaene said, \"cognitive psychology directly refutes any notion of teaching via a 'global' or 'whole language' method.\" He goes on to talk about \"the myth of whole-word reading\", saying it has been refuted by recent experiments. \"We do not recognize a printed word through a holistic grasping of its contours, because our brain breaks it down into letters and graphemes.\"\nMost whole language advocates now see that children go through stages of spelling development as they develop, use, and gain control over written language. Early literacy research conducted by Piagetian researcher Emilia Ferreiro, published in her book \"Literacy Before Schooling\", has been replicated by University of Alabama professor Maryann Manning. Based on this research, \"invented spelling\" is another \"whole-part-whole\" approach: children learn to read by writing in a meaningful context, e.g., by writing letters to others. To write a word, they have to decompose its spoken form into sounds and then translate them into letters, e.g., \"k\", \"a\", \"t\" for the phonemes /k/, /\u00e6/, and /t/. Empirical studies show that later spelling development is fostered rather than hindered by these invented spellings\u2014as long as children from the beginning are confronted with \"book spellings\", too.\nRise of whole language and reaction.\nAfter its introduction by Goodman, whole language rose in popularity dramatically. It became a major educational paradigm of the late 1980s and the 1990s. Despite its popularity during this period, educators who believed that skill instruction was important for students' learning, and some researchers in education, were skeptical of whole-language claims. What followed were the \"Reading Wars\" of the 1980s and 1990s between advocates of phonics and those of whole-language methodology, which in turn led to several attempts to catalog research on the efficacy of phonics and whole language.\nNew Zealand education researcher Marie Clay created the Reading Recovery program in 1976. After lengthy observations of early readers, Clay defined reading as a message-getting, problem-solving activity, and writing as a message-sending, problem-solving activity. Clay suggested that both activities involved linking invisible patterns of oral language with visible symbols.\nThe US Congress commissioned reading expert Marilyn Jager Adams to write a definitive book on the topic. She determined that phonics was important but suggested that some elements of the whole language approach were helpful. Two large-scale efforts, in 1998 by the United States National Research Council's Commission on Preventing Reading Difficulties in Young Children and in 2000 by the United States National Reading Panel, catalogued the most important elements of a reading program. While proponents of whole language find the latter to be controversial, both panels found that phonics instruction of varying kinds, especially analytic and synthetic phonics, contributed positively to students' ability to read words on tests of reading words in isolation. Both panels also found that embedded phonics and no phonics contributed to lower rates of achievement for most populations of students when measured on tests of reading words in isolation. The panel recommended an approach it described as \"scientifically based reading research\" (SBRR), which cited five elements essential to effective reading instruction: explicit Systematic Phonics instruction, phonological awareness, reading comprehension, vocabulary, and fluency.\nStephen Krashen criticized the evidence presented in the National Reading Panel's Report in 2004 as well as clarifying the role of reading in acquiring phonics and the use of explicit phonics instruction at the beginner level in whole language.\nIn December 2005, the Australian government endorsed the teaching of synthetic phonics and discredited the whole language approach (\"on its own\"). Its Department of Education, Science and Training published a National Inquiry into the Teaching of Literacy. The report states: \"The evidence is clear, whether from research, good practice observed in schools, advice from submissions to the Inquiry, consultations, or from Committee members' own individual experiences, that direct systematic instruction in phonics during the early years of schooling is an essential foundation for teaching children to read.\" See .\nIn 2006, the U.K. Department for Education and Skills undertook a review of early reading that came out in favor of Synthetic phonics. Subsequently, in March 2011, the U.K. Department of Education released a white paper entitled \"The Importance of Teaching\", which supported systematic synthetic phonics as the best method for teaching reading.\nOn 23 April 2022, the Center for Research in Education and Social Policy at the University of Delaware presented the results of a study of Marie Clay's Reading Recovery long-term effects, finding that the \"long-term impact estimates were significant and negative\".\nState of the debate.\nDespite these results, many whole language advocates continue to argue that their approach, including embedded phonics, has been shown to improve student achievement. Whole language advocates sometimes criticize advocates of skill instruction as reductionist and describe the use of phonics as \"word calling\", because it does not involve the use of meaning. The United States National Reading Panel is criticized especially harshly by some in the whole-language community for failing to include qualitative research designs that show benefits for embedded phonics (the panel only considered experiments and quasi-experiments). On the other hand, some parents and teachers have objected to the de-emphasis of phonics in whole-language based curricula (such as Reading Recovery) and have advocated for the removal of whole language from schools.\nIn 1996, the California Department of Education led the way in returning to the teaching of phonics. By 2014, the department had clear guidelines for teaching children in phonemic awareness, phonics, and segmenting and blending. The New York Public School System followed, and by 2015 had abandoned whole language, Embedded Phonics, and Balanced Literacy in favor of systematic phonics.\nNeuroscientists have also weighed into the debate, some of them demonstrating that the whole-word method is much slower and uses the wrong brain area for reading. One neuroscientist, Mark Seidenberg, says \"Goodman's guessing game theory was grievously wrong\" and \"the impact was enormous and continues to be felt\". When it come to evidence supporting the whole-language theory, he emphatically states \"There wasn't any\". He is also especially critical of Smith's book, \"Reading Without Nonsense\", which suggests the following recommendation to help a struggling reader: \"The first alternative and preference is to skip over the puzzling word. The second alternative is to guess what the unknown word might be. And the final and least preferred alternative is to sound the word out. Phonics, in other words, comes last.\" Seidenberg goes on to say that, although reading science has rejected the theories behind whole language, in education they are \"theoretical zombies\". Cognitive neuroscientist Stanislas Dehaene has said, \"cognitive psychology directly refutes any notion of teaching via a 'global' or 'whole language' method.\" He goes on to talk about \"the myth of whole-word reading\" (also: sight words), saying it has been refuted by recent experiments. \"We do not recognize a printed word through a holistic grasping of its contours, because our brain breaks it down into letters and graphemes.\"\nOne district's experience: Bethlehem, PA.\nIn 2015, Jack Silva, the chief academic officer for Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, discovered that a lot of students in his district were struggling with reading. In 2015, only 56 percent of third-graders were scoring proficient on the state reading test. Silva conducted a survey of reading instruction methods that were being used. The predominant approach, he learned, involved the use of methods based upon a whole-language philosophy. In response, the Bethlehem district invested approximately $3 million on training, materials, and support to help its early elementary teachers and principals learn the science of how reading works and how children should be taught, focusing on phonics instruction. At the end of the 2018 school year, after the phonics-based re-training, 84 percent of kindergartners met or exceeded the benchmark score.\nAdoption of some whole-language concepts.\nWhile rancor continues, much of whole language's emphasis on quality literature, cultural diversity, and reading in groups and to students is widely supported by the educational community due to its benefits of increased comprehension. The importance of motivation, long a central focus of whole-language approaches, has gained more attention in the broader educational community in the last few years. Prominent critic of whole language Louisa Cook Moats has argued, however, that the focus on quality literature, diversity, reading groups, and motivation are not the sole property of whole language. She and others contend that these components of instruction are supported by educators of diverse educational perspectives. As one report states, \"Reading materials must be carefully chosen so as to be at the right reading level. Phonics instruction cannot stand alone\". Moats contends that the principles essential to whole language, and those that render it ineffective and unfit for reading education are: a) children learn to read from exposure to print, b) hostility to drilling in phonics and other forms of direct instruction, and c) the tendency to endorse the use of context-clues and guesswork to decipher a word rather than phonemic decoding.\nBalanced literacy.\nSince 1996, \"balanced literacy\" has been suggested as an integrative approach, portrayed by its advocates as taking the best elements of both whole language and code-emphasizing phonics, something promoted by Adams in 1990. In 1996, the California Department of Education described the balanced approach as \"one which combines the language and literature-rich activities associated with whole language with explicit teaching of the skills needed to decode words\u2014for all children.\" In 1997, the department called for grade-one teaching of concepts about print, phonemic awareness, decoding, and word recognition, as well as vocabulary and concept development. In 2014, the department stated, \"Ensuring that children know how to decode regularly spelled one-syllable words by mid-first grade is crucial\". It went on to say that \"Learners need to be phonemically aware (especially able to segment and blend phonemes)\". In grades two and three, children receive explicit instruction in advanced phonic-analysis and reading multi-syllabic and more complex words.\nThe New York Public School system adopted balanced literacy as its literacy curriculum in 2003. However, in 2015, it began a process of revising its English Language Arts Learning Standards, calling for teaching involving \"reading or literacy experiences\" as well as phonemic awareness from pre-kindergarten to grade 1, and phonics and word recognition from grade 1 to grade 4.\nOther states, such as Ohio, Colorado, Minnesota, Mississippi, and Arkansas are continuing to emphasize the need for instruction in evidenced-based phonics.\nCritics of balanced literacy have suggested that the term is a disingenuous recasting of whole language with obfuscating new terminology. Neuroscientist Mark Seidenberg, a proponent of the science of reading and the teaching of phonics, writes that, \"Balanced literacy allowed educators to declare an end to the increasingly troublesome 'wars' without resolving the underlying issues\", and that \"Balanced literacy provided little guidance for teachers who thought that phonics was a cause of poor reading and did not know how to teach it\".\nNo Child Left Behind has brought a resurgence of interest in phonics. Its \"Reading First\" program addresses the reading deficiency in elementary students and requires that students must be explicitly and systematically taught five skills: phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, comprehension, and fluency. During the 2000s, whole language receded to marginal status, and continues to fade.\nProponents and critics.\nProminent proponents of whole language include Ken Goodman, Frank Smith, Carolyn Burke, Jerome Harste, Yetta Goodman, Dorothy Watson, and Stephen Krashen.\nWidely known whole-language critics include Rudolf Flesch, Louisa Cook Moats, G. Reid Lyon, James M. Kauffman, Phillip Gough (co-creator of the Simple view of reading), Keith Stanovich, Diane McGuinness, Steven Pinker, David C. Geary, Douglas Carnine, Edward Kame'enui, Jerry Silbert, Lynn Melby Gordon, Diane Ravitch, Jeanne Chall, Emily Hanford, Jordan Peterson, Mark Seidenberg, and Stanislas Dehaene.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42325", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42325", "title": "Phonics", "text": "Method of teaching reading and writing\nPhonics is a method for teaching reading and writing to beginners. To use phonics is to teach the relationship between the sounds of the spoken language (phonemes), and the letters (graphemes) or groups of letters or syllables of the written language. Phonics is also known as the alphabetic principle or the \"alphabetic code\". It can be used with any writing system that is alphabetic, such as that of English, Russian, and most other languages. Phonics is also sometimes used as part of the process of teaching people from China (and other foreign students) to read and write Chinese characters, which are not alphabetic, using pinyin, which is alphabetic.\nWhile the principles of phonics generally apply regardless of the language or region, the examples in this article are from General American English pronunciation. For more about phonics as it applies to British English, see Synthetic phonics, a method by which the student learns the sounds represented by letters and letter combinations, and blends these sounds to pronounce words.\nPhonics is taught using a variety of approaches, for example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOverview.\nReading by using phonics is often referred to as \"decoding words\", \"sounding-out words\" or using \"print-to-sound relationships\". Since phonics focuses on the sounds and letters within words (i.e. sublexical), it is often contrasted with whole language (a word-level-up philosophy for teaching reading) and a compromise approach called balanced literacy (the attempt to combine whole language and phonics).\nSome phonics critics suggest that learning phonics prevents children from reading \"real books\". However, the Department for Education in England says children should practise phonics by reading books consistent with their developing phonic knowledge and skill; and, at the same time they should hear, share and discuss \"a wide range of high-quality books to develop a love of reading and broaden their vocabulary\". In addition, researchers say that \"the phonological pathway is an essential component of skilled reading\" and \"for most children it requires instruction, hence phonics\". Some recommend 20\u201330 minutes of daily phonics instruction in grades K\u20132, about 200 hours.\nThe National Reading Panel in the United States concluded that systematic phonics instruction is more effective than unsystematic phonics or non-phonics instruction. Some critics suggest that systematic phonics is \"skill and drill\" with little attention to meaning. However, researchers point out that this impression is false. Teachers can use engaging games or materials to teach letter-sound connections, and it can also be incorporated with the reading of meaningful text.\nHistory.\nThe term \"phonics\" during the 19th century and into the 1970s was used as a synonym of phonetics. The use of the term in reference to the method of teaching is dated to 1901 by the Oxford English Dictionary. The relationship between sounds and letters is the backbone of traditional phonics.\nThis principle was first presented by John Hart in 1570. Prior to that children learned to read through the ABC method, by which they recited the letters used in each word, from a familiar piece of text such as Genesis. It was John Hart who first suggested that the focus should be on the relationship between what is now referred to as graphemes and phonemes.\nFor more information see Practices by country or region (below); and History of learning to read.\nPhonemic awareness.\nNot to be confused with phonics, phonemic awareness (PA) is the ability to hear, identify, and manipulate the individual spoken sounds of language, independent of writing. Phonemic awareness is part of oral language ability and is critical for learning to read. To assess phonemic awareness, or teach it explicitly, learners are given a variety of exercises, such as adding a sound (e.g., \"Add the th sound to the beginning of the word ink\"), changing a sound (e.g., \"In the word sing, change the ng sound to the t sound)\", or removing a sound (e.g., \"In the word park, remove the p sound)\". Phonemic awareness and the resulting knowledge of spoken language is the most important determinant of a child's early reading success. Phonemic awareness is sometimes taught separately from phonics and at other times it is the result of phonics instruction (i.e. segmenting or blending phonemes with letters).\nIt is that part of phonological awareness that is concerned with phonemes.\nIn one instance, a 2014 program of advanced phonemic awareness training (without using the corresponding letters) improved the PA but not the word reading. When teaching phonemic awareness, the National Reading Panel found that better results were obtained with focused and explicit instruction of one or two elements, over five or more hours, in small groups, and using the corresponding graphemes (letters).\nThe alphabetic principle (also: The alphabetic code).\nEnglish spelling is based on the alphabetic principle. In the education field it is also referred to as \"the alphabetic code\". In an alphabetic writing system, letters are used to represent speech sounds, or phonemes. For example, the word \"cat\" is spelled with three letters, \"c\", \"a\", and \"t\", each representing a phoneme, respectively, , , and .\nThe spelling structures for some alphabetic languages, such as Spanish, Russian and German, are comparatively orthographically transparent, or orthographically shallow, because there is nearly a one-to-one correspondence between sounds and the letter patterns that represent them. English spelling is more complex, a deep orthography, partly because it attempts to represent the 40+ phonemes of the spoken language with an alphabet composed of only 26 letters (and no accent marks or diacritics). As a result, two letters are often used together to represent distinct sounds, referred to as \"digraphs\". For example, \"t\" and \"h\" placed side by side to represent either as in \"math\" or as in \"father\".\nEnglish has absorbed many words from other languages throughout its history, usually without changing the spelling of those words. As a result, the written form of English includes the spelling patterns of many languages (Old English, Old Norse, Norman French, Classical Latin and Greek, as well as numerous modern languages) superimposed upon one another. These overlapping spelling patterns mean that in many cases the same sound can be spelled differently (e.g., tr\"ay\" and br\"ea\"k) and the same spelling can represent different sounds (e.g., m\"oo\"n and b\"oo\"k). However, the spelling patterns usually follow certain conventions. In addition, the Great Vowel Shift, a historical linguistic process in which the quality of many vowels in English changed while the spelling remained as it was, greatly diminished the transparency of English spelling in relation to pronunciation.\nThe result is that English spelling patterns vary considerably in the degree to which they follow rules. For example, the letters \"ee\" almost always represent (e.g., \"meet\"), but the sound can also be represented by the letters \"e\", \"i\" and \"y\" and digraphs \"ie\", \"ei\", or \"ea\" (e.g., sh\"e\", sard\"i\"ne, sunn\"y\", ch\"ie\"f, s\"ei\"ze, \"ea\"t). Similarly, the letter cluster \"ough\" represents as in en\"ough\", as in th\"ough\", as in thr\"ough\", as in c\"ough\", as in b\"ough\", as in b\"ough\"t, and as in hicc\"ough\", while in sl\"ough\" and l\"ough\", the pronunciation varies.\nAlthough the patterns are inconsistent, when English spelling rules take into account syllable structure, phonetics, etymology, and accents, there are dozens of rules that are 75% or more reliable. This level of reliability can only be achieved by extending the rules far outside the domain of phonics, which deals with letter-sound correspondences, and into the morphophonemic and morphological domains.\nAlternative spellings of the sounds.\nThe following are a selection of the alternative spellings of the 40+ sounds of the English language based on General American English pronunciation, recognizing there are many regional variations. Teachers of synthetic phonics emphasize the letter sounds instead of the letter names (i.e. \"mmm\" not \"em\", \"sss\" not \"ess\", \"fff\" not \"ef\"). It is usually recommended that teachers of English-reading introduce the \"most frequent sounds\" and the \"common spellings\" first and save the more infrequent sounds and complex spellings for later. (e.g., the sounds /s/ and /t/ before /v/ and /w/; and the spellings cake before eight and cat before duck).\nFor a more complete list of alternative spellings of the sounds, see .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVowel and consonant phonics patterns.\nThe following is an explanation of many of the phonics patterns.\nConsonant phonics patterns.\nThese patterns are just a few examples out of dozens that can be used to help learners unpack the challenging English alphabetic code. While complex, many believe English spelling does retain order and reason.\nEffectiveness of programs and evidence-based education.\nResearchers such as Joseph Torgesen estimate that \"between four and six percent\" of children would still have weak word reading skills even if they were exposed to effective interventions in the first or second year of school. Yet, in the USA 20% or more do not meet grade expectations.\nAccording to the 2019 Nation's Report card, 34% of grade four students in the United States failed to perform at or above the \"Basic reading level\". There was a significant difference by race and ethnicity (e.g., black students at 52% and white students at 23%). Following the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, this increased to 37% in 2022, and by 2024 it was at 40%. It is believed that students who read below the basic level lack sufficient support to complete their schoolwork.\nBetween 2013 and 2027, 37 US States have passed laws or implemented new policies related to evidence-based reading instruction. As a result, many schools are moving away from balanced literacy programs that encourage students to guess a word, and are introducing phonics where they learn to \"decode\" (sound out) words.\nThe Canadian provinces of Ontario and Nova Scotia, respectively, reported that 26% and 30% of grade three students did not meet the provincial reading standards in 2019. In Ontario, 53% of Grade 3 students with special education needs (students who have an Individual Education Plan), were not meeting the provincial standard. In 2022, the Minister of Education for Ontario said they are taking immediate action to improve student literacy and making longer-term reforms to modernize the way reading is taught and assessed in schools, with a focus on phonics. Their plan includes \"revising the elementary Language curriculum and the Grade 9 English course with scientific, evidence-based approaches that emphasize direct, explicit and systematic instruction, and removing references to unscientific discovery and inquiry-based learning, including the three-cueing system, by 2023.\"\nProponents of evidence-based reading instruction maintain that teaching reading without teaching phonics can be harmful to large numbers of students, although in their view not all phonics teaching programs are equally effective. According to them, the effectiveness of a program depends on using specific curriculum and instruction techniques, classroom management, grouping, and other factors. Phonics instruction is also an important part of the science of reading.\nInterest in evidence-based education appears to be growing. In 2019, Best Evidence Encyclopedia (BEE) released a review of research on 48 different programs for struggling readers in elementary schools. Many of the programs used phonics-based teaching and/or one or more of the following: cooperative learning, technology-supported adaptive instruction (see Educational technology), metacognitive skills, phonemic awareness, word reading, fluency, vocabulary, multisensory learning, spelling, guided reading, reading comprehension, word analysis, structured curriculum, and balanced literacy (non-phonetic approach).\nThe BEE review concludes that:\nRobert Slavin, of BEE, goes so far as to suggest that states should \"hire thousands of tutors\" to support students scoring far below grade level \u2013 particularly in elementary school reading. Research, he says, shows \"only tutoring, both one-to-one and one-to-small group, in reading and mathematics, had an effect size larger than +0.10 ... averages are around +0.30\", and \"well-trained teaching assistants using structured tutoring materials or software can obtain outcomes as good as those obtained by certified teachers as tutors\".\nOther evidence-based comparison databases featuring phonics and other methods include Evidence for ESSA (Center for Research and Reform in Education) (meeting the standards of the U.S. Every Student Succeeds Act, and the What Works Clearinghouse.\nTeaching reading with phonics.\nCombining phonics with other literacy instruction.\nThere are many ways that phonics is taught and it is often taught together with some of the following: oral language skills, concepts about print, phonological awareness, phonemic awareness, phonology, oral fluency, vocabulary, syllables, reading comprehension, spelling, word study, cooperative learning, multisensory learning, and guided reading. And, phonics is often featured in discussions about science of reading, and evidence-based practices.\nThe National Reading Panel (U.S. 2000) suggests that phonics be taught together with phonemic awareness, oral fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. Timothy Shanahan, a member of that panel, suggests that primary students receive 60\u201390 minutes per day of explicit, systematic, literacy instruction time; and that it be divided equally between a) words and word parts (e.g., letters, sounds, decoding and phonemic awareness), b) oral reading fluency, c) reading comprehension, and d) writing. Furthermore, he states that \"the phonemic awareness skills found to give the greatest reading advantage to kindergarten and first-grade children are \"segmenting and blending\"\".\nThe Ontario Association of Deans of Education (Canada) published research Monograph # 37 entitled \"Supporting early language and literacy\" with suggestions for parents and teachers in helping children prior to grade one. It covers the areas of letter names and letter-sound correspondence (phonics), as well as conversation, play-based learning, print, phonological awareness, shared reading, and vocabulary.\nSight words and sight vocabulary.\nSight words (i.e. high-frequency or common words) are \"not\" a part of the phonics method. They are usually associated with whole language and balanced literacy where students are expected to memorize common words such as those on the Dolch word list and the Fry word list (e.g., a, be, call, do, eat, fall, gave, etc.). The supposition (in whole language) is that students will learn to read more easily if they memorize the most common words they will encounter, especially words that are not easily decoded (i.e. exceptions). However, according to research, whole-word memorisation is \"labor-intensive\", requiring on average about 35 trials per word.\nOn the other hand, phonics advocates say that most words are decodable, so comparatively few words have to be memorized. And because a child will over time encounter many low-frequency words, \"the phonological recoding mechanism is a very powerful, indeed essential, mechanism throughout reading development\". Furthermore, researchers suggest that teachers who withhold phonics instruction to make it easier on children \"are having the opposite effect\" by making it harder for children to gain basic word-recognition skills. They suggest that learners should focus on understanding the principles of phonics so they can recognize the phonemic overlaps among words (e.g., have, had, has, having, haven't, etc.), making it easier to decode them all.\nSight vocabulary is a part of the phonics method. It describes words that are stored in long-term memory and read automatically. Skilled fully-alphabetic readers learn to store words in long-term memory without memorization (i.e. a mental dictionary), making reading and comprehension easier. The process, called \"orthographic mapping\", involves \"decoding, crosschecking, mental marking and rereading\". It takes significantly less time than memorization. This process works for fully-alphabetic readers when reading simple decodable words from left to right through the word. \"Irregular words\" pose more of a challenge, yet research in 2018 concluded that \"fully-alphabetic students\" learn irregular words more easily when they use a process called \"hierarchical decoding\". In this process, students, rather than decode from left to right, are taught to focus attention on the irregular elements such as a vowel-digraph and a silent-e; for example, \"break (b - r - ea - k), height (h - eigh - t), touch (t - ou - ch), and make (m - a- ke)\". Consequentially, they suggest that teachers and tutors should focus on \"teaching decoding with more advanced vowel patterns before expecting young readers to tackle irregular words\".\nSystematic phonics.\n\"Systematic phonics\" is not one specific method of teaching phonics; it is a term used to describe phonics approaches that are taught \"explicitly\" and in a structured, systematic manner. They are \"systematic\" because the letters and the sounds they relate to are taught in a specific sequence, as opposed to incidentally or on a \"when needed\" basis.\nSystematic phonics is sometimes mischaracterized as \"skill and drill\" with little attention to meaning. However, researchers point out that this impression is false. Teachers can use engaging games or materials to teach letter-sound connections, and it can also be incorporated with the reading of meaningful text.\nPhonics can be taught systematically in a variety of ways, such as: synthetic phonics, analytic phonics and analogy phonics. However, their effectiveness vary considerably because the methods differ in such areas as the range of letter-sound coverage, the structure of the lesson plans, and the time devoted to specific instructions.\nSystematic phonics has gained increased acceptance in different parts of the world since the completion of three major studies into teaching reading; one in the United States in 2000, another in Australia in 2005, one in the UK in 2006., and another in Canada in 2022.\nIn 2009, the UK Department of Education published a curriculum review that added support for systematic phonics, which in the UK is known as synthetic phonics. Beginning as early as 2014, several States in the United States have changed their curriculum to include systematic phonics instruction in elementary school. In 2018, the State Government of Victoria, Australia, published a website containing a comprehensive Literacy Teaching Toolkit including Effective Reading Instruction, Phonics, and Sample Phonics Lessons.\nSynthetic phonics.\n\"Synthetic phonics\", also known as blended phonics, is a method employed to teach students to read by \"sounding out\" the letters then \"blending\" the sounds to form the word. This method involves learning how letters or letter groups represent individual sounds, and that those sounds are blended to form a word. For example, \"shrouds\" would be read by pronouncing the sounds for each spelling, \"sh,r,ou,d,s\" (IPA ), then blending those sounds orally to produce a spoken word, \"sh - r - ou - d - s = shrouds\" (IPA ). The goal of either a blended phonics or synthetic phonics instructional program is that students identify the sound-symbol correspondences and blend their phonemes automatically. Since 2005, synthetic phonics has become the accepted method of teaching reading (by phonics instruction) in the United Kingdom and Australia. In the United States, a pilot program using the Core Knowledge Early Literacy program that used this type of phonics approach showed significantly higher results in K\u20133 reading compared with comparison schools. In addition, several States such as California, Ohio, New York and Arkansas, are promoting the principles of synthetic phonics (see synthetic phonics in the US).\nAnalytic phonics and analogy phonics.\n\"Analytic phonics\" does not involve pronouncing individual sounds (phonemes) in isolation and blending the sounds, as is done in synthetic phonics. Rather, it is taught at the word level and students learn to analyze letter-sound relationships once the word is identified. For example, students analyze letter-sound correspondences such as the \"ou\" spelling of in shrouds. Also, students might be asked to practice saying words with similar sounds such as ball, bat and bite. Furthermore, students are taught consonant blends (separate, adjacent consonants) as units, such as break or shrouds.\n\"Analogy phonics\" is a particular type of \"analytic phonics\" in which the teacher has students analyze phonic elements according to the speech sounds (phonograms) in the word. One method is referred to as the \"onset-rime)\" approach. The onset is the initial sound and the rime is the vowel and the consonant sounds that follow it. For example, in the words \"cat, mat and sat,\" the rime is at.) Teachers using the analogy method may have students memorize a bank of phonograms, such as \"-at\" or \"-am\".\nTeachers might also teach students about \"word families\" (e.g., can, ran, man, or may, play, say). When students are exposed to different word families, they are able to identify, analyze and construct different rhyming word patterns. An example of a student's increasing ability to construct a rhyming word pattern with the \"oa\" grapheme would be as follows: \"road, toad, load and goad\". Examples of other recognizable graphemes that allow students to construct rhyming word patterns are \"at, igh, ew, oo, ou\" and \"air\". More letter combinations or graphemes can be viewed in the table below to support students increasing ability to construct a rhyming word pattern of similar phonemes or speech sound:\nLetter combinations or graphemes of new words should have letters students have already learned and can recognize on their own.\nThere have been many experimental research studies and correlational data studies conducted on the effectiveness of instruction using analytic phonics and synthetic phonics. Johnston et al. (2012) conducted experimental research studies that tested the effectiveness of phonics learning instruction among 10 year old boys and girls. They used comparative data from the Clackmannanshire Report and chose 393 participants to compare synthetic phonics instruction and analytic phonics instruction. The boys taught by the synthetic phonics method had better word reading than the girls in their classes, and their spelling and reading comprehension was as good. On the other hand, with analytic phonics teaching, although the boys performed as well as the girls in word reading, they had inferior spelling and reading comprehension. Overall, the group taught by synthetic phonics had better word reading, spelling, and reading comprehension. And, synthetic phonics did not lead to any impairment in the reading of irregular words.\nStructured literacy.\nStructured literacy is a way of teaching reading using methods that are systematic, cumulative, explicit, multi-sensory, and diagnostic. It teaches phonology, phonics (sound-symbol association), syllables, morphology, syntax, and semantics.\nEmbedded phonics with mini-lessons.\n\"Embedded phonics\", also known as \"Incidental phonics\", is the type of phonics instruction used in whole language programs. It is not \"systematic phonics\". Although phonics skills are de-emphasised in whole language programs, some teachers include phonics \"mini-lessons\" when students struggle with words while reading from a book. Short lessons are included based on phonics elements the students are having trouble with, or on a new or difficult phonics pattern that appears in a class reading assignment. The focus on meaning is generally maintained, but the mini-lesson provides some time for focus on individual sounds and the letters that represent them. Embedded phonics is different from other methods because instruction is always in the context of literature rather than in separate lessons about distinct sounds and letters; and skills are taught when an opportunity arises, not systematically.\nPhonics through spelling.\nFor some teachers this is a method of teaching spelling by using the sounds (phonemes). However, it can also be a method of teaching reading by focusing on the sounds and their spelling (i.e. phonemes and syllables). It is taught systematically with guided lessons conducted in a direct and explicit manner including appropriate feedback. Sometimes mnemonic cards containing individual sounds are used to allow the student to practice saying the sounds that are related to a letter or letters (e.g., \"a\", \"e\", \"i\", \"o\", \"u\"). Accuracy comes first, followed by speed. The sounds may be grouped by categories such as vowels that sound short (e.g., c-a-t and s-i-t). When the student is comfortable recognizing and saying the sounds, the following steps might be followed: a) the tutor says a target word and the student repeats it out loud, b) the student writes down each individual sound (letter) until the word is completely spelled, saying each sound as it is written, and c) the student says the entire word out loud. An alternate method would be to have the student use mnemonic cards to sound-out (spell) the target word.\nTypically, the instruction starts with sounds that have only one letter and simple CVC words such as \"sat\" and \"pin\". Then it progresses to longer words, and sounds with more than one letter (e.g., hear and day), and perhaps even syllables (e.g., wa-ter). Sometimes the student practices saying (or sounding-out) cards that contain entire words.\nReading and spelling (writing).\nEvidence supports the strong synergy between reading (decoding) and spelling (encoding), especially for children in kindergarten or grade one and elementary school students at risk for literacy difficulties. Students receiving encoding instruction and guided practice that included using (a) manipulatives such as letter tiles to learn phoneme-grapheme relationships and words and (b) writing phoneme-grapheme relationships and words made from these correspondences significantly outperformed contrast groups not receiving encoding instruction.\nUsing embedded pictures, and mnemonic alphabet cards when teaching phonics.\nResearch supports the use of embedded, picture mnemonic (memory support) alphabet cards when teaching letters and sounds, but not words.\nIntroducing the Letters - Faster vs. slower.\nA study in 2019 concluded that, during the first year of school, introducing the letters at a faster pace yielded significantly better results, especially for the lower-performing students.\nThe Reading Wars \u2013 phonics vs. whole language.\nA debate has been going on for decades about the merits of phonics vs. whole language, often known in the UK as \"look and say\". It is sometimes referred to as the \"Reading Wars\".\nPhonics was a popular way to learn reading in the 19th century. William Holmes McGuffey (1800\u20131873), an American educator, author, and Presbyterian minister who had a lifelong interest in teaching children, compiled the first four of the McGuffey Readers in 1836.\nThen, in 1841 Horace Mann, the Secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education, advocated for a whole-word method of teaching reading to replace phonics. Rudolf Flesch advocated for a return to phonics in his book \"Why Johnny Can't Read\" (1955).\nThe whole-word method received support from Kenneth J. Goodman who wrote an article in 1967 entitled \"Reading: A psycholinguistic guessing game\". In it, he says efficient reading is the result of the \"skill in selecting the fewest, most productive cues necessary to produce guesses which are right the first time\". Although not supported by scientific studies, the theory became very influential as the whole language method. Since the 1970s some whole language supporters such as Frank Smith, are unyielding in arguing that phonics should be taught little, if at all.\nYet other researchers say instruction in phonics and phonemic awareness are \"critically important\" and \"essential\" to develop early reading skills. In 2000, the US National Reading Panel identified five ingredients of effective reading instruction, of which phonics is one; the other four are phonemic awareness, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. Reports from other countries, such as the Australian report on \"Teaching reading\" (2005) and the Independent review of the teaching of early reading (Rose Report 2006) from the UK have also supported the use of phonics.\nSome notable researchers have clearly stated their disapproval of whole language. Cognitive neuroscientist Stanislas Dehaene has said, \"cognitive psychology directly refutes any notion of teaching via a 'global' or 'whole language' method.\" He goes on to talk about \"the myth of whole-word reading\" (also: sight words), saying it has been refuted by recent experiments. \"We do not recognize a printed word through a holistic grasping of its contours, because our brain breaks it down into letters and graphemes.\" Mark Seidenberg refers to whole language as a \"theoretical zombie\" because it persists in spite of a lack of supporting evidence.\nFurthermore, a 2017 study published in the \"Journal of Experimental Psychology\" compared teaching with phonics vs. teaching whole written words and concluded that phonics is more effective. It states \"Our results suggest that early literacy education should focus on the systematicities present in print-to-sound relationships in alphabetic languages, rather than teaching meaning-based strategies, in order to enhance both reading aloud and comprehension of written words\".\nMore recently, some educators have advocated for the theory of balanced literacy purported to combine phonics and whole language yet not necessarily in a consistent or systematic manner. It may include elements such as word study and phonics mini-lessons, differentiated learning, cueing, leveled reading, shared reading, guided reading, independent reading and sight words. According to a survey in 2010, 68% of K\u20132 teachers in the United States practice balanced literacy; however, only 52% of teachers included \"phonics\" in their definition of \"balanced literacy\". In addition, 75% of teachers teach the three-cueing system (i.e., meaning/structure/visual or semantic/syntactic/graphophonic) that has its roots in whole language.\nIn addition, some phonics supporters assert that \"balanced literacy\" is merely \"whole language\" by another name. Critics of whole language and skeptics of balanced literacy, such as neuroscientist Mark Seidenberg, state that struggling readers should \"not\" be encouraged to skip words that they find puzzling or to rely on semantic and syntactic cues to guess words.\nOver time a growing number of countries and states have put greater emphasis on phonics and other evidence-based practices (see Practices by country or region below).\nSimple view of reading.\nThe \"simple view of reading\" is a scientific theory about reading comprehension. The creators of the theory hoped it would help to end the reading wars. According to the theory, in order to comprehend what they are reading students need both \"decoding skills\" and oral \"language comprehension ability\"; neither is enough on their own.\nThe formula is: Decoding \u00d7 Oral Language Comprehension = Reading Comprehension.\nStudents are not reading if they can decode words but do not understand their meaning. Similarly, students are not reading if they cannot decode words that they would ordinarily recognize and understand if they heard them spoken out loud.\nPractices by country or region.\nThe following are examples of how phonics is used in some countries:\nAustralia.\nOn 30 November 2004 Brendan Nelson, Minister for Education, Science and Training, established a National Inquiry into the Teaching of Literacy in Australia. The Inquiry examined the way reading is taught in schools, as well as the effectiveness of teacher education courses in preparing teachers for reading instruction. In the resulting report in 2005, \"Teaching Reading\", the first two recommendations make clear the committee's conviction about the need to base the teaching of reading on evidence and the importance of teaching systematic, explicit phonics within an integrated approach.\nThe executive summary states, \"The evidence is clear ... that direct systematic instruction in phonics during the early years of schooling is an essential foundation for teaching children to read. Findings from the research evidence indicate that all students learn best when teachers adopt an integrated approach to reading that explicitly teaches phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary knowledge and comprehension.\" The Inquiry Committee also states that the apparent dichotomy between phonics and the whole-Language approach to teaching \"is false\". However, it goes on to say \"It was clear, however, that systematic phonics instruction is critical if children are to be taught to read well, whether or not they experience reading difficulties.\"\nIn the executive summary it goes on to say the following:\n\"Overall we conclude that the synthetic phonics approach, as part of the reading curriculum, is more effective than the analytic phonics approach, even when it is supplemented with phonemic awareness training. It also led boys to reading words significantly better than girls, and there was a trend towards better spelling and reading comprehension. There is evidence that synthetic phonics is best taught at the beginning of Primary 1, as even by the end of the second year at school the children in the early synthetic phonics programme had better spelling ability, and the girls had significantly better reading ability.\"\nAs of October 5, 2018, The State Government of Victoria, Australia, publishes a website containing a comprehensive Literacy Teaching Toolkit including Effective Reading Instruction, Phonics, and Sample Phonics Lessons. It contains elements of synthetic phonics, analytical phonics, and analogy phonics.\nThe Department of Education of Queensland published a review entitled \"Effective teaching of reading\" in 2023. It has a comprehensive section on word reading, including \"Systematic synthetic phonics\".\nIn 2016 Australia ranked 21st in the PIRLS reading achievement for students in their fourth year of school.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, public education is the responsibility of the Provincial and Territorial governments. As in other countries there has been much debate on the value of phonics in teaching reading in English; however, phonemic awareness and phonics appears to be receiving some attention. The curriculum of all of the Canadian provinces include some of the following: phonics, phonological awareness, segmenting and blending, decoding, phonemic awareness, graphophonic cues, and letter-sound relationships. In addition, systematic phonics and synthetic phonics receive attention in some publications.\nHowever, some of the practices of whole language are evident, such as:\nConsequentially, with the exception of those indicated below, there appears to be no evidence of a comprehensive or systematic practice of phonics in most of Canada's public schools.\nIn 2016, amongst 50 countries, Canada ranked 23rd in the PIRLS reading achievement for students in their fourth year of school.\nIn 2018, Canada ranked 6th out of 78 countries in the PISA reading scores for 15-year-old students. However, critics say PISA is fundamentally flawed, and in 2014 more than 100 academics from around the world called for a moratorium on PISA.\nIn 2021, the province of New Brunswick introduced a new English Language Arts curriculum that includes phonological awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary and reading comprehension. Notably, the teaching of alphabetic skills based on the science of reading has replaced the use of various cueing systems and a variety of strategies to construct meaning from text.\nOn January 27, 2022, the Ontario Human Rights Commission (OHRC) released a report on its public inquiry into the right to read. It followed the unanimous decision of the Supreme Court of Canada, on November 9, 2012, recognizing that learning to read is not a privilege, but a basic and essential human right.\nThe OHRC's report deals with all students, not just those with learning disabilities. The inquiry found that Ontario is not fulfilling its obligations to meet students' right to read. Specifically, foundational word-reading skills are not effectively targeted in Ontario's education system. With science-based approaches to reading instruction, early screening, and intervention, we should see only about 5% of students reading below grade level. However, in 2018\u20132019, 26% of all Ontario Grade 3 students and 53% of Grade 3 students with special education needs (students who have an Individual Education Plan), were not meeting the provincial EQAO standard. The results improved only slightly for Grade 6 students, where 19% of all students and 47% of students with special education needs did not meet the provincial standard.\nThe Ontario curriculum encourages the use of the three-cueing system and balanced literacy, which are ineffective because they teach children to \"guess\" the meaning of a word rather than sound it out. What is required is a) evidence-based curriculum and instruction (including explicit and systematic instruction in phonemic awareness and phonics), b) evidence-based screening assessments, c) evidence-based reading interventions, d) accommodations that are not used as a substitute for teaching students to read, and e) professional assessments (yet, not required for interventions or accommodations).\nThe Minister of Education for Ontario responded to this report by saying the government is taking immediate action to improve student literacy and making longer-term reforms to modernize the way reading is taught and assessed in schools, with a focus on phonics. Their plan includes \"revising the elementary Language curriculum and the Grade 9 English course with scientific, evidence-based approaches that emphasize direct, explicit and systematic instruction and removing references to unscientific discovery and inquiry-based learning, including the three-cueing system, by 2023.\" In January 2024, the province unveiled a back-to-basics kindergarten curriculum. It will provide evidence-based clear and direct instruction in literacy, including understanding sound-letter relationships, developing phonics knowledge, and using specific vocabulary.\nIn 2024, the province of Nova Scotia introduced a draft of its updated English Language Arts program. It outlines the essential skills for readers in grades one and two in the areas of oral language, phonological awareness, phonics and word recognition, vocabulary, reading fluency, and comprehension.\nFinland.\nBefore the beginning of school, usually at the age of 7, most children in Finland participate in one year of preprimary education. Most children already learn to read before they start school.\nSince letters in Finnish words almost always represent the same sounds (and almost all sounds are represented by only one letter), most words are orthographically transparent making them comparatively easy to read.\nAt the primary level, reading and writing difficulties are the second most common reason (after speech disorders) for part-time special education. The most commonly used standardized reading test is the Comprehensive School Reading Test, covering linguistic awareness, \"decoding\", and reading comprehension.\nIn the case of minor reading difficulties, the classroom teacher may give remedial instruction to students, whereas a special education teacher will help with more severe or more persistent reading difficulties. If these support measures are inadequate, students may receive enhanced support or be transferred to full-time special education, depending on individual teaching and learning plans.\nIn the fourth year of school, the basic teaching techniques consist of ample practice of \"sound-letter correspondence\"; breaking down speech into words, syllables, and sounds; word recognition; and spelling at the sound and sentence level; daily reading and writing; and comprehension strategies.\nIn 2016, amongst 50 countries, Finland ranked 5th in reading achievement for students in their fourth year of school according to the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS).\nFrance.\nThere has been a strong debate in France on the teaching of phonics (\"m\u00e9thode syllabique\") versus whole language (\"m\u00e9thode globale\"). After the 1990s, supporters of the latter started defending a so-called \"mixed method\" (also known as balanced literacy) in which approaches from both methods are used. France is home to some of the most influential researchers in psycho-pedagogy, cognitive sciences and neurosciences, such as Stanislas Dehaene and , who support phonics.\nMore recently, with the appointment of the academic Jean-Michel Blanquer as minister of education, the ministry created a science educational council chaired by Dehaene. This council openly supported phonics. In April 2018, the minister issued a set of four guiding documents for early teaching of reading and mathematics and a booklet detailing phonics recommendations. Teachers unions and a few educationalists were very critical of his stances, and classified his perspective as \"traditionalist\", trying to bring the debate to the political sphere. But Blanquer has openly declared that the so-called mixed approach is no serious choice.\nIn 2016, France is slightly above average in Reading Achievement for students in their fourth year of school according to the \"Progress in International Reading Literacy Study\" (PIRLS).\nHungary.\nThe official language and the language of instruction in the Republic of Hungary is the Hungarian language. However, in 2010 4.6% of minority students (Croatians, Germans, Romanians, Serbians, Slovaks, and Slovenes) attended minority operated mother tongue, bilingual, or language teaching schools or kindergartens.\nCr\u00e8che (nursery school) in Hungary is a \"welfare institution\" catering for children aged 20 weeks to 3 years and providing professional day care and development. In addition, kindergarten education and care is free and compulsory for children aged 3\u20136. Socially disadvantaged children are given priority in enrolment. Pre-school programmes focus on developing children's emergent literacy skills through play rather than systematic training in phonics or teaching the alphabet.\nAccording to the PIRLS Encyclopedia, the Ministry of Education does not explicitly recommend one particular reading method over another, however all the accredited textbook series use the \"sounding-analyzing method\". The \"European Literacy Policy Network\" (ELINET) 2016 reports that Hungarian children in grades one and two receive explicit instruction in phonemic awareness and phonics \"as the route to decode words\". In grades three and four they continue to apply their knowledge of phonics, however the emphasis shifts to the more meaning-focused technical aspects of reading and writing (i.e., vocabulary, types of texts, reading strategies, spelling, punctuation and grammar).\nIn 2016, amongst 50 countries, Hungary achieved the 13th highest score in reading literacy for students in their fourth year of school according to the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS). 19% of their students performed at or below the low benchmark on overall reading, just above the EU average of 20%.\nLatin America and the Caribbean.\nAccording to the 2019 Campbell Systematic Reviews approximately 250 million children across the world are not acquiring basic reading and math skills, even though about 50% of them have spent at least 4 years in school (UNESCO 2014). And, more than 60% of third\u2010grade students in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) have only achieved basic reading skills, in part because of the lack of evidence\u2010based training, preparation and support for teachers.\nThe review summarizes the findings of 107 studies of early grade literacy interventions (EGL) in LAC. They conclude that teacher training, nutrition, and technology\u2010in\u2010education programs on average do not show positive effects on EGL outcomes in the LAC region. However, some factors have the potential for positive impacts; including combining teacher training with coaching, targeting school feeding and other nutrition programs to low\u2010income countries with high rates of stunting and wasting, and combining technology\u2010in\u2010education programs with \"a strong focus on pedagogical practices\".\nThey also suggest that \"the quantitative nonintervention studies indicate that phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, and comprehension are associated with reading ability\", and that the poor reading levels of children \"may be the consequence of not providing them with adequate instructions on meta-phonological strategies and explicit and systematic phonics\". However, the available studies are unable to provide conclusive evidence on the effects of teaching phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, and comprehension on reading ability, suggesting a need for even more high-quality research.\nThe \"Progress in International Reading Literacy Study\" (PIRLS 2016) describes the special reading initiatives in Trinidad and Tobago. In 2013, the National Commission for UNESCO launched the \"Leading for Literacy\" project to develop the literacy skills of grade 1 and 2 students. The project facilitates the training of primary school teachers in the use of a synthetic phonics program.\nFrom 2013 to 2015, the Trinidad and Tobago Ministry of Education appointed seven reading specialist to help primary and secondary school teachers improve their literacy instruction. From February 2014 to January 2016, literacy coaches were hired in selected primary schools to assist teachers of Infant 1 (kindergarten), Infant 2 (Grade 1), and Standard 1 (Grade 2) with pedagogy and content of early literacy instruction. Primary schools have been provided with literacy resources for instruction, including phonemic awareness, word recognition, vocabulary manipulatives, phonics and comprehension.\nNew Zealand.\nAs of 2018, the Ministry of Education in New Zealand has online information to help teachers to support their students in years 1\u20133 in relation to sounds, letters, and words. It has specific suggestions in the areas of oral language, phonological awareness, phonemic awareness, phonemes and phonics. There are also examples and recommended books concerning phonics instruction, hearing sounds in spoken words, syllables, phoneme blending, onset and rime, and sounds and letters (initial, ending and medial). In its introduction it states that phonics instruction \"is not an end in itself\" and it is \"not\" necessary to teach students \"every combination of letters and sounds\".\nOn June 14, 2024, the Minister of Education announced the most significant changes to the national curriculum since 2007. The changes are designed to be evidence-based and grounded in the science of learning. Their website includes many resources to help teachers teach phonics, such as phonics checks \u2013 guidance for schools, assessment materials, 29 phonics Cards, video guides, and Phonics Plus Supporting Games.\nNew Zealand's score (523) in the 2016 PIRLS report on the reading achievement of students in their fourth year of school was above the average of 500 and below other English speaking countries such as Canada (543), United States (549), England (559), Northern Ireland (565) and Ireland (567).\nNorway.\nNorwegian is Norway's main language and English is taught beginning in grade one. Children enter first grade in August of the year they turn age 6. The majority of students are enrolled in public (government-owned) schools as opposed to private schools.\nIn the Norwegian curriculum, basic skills include \"decoding and comprehension of simple texts\" (i.e. phonics). At the end of grade two students are expected to demonstrate an understanding of the relationship between \"speech sound and letter\".\nIn 2016, amongst 50 countries, Norway achieved the 8th highest score in Reading Literacy for students in their fourth year of school according to the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS), and 20th out of 78 for 15-year-olds in PISA 2018.\nPoland.\nThe national curriculum of Poland considers reading to be the main goal of primary education, defining it as the technical skill of \"decoding graphemes into phonemes and understanding, using, and processing written texts\" (i.e. phonics). Instruction often consists of telling students how things should be done instead of letting them experiment for themselves and experience the results. According to researchers, teachers seldom use the internet and other digital technologies during reading instruction. Polish schools do not have trained reading specialists, however speech and educational therapists are available to assist students with special needs or learning disabilities. In 1998 a national campaign was introduced to encourage parents to read aloud to their children for 20 minutes every day.\nIn 2014, 10.6% of 15-year-olds had underachievement in reading, lower than the EU average of 17.8%. Beginning in 2014, a program to provide free schoolbooks was introduced gradually across Poland. Students' socioeconomic background was a matter of concern in 2015, and six year-olds commenced compulsory schooling in that year.\nAccording to the 2000 International Student Assessment (PISA) 15\u2011year\u2011old Polish students read significantly below the OECD average. However, with a renewed emphasis on reading, by 2018 Poland made the most progress in reading since 1994 and Poles ages 16 to 19 exceeded their European peers in reading (10th out of 72 countries in PISA).\nPoland ranked 6th in the 2016 PIRLS 4th grade reading achievement.\nPortugal.\nDuring the late 1990s the whole language approach gained popularity in Portugal, but in a non-explicit form. Emphasis was placed on meaning, reading for pleasure, and developing a critical approach to the texts. Explicit phonemic awareness and explicit training for reading fluency were considered outdated by some teachers' organizations.\nPoor results in international comparisons led parents and schools to react to this approach and to insist on direct instruction methods. Later, during minister Nuno Crato's tenure (2011\u20132015), who is known to be a vocal critic of constructivist approaches and a supporter of cognitive psychology findings, new standards (\"metas\") were put in place. The ministry convened a team led by a well-known specialist in reading, Jos\u00e9 Morais. This team introduced an explicit phonics teaching approach, putting emphasis on decoding and reading fluency.\nLater, international evaluations TIMSS and PISA showed a sharp improvement in the areas of math, reading and science from 2006 to 2015. Portuguese students results raised to above OECD and IEA averages, attaining the best results ever for Portugal. The PISA reading results moved from 472 to 498, above the United States at 497. However, by 2018 Portugal had dropped slightly to 492 and the United States had increased to 505. Some analysts explain these advances by the educational measures Portugal put in place: a more demanding curricula, the emphasis on direct teaching, standardized testing, less ability streaming, and explicit fluency training in reading and mathematics.\nIn 2016, amongst 50 countries, Portugal achieved the 30th highest score in Reading Literacy for students in their fourth year of school according to the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS).\nA 2017 study entitled \"Effective literacy teaching practices in Portugal: a study in first grade\", concluded that the best way to teach reading in the first grade was to combine \"explicit instruction of the code\" (phonics) with scaffolding, differentiated instruction, and text reading and writing.\nRepublic of Ireland.\nThe school curriculum in Ireland focuses on ensuring children are literate in both the English language and the Irish language. In 2011, the Department of Education and Youth developed a national strategy to improve literacy and numeracy.\nThe 2014 teachers' Professional Development guide covers the seven areas of attitude and motivation, fluency, comprehension, word identification, vocabulary, phonological awareness, phonics, and assessment. It recommends that phonics be taught in a systematic and structured way and is preceded by training in phonological awareness.\nIn 2016, amongst 50 countries, Ireland achieved the 4th highest score in Reading Literacy for students in their fourth year of school according to the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS).\nThe Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) for 2018 showed Ireland's 15-year-old students were significantly above average in reading, science and mathematics.\nThe 2019 Primary Language Curriculum specifies that reading outcomes must include phonics, phonological awareness, and phonemic awareness.\nRussia.\nAccording to a 1998 report in \"The Baltimore Sun\", at the time, there was some debate in Russia about phonics versus whole language. According to one supervisor of a primary education centre at the time, most teachers in Russia would have suggested that they use phonics.\nThe 2016 international PISA study states that the method widely used to teach reading in the Russian Federation was developed by the famous psychologist Daniil Elkonin in the 1960s. It says, \"students learn to define the sequence of sounds in a word and characterize each sound ... acquiring the knowledge of the phonetic system at an early stage\" and \"become better familiarized with the skills of reading\".\nIn 1959, a journal report adds more details about the use of phonics in teaching the Russian language: it says other\nobservers report that the Russian system in beginning reading is \"strictly phonetic\". However, there are no separate phonics lessons, drill periods, drill books, exercises or \"gadgets\" as one might have seen in typical US schools. Instead, each new letter-sound is introduced at once in meaningful words the children can pronounce as soon as they know the sound of the new letter. There are no \"blending\" of the sounds, or \"crutches\" such as equating the sound of /s/ with a snake. Instead, \"all learning is by eye and ear in tandem\", and the association is formed solely between the printed symbol and its sound. And finally, each lesson makes use of exercises to confirm comprehension.\nAmongst 50 countries, the Russian Federation achieved the highest score (581) in \"Reading Literacy\" for students in their fourth year of school according to the 2016 Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS).\nSingapore.\nSingapore has a diverse language environment with four official languages including English which is the language of education and administration. Bilingualism is the \"cornerstone\" of the education system where students learn both English and their own mother tongue language in school. 99% of children attend preschool education (as early as 18 months of age) although it is not compulsory in Singapore.\nThe 2001 English Language Syllabus of Singapore advocated \"a balance between decoding and meaning-based instruction ... phonics and whole language\". However, a review in 2006 advocated for a \"systematic\" approach. The subsequent syllabus, in 2010, had no mention of whole language and recommended a balanced, interactive and comprehensive reading programme. It refers to \"Learning to Read: The Great Debate\" by Jeanne Chall (1967) and the National Reading Panel (2000) both of which supported systematic phonics; and the International Literacy Association (2005) that supported balanced instruction saying phonics is \"necessary but insufficient\".\nThe syllabus for 2010 advocates for a balance between \"systematic and explicit instruction\" and \"a rich language environment\". It called for increased instruction in oral language skills together with phonemic awareness and the key decoding elements of synthetic phonics, analytic phonics and analogy phonics. Specifically, it advocated for instruction in phonic's areas such as word families and rimes (e.g., jumps and jumped; bite and kite), segmenting and blending (e.g., , , = cat), vowels, consonants and syllables. And finally, it called for instruction in word study, grammar, vocabulary, writing and comprehension.\nSingapore received the second highest reading score (576) after the Russian Federation (581) in the 2016 PIRLS report on grade four students.\nSweden.\nSince the 1860s it was \"taken for granted\" that phonics is a major part of reading instruction in the first school years in Sweden. However, in the 1990s the National Agency for Education (Sweden) encouraged teachers to try other methods, including whole language.\nSweden's performance in the international fourth grade reading assessments (PIRLS) dropped by 19 points from 2001 (561) to 2011 (542) and recovered by 13 points in 2016 (555), still lower than the 2001 results.\nSome suggest that the lower scores are related to the increase in immigration.\nIn 2016 the European Literacy Policy Network (ELINET) published a report on literacy in Sweden saying there is an \"urgent need\" to address decreases in performance as measured by PIRLS and PISA.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland.\nThere has been a resurgence of interest in synthetic phonics in recent years, particularly in England. As of 2013, all (local-authority-maintained) primary schools in England have a statutory requirement to teach synthetic phonics in years one and two. In addition, any pupil who is struggling to decode words properly by year three must \"urgently\" receive help through a \"rigorous and systematic phonics programme\".\nPrior to that, synthetic phonics was promoted by a cross-party group of parliamentarians, particularly Nick Gibb. A report by the House of Commons Education and Skills Committee called for a review of the phonics content in the National Curriculum. Subsequently, the Department for Education and Skills announced a review into early years reading, headed by Sir Jim Rose, former Director of Inspection for Ofsted (responsible for the education standards in England). The review, entitled Independent review of the teaching of early reading (Rose Report 2006), addresses the question of why children's reading and writing (especially for boys) have not been meeting expectations. Paragraph 3.25 of the final report suggests \"it is far more often the nature of the teaching than the nature of the child which determines success or failure in learning the 'basic' skills of reading and writing.\" It goes on to say it is not suggesting teachers are unable or unwilling to develop the required expertise, only that there has been systematic confusion and conflicting views about phonics. It also makes it clear that, when it comes to the wider knowledge and skills required for reading and writing, phonics work is \"necessary but not sufficient\". It concludes by suggesting the challenge will be resolved as research continues to support systematic phonics, and that teacher training and systematic phonics programs will produce \"good results for children\".\nBy November 2010, a government white paper contained plans to train all primary school teachers in phonics. The 2013 curriculum has \"statutory requirements\" that, amongst other things, students in years one and two be capable in using systematic synthetic phonics in regards to Word Reading, Reading Comprehension, Fluency, and Writing. This includes having skills in \"sound to graphemes\", \"decoding\", and \"blending\". Following this, Ofsted updated their guidance for school inspectors in 2014 to include tips on how schools should teach reading with systematic phonics, including \"Getting them Reading Early\". It includes a description of the simple view of reading as \"the word recognition processes\" (recognizing the words on the page, free of context and using phonics) and the \"language recognition processes\" (understanding the meaning of the language). It also includes some videos to illustrate its principles.\nIn 2015, the Carter Review of Initial Teacher Training (published by the Department for Education calls for evidence-based teaching to be part of the framework for initial teacher training. It gives an example of a case study in which \"trainees on the Early Reading placement are required to work alongside a literacy specialist to plan and teach a phonics lesson to a group, evaluate the lesson and deliver a second lesson in light of their evaluation\".\nThe 2016 Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) awarded England its best results since the studies began in 2001. Nick Gibb attributes this success to the use of systematic synthetic phonics. In March of that year the Secretary of State for Education released a report entitled \"Educational Excellence Everywhere\". The report states that in 2010 33% percent of primary school students did not achieve the expected standard in reading, however \"since the introduction of the phonics reading check in 2012\", that number is down to 20%. The report goes on to say they still have much to do, particularly with students who are disadvantaged. The phonics check involves pupils reading aloud 40 words (including 20 non-words). In 2016, 81 per cent of pupils reached the expected standard of 32 correct words \u2013 up from 77 per cent in 2015.\nIn 2016, the London School of Economics published a paper supporting the teaching of synthetic phonics to disadvantaged children because it helps to close the literacy gap.\nIn 2018, Ofsted, as part of its curriculum research, published an online video on Early Reading wherein a regional director states \"it is absolutely essential that every child master the phonic code as quickly as possible ... So, successful schools firstly teach phonics first, fast and furious.\"\nIn January 2019, Ofsted published a report entitled \"Education inspection framework: overview of research\" that further supports \"systematic synthetic phonics\" together with phonemic awareness, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. In 2022 they published a \"Research review series: English\" that reiterates its support for \"a systematic synthetic approach\" to teaching reading.\nWhile there has been concern expressed about the phonics screening test at the end of year one, some report that phonics is especially valuable for poor readers and those without English as a first language.\nResearch published in 2022 by two University College London professors does not recommend the sole use of phonics for developing children's literacy. Their work is backed up by a systematic review of 55 research papers. An article about the study, published in \"The Conversation\" concludes: \"The approach to teaching reading in England means that children in England are unlikely to be learning to read as effectively as they should be. Teachers, children, and their parents need a more balanced approach to the teaching of reading.\" The actual research report describes \"balanced instruction\" as having a balance of teaching based on the use of whole text and the systematic teaching of the alphabetic code and other linguistic features. In this way, the comprehension of written language is balanced with a range of skills and knowledge. The report places a great deal of emphasis on the PISA study which critics say is \"fundamentally flawed\" and failing in its mission. The report also included an analyses of three Canadian provinces saying Canada, amongst English-dominant nations, is the strongest performer in PISA and PIRLS. In fact, the 2016 PIRLS report places Canada in 23rd place and England in 10th place.\nNorthern Ireland.\nIn 2007 the Department of Education (DE) in Northern Ireland was required by law to teach children foundational skills in phonological awareness and the understanding \"that words are made up of sounds and syllables and that sounds are represented by letters (phoneme/grapheme awareness)\".\nIn 2010 the DE went further by outlining a new strategy with standards requiring that teachers receive support in using evidence-based practices to teach literacy and numeracy. It outlined ten requirements, including a \"systematic programme of high-quality phonics\" that is explicit, structured, well-paced, interactive, engaging, and applied in a meaningful context.\nIn 2016, amongst 50 countries, Northern Ireland achieved the 7th highest score in Reading Literacy for students in their fourth year of school according to the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS).\nIn 2018, in the PISA Reading Performance of 15-year-old students, Northern Ireland students achieved a score of 505 as compared to England at 507 and the OECD average of 487.\nScotland.\nSynthetic phonics in Scotland has its roots in the Clackmannanshire Report, a seven-year study that was published in 2005. It compared analytic Phonics with synthetic Phonics and advantaged students with disadvantaged children. The report found that, using synthetic phonics, children from lower socio-economic backgrounds performed at the same level as children from advantaged backgrounds in primary school (whereas with analytic phonics teaching, they did significantly less well.); and boys performed better than or as well as girls.\nA five-year follow-up of the study concluded that the beneficial effects were long-lasting, in fact the reading gains increased.\nSubsequently, Education Scotland concluded that explicit, systematic phonics programs, usually embedded in a rich literacy environment, give an additional four months progress over other programs such as whole language, and are particularly beneficial for young learners (aged 4\u20137). There is evidence, though less secure, that synthetic phonics programs may be more beneficial than analytic phonics programs; however it is most important to teach systematically.\nIn the PISA 2018 reading results of 15-year-old students, Scotland's score was above average, 504 as compared to the OECD average of 487. Scotland does not participate in PIRLS.\nUnited States.\nMore than a century of debate has occurred over whether English phonics should or should not be used in teaching beginning reading.\nThe use of phonics in education in the United States dates at least to the work of Favell Lee Mortimer, whose works using phonics includes the early flashcard set \"Reading Disentangled\" (1834) and text \"Reading Without Tears\" (1857). Despite the work of 19th-century proponents such as Rebecca Smith Pollard, some American educators, prominently Horace Mann, argued that phonics should not be taught at all. This led to the commonly used \"look-say\" approach ensconced in the \"Dick and Jane\" readers popular in the mid-20th century. Beginning in the 1950s, however, inspired by a landmark study by Dr. Harry E. Houtz, and spurred by Rudolf Flesch's criticism of the absence of phonics instruction (particularly in his book, \"Why Johnny Can't Read\", 1955) and Jeanne Chall (the author of \"Learning to Read the Great Debate\" - 1967\u20131995 phonics resurfaced as a method of teaching reading.\nIn the 1980s, the \"whole language\" approach to reading further polarized the debate in the United States. Whole language instruction was predicated on the principle that children could learn to read given (a) proper motivation, (b) access to good literature, (c) many reading opportunities, (d) focus on meaning, and (e) instruction to help students use semantic, syntactic and graphophonic cues to \"guess\" the pronunciation of unknown words. Also, in practice children are often taught to use pictures to guess a word. For some advocates of whole language, phonics was antithetical to helping new readers to get the meaning; they asserted that parsing words into small chunks and reassembling them had no connection to the ideas the author wanted to convey.\nThe whole language emphasis on identifying words using context and focusing only a little on the sounds (usually the alphabet consonants and the short vowels) could not be reconciled with the phonics emphasis on individual sound-symbol correspondences. Thus, a dichotomy between the whole language approach and phonics emerged in the United States causing intense debate. Ultimately, this debate led to a series of Congressionally-commissioned panels and government-funded reviews of the state of reading instruction in the U.S.\nIn 1984, the National Academy of Education commissioned a report on the status of research and instructional practices in reading education, \"Becoming a Nation of Readers\". Among other results, the report includes the finding that phonics instruction improves children's ability to identify words. It reports that useful phonics strategies include teaching children the sounds of letters in isolation and in words, and teaching them to blend the sounds of letters together to produce approximate pronunciations of words. It also states that phonics instruction should occur in conjunction with opportunities to identify words in meaningful sentences and stories.\nIn 1990, Congress asked the U.S. Department of Education (ED) to compile a list of available programs on beginning reading instruction, evaluating each in terms of the effectiveness of its phonics component. As part of this requirement, the ED asked Dr. Marilyn J. Adams to produce a report on the role of phonics instruction in beginning reading. This resulted in her 1994 book \"Beginning to Read: Thinking and Learning about Print\". In the book, Adams asserted that existing scientific research supported that phonics is an effective way to teach students the \"alphabetic code\" \u2013 building their skills in decoding unknown words. By learning the alphabetic code, she argued, students can free up mental energy used for word analysis and devote this mental effort to meaning, leading to stronger comprehension. Furthermore, she suggested that students be encouraged \"not\" to skip words they find difficult. Instead they should take the time to study the challenging words and to reread sentences after they have succeeded in decoding them. She also concluded that while phonics instruction is a necessary component of reading instruction, it is not sufficient by itself. Children should also have practice reading text provided they do not make too many mistakes. In spite of her study, the argument about how to teach reading eventually known as \"the Great Debate\", continued unabated.\nIn 1996 the California Department of Education took an increased interest in using phonics in schools. And in 1997 the department called for grade one teaching in concepts about print, phonemic awareness, decoding and word recognition, and vocabulary and concept development.\nIn 1997, Congress asked the Director of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) at the National Institutes of Health, in consultation with the Secretary of Education, to convene a national panel to assess the effectiveness of different approaches used to teach children to read.\nThe National Research Council re-examined the question of how best to teach reading to children (among other questions in education) and in 1998 published the results in the \"Prevention of Reading Difficulties in Young Children.\" The National Research Council's findings largely matched those of Adams. They concluded that phonics is a very effective way to teach children to read at the word level, more effective than what is known as the \"embedded phonics\" approach of whole language (where phonics was taught opportunistically in the context of literature). They found that phonics instruction must be systematic (following a sequence of increasingly challenging phonics patterns) and explicit (teaching students precisely how the patterns worked, e.g., \"this is \"b\", it stands for the /b/ sound\").\nIn 2000 the findings of the National Reading Panel was published. It examined quantitative research studies on many areas of reading instruction, including phonics and whole language. The resulting report \"Teaching Children to Read: An Evidence-based Assessment of the Scientific Research Literature on Reading and its Implications for Reading Instruction\" provides a comprehensive review of what is known about best practices in reading instruction in the U.S. The panel reported that several reading skills are critical to becoming good readers: phonemic awareness, phonics for word identification, fluency, vocabulary and text comprehension. With regard to phonics, their meta-analysis of hundreds of studies confirmed the findings of the National Research Council: teaching phonics (and related phonics skills, such as phonemic awareness) is a more effective way to teach children early reading skills than is embedded phonics or no phonics instruction. The panel found that phonics instruction is an effective method of teaching reading for students from kindergarten through 6th grade, and for all children who are having difficulty learning to read. They also found that phonics instruction benefits all ages in learning to spell. They also reported that teachers need more education about effective reading instruction, both pre-service and in-service.\nThe State driven Common Core State Standards Initiative was developed in 2009, because of a lack of standardization of education principles and practices. The site has a comprehensive description of the specific details of the English Language Arts Standards that include the areas of the Alphabetic Principle, Print Concepts, Phonological Awareness, Phonics and Word Recognition, and Fluency. It is up to the individual States and School Districts to develop plans to implement the standards. As of 2020, 41 States had adopted the standards, and in most cases it has taken three or more years to have them implemented. For example, Wisconsin adopted the standards in 2010, implemented them in the 2014\u20132015 school year, yet in 2020 the state Department of Public Instruction was in the process of developing materials to support the standards in teaching phonics.\nThe State of Mississippi passed the Literacy-Based Promotion Act in 2013 in part because of the States' poor showing in the National Assessment of Educational Progress. The Mississippi Department of Education provides resources for teachers in the areas of phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, fluency, comprehension and reading strategies. In 2019 Mississippi made a bigger advance in reading than any other State.\nIn 2014 the California Department of Education stated \"Ensuring that children know how to decode regularly spelled one-syllable words by mid-first grade is crucial\". It goes on to say that \"Learners need to be phonemically aware (especially able to segment and blend phonemes)\". In grades two and three children receive explicit instruction in advanced phonic-analysis and reading multi-syllabic and more complex words.\nIn 2015 the New York State Public School system began a process to revise its English Language Arts Learning Standards. The new standards call for teaching involving \"reading or literacy experiences\" as well as phonemic awareness from prekindergarten to grade 1 and phonics and word recognition from grade 1 to grade 4.\nIn 2015 the Ohio Legislature set minimum standards requiring the use of phonics as a technique in teaching reading. It includes guidelines for teaching phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. In February 2017, the Ohio Department of Education adopted new learning standards for English Language Arts. They include \"Reading Standards for Foundational Skills K\u201312\" that clearly lay out a systematic approach to teaching \"phonological awareness\" in kindergarten and grade one, and \"grade-level phonics and word analysis skills in decoding words\" (including fluency and comprehension) in grades one through five.\nIn 2016 the What Works Clearinghouse and the Institute of Education Sciences, an independent and non-partisan arm of the U.S. Department of Education, published an Educator's Practice Guide (with evidence) on Foundational Skills to Support Reading for Understanding in Kindergarten Through 3rd Grade. It contains four recommendations to support reading: 1) Teach students academic language skills, including the use of inferential and narrative language, and vocabulary knowledge, 2) Develop awareness of the segments of sounds in speech and how they link to letters (phonemic awareness and phonics), 3) Teach students to decode words, analyze word parts, and write and recognize words (phonics and synthetic phonics), and 4) Ensure that each student reads connected text every day to support reading accuracy, fluency, and comprehension. Some universities have created additional material based on this guide.\nIn 2016, Colorado Department of Education updated their Elementary Teacher Literacy Standards with a comprehensive outline including standards for development in the areas Phonology; Phonics and Word Recognition; Fluent Automatic Reading; Vocabulary; Text Comprehension; and Handwriting, Spelling, and Written Expression. At the same time, the Department of Education in Delaware produced a plan to improve education results. It states that teachers' preparation programs must include evidence-based practices, including the five essential components of reading instruction (phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension).\nIn 2017, research published in the \"Journal of Experimental Psychology\" has shown that learning to read by sounding out words (i.e. phonics) has a dramatic impact on the accuracy of reading aloud and comprehension. It concludes that early literacy education should focus on the systematic approach in \"print-to-sound relationships\" in alphabetic languages, rather than teaching \"meaning-based strategies\", in order to enhance both reading aloud and comprehension of written words.\nIn 2018 The Association for Psychological Science published an article entitled \"Ending the Reading Wars: Reading Acquisition From Novice to Expert\". The purpose of the article is to fill the gap between the current research knowledge and the public understanding about how we learn to read, and to explain \"why phonics instruction is so central to learning in a writing system such as English\".\nIn 2018 the Arkansas Department of Education, Literacy Support Unit, published a report about their new initiative known as R.I.S.E., Reading Initiative for Student Excellence, that was the result of The Right to Read Act, passed in 2017. The first goal of this initiative is to provide educators with the in-depth knowledge and skills of \"the science of reading\" and evidence-based instructional strategies. This includes a change of focus to research-based instruction on phonological awareness, phonics, vocabulary, fluency, and comprehension. Specific requirements are that reading instruction be systematic and explicit, and include decoding techniques. Part of the instruction involves the use of a book and study guide entitled Essentials of Assessing, Preventing and Overcoming Reading Difficulties, by David Kilpatrick.\nIn 2018 the Minnesota Reading Corps (MRC) published impact evaluation reports of their reading programs for children in pre-kindergarten to grade three (2017\u20132018). MRC is a participating organization under Americorps in which volunteers tutor at-risk students who need extra support in reading and math. The tutors are trained to use research-based literacy activities and interventions as identified by the National Reading Panel, including phonological awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension. The reports, presented by NORC at the University of Chicago, compare the results of students in the MRC program with students in control groups. They found that MRC kindergarten students achieved significantly higher scores in letter-sound fluency, and MRC first grade students achieved significantly higher scores in both nonsense word fluency and oral reading fluency.\nIn 2019 the Minnesota Department of Education introduced standards requiring school districts to \"develop a Local Literacy Plan to ensure that all students have achieved early reading proficiency by no later than the end of third grade\" in accordance with a Statute of the Minnesota Legislature requiring elementary teachers to be able to implement comprehensive, scientifically based reading and oral language instruction in the five reading areas of phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension.\nIn 2019 the International Literacy Association released a report entitled Meeting the Challenges of Early Literacy Phonics Instruction The report clearly supports the use of phonics instruction that is explicit and systematic, stating that \"phonics instruction is helpful for all students, harmful for none, and crucial for some\". It also offers an opinion on the ten most common causes of Phonics Instructional Failure, namely: inadequate time devoted to mastering a new phonics skill such as blending (4\u20136 weeks recommended); lack of application to real reading instruction; inappropriate reading material to practice the skills; too much teacher instruction, and too little reading by the student; lost time during instructional transitions; the teacher's attitude and knowledge of phonics instructional material; lessons that are not fast-paced and rigorous; lack of assessments over an extended period of time; waiting too long to transition to multi-syllable words; and over-emphasis of phonics drills at the expense of other aspects such as vocabulary.\nIn 2019, the Best Evidence Encyclopedia, part of Johns Hopkins University, released a review of research on 61 studies of 48 different programs for struggling readers in elementary schools. It concluded that:\nIn 2019, 52.8% of Louisiana's third-graders scored at or above the State's reading benchmark. Also in 2019, 26% of grade 4 students were reading at a proficiency level according to the Nation's Report Card. In that same year, the Louisiana State Legislature passed resolution 222 urging the Department of Education to create the \"Early Literacy Commission\" to make recommendations to implement a system providing effective evidence-based reading instruction for children from birth through third grade. On March 8, 2019, the Louisiana Department of Education revised their curriculum for K\u201312 English Language Arts. Its \"Reading Standards for Foundational Skills\" includes requirements for instruction in the alphabetic principle, phonological awareness, phonics and word recognition, fluency and comprehension. Effective in 2020 The Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education (BESE) screens for the following skills: Kindergarten-Phonemic Awareness; First Grade-Phonics; Second Grade-Oral Reading Fluency; and Third Grade-Reading Comprehension.\nIn 2019, 30% of grade 4 students in Texas were reading at the \"proficiency level\" according to the Nation's Report Card, as compared to the National Average of 34%. In June of that same year the Texas Legislature passed House Bill 3 (HB 3 Reading Academies) requiring all kindergarten through grade-three teachers and principals to \"\"begin\" a teacher literacy achievement academy before the 2022\u20132023 school year\". The training is anticipated to be a total of 80 hours. The goal is to \"increase teacher knowledge and implementation of evidence-based practices to positively impact student literacy achievement\". The required content of the academies' training includes the areas of \"Science of Teaching Reading, Oral Language, Phonological Awareness, Decoding (i.e. Phonics), Fluency and Comprehension.\"\nIn 2016, amongst 50 countries, the United States achieved the 15th highest score in Reading Literacy for students in their fourth year of school according to the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS). Of 78 countries, the United States ranked 14th in reading for the international PISA study for 15-year-old students. In 2019, with respect to the nation's grade-four public school students, 34% performed at or above the Nations Report Card \"proficient level\" (solid academic performance) and 65% performed at or above the NAEP \"basic level\" (partial mastery of the proficient level skills).\nIn 2021, the State of Connecticut passed an act concerning the \"right to read\" that will take effect in 2023. It requires education standards that are evidenced-based and scientifically based and focused on competency in the five areas of reading: phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary development, and reading fluency, including oral skills and reading comprehension. In the same year, the state of North Carolina passed a bill requiring that the teaching of reading be based on the science of reading.\nBetween 2013 and 2022, 30 States have passed laws or implemented new policies related to evidence-based reading instruction. In some instances, this requires the teaching of phonics in an explicit and systematic manner. However, these requirements are not uniform and may prove difficult to implement as \"old practices prove hard to shake\".\nIn 2023, New York City set about to require schools to teach reading with an emphasis on phonics. In that city, less than half of the students from the third grade to the eighth grade of school scored as proficient on state reading exams. More than 63% of Black and Hispanic test-takers did not make the grade. Elementary school teachers will have to implement one of three comprehensive reading programs over the next couple of years. The United Federation of Teachers celebrated the announcement, but the local principals union was \"not satisfied\" with the lack of choice. All but two of the school superintendents chose the most traditional of the three choices, with explicit and systematic instruction in foundational literacy skills such as vocabulary and reading comprehension.\nThe University of Florida Literacy Institute has released its \"UFLI Foundations Toolbox\" containing 128 lessons in teaching reading using phonics.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42327", "revid": "50574766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42327", "title": "Sex education", "text": "Instruction on human sexuality issues\nSex education, also known as sexual education, sexuality education or sex ed, is the instruction of issues relating to human sexuality, including human sexual anatomy, sexual activity, sexual reproduction, safe sex, birth control, sexual health, reproductive health, emotional relations, emotional responsibilities, age of consent, and reproductive rights.\nSex education that includes all of these issues is known as comprehensive sexuality education. In contrast, abstinence-only sex education, which focuses solely on promoting sexual abstinence, is often favored in more socially conservative regions, including some parts of the United States.\nSex education may be provided as part of school programs, public health campaigns, or by parents or caregivers. In some countries it is known as \"relationships and sexual health education\".\nMany governments see it as beneficial to provide public education on such matters prior to or at the beginning of puberty to improve public health, to limit the spread of sexually transmitted infections, and to avoid teenage pregnancy and unwanted pregnancies later on.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nIn multiple cultures, the discussion of all sexual issues has traditionally been considered taboo, and adolescents were not given any information on sexual matters. Such instruction, as was given, was traditionally left to a child's parents, and often this was put off until just before their marriage. However, in the late 19th century, the progressive education movement led to the introduction of sex education as \"social hygiene\" in North American school curricula and the introduction of school-based sex education.\nDuring the Second World War, UK governmental concerns grew around mass relocation, parentless youths, and young men and women working together for the first time. Not only were there fears of new sexually transmitted diseases, but there was also growing anxiety around young pregnancy putting pressure on the war-ravaged economy and healthcare system. As such, the UK Board for Education introduced the \"Sex Education in Schools and Youth Organizations\" guidance. This put the onus of sex education on schools and youth groups, and guided leaders on how to execute this. For example, the mechanics of sexual intercourse could be communicated via \"the keeping of livestock\", as students could observe reproduction in real-time; the guidance also encouraged discussions about menstruation, motherhood courses, and personal hygiene talks. Popular among teachers and some parents, this guidance \u2013 which made sex education a possibility, not an obligation \u2013 prevailed for a number of years in the UK. In the 1970s, informational films became popular among teachers. Martin Cole's \"Growing Up\" (1971) was a frank look at how sex works physiologically and socially. It showed real clips of penises and masturbation, which sparked some backlash. However, it became apparent in the 1980s that a frank and factual approach was required in sex education as the HIV/AIDS crisis began in the UK. In 1999, the Labour government introduced Sex and Relationships Education guidance, with particular focus on sexually transmitted diseases and teenage pregnancy. This was part of the ten-year Teenage Pregnancy Strategy, which would eventually resolve in 2010. Teenage pregnancy rates were halved across this period, however similar changes in other countries indicate that this was not an effect of the strategy.\nAfter the Second World War, some developing countries promoted sex education programs that evolved to address political goals. A growing anxiety in some areas of the world over rising birth rates led to population-centered sex education programs. For instance, the first sex education curriculum in Singapore between 1966 and 1973 emphasized birth control as a way to avoid overpopulation. Reforms in some socialist countries focused on the role of sex education in strengthening family ties within society. This was the focus of sex education programs that developed in the German Democratic Republic (GDR) and Cuba during the late twentieth century. The evolving content of sex education programs reflected shifting opinions regarding sexuality within each society. For example, Swedish sex education guidelines and textbooks published between 1945 and 2000 originally depicted masturbation as inherently harmful but increasingly portrayed it as natural and harmless.\nGlobally, the outbreak of AIDS has given a new sense of urgency to sex education. In multiple African countries where AIDS is at epidemic levels (see HIV/AIDS in Africa) sex education is seen by most scientists as a vital public health strategy. Some international organizations such as Planned Parenthood consider that broad sex education programs have global benefits, such as controlling the risk of overpopulation and advancing women's rights, including reproductive rights. The use of mass media campaigns has sometimes resulted in high levels of awareness coupled with essentially superficial knowledge of HIV transmission.\nAccording to SIECUS, the Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States, 93% of adults they surveyed support sexuality education in high school and 84% support it in junior high school. In fact, 88% of the parents of junior high school students and 80% of parents of secondary school students believe that sex education in school makes it easier for them to talk to their adolescents about sex. Also, 92% of adolescents report that they want both to talk to their parents about sex and to have comprehensive in-school sex education. Furthermore, a \"study, conducted by Mathematica Policy Research on behalf of the US Department of Health and Human Services, found that abstinence-only-until-marriage programs are ineffective.\"\nThe current frontier in the development of relationship and sex education (RSE) is LGBTQ+ inclusion. The recent 2019 guidance update is tentative in its acknowledgement of LGBT people, something which has proved controversial among homo- and transphobic groups, as well as among LGBT allies and pro-inclusion sociologists. For example, while Birmingham primary schools were protested by Muslim parents opposing the introduction of LGBT content to the guidance, sociologist Jonathan Glazzard criticized the Department for Education for the document's ambiguity and \"opt-out\" potential. The inclusion of this form of sex education is argued to make LGBT students feel more included, and that feelings of safety would foster healthy developmental outcomes for this group.\nDefinitions.\nLeepson sees sex education as instruction in various physiological, psychological and sociological aspects of sexual response and reproduction. Kearney (2008) also defined sex education as \"involving a comprehensive course of action by the school, calculated to bring about the socially desirable attitudes, practices and personal conduct on the part of children and adults, that will best protect the individual as a human and the family as a social institution.\" Thus, sex education may also be described as \"sexuality education\", which means that it encompasses education about all aspects of sexuality, including information about family planning, reproduction (fertilization, conception and development of the embryo and fetus, through to childbirth), plus information about all aspects of one's sexuality including: body image, sexual orientation, sexual pleasure, values, decision making, communication, dating, relationships, sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and how to avoid them, and birth control methods. Various aspects of sex education are considered appropriate in school depending on the age of the students or what the children can comprehend at a particular point in time. Rubin and Kindendall expressed that sex education is not merely the topics of reproduction and teaching how babies are conceived and born. Instead, it has a far richer scope and goal of helping children incorporate sex more meaningfully into their present and future life and to provide them with some basic understanding of virtually every aspect of sex by the time they reach full maturity.\nSex education delivered via in-person classroom instruction and workshops led by teachers or trained sex educators is commonly referred to as \"school-based sex education\".\nImpacts of Sex Education.\nThe United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) recommends comprehensive sexuality education, as it enables young people to make informed decisions about their sexuality. According to UNFPA, it is taught over several years, introducing age-appropriate information consistent with the evolving capacities of young people. It includes scientifically accurate, curriculum-based information about human development, anatomy and pregnancy. It also includes information about contraception and sexually transmitted infections (STIs), including HIV. And it goes beyond information, to encourage confidence and improved communication skills. According to UNFPA, curricula should also address the social issues surrounding sexuality and reproduction, including cultural norms, family life and interpersonal relationships.\nThe Reach of Comprehensive Sexual Education.\nA U.S. review concludes that \"the overwhelming weight of evidence shows that sex education that discusses contraception does not increase sexual activity\". The 2007 study found that \"No comprehensive program hastened the initiation of sex or increased the frequency of sex, results that many people fear.\" Additionally, the report showed \"Comprehensive programs worked for both genders, for all major ethnic groups, for sexually inexperienced and experienced teens, in different settings, and in different communities.\"\nFurther, evidence shows that a combination of comprehensive sexuality education and access to birth control appears to decrease the rates of unintended pregnancies among teenagers. A meta-analysis that compared comprehensive sexuality education programs with abstinence-only programs found that abstinence-only programs did not reduce the likelihood of pregnancy, but rather may have increased it. Studies show that curricula providing accurate information about condoms and contraception can lead to reductions in the risky behaviors reported by young people as well as reductions in unintended pregnancies and STIs. Programs that teach only abstinence have not been shown to be effective. The individuals in this study were also found to be less likely to engage in violent relationships and to have a lower rate of STIs (including HIV) and unintended pregnancy.\nOther studies have found that \"few sexual health interventions are designed with input from adolescents. Adolescents have suggested that sex education should be more positive with less emphasis on anatomy and scare tactics; it should focus on negotiation skills in sexual relationships and communication; and details of sexual health clinics should be advertised in areas that adolescents frequent (for example, school toilets, shopping centers).\"\nAccording to the United Nations Population Fund, human rights issues, gender equality and gender roles should be integrated into every aspect of these discussions. This includes human rights protection, fulfillment and empowerment; the impact of gender discrimination; the importance of equality and gender-sensitivity; and the ideas underlying gender roles.\nSexual Rights / Violence Discussions.\nThe United Nations Population fund argues that sexual abuse, gender-based violence and harmful practices should be discussed according to the global organization on reproductive rights.\u00a0 By definition, sexual assault is any sexual activity without clear, voluntary, and ongoing verbal consent, through force, manipulation, or coercion. Sexual violence is a deep-rooted issue in current society, stemming from a need for power and control. It is further propagated by societal norms that tolerate inequality. Taken together to form comprehensive sex education, all this information teaches young people the life skills necessary to assume responsibility for their own behavior and to respect the rights of others.\"\nComprehensive sexual education \u201cenables young people to make informed decisions about their sexuality and health,\u201d allowing for younger generations to understand concepts of human rights and gender equality. Such skills have shown to increase better-informed decisions regarding sex, sexual violence, and consent.\nIncluding this information in Sex Ed courses not only shows what consent looks like but also breaks free of societal norms that lead to violence and teaches students to recognize signs of assault or abuse. Research shows that people who receive comprehensive sex ed are better equipped to speak out against negative behaviors, support victims, and respect the boundaries of others. Studies concluded that by bringing in this knowledge at an early age, correct morals during sexual interactions are ingrained in their lives and will allow them to apply this knowledge in their futures to help victims and speak out against aggressors, allowing them to build safer communities.\nHowever, sexual violence is not always physical; it can be emotional, mental, and psychological manipulation as well. Broader systems of oppression, such as racism and sexism, often reinforce societal beliefs that normalize abuse, while the media and everyday jokes have created environments where sexism, objectification, and violence have become easily dismissed.\nAdditionally, according to UNFPA, \"A 2010 review found that 'gender-focused' curricula \u2013 meaning curricula that integrate gender equality into the learning material \u2013 were substantially more effective in reducing risky behaviors than programs that did not consider gender.\" Research has also shown that delay in sexual initiation and the use of condoms and other contraception have been a result of young people adopting egalitarian attitudes towards gender roles.\nCase Studies.\nUS Study on Sex-Ed and College Violence.\nIn the United States Sex-Ed curricula, most abstinence-only and abstinence-plus approaches don\u2019t include education on consent or on prevention of sexual violence. While 29 out of 50 states (plus DC) mandate Sex-Ed to be taught in schools, only 16 states (plus DC) mandate the teaching of consent in sexual education, which Caulfield et. al argue has negative effects on the way consent and rape are managed in a collegiate environment.\nCaulfield et. al conducted a 2024 experiment to examine the effects of different kinds of sexual education on college students\u2019 experiences with sexual violence and rape myth acceptance. In doing their study, they contacted over 600 students, and measured their level of acceptance of rape myths, past experience with sexual violence, and type of sexual education received. Their results indicated that those who received comprehensive sexual education during high school were 2.5 times more likely to be taught about consent than those who did not receive comprehensive sex education, indicating that consent education is commonly part of comprehensive sex-ed. Further, the study found that those who were taught consent had a 51% lower likelihood of being sexually victimized than those who were not taught consent.\nUS - Netherlands Study on Attitudes towards Sex.\nWhen places have more comprehensive sexuality education, STI and pregnancy rates drop. The attitudes of children have also been found to differ depending on the content of their sex education. One comparison of results can be made between the sex education curriculum in the Netherlands and that in the US. On average teens in Europe and the Netherlands (which have more comprehensive sex ed) do not have sex at a younger age than teens in the US (with less comprehensive sex ed); however teens in the Netherlands report having a positive and consensual first sexual experience while 66% of sexually active US teens report that they wished they waited longer for their first sexual experience.\nNine out of ten teens in the Netherlands use contraception during their first sexual experience, which contributes to the lower pregnancy and STI rates. More comprehensive sex ed starting at the elementary level resulted in appreciation of sexual diversity, dating and intimate partner violence prevention, development of healthy relationships, prevention of child sex abuse, improved social/emotional learning, and increased media literacy.\nSources.\nSex education may be taught informally, such as when someone receives information from a conversation with a parent, friend, religious leader, or through the media. It may also be delivered through sex self-help authors, magazine advice columnists, sex columnists, or sexual education discussion board web sites. Sex education training for parents and educators can also be accessed on the internet through multimedia educational resources, including short videos, created by master sexuality educators. Adolescents spend a lot of their time on social media, or watching television. Those same adolescents may also have a hard time talking to their families about sexual matters. A study has shown that mass media interventions; for example, use of teaching sexual education through commercials shown on television, or ads on social media, have proven effective and decreased the amount of unprotected sex. Formal sex education occurs when schools or health care providers offer sex education. Slyer stated that sex education teaches the young person what he or she should know for his or her personal conduct and relationship with others. Gruenberg also stated that sex education is necessary to prepare the young for the task ahead. According to him, officials generally agree that some kind of planned sex education is necessary.\nSometimes formal sex education is taught as a full course as part of the curriculum in junior high school or high school. Other times it is only one unit within a more broad biology, health, home economics, or physical education class. Some schools offer no sex education, since it remains a controversial issue in several countries, particularly the United States (especially with regard to the age at which children should start receiving such education, the amount of detail that is revealed, including LGBT sex education, and topics dealing with human sexual behavior, e.g. safe sex practices, masturbation, premarital sex, and sexual ethics).\nWilhelm Reich commented that sex education of his time was a work of deception, focusing on biology while concealing excitement-arousal, which is what a pubescent individual is mostly interested in. Reich added that this emphasis obscures what he believed to be a basic psychological principle: that all worries and difficulties originate from unsatisfied sexual impulses. Leepson asserted that the majority of people favor some sort of sex instruction in public schools, and this has become an intensely controversial issue because, unlike most subjects, sex education is concerned with an especially sensitive and highly personal part of human life. He suggested that sex education should be taught in the classroom.\nThe problem of pregnancy in adolescents is delicate and difficult to assess using sex education. But Calderone believed otherwise, stating that the answer to adolescents' sexual woes and pregnancy can not lie primarily in school programmes which at best can only be remedial; what is needed is prevention education and as such parents should be involved.\nWhen sex education is contentiously debated, the chief controversial points are whether covering child sexuality is valuable or detrimental; whether LGBT sex education should be integrated into the curriculum; the use of birth control such as condoms and hormonal contraception; and the impact of such use on pregnancy outside marriage, teenage pregnancy, and the transmission of STIs. Increasing support for abstinence-only sex education by conservative groups has been one of the primary causes of this controversy. Countries with conservative attitudes towards sex education (including the UK and the U.S.) have a higher incidence of STIs and teenage pregnancy. On the other hand, it seems that in countries where sex education is not part of the curriculum, students show limited knowledge even in basic reproductive issues. For example, in a 2019 study with Greek students, it is reported that about two-thirds of the students failed to name external female genitals, such as the clitoris and labia, even after detailed pictures were provided to them.\nPublic opinion.\nA survey conducted in Britain, Canada and the United States by Angus Reid Public Opinion in November 2011 asked adult respondents to look back to the time when they were teenagers, and describe how useful several sources were in enabling them to learn more about sex. By far, the largest proportion of respondents in the three countries (74% in Canada, 67% in Britain and 63% in the United States) said that conversations with friends were \"very useful\" or \"moderately useful.\" The next reputable source was the media (television, books, movies, magazines), mentioned by three-in-five British (65%) and Canadians (62%) and more than half of Americans (54%) as useful.\nIn 2011, \"Angus Reid Public Opinion\" said that half of Canadians (54%) and Americans (52%) found their sex education courses at school to be useful, only 43% of Britons share the same view. And while more than half of Americans (57%) say conversations with family were useful, only 49% of Canadians and 35% of Britons said so.\nBy area.\nAfrica.\nSex education in Africa has focused on stemming the growing AIDS epidemic. Most governments in the region have established AIDS education programs in partnership with the World Health Organization and international NGOs. These programs were undercut significantly by the Mexico City policy, an initiative put in place by President Ronald Reagan, suspended by President Bill Clinton, and re-instated by President George W. Bush. The Global Gag Rule \"required nongovernmental organizations to agree as a condition of their receipt of Federal funds that such organizations would neither perform nor actively promote abortion as a method of family planning in other nations...\" The policy was again suspended as one of the first official acts by United States President Barack Obama. New HIV infections in Uganda decreased dramatically when Clinton supported a comprehensive sexuality education approach (including information about contraception and abortion). According to Ugandan AIDS activists, the policy undermined community efforts to reduce HIV prevalence and HIV transmission.\nEgypt teaches knowledge about male and female reproductive systems, sexual organs, contraception and STDs in public schools at the second and third years of the middle-preparatory phase (when students are aged 12\u201314). A coordinated program between UNDP, UNICEF, and the ministries of health and education promotes sexual education at a larger scale in rural areas and spreads awareness of the dangers of female genital mutilation.\nAsia.\nThe state of sex education programs in Asia is at various stages of development. The topic of sex education is considered to be controversial because it deals with different topics which are sometimes too vague and too broad to be used effectively in society.\nThailand.\nIn Thailand there has been progress on sex education, with the boundaries being pushed forward with each revision of the curriculum. The first national policy on sexuality education in schools was announced in 1938, but sex education was not taught in schools until 1978. It was then called \"Life and Family Studies\", and its content consisted of issues related to the reproductive system and personal hygiene. The education curriculum has been revised several times, involving efforts from both government and non-government sectors, and sex education has been accepted as a problem solving tool for adolescent sexual reproduction and health issues. This has been a result of educational reform following the National Education Act B.E. 2542, increasing awareness of problems related to adolescents' sexual practices, and the emergence of women's sexuality and queer movements. Another new approach in sexuality education curricula in Thailand has been the Teenpath Project developed by PATH, Thailand. PATH has also succeeded in institutionalizing sexuality education curricula in schools since 2003.\nIndia.\n Sex education in India remains a controversial subject due to conflicting religious, moral, and cultural beliefs regarding its place in adolescent and youth education. Sexual reproduction and different contraceptive methods are taught in grades 8, 10 and 12 (ages 13\u201317) compulsorily as a part of the biology course and some urban schools do have seminars in the area of sex education. In 1993, the Adolescent Education Programme (AEP) was initiated by the Government of India which formalized the need for sex education, similarly included in the National Curriculum Framework in 2005. However, there was no consensus among states to make it compulsory, and dedicated comprehensive sexuality education (CSE) has not been mandated in any national school curricula. Some states in India have also banned or refused to implement sex education in their states, citing conflict with traditional Indian values.\nIn India, there are multiple in- and out-of-school programs promoting sex education, including information on reproduction, sexuality, gender, contraception, STIs, violence, etc. Once such example is the Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK), which was launched in 2014 by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare regarding adolescent health programming in the country, including sexual and reproductive health. Non-profit organizations and other groups in the development sector primarily lead the delivery of out-of-school CSE programs. These organizations and collectives also work closely with relevant governmental ministries and multi-lateral institutions (like UNESCO and WHO) to engage in public advocacy and policy change around acceptance and implementation of sex education.\nThe AIDS prevalence rate in India is lower than that of other countries, despite being home to the world's third-largest population of persons with HIV/AIDS (as of 2023, with South Africa and Nigeria having more). However, AIDS clinics are not universally available and accessible in across different geographic regions in the country.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;India has a strong prevention program which goes hand in hand with care, support and treatment. We have been able to contain the epidemic with a prevalence of just 0.31%. We have also brought about a decline of 50% in new infections annually.\u2014\u200a\nChina.\nIn 2000, a new five-year project was introduced by the China Family Planning Association to \"promote reproductive health education among Chinese teenagers and unmarried youth\" in twelve urban districts and three counties. This included discussion about sex within human relationships as well as pregnancy and HIV prevention. Since the 2010s there has been a great increase in books about sex education for children and young adults.\nThere is demand for sex education that is concentrated on social media platforms such as Weibo, citing the need to have sex education for its people to learn how to protect themselves against sexual related abuse and harassments. China currently still experiences sexual illiteracy. China's government has passed a law that mandates \"age-appropriate sex education\" in October, 2020, but no outlines have been created yet to clarify how the mandate would be implemented in school.\nMost recently, China has introduced a new sexual education for students named the 'Healthy China Initiatives (2019\u20132030)'. The initiative came after a 2015 study by the China Family Planning Association conducted a study that showed only 10% of approximately 20,000 universities reported that they were not content with their sexual education in grade school and were unknowledgeable to violence, gender, contraceptives, sexually transmitted diseases, and pregnancy among other topics. The initiative is said to help provide students with knowledge of gender, sexuality, equality, consent, and rights.\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, sex education began in some schools in the 1960s, and has been officially taught in public schools since 1984. A 2007 revision to the School Health Act made health education a mandatory subject in all grade schools, within which topics regarding gender equality, safe sex practices, and sexual ethics were included. Currently, all primary and secondary schools are required to include at least 15 hours of sex education in every school year, though 12 hours can be replaced with other subjects using each school's discretion.\nAccording to a 2020 study, 81% of primary school students reported receiving sex education. Sex education was reportedly superficial and focused mostly on biological topics, such as bodily changes during puberty, the process of reproduction, the anatomy of the reproductive system, and menstruation. Contraception and prevention of sexual violence were also covered. Most of the participants in the study were unsatisfied with the current state of sex education, and believed it was ineffective.\nSex education in schools has been subject to controversy, and has drawn criticisms from both conservative and feminist groups. A standardized guideline on sex education published by the Ministry of Education in 2015 was later withdrawn after being criticized for \"poor quality\". Some Christian associations and parent groups have protested against in-depth sex education, specifically regarding reproductive rights and homosexuality. In one case, a demonstration on the correct use of a condom at a school was suspended due to complaints. The South Korean government has censored books regarding sex education due to pressure from conservative and parent groups. MBC reported that 67 out of 68 censored sex education books were \"harmless\", however.\nConservative and Christian groups in South Korea oppose comprehensive sexuality education (CSE), claiming it could encourage early sexualization(\uc870\uae30 \uc131\uc560\ud654, \"jogi seongaehwa\"). However, there is no evidence to support their claims. In contrast to the United States, where teenage pregnancy has decreased due to the strengthening of sex education focused on contraception, the problem of teenage unwed mothers due to unintended pregnancies is serious in South Korea.\nAlso, sex education in South Korea does not teach about the existence of LGBT. This has been criticised internationally and by LGBT rights groups in South Korea.\nSome South Korean parents, who want to properly educate their children about sex, rely on private education for sex education because of unsatisfactory sex education in schools.\nOther countries.\nIndonesia, Mongolia have a systematic policy framework for teaching about sex within schools. Malaysia and Thailand have assessed adolescent reproductive health needs with a view to developing adolescent-specific training, messages and materials.\nBangladesh, Myanmar, and Pakistan have no coordinated sex education programs.\nIn most Islamic countries, sex education is given after marriage to the couple.\nIn Nepal, sex education is mandatory in school.\nIn Japan, sex education is mandatory from age 10 or 11, mainly covering biological topics such as menstruation and ejaculation.\nIn Sri Lanka, sex education traditionally consisted of reading the reproduction section of biology textbooks. Young people are taught when they are 12 years old.\nThe International Planned Parenthood Federation and the BBC World Service ran a 12-part series known as \"Sexwise\", which discussed sex education, family life education, contraception and parenting. It was first launched in South Asia and then extended worldwide.\nIn Taiwan, compared to China's progress, has been a lot more progressive in implementing sex education. However, the controversy lies more in anti-gay groups who argue that including same-sex relationships in sex education is morally controversial, despite being the first Asian country to legalize same-sex marriage. Therefore, while sex education is required in school, LGBTQ topics have been rejected by multiple parents in the society, which potentially violates gender equity education in school. From the \"Journal of Modern Education Review,\" Taiwan has committed to achieving gender equity since 2004 with its Gender Equity Education Act (Taiwan) (GEEA), which includes curriculum, material, and activities to be practiced and taught in elementary and middle school. But also as a relatively conservative Asian country and culture, Taiwan has not yet been up to par with international standards, but seemingly on its way towards more progressive sex education.\nSingapore.\nThe Singapore Family Planning Association has developed a series of sex education programs for young people, focusing on strict control of sexual behavior and age. The Singapore government attaches great importance to the moral education of young people, and the sentencing of sexual offenses is strict.\nEurope.\nThe World Health Organization and the German Federal Office of Health Education recommend sex education for children of all ages.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, sexual education is usually incorporated into various compulsory courses, mainly as part of biology lessons (in lower grades) and later in a course related to general health issues.\nFrance.\nIn France, sex education has been part of school curricula since 1973, though optional. Schools are expected to provide 30 to 40 hours of sex education, and pass out condoms, to students in grades 8 and 9 (aged 14). In January 2000, the French government launched an information campaign on contraception with TV and radio spots and the distribution of five million leaflets on contraception to high school students.\nIn September 2013, the government launched a new program called ('the ABCD of equality') whose main aim is to \"fight gender stereotypes at school\". The ultimate goal is to foster mutual respect between boys and girls early on so that it impacts their conception of the world later on.\nGermany.\nThe first state-sponsored courses on sex education were introduced in Breslau, Prussia, c. 1900 by Dr. Martin Chotzen.\nIn Germany, sex education has been part of school curricula since 1970. Since 1992 sex education is a governmental duty by law.\nIt normally covers all subjects concerning the process of growing up, bodily changes during puberty, emotions involved, the biological process of reproduction, sexual activity, partnership, homosexuality, unwanted pregnancies and the complications of abortion, the dangers of sexual violence, child abuse, and sex-transmitted diseases. It is comprehensive enough that it sometimes also includes things in its curricula such as sex positions. Most schools offer courses on the correct usage of contraception.\nA sex survey by the World Health Organization concerning the habits of European teenagers in 2006 revealed that German teenagers care about contraception. The birth rate among 15- to 19-year-olds was low\u2014only 11.7 per 1000 people, compared to 27.8 births per 1,000 people in the UK, and 39.0 births per 1,000 people in Bulgaria (which, incidentally, has the highest birth rate in Europe).\nGerman Constitutional Court and later, in 2011, the European Court of Human Rights, rejected complaints from several Baptists against Germany concerning mandatory sex education.\nGreece.\nA 2022 analysis reported that human reproduction is mentioned in six out of 113 Greek secondary education textbooks used in biology classes from 1870s to present.\nPoland.\nAt the time of the People's Republic of Poland, since 1973, sex education was one of the school subjects; however, it was relatively poor and did not achieve any actual success. After 1989, it practically vanished from the school life\u2014it is currently a subject called \"family life education\" () rather than \"sex education\" ()\u2014and schools explicitly require parental consent for their children to attend sex education classes. This policy is largely due to the strong objection against sex education raised by the Catholic Church.\nPortugal.\nSome sex education is taught as part of biology-related curricula. There is also an official program intended to provide sex education for students.\nNetherlands.\nSubsidized by the Dutch government, the \"Long Live Love\" package (), developed in the late 1980s, aims to give teenagers the skills to make their own decisions regarding health and sexuality. Nearly all secondary schools provide sex education, as part of biology classes and over half of primary schools discuss sexuality and contraception. Starting the 2012 school year, age-appropriate sex education\u2014including education about sexual diversity \u2014has been compulsory in all secondary and primary schools. The curriculum focuses on biological aspects of reproduction as well as on values, attitudes, communication and negotiation skills. Dutch sex education encourages the idea that topics like masturbation, homosexuality, and sexual pleasure are normal or natural and that there are larger emotional, relational, and societal forces that shape the experiences of sexuality. This type of curriculum can begin for students as young as at age four. The curriculum for children focuses on topics like love, self-image, and gender stereotypes. All elementary level students in the Netherlands are required by law to receive some level of sex education. There is some flexibility in how the subject is taught however there are some required principles such as sexual diversity and sexual assertiveness. Moreover, according to Amy Schalet, Dutch parents tend to form close relationships with their children, openly discussing teen sexuality. Dutch parents try to accept their children's romantic relationships and even allow sleepovers, expecting them to have sex. The media has encouraged open dialogue and the health-care system guarantees confidentiality and a non-judgmental approach. The Netherlands has one of the lowest teenage pregnancy rates in the world, and the Dutch approach is often seen as a model for other countries.\nSlovakia.\nIn Slovakia the content of sex education varies from school to school, most frequently as a segment of a larger lesson plan of a subject akin to nature science in English (this course covers both biology and petrology). Generally the sex ed content taught in Slovakia is quite basic, sometimes lacking, though exactly what any given lesson contains varies among schools and is dependent on the teacher's knowledge of the subject. It is not uncommon for teachers to rely on students asking questions (as opposed to documentaries, discussions, textbooks and in-class debates). Classes are usually divided into boys and girls. Boys are taught the basics of sex, usually limited to dialogue between student and teacher of annotated diagrams of genitalia; while girls are additionally taught about menstruation and pregnancy.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, sex education was established in 1921 for secondary education and in 1942 for all grades. The subject is usually started in kindergarten and continues cumulatively throughout the student's entire schooling. This sexual education is incorporated into different subjects such as biology and history. The Swedish Association for Sexuality Education (RFSU) has a sex education that emphasizes \"sexual diversity, freedom and enjoyment\", and the RFSU collaborate frequently with government organizations such as the National Institute of Public Health. Alongside this emphasis of sexual diversity, Swedish sex education has equal incorporations of lesbian and gay sexuality as well as heterosexual sexuality. They provide knowledge about masturbation, oral and anal sex as well as heterosexual, genital intercourse.\nSwitzerland.\nIn Switzerland, the content and amount of sex education is decided at the cantonal level. In Geneva, courses have been given at the secondary level first for girls since 1926 and compulsory programs have been implemented at secondary level for all classes since the 1950s. In most French-speaking cantons since the 1970s, generalized courses have been implemented by states with duly formed and trained specialists working within school health services at the secondary level.\nInterventions in primary schools were started during the 1980s, with the basic objective of empowering children, strengthening their resources, and giving the capacity to discriminate what is right or wrong based upon what is and is not allowed by law and society. They are also given knowledge of their own rights, told that they can have their own feelings about themselves, and informed on whom to talk to in case they feel uncomfortable about a private matter and wish to talk about it.\nFinally, the objectives include an enforcement of their capacity to decide for themselves and their ability to express their feelings about a situation and say \"no\". In secondary schools, there are programs at ages 13\u201314 and 16\u201317 with the basic objective to give students a secure moment with caring, well-informed adults. With confidentiality and mutual respect, students can talk to an adult who understands youth needs and what they should know about sexual life in conformity with age and maturity.\nIn the German part of the country, the situation is somewhat different. Sex education as a school implemented program is a fairly recent subject, the responsibility given to school teachers. Though federal structures give authority to each state to decide, there are efforts, notably under the auspices of \u2013 the Swiss branch of IPPF (International Planned Parenthood Federation) \u2013 to look for and propose possible models of application which take into account all factors of sex education according to their different levels of concern, parents, teachers, and external experts.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland and Wales.\nCecil Reddie ran the first sex education course at a British school in October 1889 at Abbotsholme School but the lessons were only for sex between married couples.\nIn England and Wales, Sex and relationships education (SRE) is compulsory since 1976, in part, from age 11 onwards. It involves teaching children about reproduction, sexuality and sexual health. It does not promote early sexual activity or any particular sexual orientation. The compulsory parts of sex and relationships education are the elements contained within the national curriculum for science. Parents can currently withdraw their children from all other parts of sex and relationships education if they want.\nThe compulsory curriculum focuses on the reproductive system, fetal development, and the physical and emotional changes of adolescence, while information about contraception and safe sex is discretionary and discussion about relationships is often neglected. Britain has one of the highest teenage pregnancy rates in Europe However, these have halved across England and Wales in recent years and continue to fall\nSome schools actively choose to deliver age appropriate relationship and sex education from Early Years Foundation Stage, which include the differences between boys and girls, naming body parts, what areas of the body are private and should not be touched unless the child is happy and gives consent.\nFollowing sustained political pressure, in March 2017 it was announced by the Department for Education (DfE) that from September 2019, Relationship Education (RE) in primary schools and Relationship and Sex Education (RSE) in secondary schools would be made mandatory in England by the UK government. The existing category of SRE (Sex and Relationships Education) is now referred to as RSE (Relationship and Sex Education) by the British government.\nSince September 2020, all primary age schoolchildren and up in England are taught Relationships and Health Education. Relationships education includes the follow topics: families and people who care for me; caring friendships; respectful relationships; online relationships; and being safe. By the end of primary school, pupils have also learned the following from their health education: mental wellbeing; internet safety and harms; physical health and fitness; healthy eating; facts and risks associated with drugs, alcohol and tobacco; health and prevention; basic first aid; and the changing adolescent body. At secondary school, pupils' understanding of health is developed with an increased focus on areas like drugs, alcohol, intimate relationships and sex, and how to have positive and health sexual relationships.\nStudents cannot be withdrawn from Relationships Education, but they can be withdrawn by their parents from the sexual health part of the curriculum if the headteacher grants this request. Schools must respect the parents' request to withdraw their child up to and until three terms before the child turns 16. If the child wishes to receive sex education after this point, the school is expected to make arrangements to offer it.\nScotland.\nThe main sex education program in Scotland is \"Healthy Respect\", which focuses not only on the biological aspects of reproduction but also on relationships and emotions. Education about contraception and sexually transmitted diseases are included in the program as a way of encouraging good sexual health. In response to a refusal by Catholic schools to commit to the program, however, a separate sex education program has been developed for use in those schools. Funded by the Scottish Government, the program \"Called to Love\" focuses on encouraging children to delay sex until marriage, and does not cover contraception, and as such is a form of abstinence-only sex education.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nAs education is a provincial concern, sex education varies across Canada. Ontario has a provincial curriculum created in 1998. Attempting to update it has proven controversial: a first reform was shelved in 2010 and a new curriculum introduced in 2015 by the Liberal government under Kathleen Wynne was reversed three years later by the Conservatives under Doug Ford, inviting parents to file complaints against teachers who will not comply with the change. Mandatory sex education was removed from the Quebec provincial curriculum in 2005, leaving it at the discretion of each teacher. With rates of syphilis and gonorrhea rising in the province since this change, several researchers and sex educators are criticizing the current policy, most notably Lisa Trimble and Stephanie Mitelman. It was brought back as a facultative subject in 2016\u20132017, then mandatory for the 2017\u20132018 school year.\nUnited States.\nAlmost all U.S. public students receive some form of sex education at least once between grades 7 and 12; a number of public schools begin addressing some topics in grades 5 or 6. However, what students learn varies widely, because curriculum decisions are decentralized. Multiple states have laws governing what is taught in sex education classes and contain provisions to allow parents to opt out. Some state laws leave curriculum decisions to individual school districts.\nIn January 2022, a study found that a majority of US teens lack quality sexual education, a trend that has been worsening over years. Instruction on waiting until marriage to have sex declined from 73% to 67% among females (\"P\" = 0.005) and from 70% to 58% in males (\"P\" &lt; 0.001).\nSex education is required in 30 states, 28 of which also require HIV education. 9 more states require just HIV education. Only 18 states require the information taught to be medically accurate by law. 37 states allow parents to opt their kids out of their Sex Ed. 19 states require instruction that sexual activity should only occur in marriage and 28 states require that abstinence be stressed. Contextually, 11 states must inclusively discuss sexual orientation and 5 legally must emphasize heterosexuality or provide negative information about homosexuality. A total of 6 states require LGBTQ+-inclusive sex education to be taught in school. Only 9 states require the importance of consent in a sexual situation.\nFor example, a 1999 study by the Guttmacher Institute found that most U.S. sex education courses in grades 7 through 12 cover puberty, HIV, STIs, abstinence, implications of teenage pregnancy, and how to resist peer pressure. Other studied topics, such as methods of birth control and infection prevention, sexual orientation, sexual abuse, and factual and ethical information about abortion, varied more widely.\nWithin the last decade, the US federal government has encouraged abstinence-only education by steering over a billion dollars to such programs. Some 25 states now decline the funding so that they can continue to teach comprehensive sexuality education. Funding for one of the federal government's two main abstinence-only funding programs, \"Title V\", was extended only until December 31, 2007; Congress debated whether to continue it past that date. In 2007, a study ordered by the U.S. Congress found that middle school students who took part in abstinence-only sex education programs were just as likely to have sex (and use contraception) in their teenage years as those who did not. Abstinence-only advocates claimed that the study was flawed because it was too narrow and began when abstinence-only curricula were in their infancy, and that other studies have demonstrated positive effects.\nProponents of comprehensive sexuality education, which include the American Psychological Association, the American Medical Association, the National Association of School Psychologists, the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Public Health Association, and the American College Health Association, argue that sexual behavior after puberty is a given, and it is therefore crucial to provide information about the risks and how they can be minimized; they also claim that denying teens such factual information leads to STIs and unwanted pregnancies.\nA 2007 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report showed a 3% increase in teenage pregnancies from 2005 to 2006, to nearly 42 births per 1,000. Apart from this, the rate of teen pregnancy has been declining consistently since 1991. Still, the U.S. has the highest teen birth rate and one of the highest rates of STIs among teens in the industrialized world.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nThe Government of Victoria (Australia) developed a policy for the promotion of \"Health and Human Relations Education\" in schools in 1980 that was introduced into the State's primary and secondary schools during 1981. The initiative was developed and implemented by the Honorable Norman Lacy MP, Minister for Educational Services from 1979 to 1982.\nA \"Consultative Council for Health and Human Relations Education\" was established in December 1980 under the chairmanship of Dame Margaret Blackwood; its members possessed considerable expertise in the area.\nThe council had three major functions:\nSupport services for the Consultative Council were provided by a new Health and Human Relations Unit within the Special Services Division of the Education Department of Victoria and was responsible for the implementation of the Government's policy and guidelines in this area. The Unit advised principals, school councils, teachers, parents, tertiary institutions and others in all aspects of \"Health and Human Relations Education\".\nIn 1981 the Consultative Council recommended the adoption of a set of guidelines for the provision of \"Health and Human Relations Education\" in schools as well as a Curriculum Statement to assist schools in the development of their programs. These were presented to the Victorian Cabinet in December 1981 and adopted as government policy.\nAs of March 2021, a program called \"Respectful Relationships\" was a core part of Victoria's curriculum, and was to become mandatory in all state schools. Students will also be specifically taught about consent.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, sexuality education is part of the Health and Physical Education curriculum, which is compulsory for the first ten years of schooling (Years 1 to 10) but optional beyond that. Sexual and reproductive health education begins at Year 7 (approximately age 11), although broader issues such as physical, emotional and social development, personal and interpersonal skills, and (non-sexual) relationships begin as early as Year 1 (approximately age 5).\nThe Health/ curriculum, including the sexuality education component, is the only part of the New Zealand Curriculum/ (the former for English-medium schools, the latter for M\u0101ori-medium schools) in which state and state-integrated schools must legally consult with the school community regarding its delivery, and the consultations must occur at least once every two years. Parents can ask for their children to be removed from the sexuality education component of the health curriculum for any reason, provided they apply in writing to the school principal, and do so at least 24 hours beforehand so alternative arrangements can be made. However, this does not prevent a teacher answering sexuality education questions if a student, excluded or not, asks them.\nOpposing sides regarding the ethics of sexuality.\nThere are two opposing sides of the sex education argument among parents. Sexual liberals see knowledge on sex as equipping individuals to make informed decisions about their personal sexuality, and they are in favor of comprehensive sexual education all throughout schooling, not just in high school. Sexual conservatives see extensive education on sex as encouraging adolescents to have sex, and they believe that sex education should be taught inside the family for morals to be included in the conversation. Sexual conservatives see the importance of teaching sex education, but only through abstinence-only programs.\nSome claim that certain sex education curricula break down pre-existing notions of modesty or encourage acceptance of what they consider immoral practices, such as homosexuality or premarital sex. Naturally, those that believe that homosexuality and premarital sex are a normal part of the range of human sexuality disagree with them.\nMultiple religions teach that sexual behavior outside of marriage is immoral and/or psychologically damaging, and some adherents desire this morality to be taught as a part of sex education. They may believe that sexual knowledge is necessary, or simply unavoidable, hence their preference for curricula based on abstinence.\nSexual Health Website Evaluation Studies.\nResearch conducted in the 2010\u201320 shows the effectiveness of digital sexual health interventions for young adults. The systematic literature review examined 9881 records and assessed 61 studies, showing that phones are the leading way to deliver cognitive and behavioral results related to sexual health. Tools identified as the most popular mechanisms for sexual health promotion were: interactive websites, text messaging, phone calls, and online education programs. In evaluating the impact of these interventions, the review highlighted the importance of robust research designs, such as randomized controlled trials.\nThe reliability of the information on Sexual Health remains a concern. A study focusing on websites that adolescents tend to access when seeking online sexual health information revealed the differences in reliability of those online resources. The study focused on websites based in the US such as: Planned Parenthood and WebMD. While Planned Parenthood was found to be the most well-rounded website, concerns about the reliability of some websites remain.\nAnother study focused on the quality of online sexual health resources accessed by young people. It found that the CDC had the highest reliability score, while Planned Parenthood and WebMD scored higher in usability.\nBoth these studies highlight the importance of online resources promoting sexual health in being easily accessible and trustworthy.\nA study examined the accessibility of sex education content online. The research was a keyword search which resulted in identifying 41 relevant web pages. A surprising finding was that 63% of the pages were classified as pornography. This study highlights the difficulties and challenges that surround sexual health website evaluation studies.\nLGBT sex education.\nOne major source of controversy in the realm of sex education is whether LGBT sex education should be integrated into school curricula. LGBT sex education includes inclusive teaching of safe sex practices for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals and general instruction in topics related to sexual orientation and gender identity. Studies have shown that a number of schools do not offer such education today. Five states (Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, Oklahoma, and Texas) have laws in place that ban teaching LGBT sex education. Only 20% of LGBT students have heard anything positive about their community and they reported in a 2011 Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Network (GLSEN) report that they were more likely to hear positive information about LGBT people from a history or social studies class rather than a health class. Six states (California, Colorado, New Jersey, Oregon, Rhode Island, and Washington) enforce sex education curricula that includes LGBT information beginning 2020. Beyond states, the District of Columbia has also moved to offer curricula that supports the involvement of LGBT sexual education. Beneficial factors have shown to include lowered rates of depression and suicide, tentative approaches to sexual behaviors, and intimidation from peers.\nPro-LGBT.\nProponents of LGBT sex education argue that encompassing homosexuality into the curricula would provide LGBT students with the sexual health information they need, and help to ameliorate problems such as low self-esteem and depression that research has shown can be present in LGBT individuals. They also claim that it could reduce homophobic bullying.\nAn example of LGBT-inclusive curriculum is introduced by the National Sexuality Education Standards set forth by the Future of Sex Education Initiative. These education standards outline seven core topics that must be addressed in sex education; one of those core topics is identity. The identity topic presents lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender identities as possibilities for students as they progress through life and come to understand who they are. These standards, the Future of Sex Education argues, will start in kindergarten and will evolve into more complex topics throughout schooling as the students mature and age. In the UK, BigTalk Education's Growing Up Safe program, which includes LGBT relationship education from Primary School age, was awarded the 2017 Pamela Sheridan award for innovation and good practice in relationships and sex education (RSE), services and projects for young people.\nAnti-LGBT.\nOpponents often argue that teaching LGBT sex education would be disrespectful to some religions and expose students to inappropriate topics. They say that including homosexuality in the curriculum would violate parents' rights to control what their children are exposed to and that schools should not inflict a particular political view on students. Currently, multiple sex education curricula do not include LGBT topics, and research has reported that students often feel that they do not receive adequate instruction in LGBT sex topics.\nParental rights in education.\nRecently, some states have opted to restrict topics about LGBT matter and people. One of the most controversial laws passed has been labeled the \"Don't Say Gay\" law that has most recently been passed in Florida. The bill seeks to ban gender and sexuality issues being presented to students while in lower grade school in efforts to allow parents to make the decision as to when or if they will introduce their child to Gender and Sexuality subject matter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42328", "revid": "11104410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42328", "title": "Diversity", "text": "Diversity, diversify, or diverse may refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "42333", "revid": "16807074", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42333", "title": "Sumeria (disambiguation)", "text": "Sumeria, or Sumer, is the region of city-states in ancient Mesopotamia.\nSumeria may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "42335", "revid": "44342819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42335", "title": "Kongo (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "42338", "revid": "50817669", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42338", "title": "Pankisi", "text": "Gorge in Georgia\nPankisi (Georgian: ) or the Pankisi Gorge (Georgian: , \"Pankisis Kheoba\") is a valley region in Georgia, in the upper reaches of River Alazani. It lies just south of Georgia\u2019s historic region of Tusheti between Mt Borbalo and the ruined 17th-century fortress of Bakhtrioni.\nAdministratively, Pankisi is included in the Akhmeta municipality of the Kakheti region. The area is about two and half miles wide and eight miles long.\nFrom November 2000 until 2002, the valley played host to an armed formation led by the Chechen commander Ruslan Gelayev, who had fled the Second Chechen War. After the September 11 terrorist attacks in 2001, both Russian and American political figures made public allegations, which were subsequently either disproved or uncorroborated, that senior Al-Qaeda leaders were present in the Gorge, and had acquired the nerve agent ricin. The Gorge has occasionally been mentioned in subsequent reports linking it to Salafi-jihadist activity.\nAs of 2019, the Kist ethnic group accounted for the majority of the area's roughly 5,000 residents. The Kists are Vainakhs, usually of Chechen roots, who have moved to the Pankisi area since the 19th Century. Kist culture combines Vainakh traditions with some influences from surrounding eastern Georgia.\nHistory.\nThe 17th-century geographer and historian Prince Vakhushti Bagrationi, in his book \"Description of the Kingdom of Georgia\", writes that the inhabitants of Pankisi were Georgian nobility of the Aznauri and Tavadi classes, although his account makes clear that there were also peasants in the area. He described them as intelligent, and as \"skilled warriors.\"\nVakhushti described Pankisi itself as forested, with plentiful fruit trees, and vineyards that produced good wine. He added that the harvests were good, and the forests rich in game. Fish were also numerous, he wrote, especially \"mountain trout\", and there were many cattle, and many pigs, but few sheep.\nIn the 1730s, the Pankisi valley was emptied of Georgian population: part of them were killed as a result of the invasions, and rest of them resettled elsewhere.\nIn 18th century Georgian legislation, the noble (Aznauri) Kobiashvili family of the Kingdom of Kakheti are mentioned as the lords of the Pankisi valley.\nGeorgia's 1989 census found that the Pankisi Gorge's population was 43% Kist, 29% Georgian, and 28% Ossetian. However, during the subsequent two decades the valley's ethnic composition changed again under the pressure of regional wars. Many of the valley's Ossetians fled from the South Ossetia War and the Georgian Civil War, to settle in North Ossetia-Alania in the Russian Federation. Chechens fled from the two wars in Chechnya, which had attempted to secede from the Russian Federation, and some made their homes in Pankisi's villages. By 2007, the Kists were the largest ethnic group in the area. \nThe 2014 census did not report a separate demographic breakdown for Pankisi, but found that the wider Akhmeta municipality was home to 5,471 Kists, who constituted roughly 17% of the municipal population. By 2019, Kists were reported to be a majority of Pankisi's roughly-5,000 inhabitants.\nEtymology.\nAccording to Mate Albutashvili (also known as Kisti Chobani), the toponym Pankisi is of Georgian origin. He writes that Pankisi derives from Pantisi which means \"land rich in wild forest pears\", (P\u2019ant\u2019a-\u10de\u10d0\u10dc\u10e2\u10d0) (pyrus caucasica) with the Georgian suffix -\u10e1\u10d8(si).\nPankisi Gorge crisis and local links to Salafi-jidhadism.\nThe Pankisi Gorge crisis was a 2002 geopolitical dispute that arose as a direct result of the Second Chechen War, and which was shaped by the U.S. Global War on Terror and pre-existing tensions between Russia and Georgia. From 1999, thousands of refugees from the war in Chechnya, 25 miles to the north, congregated in the valley, including some armed rebels. By 2002, Ruslan Gelayev, a Chechen commander was reported to have gathered hundreds of armed men there.\nRussia wanted Georgia to act against Gelayev's band, but Georgia was in dispute with Russia over South Ossetia and Abkhazia, and declined to do so. On the contrary, Gelayev's force allegedly fought on behalf of Georgia in Abkhazia in 2001.\nBoth Russian and U.S. leaders made public claims during 2002 and 2003 that Al-Qaeda was operating in the valley, and that a \"Chechen network\" associated with the organisation had learned to manufacture ricin, a lethal nerve agent. In Russia's case, the claims, which were unfounded, may have been made in an effort to persuade the U.S. to put pressure on Georgia to expel Gelayev and his men. In the event, Gelayev led his column out of Georgia and back onto Russian territory in September 2003, after which Georgian authorities conducted an operation in the Pankisi Gorge. It netted 15 alleged militants of Arab heritage, none of whom were thought to have been senior. \nNonetheless, in Colin Powell's presentation to the United Nations Security Council in February 2003, the Secretary of State claimed to know that associates of the Al-Qaeda leader Musab al-Zarqawi had \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;been active in the Pankisi Gorge, Georgia and in Chechnya, Russia. The plotting to which they are linked is not mere chatter. Members of Zarqawi's network say their goal was to kill Russians with toxins.\nPowell showed a slide that depicted a purported Al-Qaeda network under the command of al-Zarqawi, including a bearded man named Abu 'Atiya located in Pankisi, Georgia. Abu 'Atiya was reportedly arrested in Azerbaijan on 12 August 2003, and deported to Jordan.\nIn 2008, the valley was reported to be peaceful despite the nearby Russo-Georgian war, and substantial numbers of refugees from Chechnya remained living there\nThe former senior Islamic State leader Tarkan Batirashvili, otherwise known as \"Omar the Chechen,\" grew up in Pankisi, which was still home to some of his family as of 2014. In 2014, Batirashvilii reportedly threatened to return to the area to lead a Muslim attack on Russian Chechnya. However, the threat never came into fruition, and Batirashvili was killed during a battle in the Iraqi town of Al-Shirqat in 2016.\nNotable people.\nJihadists and North-Caucasian separatists.\nA number of transnational jihadists and North-Caucasian separatists - especially Chechens - were either born in, lived in, or passed through the Pankisi Gorge. Several fought in the first or second Chechen wars, were implicated in the Pankisi Gorge crisis, or fought in the Syrian civil war.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
