{"id": "43805", "revid": "43445499", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43805", "title": "McCarthyism", "text": "Phenomenon of US political rhetoric after WWII\nMcCarthyism is a political practice defined by the political repression and persecution of left-wing individuals and a campaign spreading fear of communist and Soviet influence on American institutions and of Soviet espionage in the United States during the late 1940s through the 1950s, heavily associated with the Second Red Scare, also known as the McCarthy era. After the mid-1950s, U.S. senator Joseph McCarthy, who had spearheaded the campaign, gradually lost his public popularity and credibility after several of his accusations were found to be false. The U.S. Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren made a series of rulings on civil and political rights that overturned several key laws and legislative directives, and helped bring an end to the Second Red Scare. \nHistorians have suggested since the 1980s that as McCarthy's involvement was less central than that of others, a different and more accurate term should be used instead that more accurately conveys the breadth of the phenomenon, and that the term \"McCarthyism\" is, in the modern day, outdated. Ellen Schrecker has suggested that Hooverism, after FBI head J. Edgar Hoover, is more appropriate. Following the end of the Cold War, unearthed documents revealed substantial Soviet spy activity in the United States, although many of the agents were never properly identified by McCarthy.\nOrigins.\nPresident Harry S. Truman's Executive Order 9835 of March 21, 1947, required that all federal civil-service employees be screened for \"loyalty\". The order said that one basis for determining disloyalty would be a finding of \"membership in, affiliation with or sympathetic association\" with any organization determined by the attorney general to be \"totalitarian, fascist, communist or subversive\" or advocating or approving the forceful denial of constitutional rights to other persons or seeking \"to alter the form of Government of the United States by unconstitutional means\".\nWhat became known as the McCarthy era began before McCarthy's rise to national fame. Following the breakdown of the wartime East-West alliance with the Soviet Union, and with many remembering the First Red Scare, President Harry S. Truman signed an executive order in 1947 to screen federal employees for possible association with organizations deemed \"totalitarian, fascist, communist, or subversive\", or advocating \"to alter the form of Government of the United States by unconstitutional means.\" The following year, the Czechoslovak coup by the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia heightened concern in the West about Communist parties seizing power and the possibility of subversion. In 1949, a high-level State Department official was convicted of perjury in a case of espionage, and the Soviet Union tested a nuclear bomb. The Korean War started the next year, significantly raising tensions and fears of impending communist upheavals in the United States. In a speech in February 1950, McCarthy claimed to have a list of members of the Communist Party USA working in the State Department, which attracted substantial press attention, and the term \"McCarthyism\" was published for the first time in late March of that year in \"The Christian Science Monitor\", along with a political cartoon by Herblock in \"The Washington Post\". The term has since taken on a broader meaning, describing the excesses of similar efforts to crack down on alleged \"subversive\" elements. In the early 21st century, the term is used more generally to describe reckless and unsubstantiated accusations of treason and far-left extremism, along with demagogic personal attacks on the character and patriotism of political adversaries.\nThe primary targets for persecution were government employees, prominent figures in the entertainment industry, academics, left-wing politicians, and labor union activists. Suspicions were often given credence despite inconclusive and questionable evidence, and the level of threat posed by a person's real or supposed leftist associations and beliefs was often exaggerated. Many people suffered loss of employment and the destruction of their careers and livelihoods as a result of the crackdowns on suspected communists, and some were outright imprisoned. Most of these reprisals were initiated by trial verdicts that were later overturned, laws that were later struck down as unconstitutional, dismissals for reasons later declared illegal or actionable, and extra-judiciary procedures, such as informal blacklists by employers and public institutions, that would come into general disrepute, though by then many lives had been ruined. The most notable examples of McCarthyism include the investigations of alleged communists that were conducted by Senator McCarthy, and the hearings conducted by the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC).\nThe historical period that came to be known as the McCarthy era began well before Joseph McCarthy's own involvement in it. Many factors contributed to McCarthyism, some of them with roots in the First Red Scare (1917\u201320), inspired by communism's emergence as a recognized political force and widespread social disruption in the United States related to unionizing and anarchist activities. Owing in part to its success in organizing labor unions and its early opposition to fascism, and offering an alternative to the ills of capitalism during the Great Depression, the Communist Party of the United States increased its membership through the 1930s, reaching a peak of about 75,000 members in 1940\u201341. While the United States was engaged in World War II and allied with the Soviet Union, the issue of anti-communism was largely muted. With the end of World War II, the Cold War began almost immediately, as the Soviet Union installed communist puppet r\u00e9gimes in areas it had occupied across Central and Eastern Europe. In a March 1947 address to Congress, Truman enunciated a new foreign policy doctrine that committed the United States to opposing Soviet geopolitical expansion. This doctrine came to be known as the Truman Doctrine, and it guided United States support for anti-communist forces in Greece and later in China and elsewhere.\nAlthough the Igor Gouzenko and Elizabeth Bentley affairs had raised the issue of Soviet espionage in 1945, events in 1949 and 1950 sharply increased the sense of threat in the United States related to communism. The Soviet Union tested an atomic bomb in 1949, earlier than many analysts had expected, raising the stakes in the Cold War. That same year, Mao Zedong's communist army gained control of mainland China despite heavy American financial support of the opposing Kuomintang. In 1950, the Korean War began, pitting U.S., U.N., and South Korean forces against communists from North Korea and China.\nDuring the following year, evidence of increased sophistication in Soviet Cold War espionage activities was found in the West. In January 1950, Alger Hiss, a high-level State Department official, was convicted of perjury. Hiss was in effect found guilty of espionage; the statute of limitations had run out for that crime, but he was convicted of having perjured himself when he denied that charge in earlier testimony before the HUAC. In Britain, Klaus Fuchs confessed to committing espionage on behalf of the Soviet Union while working on the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos National Laboratory during the War. Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were arrested in 1950 in the United States on charges of stealing atomic-bomb secrets for the Soviets, and were executed in 1953.\nOther forces encouraged the rise of McCarthyism. The more conservative politicians in the United States had historically referred to progressive reforms, such as child labor laws and women's suffrage, as \"communist\" or \"Red plots\", trying to raise fears against such changes. They used similar terms during the 1930s and the Great Depression when opposing the New Deal policies of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Many conservatives equated the New Deal with socialism or Communism, and thought the policies were evidence of too much influence by allegedly communist policy makers in the Roosevelt administration. In general, the vaguely defined danger of \"Communist influence\" was a more common theme in the rhetoric of anti-communist politicians than was espionage or any other specific activity. An example of this was Leland Olds, an economist who was Chairman of the Federal Power Commission but failed renomination due to earlier suspected Communist sympathies.\nStart of McCarthy's involvement.\nMcCarthy's involvement in these issues began publicly with a speech he made on Lincoln Day, February 9, 1950, to the Republican Women's Club of Wheeling, West Virginia. He brandished a piece of paper, which he claimed contained a list of known communists working for the State Department. McCarthy is usually quoted as saying: \"I have here in my hand a list of 205\u2014a list of names that were made known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Communist Party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the State Department.\" This speech resulted in a flood of press attention to McCarthy and helped establish his path to becoming one of the most recognized politicians in the United States.\nThe first recorded use of the term \"McCarthyism\" was in the \"Christian Science Monitor\" on March 28, 1950 (\"Their little spree with McCarthyism is no aid to consultation\"). The paper became one of the earliest and most consistent critics of the Senator. The next recorded use happened on the following day, in a political cartoon by \"Washington Post\" editorial cartoonist Herbert Block (Herblock). The cartoon depicts four leading Republicans trying to push an elephant (the traditional symbol of the Republican Party) to stand on a platform atop a teetering stack of ten tar buckets, the topmost of which is labeled \"McCarthyism\". Block later wrote: \"Nothing [was] particularly ingenious about the term, which is simply used to represent a national affliction that can hardly be described in any other way. If anyone has a prior claim on it, he's welcome to the word and to the junior senator from Wisconsin along with it. I will also throw in a set of free dishes and a case of soap.\"\nInstitutions.\nA number of anti-communist committees, panels, and \"loyalty review boards\" in federal, state, and local governments, as well as many private agencies, carried out investigations for small and large companies concerned about possible Communists in their work forces.\nIn Congress, the primary bodies that investigated Communist activities were the HUAC, the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee, and the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Between 1949 and 1954, a total of 109 investigations were carried out by these and other committees of Congress.\nOn December 2, 1954, the United States Senate voted 67 to 22 to condemn McCarthy for \"conduct that tends to bring the Senate into dishonor and disrepute\".\nExecutive branch.\nLoyalty-security reviews.\nIn the federal government, President Truman's Executive Order 9835 initiated a program of loyalty reviews for federal employees in 1947. It called for dismissal if there were \"reasonable grounds\u00a0... for belief that the person involved is disloyal to the Government of the United States.\" Truman, a Democrat, was probably reacting in part to the Republican sweep in the 1946 Congressional election and felt a need to counter growing criticism from conservatives and anti-communists.\nWhen President Dwight Eisenhower took office in 1953, he strengthened and extended Truman's loyalty review program, while decreasing the avenues of appeal available to dismissed employees. Hiram Bingham, chairman of the Civil Service Commission Loyalty Review Board, referred to the new rules he was obliged to enforce as \"just not the American way of doing things.\" The following year, J. Robert Oppenheimer, scientific director of the Manhattan Project that built the first atomic bomb, then working as a consultant to the Atomic Energy Commission, was stripped of his security clearance after a four-week hearing. Oppenheimer had received a top-secret clearance in 1947, but was denied clearance in the harsher climate of 1954.\nSimilar loyalty reviews were established in many state and local government offices and some private industries across the nation. In 1958, an estimated one of every five employees in the United States was required to pass some sort of loyalty review. Once a person lost a job due to an unfavorable loyalty review, finding other employment could be very difficult. \"A man is ruined everywhere and forever,\" in the words of the chairman of President Truman's Loyalty Review Board. \"No responsible employer would be likely to take a chance in giving him a job.\"\nThe Department of Justice started keeping a list of organizations that it deemed subversive beginning in 1942. This list was first made public in 1948, when it included 78 groups. At its longest, it comprised 154 organizations, 110 of them identified as Communist. In the context of a loyalty review, membership in a listed organization was meant to raise a question, but not to be considered proof of disloyalty. One of the most common causes of suspicion was membership in the Washington Bookshop Association, a left-leaning organization that offered lectures on literature, classical music concerts, and discounts on books.\nJ. Edgar Hoover and the FBI.\nFBI director J. Edgar Hoover designed President Truman's loyalty-security program, and its background investigations of employees were carried out by FBI agents. This was a major assignment that led to the number of agents in the bureau being increased from 3,559 in 1946 to 7,029 in 1952. Hoover's sense of the communist threat and the standards of evidence applied by his bureau resulted in thousands of government workers losing their jobs. Due to Hoover's insistence upon keeping the identity of his informers secret, most subjects of loyalty-security reviews were not allowed to cross-examine or know the identities of those who accused them. In many cases, they were not even told of what they were accused.\nHoover's influence extended beyond federal government employees and beyond the loyalty-security programs. The records of loyalty review hearings and investigations were supposed to be confidential, but Hoover routinely gave evidence from them to congressional committees such as HUAC.\nFrom 1951 to 1955, the FBI operated a secret \"Responsibilities Program\" that distributed anonymous documents with evidence from FBI files of communist affiliations on the part of teachers, lawyers, and others. Many people accused in these \"blind memoranda\" were fired without any further process.\nThe FBI engaged in a number of illegal practices in its pursuit of information on communists, including burglaries, opening mail, and illegal wiretaps. The members of the left-wing National Lawyers Guild (NLG) were among the few attorneys who were willing to defend clients in communist-related cases, and this made the NLG a particular target of Hoover's; the office of the NLG was burgled by the FBI at least 14 times between 1947 and 1951. Among other purposes, the FBI used its illegally obtained information to alert prosecuting attorneys about the planned legal strategies of NLG defense lawyers.\nThe FBI also used illegal undercover operations to disrupt communist and other dissident political groups. In 1956, Hoover was becoming increasingly frustrated by Supreme Court decisions that limited the Justice Department's ability to prosecute communists. At this time, he formalized a covert \"dirty tricks\" program under the name COINTELPRO. COINTELPRO actions included planting forged documents to create the suspicion that a key person was an FBI informer, spreading rumors through anonymous letters, leaking information to the press, calling for IRS audits, and the like. The COINTELPRO program remained in operation until 1971.\nHistorian Ellen Schrecker calls the FBI \"the single most important component of the anti-communist crusade\" and writes: \"Had observers known in the 1950s what they have learned since the 1970s, when the Freedom of Information Act opened the Bureau's files, 'McCarthyism' would probably be called 'Hooverism'.\"\nAllen Dulles and the CIA.\nIn March 1950, McCarthy had initiated a series of investigations into potential infiltration of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) by communist agents and came up with a list of security risks that matched one previously compiled by the Agency itself. At the request of CIA director Allen Dulles, President Eisenhower demanded that McCarthy discontinue issuing subpoenas against the CIA. Documents made public in 2004 revealed that the CIA, under Dulles' orders, had broken into McCarthy's Senate office and fed disinformation to him in order to discredit him and stop his investigation from proceeding any further.\nCongress.\nHouse Committee on Un-American Activities.\nThe House Committee on Un-American Activities (commonly referred to as the HUAC) was the most prominent and active government committee involved in anti-communist investigations. Formed in 1938 and known as the Dies Committee, named for Rep. Martin Dies, who chaired it until 1944, HUAC investigated a variety of \"activities\", including those of German-American Nazis during World War II. The committee soon focused on communism, beginning with an investigation into communists in the Federal Theatre Project in 1938. A significant step for HUAC was its investigation of the charges of espionage brought against Alger Hiss in 1948. This investigation ultimately resulted in Hiss's trial and conviction for perjury, and convinced many of the usefulness of congressional committees for uncovering communist subversion.\nHUAC achieved its greatest fame and notoriety with its investigation into the Hollywood film industry. In October 1947, the committee began to subpoena screenwriters, directors, and other movie-industry professionals to testify about their known or suspected membership in the Communist Party, association with its members, or support of its beliefs. At these testimonies, this question was asked: \"Are you now or have you ever been a member of the Communist Party of the United States?\" Among the first film industry witnesses subpoenaed by the committee were ten who decided not to cooperate. These men, who became known as the \"Hollywood Ten\", cited the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech and free assembly, which they believed legally protected them from being required to answer the committee's questions. This tactic failed, and the ten were sentenced to prison for contempt of Congress. Two of them were sentenced to six months, the rest to a year.\nIn the future, witnesses (in the entertainment industries and otherwise) who were determined not to cooperate with the committee would claim their Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination. William Grooper and Rockwell Kent, the only two visual artists to be questioned by McCarthy, both took this approach, and emerged relatively unscathed by the experience. However, while this usually protected witnesses from a contempt-of-Congress citation, it was considered grounds for dismissal by many government and private-industry employers. The legal requirements for Fifth Amendment protection were such that a person could not testify about his own association with the Communist Party and then refuse to \"name names\" of colleagues with communist affiliations. Thus, many faced a choice between \"crawl[ing] through the mud to be an informer,\" as actor Larry Parks put it, or becoming known as a \"Fifth Amendment Communist\"\u2014an epithet often used by Senator McCarthy.\nSenate committees.\nIn the Senate, the primary committee for investigating communists was the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee (SISS), formed in 1950 and charged with ensuring the enforcement of laws relating to \"espionage, sabotage, and the protection of the internal security of the United States\". The SISS was headed by Democrat Pat McCarran and gained a reputation for careful and extensive investigations. This committee spent a year investigating Owen Lattimore and other members of the Institute of Pacific Relations. As had been done numerous times before, the collection of scholars and diplomats associated with Lattimore (the so-called China Hands) were accused of \"losing China\", and while some evidence of pro-communist attitudes was found, nothing supported McCarran's accusation that Lattimore was \"a conscious and articulate instrument of the Soviet conspiracy\". Lattimore was charged with perjuring himself before the SISS in 1952. After many of the charges were rejected by a federal judge and one of the witnesses confessed to perjury, the case was dropped in 1955.\nMcCarthy headed the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations in 1953 and 1954, and during that time, used it for a number of his communist-hunting investigations. McCarthy first examined allegations of communist influence in the Voice of America, and then turned to the overseas library program of the State Department. Card catalogs of these libraries were searched for works by authors McCarthy deemed inappropriate. McCarthy then recited the list of supposedly pro-communist authors before his subcommittee and the press. Yielding to the pressure, the State Department ordered its overseas librarians to remove from their shelves \"material by any controversial persons, Communists, fellow travelers, etc.\" Some libraries actually burned the newly forbidden books. Though he did not block the State Department from carrying out this order, President Eisenhower publicly criticized the initiative as well, telling the graduating class of Dartmouth College President in 1953: \"Don't join the book burners! ... Don't be afraid to go to the library and read every book so long as that document does not offend our own ideas of decency\u2014that should be the only censorship.\" The president then settled for a compromise by retaining the ban on Communist books written by Communists, while also allowing the libraries to keep books on Communism written by anti-Communists.\nMcCarthy's committee then began an investigation into the United States Army. This began at the Army Signal Corps laboratory at Fort Monmouth. McCarthy garnered some headlines with stories of a dangerous spy ring among the Army researchers, but ultimately nothing came of this investigation.\nMcCarthy next turned his attention to the case of a U.S. Army dentist who had been promoted to the rank of major despite having refused to answer questions on an Army loyalty review form. McCarthy's handling of this investigation, including a series of insults directed at a brigadier general, led to the Army\u2013McCarthy hearings, with the Army and McCarthy trading charges and counter-charges for 36 days before a nationwide television audience. While the official outcome of the hearings was inconclusive, this exposure of McCarthy to the American public resulted in a sharp decline in his popularity. In less than a year, McCarthy was censured by the Senate, and his position as a prominent force in anti-communism was essentially ended.\nBlacklists.\nOn November 25, 1947, the day after the House of Representatives approved citations of contempt for the Hollywood Ten, Eric Johnston, president of the Motion Picture Association of America, issued a press release on behalf of the heads of the major studios that came to be referred to as the Waldorf Statement. This statement announced the firing of the Hollywood Ten and stated: \"We will not knowingly employ a Communist or a member of any party or group which advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States...\" This marked the beginning of the Hollywood blacklist. In spite of the fact that hundreds were denied employment, the studios, producers, and other employers did not publicly admit that a blacklist existed.\nAt this time, private loyalty review boards and anti-communist investigators began to appear to fill a growing demand among certain industries to certify that their employees were above reproach. Companies that were concerned about the sensitivity of their business, or which, like the entertainment industry, felt particularly vulnerable to public opinion, made use of these private services. For a fee, these teams investigated employees and questioned them about their politics and affiliations.\nAt such hearings, the subject usually did not have a right to the presence of an attorney, and as with HUAC, the interviewee might be asked to defend himself against accusations without being allowed to cross-examine the accuser. These agencies kept cross-referenced lists of leftist organizations, publications, rallies, charities, and the like, as well as lists of individuals who were known or suspected communists. Books such as \"Red Channels\" and newsletters such as \"Counterattack\" and \"Confidential Information\" were published to keep track of communist and leftist organizations and individuals. Insofar as the various blacklists of McCarthyism were actual physical lists, they were created and maintained by these private organizations.\nLaws and arrests.\nEfforts to protect the United States from the perceived threat of communist subversion were particularly enabled by several federal laws. The Hatch Act of 1939 banned membership in subversive organizations, which was interpreted as being anti-labor legislation. The Hatch Act would allow for the reduction of influence of the Workers' Alliance, which was claimed to have been created by the Soviet Union based on a model of their unemployed councils. The Alien Registration Act or Smith Act of 1940 made the act of \"knowingly or willfully advocate, abet, advise or teach the ... desirability or propriety of overthrowing the Government of the United States or of any State by force or violence, or for anyone to organize any association which teaches, advises or encourages such an overthrow, or for anyone to become a member of or to affiliate with any such association\" a criminal offense.\nHundreds of communists and others were prosecuted under this law between 1941 and 1957. Eleven leaders of the Communist Party were convicted under the Smith Act in 1949 in the Foley Square trial. Ten defendants were given sentences of five years and the eleventh was sentenced to three years. The defense attorneys were cited for contempt of court and given prison sentences. In 1951, 23 other leaders of the party were indicted, including Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, a founding member of the American Civil Liberties Union. Many were convicted on the basis of testimony that was later admitted to be false. By 1957, 140 leaders and members of the Communist Party had been charged under the law, of whom 93 were convicted.\nThe McCarran Internal Security Act, which became law in 1950, has been described by scholar Ellen Schrecker as \"the McCarthy era's only important piece of legislation\" (the Smith Act technically antedated McCarthyism). However, the McCarran Act had no real effect beyond legal harassment. It required the registration of Communist organizations with the U.S. Attorney General and established the Subversive Activities Control Board to investigate possible communist-action and communist-front organizations so they could be required to register. Due to numerous hearings, delays, and appeals, the act was never enforced, even with regard to the Communist Party of the United States itself, and the major provisions of the act were found to be unconstitutional in 1965 and 1967. In 1952, the Immigration and Nationality, or McCarran\u2013Walter, Act was passed. This law allowed the government to deport immigrants or naturalized citizens engaged in subversive activities and also to bar suspected subversives from entering the country.\nThe Communist Control Act of 1954 was passed with overwhelming support in both houses of Congress after very little debate. Jointly drafted by Republican John Marshall Butler and Democrat Hubert Humphrey, the law was an extension of the Internal Security Act of 1950, and sought to outlaw the Communist Party by declaring that the party, as well as \"Communist-Infiltrated Organizations\" were \"not entitled to any of the rights, privileges, and immunities attendant upon legal bodies.\" While the Communist Control Act had an odd mix of liberals and conservatives among its supporters, it never had any significant effect.\nThe act was successfully applied only twice. In 1954 it was used to prevent Communist Party members from appearing on the New Jersey state ballot, and in 1960, it was cited to deny the CPUSA recognition as an employer under New York state's unemployment compensation system. The \"New York Post\" called the act \"a monstrosity\", \"a wretched repudiation of democratic principles,\" while \"The Nation\" accused Democratic liberals of a \"neurotic, election-year anxiety to escape the charge of being 'soft on Communism' even at the expense of sacrificing constitutional rights.\"\nRepression in the individual states.\nIn addition to the federal laws and responding to the worries of the local opinion, several states enacted anti-communist statutes.\nBy 1952, several states had enacted statutes against criminal anarchy, criminal syndicalism, and sedition; banned communists and \"subversives\" from public employment, or even from receiving public aid; demanded on loyalty oaths from public servants; and severely restricted or banned the Communist Party. In addition, six states had equivalents to the HUAC. The California Senate Factfinding Subcommittee on Un-American Activities and the Florida Legislative Investigation Committee were established by their respective legislatures.\nSome of these states had very severe, or even extreme, laws against communism. In 1950, Michigan enacted life imprisonment for subversive propaganda; the following year, Tennessee enacted the death penalty for advocating the violent overthrow of the government. The death penalty for membership in the Communist Party was discussed in Texas by Governor Allan Shivers, who described it as \"worse than murder.\"\nMunicipalities and counties also enacted anti-communist ordinances: Los Angeles banned any communist or \"Muscovite model of police-state dictatorship\" from owning arms, while Birmingham, Alabama and Jacksonville, Florida banned any communist from being within the city's limits.\nPopular support.\nMcCarthyism was supported by a variety of groups, including the American Legion and various other anti-communist organizations. One core element of support was a variety of militantly anti-communist women's groups such as the American Public Relations Forum and the Minute Women of the U.S.A. These organized tens of thousands of housewives into study groups, letter-writing networks, and patriotic clubs that coordinated efforts to identify and eradicate what they saw as subversion.\nAlthough right-wing radicals were the bedrock of support for McCarthyism, they were not alone. A broad \"coalition of the aggrieved\" found McCarthyism attractive, or at least politically useful. Common themes uniting the coalition were opposition to internationalism, particularly the United Nations; opposition to social welfare provisions, particularly the various programs established by the New Deal; and opposition to efforts to reduce inequalities in the social structure of the United States.\nOne focus of popular McCarthyism concerned the provision of public health services, particularly vaccination, mental health care services, and fluoridation, all of which were denounced by some to be communist plots to poison or brainwash the American people. Such viewpoints led to collisions between McCarthyite radicals and supporters of public-health programs, most notably in the case of the Alaska Mental Health Bill controversy of 1956.\nWilliam F. Buckley Jr., the founder of the influential conservative political magazine \"National Review\", wrote a defense of McCarthy, \"McCarthy and his Enemies\", in which he asserted that \"McCarthyism ... is a movement around which men of good will and stern morality can close ranks.\"\nIn addition, as Richard Rovere points out, many ordinary Americans became convinced that there must be \"no smoke without fire\" and lent their support to McCarthyism. The Gallup poll found that at his peak in January 1954, 50% of the American public supported McCarthy, while 29% had an unfavorable opinion. His support fell to 34% in June 1954. Republicans tended to like what McCarthy was doing and Democrats did not, though McCarthy had significant support from traditional Democratic ethnic groups, especially Catholics, as well as many unskilled workers and small-business owners. (McCarthy himself was a Catholic.) He had very little support among union members and Jews.\nPortrayals of communists.\nThose who sought to justify McCarthyism did so largely through their characterization of communism, and American communists in particular. Proponents of McCarthyism claimed that the CPUSA was so completely under Moscow's control that any American communist was a puppet of the Soviet intelligence services. This view, if restricted to the Communist Party's leadership is supported by recent documentation from the archives of the KGB as well as post-war decodes of wartime Soviet radio traffic from the Venona project, showing that Moscow provided financial support to the CPUSA and had significant influence on CPUSA policies. J. Edgar Hoover commented in a 1950 speech, \"Communist members, body and soul, are the property of the Party.\"\nAccording to historian Richard G. Powers, McCarthy added \"bogus specificity\" to \"sweeping accusation[s]\", gaining support among \"countersubversive anticommunists\" on one hand, who sought to find and punish perceived communists. On the other hand, \"liberal anticommunists\" believed that the Communist Party was \"despicable and annoying\" but ultimately politically irrelevant.\nPresident Harry Truman, who pursued the anti-Soviet Truman Doctrine, called McCarthy \"the greatest asset the Kremlin has\" by \"torpedo[ing] the bipartisan foreign policy of the United States.\"\nHistorian Landon R. Y. Storrs writes that the CPUSA's \"secretiveness, its authoritarian internal structure, and the loyalty of its leaders to the Kremlin were fundamental flaws that help explain why and how it was demonized. On the other hand, most American Communists were idealists attracted by the party's militance against various forms of social injustice.\" Furthermore, based on later declassified evidence, \"The paradoxical lesson from several decades of scholarship is that the same organization that inspired democratic idealists in the pursuit of social justice also was secretive, authoritarian, and morally compromised by ties to the Stalin regime.\"\nIn the mid 20th century, this attitude was not confined to arch-conservatives. In 1940, the American Civil Liberties Union ejected founding member Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, saying that her membership in the Communist Party was enough to disqualify her as a civil libertarian. In the government's prosecutions of Communist Party members under the Smith Act (see above), the prosecution case was based not on specific actions or statements by the defendants, but on the premise that a commitment to violent overthrow of the government was inherent in the doctrines of Marxism\u2013Leninism. Passages of the CPUSA constitution that specifically rejected revolutionary violence were dismissed as deliberate deception.\nIn addition, it was often claimed that the party didn't allow members to resign; thus someone who had been a member for a short time decades previously could be thought a current member. Many of the hearings and trials of McCarthyism featured testimony by former Communist Party members such as Elizabeth Bentley, Louis Budenz, and Whittaker Chambers, speaking as expert witnesses.\nVarious historians and pundits have discussed alleged Soviet-directed infiltration of the U.S. government and the possible collaboration of high U.S. government officials.\nVictims of McCarthyism.\nEstimating the number of victims of McCarthy is difficult. The number imprisoned is in the hundreds, and some ten or twelve thousand lost their jobs. In many cases, simply being subpoenaed by HUAC or one of the other committees was sufficient cause to be fired.\nFor the vast majority, both the potential for them to do harm to the nation and the nature of their communist affiliation were tenuous. After the extremely damaging \"Cambridge Five\" spy scandal (Guy Burgess, Donald Maclean, Kim Philby, Anthony Blunt and John Cairncross), suspected homosexuality was also a common cause for being targeted by McCarthyism. The hunt for \"sexual perverts\", who were presumed to be subversive by nature, resulted in over 5,000 federal workers being fired, and thousands were harassed and denied employment. Many have termed this aspect of McCarthyism the \"lavender scare\".\nHomosexuality was classified as a psychiatric disorder in the 1950s. However, in the context of the highly politicized Cold War environment, homosexuality became framed as a dangerous, contagious social disease that posed a potential threat to state security. As the family was believed to be the cornerstone of American strength and integrity, the description of homosexuals as \"sexual perverts\" meant that they were both unable to function within a family unit and presented the potential to poison the social body. This era also witnessed the establishment of widely spread FBI surveillance intended to identify homosexual government employees.\nThe McCarthy hearings and according \"sexual pervert\" investigations can be seen to have been driven by a desire to identify individuals whose ability to function as loyal citizens had been compromised. McCarthy began his campaign by drawing upon the ways in which he embodied traditional American values to become the self-appointed vanguard of social morality.\nIn the film industry, more than 300 actors, authors, and directors were denied work in the U.S. through the unofficial Hollywood blacklist. Blacklists were at work throughout the entertainment industry, in universities and schools at all levels, in the legal profession, and in many other fields. A port-security program initiated by the Coast Guard shortly after the start of the Korean War required a review of every maritime worker who loaded or worked aboard any American ship, regardless of cargo or destination. As with other loyalty-security reviews of McCarthyism, the identities of any accusers and even the nature of any accusations were typically kept secret from the accused. Nearly 3,000 seamen and longshoremen lost their jobs due to this program alone.\nSome of the notable people who were blacklisted or suffered some other persecution during McCarthyism include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1953, Robert K. Murray, a young professor of history at Pennsylvania State University who had served as an intelligence officer in World War II, was revising his dissertation on the Red Scare of 1919\u201320 for publication until Little, Brown and Company decided that \"under the circumstances ... it wasn't wise for them to bring this book out.\" He learned that investigators were questioning his colleagues and relatives. The University of Minnesota press published his volume, \"Red Scare: A Study in National Hysteria, 1919\u20131920\", in 1955.\nCritical reactions.\nThe nation was by no means united behind the policies and activities that have come to be associated with McCarthyism. The critics of various aspects of McCarthyism included many figures not generally noted for their liberalism. In his overridden veto of the McCarran Internal Security Act of 1950, President Truman wrote, \"In a free country, we punish men for the crimes they commit, but never for the opinions they have.\" Truman also unsuccessfully vetoed the Taft\u2013Hartley Act, which among other provisions denied trade unions National Labor Relations Board protection unless union leaders signed affidavits swearing they were not and had never been Communists. In 1953, after he left office, Truman criticized the contemporary Eisenhower administration:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is now evident that the present Administration has fully embraced, for political advantage, McCarthyism. I am not referring to the Senator from Wisconsin. He is only important in that his name has taken on the dictionary meaning of the word. It is the corruption of truth, the abandonment of the due process law. It is the use of the big lie and the unfounded accusation against any citizen in the name of Americanism or security. It is the rise to power of the demagogue who lives on untruth; it is the spreading of fear and the destruction of faith in every level of society.\nOn June 1, 1950, Senator Margaret Chase Smith, a Maine Republican, delivered a speech to the Senate she called a \"Declaration of Conscience\". In a clear attack upon McCarthyism, she called for an end to \"character assassinations\" and named \"some of the basic principles of Americanism: The right to criticize; the right to hold unpopular beliefs; the right to protest; the right of independent thought\". She said \"freedom of speech is not what it used to be in America\", and decried \"cancerous tentacles of 'know nothing, suspect everything' attitudes\". Six other Republican senators\u2014Wayne Morse, Irving M. Ives, Charles W. Tobey, Edward John Thye, George Aiken, and Robert C. Hendrickson\u2014joined Smith in condemning the tactics of McCarthyism.\nElmer Davis, one of the most highly respected news reporters and commentators of the 1940s and 1950s, often spoke out against what he saw as the excesses of McCarthyism. On one occasion he warned that many local anti-communist movements constituted a \"general attack not only on schools and colleges and libraries, on teachers and textbooks, but on all people who think and write ... in short, on the freedom of the mind\".\nIn 1952, the Supreme Court upheld a lower-court decision in \"Adler v. Board of Education\", thus approving a law that allowed state loyalty review boards to fire teachers deemed \"subversive\". In his dissenting opinion, Justice William O. Douglas wrote: \"The present law proceeds on a principle repugnant to our society\u2014guilt by association... What happens under this law is typical of what happens in a police state. Teachers are under constant surveillance; their pasts are combed for signs of disloyalty; their utterances are watched for clues to dangerous thoughts.\"\nOne of the most influential opponents of McCarthyism was the famed CBS newscaster and analyst Edward R. Murrow. On October 20, 1953, Murrow's show \"See It Now\" aired an episode about the dismissal of Milo Radulovich, a former reserve Air Force lieutenant who was accused of associating with Communists. The show was strongly critical of the Air Force's methods, which included presenting evidence in a sealed envelope that Radulovich and his attorney were not allowed to open.\nOn March 9, 1954, \"See It Now\" aired another episode on the issue of McCarthyism, this one attacking Joseph McCarthy himself. Titled \"A Report on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy\", it used footage of McCarthy speeches to portray him as dishonest, reckless, and abusive toward witnesses and prominent Americans. In his concluding comment, Murrow said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis broadcast has been cited as a key episode in bringing about the end of McCarthyism.\nIn April 1954, McCarthy was also under attack in the Army\u2013McCarthy hearings. These hearings were televised live on the new American Broadcasting Company network, allowing the public to view first-hand McCarthy's interrogation of individuals and his controversial tactics. In one exchange, McCarthy reminded the attorney for the Army, Joseph Welch, that he had an employee in his law firm who had belonged to an organization that had been accused of Communist sympathies. In an exchange that reflected the increasingly negative public opinion of McCarthy, Welch rebuked the senator: \"Have you no sense of decency, sir? At long last, have you left no sense of decency?\"\nDecline.\nIn the mid and late 1950s, the attitudes and institutions of McCarthyism slowly weakened. Changing public sentiments heavily contributed to the decline of McCarthyism. Its decline may also be charted through a series of court decisions.\nNotable events.\nA key figure in the end of the blacklisting of McCarthyism was John Henry Faulk. Host of an afternoon comedy radio show, Faulk was a leftist active in his union, the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists. He was scrutinized by AWARE, Inc., one of the private firms that examined individuals for signs of communist \"disloyalty\". Marked by AWARE as unfit, he was fired by CBS Radio. Almost uniquely among the many victims of blacklisting, Faulk decided to sue AWARE in 1957 and finally won the case in 1962.\nWith this court decision, the private blacklisters and those who used them were put on notice that they were legally liable for the professional and financial damage they caused. Although some informal blacklisting continued, the private \"loyalty checking\" agencies were soon a thing of the past. Even before the Faulk verdict, many in Hollywood had decided it was time to break the blacklist. In 1960, Dalton Trumbo, one of the best known members of the Hollywood Ten, was publicly credited with writing the films \"Exodus\" and \"Spartacus\".\nWarren Court.\nMuch of the undoing of McCarthyism came at the hands of the U.S. Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren. As Richard Rovere wrote in his biography of Joseph McCarthy, \"[T]he United States Supreme Court took judicial notice of the rents McCarthy was making in the fabric of liberty and thereupon wrote a series of decisions that have made the fabric stronger than before.\" Two Eisenhower appointees to the court\u2014Earl Warren (who was made Chief Justice) and William J. Brennan, Jr.\u2014proved to be more liberal than Eisenhower had anticipated.\nThe Warren Court made a series of rulings that helped bring an end to the McCarthyism.\nIn 1956, the Warren Court heard the case of \"Slochower v. Board of Education\". Harry Slochower was a professor at Brooklyn College who had been fired by New York City for invoking the Fifth Amendment when McCarthy's committee questioned him about his past membership in the Communist Party. The court prohibited such actions, ruling \"...we must condemn the practice of imputing a sinister meaning to the exercise of a person's constitutional right under the Fifth Amendment... The privilege against self-incrimination would be reduced to a hollow mockery if its exercise could be taken as equivalent either to a confession of guilt or a conclusive presumption of perjury.\" In addition, the 1956 \"Cole v. Young\" ruling also greatly weakened the ability to discriminate in the federal civilian workforce.\nAnother key decision was in the 1957 case \"Yates v. United States\", in which the convictions of fourteen Communists were reversed. In Justice Black's opinion, he wrote of the original \"Smith Act\" trials: \"The testimony of witnesses is comparatively insignificant. Guilt or innocence may turn on what Marx or Engels or someone else wrote or advocated as much as a hundred years or more ago... When the propriety of obnoxious or unfamiliar view about government is in reality made the crucial issue, ...prejudice makes conviction inevitable except in the rarest circumstances.\"\nAlso in 1957, the Supreme Court ruled on the case of \"Watkins v. United States\", curtailing the power of HUAC to punish uncooperative witnesses by finding them in contempt of Congress. Justice Warren wrote in the decision: \"The mere summoning of a witness and compelling him to testify, against his will, about his beliefs, expressions or associations is a measure of governmental interference. And when those forced revelations concern matters that are unorthodox, unpopular, or even hateful to the general public, the reaction in the life of the witness may be disastrous.\"\nIn its 1958 decision in \"Kent v. Dulles\", the Supreme Court halted the State Department from using the authority of its own regulations to refuse or revoke passports based on an applicant's communist beliefs or associations.\nRepercussions.\nStudy and reactions to Constitutional implications.\nThe political divisions McCarthyism created in the United States continue to make themselves manifest, and the politics and history of anti-communism in the United States are still contentious. Portions of the massive security apparatus established during the McCarthy era still exist. Loyalty oaths are still required by the California Constitution for all officials and employees of the government of California (which is highly problematic for Quakers and Jehovah's Witnesses whose beliefs preclude them from pledging absolute loyalty to the state). At the federal level, a few portions of the McCarran Internal Security Act remain in effect. However, the act's detention provision was repealed in 1971. The McCarran Act's Communist registration requirement was declared unconstitutional in the 1965 Supreme Court ruling in \"Albertson v. Subversive Activities Control Board\" as well. The McCarran Act's Subversive Activities Control Board, which enforced the law's investigation requirement for persons alleged to be involved in \"subversive activities\", was officially abolished through Congressional legislation in 1972 as well.\nHistorical study on anti-communism and Soviet espionage.\nMcCarthyism also attracts controversy purely as a historical issue. Through declassified documents from Soviet archives and Venona project decryptions of coded Soviet messages, the Soviet Union was found to have engaged in substantial espionage activities in the United States during the 1940s. The Communist Party USA also was substantially funded and its policies controlled by the Soviet Union, and accusations existed that CPUSA members were often recruited as spies.\nLiberal anti-communists like Edward Shils and Daniel Moynihan had a contempt for McCarthyism. Sociologist Edward Shils criticized an excessive policy of secrecy during the Cold War, that led to the misdirection of McCarthyism, which was addressed during the 1994\u20131997 Moynihan Commission. As Moynihan put it, \"reaction to McCarthy took the form of a modish anti-anti-Communism that considered impolite any discussion of the very real threat Communism posed to Western values and security.\" After revelations of Soviet spy networks from the declassified Venona project, Moynihan wondered: \"Might less secrecy have prevented the liberal overreaction to McCarthyism as well as McCarthyism itself?\" He described the situation during the McCarthy era as \"ignorant armies clashed by night\". With McCarthy advocating an extremist view, the discussion of communist subversion was made into a civil rights issue instead of a counterintelligence one.\nIn the view of some contemporary commentators, the revelations from Venona and other archives on espionage stand as at least a partial vindication of McCarthyism. Some, such as Goldberg, feel that a genuinely dangerous subversive element was in the United States, and that this danger justified extreme measures. The opposing view holds that, recent revelations notwithstanding, by the time McCarthyism began in the late 1940s, the CPUSA was an ineffectual fringe group, and the damage done to U.S. interests by Soviet spies after World War II was minimal. Historian Ellen Schrecker states, \"\"in this country,\" McCarthyism did more damage to the constitution than the American Communist Party ever did.\"\nHistorian John Earl Haynes, while acknowledging that inexcusable excesses occurred during McCarthyism, argues that some contemporary historians of McCarthyism underplay the un-democratic nature of the CPUSA. At the same time, Haynes, who studied the Venona decryptions extensively, argued that McCarthy's attempts to \"make anti-communism a partisan weapon\" actually \"threatened [the post-War] anti-Communist consensus\", thereby ultimately harming anti-Communist efforts more than helping them. Of the 159 people who were identified on lists used or referenced by McCarthy, evidence only substantially proved that nine of them had aided Soviet espionage efforts\u2014while several hundred Soviet spies were actually known based on Venona and other evidence, most were never named by McCarthy.\nLater political usage of term.\nA number of observers have compared the oppression of liberals and leftists during the McCarthy period to 2000s-era actions against suspected terrorists, most of them Muslims. In \"The Age of Anxiety: McCarthyism to Terrorism\", author Haynes Johnson compares the \"abuses suffered by aliens thrown into high-security U.S. prisons in the wake of 9/11\" to the excesses of the McCarthy era. Similarly, David D. Cole has written that the Patriot Act \"in effect resurrects the philosophy of McCarthyism, simply substituting 'terrorist' for 'communist'.\"\nFrom the opposite pole, conservative writer Ann Coulter devotes much of her book \"\" to drawing parallels between past opposition to McCarthy and McCarthyism and the policies and beliefs of modern-day liberals, arguing that the former hindered the anti-communist cause and the latter hindered the war on terrorism. Other authors who have drawn on a comparison between current anti-terrorism policies and McCarthyism include Geoffrey R. Stone, Ted Morgan, and Jonah Goldberg.\nSince the time of McCarthy, the word \"McCarthyism\" has entered American speech as a general term for a variety of practices: aggressively questioning a person's patriotism, making poorly supported accusations, using accusations of disloyalty to pressure a person to adhere to conformist politics or to discredit an opponent, subverting civil and political rights in the name of national security, and the use of demagoguery are all often referred to as \"McCarthyism\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43806", "revid": "420174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43806", "title": "A Beautiful Mind", "text": "A Beautiful Mind may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43807", "revid": "50700844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43807", "title": "Lombardy", "text": "Region of Italy\nLombardy (Lombard and ; ) is an administrative region of Italy that covers ; it is located in northern Italy and has a population of about 10 million people, constituting more than one-sixth of Italy's population. Lombardy is located between the Alps mountain range and tributaries of the river Po, and includes Milan, its capital, the largest metropolitan area in the country, and among the largest in the EU.\nIts territory is divided into 1,502 \"comuni\" (the region with the largest number of \"comuni\" in the entire national territory), distributed among 12 administrative subdivisions (11 provinces plus the Metropolitan City of Milan). The region ranks first in Italy in terms of population, population density, and number of local authorities, while it is fourth in terms of surface area, after Sicily, Piedmont, and Sardinia.\nIt is the second-most populous region of the European Union (EU), and the second region of the European Union by nominal GDP. Lombardy is the leading region of Italy in terms of economic importance, contributing to approximately one-fifth of the national gross domestic product (GDP). It is also a member of the Four Motors for Europe, an international economic organization whose other members are Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg in Germany, Catalonia in Spain, and Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes in France. Milan is the economic capital of Italy and is a global centre for business, fashion and finance.\nOf the 58 UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Italy, 11 are in Lombardy, tying it with Castile and Le\u00f3n in northwest-central Spain. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Lombardy\" comes from \"Lombard\", which is derived from Late Latin ' (\"a Lombard\"), which derived from the Proto-Germanic elements + ; equivalent to \"long beard\". According to some scholars, the second element derives from Proto-Germanic \"*bard\u01ed\", \"*barduz\" (\"axe\"), related to German '.\nThe name of the region derives from the name of the people of the Lombards who arrived in Italy in 568 and made Pavia their capital. During the Early Middle Ages, \"Lombardy\" referred to the Kingdom of the Lombards (). It was ruled by the Germanic Lombard raiders, who controlled most of early Christian Italy since the Lombard invasion of Italy of Byzantine Italy in 568, until the fall of Pavia, in 774 by Charlemagne on the Pope's behalf. As such, \"Lombardy\" and \"Italy\" were nearly interchangeable; by the mid-8th century, the Lombards ruled everywhere except the Papal possessions around Rome\u2014roughly modern Lazio and northern Umbria\u2014Venice and some Byzantine possessions in the south\u2014southern Apulia and Calabria; some coastal settlements including Amalfi, Gaeta, Naples and Sorrento; Sicily and Sardinia; their culture is foundational to Italy in the Middle Ages. The term was also used until around 965 in the form (\"\") as the name for the territory roughly covering modern Apulia, which the Byzantines had recovered from the Lombard rump state Duchy of Benevento.\nGeography.\nLombardy has a surface area of , and is the fourth-largest region of Italy, after Sicily, Piedmont, and Sardinia. It is bordered by Canton Ticino and Canton Grisons of Switzerland to the north, and by the Italian regions of Trentino-Alto Adige/S\u00fcdtirol and Veneto to the east, Emilia-Romagna to the south and Piedmont to the west. \nLombardy's northern border lies between the Valtellina and the valleys of the Rhine and the Inn. To the east, Lake Garda and the Mincio separate Lombardy from the other Italian regions, as does the Po River in the south, with the exception of the province of Mantua and Oltrep\u00f2 Pavese. The western boundary is formed by the Lake Maggiore and the Ticino river, except for Lomellina. Lombardy has three natural zones: mountains, hills and plains\u2014the last being divided into \"Alta\" (high plains) and \"Bassa\" (low plains).\nSoils.\nThe surface area of Lombardy is divided almost equally between the plains (which represent approximately 47% of the territory) and the mountainous areas (which represent 41%). The remaining 12% of the region is hilly.\nThe orography of Lombardy is characterised by three distinct belts; a northern mountainous belt constituted by the Alpine relief, a central piedmont area of mostly alluvial pebbly soils, and the Lombard section of the Padan Plain in the south of the region. The main valleys are Val Camonica, Val Trompia, Valle Sabbia, Valtellina, Val Seriana, Val Brembana, Valsassina, and Valassina.\nThe most important mountainous area is the Alpine zone, which includes the Lepontine and Rhaetian Alps (), which derive their name, respectively, from the Raeti, a population of Etruscan origin who took refuge in the Central Alps during the Celtic invasion of the Italian peninsula, and from the Ligurian population of the Lepontii, who were settled in this area and then subjugated by the Roman emperor Augustus, the Orobic Alps () which derive their name from the Orobii, population of Ligurian or perhaps Celtic origin, the Ortler Alps and the Adamello massif. It is followed by the Alpine foothills zone Prealps, which are followed by hills that smooth the transition from the mountain to the Po Valley, the main peaks of which are the Grigna Group (), Resegone , and Presolana ().\nThe plains of Lombardy, which are formed by alluvial deposits, can be divided into the \"Alta\"\u2014an upper, permeable ground zone in the north\u2014and the \"Bassa\", a lower zone dotted by the line of \"fontanili\", where spring waters rise from impermeable ground. Inconsistent with the three distinctions above is the small sub-region of Oltrep\u00f2 Pavese, which is formed by the Apennine foothills beyond the Po, and Lomellina, an area particularly renowned for its rice paddies.\nHydrography.\nThe Po marks the southern border of the region for approximately ; its major tributaries are the Ticino, which rises in the Val Bedretto in Switzerland and joins the Po near Pavia, the Olona, the Lambro, the Adda, the Oglio and the Mincio.\nThe numerous lakes of Lombardy are all of glacial origin and are located in the northern highlands. From west to east, these lakes are: Lake Maggiore, Lake Lugano (both shared with Switzerland), Lake Como, Lake Iseo, Lake Idro, and Lake Garda (the largest lake in Italy). South of the Alps lies a succession of low hills of morainic origin that were formed during the Last Glacial Period,as well as small, barely fertile plateaux with typical heaths and conifer woods. A minor mountainous area, the Oltrep\u00f2 Pavese lies in the Apennines range south of the Po.\nThe navigli are a system of interconnected canals in and around Milan, dating back as far as the Middle Ages. The system consists of five canals: Naviglio Grande, Naviglio Pavese, Naviglio Martesana, Naviglio di Paderno, and Naviglio di Bereguardo. The first three were connected through Milan via the \"Fossa Interna\", also known as the Inner Ring. The urban section of the Naviglio Martesana was covered over at the beginning of the 1930s, together with the entire Inner Ring, thus sounding the death knell for the northeastern canals.\nAlpine passes.\nThe Lombard Alpine valleys are wider than those found in the Alps in Piedmont and Aosta Valley. Most of them are crossed by streams that descend towards the Po Valley, forming rivers that then flow into the Po on the hydrographic left. Thanks to the width of their valleys, the Lombard Alpine passes, although they are at a high altitude, are easily accessible.\nThe most important international passes found in the Lombard Alps, which connect the region with Switzerland are the Spl\u00fcgen Pass (), the Maloja Pass () and the Bernina Pass (), with the latter two which are located in Swiss territory. The most important national passes are the Stelvio Pass () and the Tonale Pass (), which connect Lombardy with Trentino-Alto Adige. These Alpine passes are also of great importance from a historical point of view, given that they have always allowed easy communication between Lombardy and its bordering territories. This has resulted in constant commercial traffic, which contributed to the development of the region.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe plains have been intensively cultivated for centuries, and little of the original environment remains. The most common trees are elm, alder, sycamore, poplar, willow, and hornbeam. In the area of the foothills lakes, however, olive, cypresses, and larches grow, as do varieties of subtropical flora such as magnolia, azalea and acacia. Numerous species of endemic flora in the Prealpine area include some species of saxifrage, Lombardy garlic, groundsel, and bellflowers.\nThe highlands are characterised by the typical vegetation of the Italian Alps. At and below approximately , oaks or broadleaf trees grow; on the mountain slopes between , beech trees grow at the lowest limits, with conifer woods higher up. Shrubs such as rhododendron, dwarf pine, and juniper are native to the summit zone beyond .\nLombardy includes many protected areas. The most important is Stelvio National Park, established in 1935\u2014the fourth-largest Italian natural park, with typically alpine wildlife such as red deer, roe deer, ibex, chamois, foxes, ermine, and golden eagles; and the Parco naturale lombardo della Valle del Ticino, which was instituted in 1974 on the Lombard side of the River Ticino to protect one of the last major examples of fluvial forest in northern Italy. There have also been efforts to protect the endangered Italian agile frog. The Parco naturale lombardo della Valle del Ticino is the first Italian regional park to be established as well as the first European river park. In 2022, the two parks were included by UNESCO in the World Network of Biosphere Reserves.\nOther parks in the region are the Campo dei Fiori and the Cinque Vette Park, both of which are located in the Province of Varese. The system of protected areas in Lombardy consists of one national park, 24 regional parks, 65 natural reserves and 30 natural monuments. In total, protected areas cover more than 27% of the regional territory.\nClimate.\nLombardy has a wide array of climates due to variations in elevation, proximity to inland water basins, and large metropolitan areas. The climate is mainly humid subtropical (K\u00f6ppen Cfa), especially in the plains, though with significant variations from the K\u00f6ppen model, especially in the normally long, damp, and cold winters. There is high seasonal temperature variation; in Milan, the average temperature is in January and in July. The plains are often subject to fog during the coldest months.\nIn the Alpine foothills with an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen Cfb), numerous lakes have a mitigating influence, allowing typically Mediterranean crops (such as olive and citrus fruit) to grow. In the hills and mountains, the climate is humid continental (K\u00f6ppen Dfb). In the valleys, it is relatively mild, while it can be severely cold with copious snowfalls above .\nPrecipitation is more intense in the Prealpine zone, with up to annually, but it is also abundant in the plains and alpine zones, with an average of annually. The average annual rainfall is . Lake Garda, thanks to its size and position, mitigates the climate of its coasts, creating a \"Mediterranean\" microclimate that makes the cultivation of olive trees and the production of olive oil possible; the so-called \"Lombard oil\" is also produced in other Lombard lake areas.\nGeology.\nThe geological structure of Lombardy derives from the orogeny of the Alps, resulting from the collision between the African and Eurasian plates, which generated the Alpine chain from the Upper Cretaceous to the Miocene.\nThe Po Valley, on the other hand, is of more recent origin, formed by the deposit of detrital material on the continental shelf, coming from the erosion caused by surface waters that accompanied the lifting of the Alpine chain, which rose to the west and north of the plain, and of the Apennine chain to the south, filling the marine gulf that existed in the Pliocene, created by the uplift of the two mountain chains.\nPollution.\nLombardy is one of the most air-polluted areas of Europe. Because of high levels of industrialisation and the lack of wind due to the region being enclosed between mountain ranges, air pollution remains a severe problem in Lombardy and northern Italy.\nIn March 2019, the European Space Agency (ESA) published images taken from its satellites, showing a large stain composed of nitrogen dioxide and fine particles above the Po Valley area. Lombardy is the geographic and economic centre of this area, with more than 10 million residents and the highest GRP per inhabitant in the country. Most of its major cities are located in the Po River basin, which crosses the region. The stain analysed by ESA is the main reason Po Valley air pollution levels are so high. Milan also has high levels of ozone and nitrogen oxides, which are mainly produced by diesel and petrol engines in cars.\nAccording to the Chicago Energy Policy Institute, which has recently developed the Air Quality Life Index (AQLI), Po Valley air pollution reduces life expectancy by approximately six months. Air pollution in the Po Valley is linked to livestock and factories. The use of NPK fertilizers, composed of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium, along with manure emissions from intensive breeding and high levels of nitrogen dioxide released by diesel and petrol engines are all contributing factors to pollution in Northern Italy. Lombardy also produces vast amounts of animal waste, a significant contributor to pollution. Lombardy produces more than 40% of Italy's milk, and over half of the Italian pig production is located in the Po Valley.\nAccording to research published in The Lancet Planetary Health, in January 2021, Brescia and Bergamo had the highest death rate from fine particulate matter (PM2.5) in Europe.\nThe data show that many cities in Lombardy and the Po Valley suffer from the most serious impact of poor air quality in Europe, primarily the metropolitan area of Milan, which ranks 13th in terms of fine particulate impact, with an annual premature death rate of 3,967, accounting for approximately 9% of the total.\nHistory.\nPrehistory and antiquity.\nFrom archaeological findings of ceramics, arrows, axes, and carved stones, the area of current-day Lombardy has been settled at least since the second millennium BC. Well-preserved rock drawings left by ancient Camuni in the Valcamonica depicting animals, people, and symbols were made over 8,000 years before the Iron Age, based on about 300,000 records.\nThe many artefacts found in a necropolis near Lake Maggiore and the Ticino demonstrate the presence of the Golasecca Bronze Age culture that prospered in western Lombardy between the ninth and the 4th centuries BC. In the following centuries, Lombardy was inhabited by different peoples; the Etruscans founded the city of Mantua and spread the use of writing. It was the seat of the Celtic Canegrate culture starting from the 13th century BC, and later of the Celtic Golasecca culture. From the 5th century BC, the area was invaded by more Celtic Gallic tribes coming from north of the Alps. These people settled in several cities including Milan and extended their rule to the Adriatic Sea. Celtic development was halted by the Roman expansion in the Po Valley from the 3rd century BC. After centuries of struggle, at the end of the 2nd century B.C., the entirety of modern-day Lombardy became a Roman province called Gallia Cisalpina\u2014\"Gaul on the inner side (with respect to Rome) of the Alps\".\nThe Roman culture and language overwhelmed the former civilisation in the following years, and Lombardy became one of the most developed and richest areas of Italy with the construction of roads and the development of agriculture and trade. Important figures were born here, such as Pliny the Elder (in Como) and Virgil (in Mantua). In late antiquity the strategic role of Lombardy was emphasised by the move of the capital of the Western Empire to Mediolanum (Milan). Here, in 313 AD, Roman Emperor Constantine issued the famous \"Edict of Milan\", which gave freedom of confession to all religions within the Roman Empire.\nKingdom of the Lombards.\nDuring and after the fall of the Western Empire, Lombardy heavily suffered from destruction brought about by a series of invasions by tribal peoples. After 540, Pavia became the permanent capital of the Ostrogothic Kingdom, the fixed site of the court and the royal treasury. The last and most effective invasion was that of the Germanic Lombards or Longobards, whose nation migrated to the region from the Carpathian basin in fear of the conquering Pannonian Avars in 568. The Lombards' long-lasting reign, with its capital in Pavia, gave the current name to the region. There was a close relationship between the Frankish, Bavarian and Lombard nobility for many centuries.\nAfter the initial struggles, relationships between the Lombard people and the Gallo-Roman peoples improved. The Lombard language and culture was integrated with the Latin culture, leaving evidence in many names, the legal code and laws. The Lombards became intermixed with the Roman population owing to their relatively smaller number. The end of Lombard rule came in 774, when the Frankish king Charlemagne conquered Pavia, deposed Desiderius the last Lombard king, and annexed the Kingdom of Italy\u2014mostly northern and central present-day Italy\u2014to his newly established Holy Roman Empire. Charlemagne was crowned by the Pope on 25 December 800. The former Lombard dukes and nobles were replaced by other German vassals, prince-bishops and marquises. The entire northern part of the Italian peninsula continued to be called \"Lombardy\" and its population \"Lombards\" throughout the following centuries.\nCommunes and the Empire.\nIn the 10th century, Lombardy, although formally under the rule of the Holy Roman Empire, was included in the kingdom of Italy, of which Pavia remained the capital until 1024. Starting gradually in the late-11th century, Lombardy became divided into many small, autonomous city-states, the medieval communes. Also in the 11th century, the region's economy underwent a significant boom due to improved trading, sartorial manufacturing of silk and wool, and agricultural conditions; arms manufacturing for the purpose of defensive army development, by the German imperial divisions of \"Guelphs\" (\"Welfen\") defending the Pope and \"Ghibellins\" (\"Wibellingen\") defending the Emperor, became a significant factor. As in other areas of Italy, this led to a growing self-acknowledgement of the cities, whose increasing wealth made them able to defy the traditional feudal supreme power that was represented by the German emperors and their local legates. \nThis process peaked in the 12th and 13th centuries, when Lombard Leagues formed by allied cities of Lombardy, usually led by Milan, defeated the Hohenstaufen Emperor Frederick I, at Legnano but not his grandson Frederick II at Battle of Cortenuova. Although having the military purpose as preponderant, the Lombard League also had its own stable government, considered one of the first examples of confederation in Europe. Subsequently, among the local city-states, a process of consolidation took place, and by the end of the 14th century, two \"signoria\" emerged as rival hegemons in Lombardy; Milan and Mantua.\nRenaissance duchies of Milan and Mantua.\nIn the 15th century, the Duchy of Milan was one of the wealthiest states during the Renaissance. Milan and Mantua became centres of the Renaissance, whose culture with people such as Leonardo da Vinci and Andrea Mantegna, and works of art such as da Vinci's \"The Last Supper\" were highly regarded. The enterprising class of the communes extended its trade and banking activities well into northern Europe; the metonym \"Lombard\" designated a merchant or banker from northern Italy, for example Lombard Street, London. \nThe name \"Lombardy\" came to denote the whole of northern Italy until the 15th century and sometimes later. From the 14th century onward, the instability created by the internal and external struggles ended in the creation of noble \"seigniories\", the most significant of whom were the Viscontis (later Sforzas) in Milan and of the Gonzagas in Mantua. This wealth, however, attracted the now-more-organised armies of national powers such as France and Austria, which waged a lengthy battle for Lombardy in the late 15th to early 16th centuries.\nLate-Middle Ages, Renaissance and Enlightenment.\nAfter the Battle of Pavia, the Duchy of Milan became a possession of the Habsburgs of Spain; the new rulers did little to improve the economy of Lombardy, instead imposing a growing series of taxes to support their lengthy series of European wars. The eastern part of modern-day Lombardy, including the cities Bergamo and Brescia, was controlled by the Republic of Venice, which had begun to extend its influence in the area from the 14th century onwards. Between the mid-15th century and the battle of Marignano in 1515, the northern part of east Lombardy from Airolo to Chiasso (modern Ticino), and the Valtellina valley came under possession of the Old Swiss Confederacy.\nPestilences like that of 1628\u20131630, which Alessandro Manzoni described in his \"I promessi sposi\" (\"The Betrothed\"), and the general decline of Italy's economy in the 17th and 18th centuries halted further development of Lombardy. In 1706 the Austrian Empire came to power, and introduced some economic and social measures that allowed a degree of recovery to occur.\nAustrian rule was interrupted in the late-18th century by the French; under Napoleon, Lombardy became the centre of the Cisalpine Republic and of the Kingdom of Italy, both of which were puppet states of France's First Empire, with Milan as capital and Napoleon as head of state. During this period, Lombardy regained Valtellina from Switzerland.\nModern era.\nThe restoration of Austrian rule in 1815 as the Kingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia was characterised by a struggle with the new ideals introduced by the Napoleonic era. Lombardy was then an important centre of the \"Risorgimento\", with the Five Days of Milan in March 1848, the Ten Days of Brescia in 1849, the Belfiore martyrs in Mantua in the years between 1851 and 1853. The annexation of Lombardy to the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia occurred following the Second Italian War of Independence in 1859, a war during which Lombardy was the main theatre of battle (battles of Montebello, Palestro, Magenta, Solferino and San Fermo). \nIn 1861, with the proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy, Lombardy became part of the modern Italian state, except for the central-eastern part of the province of Mantua which was annexed in 1866 after the Third Italian War of Independence. Regarding the battle of Solferino, it was during this conflict that Henry Dunant took the initiative to create the Red Cross. After the annexation of Mantua, Lombardy achieved its present-day territorial shape by adding the Oltrep\u00f2 Pavese, formerly the southern part of the Province of Novara, to the Province of Pavia.\nContemporary era.\nThe Alpine front of World War I crossed the eastern Lombardy Alpine side, and in the post-war period Milan was the centre of the Italian Fasces of Combat. Milan then became the Gold Medal of Military Valor for the Italian resistance movement during the Italian Civil War after its liberation from fascism during the World War II, while the partisan resistance spread across the valleys and provinces.\nFollowing the historical borders, in 1948 the administrative region of Lombardy was prefigured as part of the newly formed Italian Republic. In the years of the Italian economic miracle, Milan was one of the poles of the \"industrial triangle\" of northern Italy formed by the cities of Turin-Milan-Genoa. The Years of Lead had wide relevance in Lombardy, with the Piazza Fontana bombing in Milan in 1969 and the Piazza della Loggia bombing in Brescia in 1974.\nIn the 1980s, Milan became a symbol of the country's economic growth, and a symbol of the economic-financial rampantism of the so-called \"Milano da bere\", literally \"Milan to be drunk\", while the Milanese socialist group of Bettino Craxi was in the national government. The city of Milan, in the early 1990s, was the origin of the series of scandals known as \"Tangentopoli\" which emerged from the judicial investigations of the Milanese prosecutor's office known as Mani pulite, which then spread to the rest of the country.\nIn early 2020, Lombardy was severely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, in which Italy was one of the worst-affected countries in Europe. Several towns were quarantined from 22 February after community transmission was documented in Lombardy and Veneto the previous day. The entirety of Lombardy was placed under lockdown on 8 March, followed by all of Italy the following day, making Italy the first country to implement a nationwide lockdown in response to the epidemic, which the World Health Organization (WHO) declared a pandemic on 11 March. The lockdown was extended twice, and the region toughened restrictions on 22 March, banning outdoor exercise and the use of vending machines, but from the beginning of May, following a reported decrease in the number of active cases, restrictions were gradually relaxed.\nEconomy.\nLombardy is the first region of Italy in terms of economic importance. As of 2021[ [update]], the gross regional product (GRP) of Lombardy was equal to over \u20ac366\u00a0billion and accounted for about 22% of Italy's total GDP. Lombardy's 2021 GRP was \u20ac36,500 per person, more than 25% higher than the national average of \u20ac25,729. Lombardy is the second region of the European Union by nominal GDP.\nLombardy's services sector has grown since the 1980s, led by innovative activities in business services, credit and financial services. Lombardy also remains the main industrial area of Italy. Milan, its capital, is the economic capital of Italy, is a global financial and business centre and is widely regarded as a global capital in industrial design, fashion and architecture.\nLombardy has cultural and economic relationships with many foreign countries including Azerbaijan, Austria, France, Hungary, Switzerland (especially the cantons of Ticino and Grisons), Canada (the Province of Quebec), Germany (the States of Bavaria, Saxony, and Saxony-Anhalt), Kuwait, the Netherlands (Province of Zuid-Holland), and Russia.\nLombardy is a member of the Four Motors for Europe, an international economical organization whose other members are Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg in Germany, Catalonia in Spain, and Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes in France. The Lombardy region is also part of the EUSALP, which promotes innovation, sustainability, and economy in the Alpine regions of Austria, France, Liechtenstein, Northern Italy, Southern Germany, Switzerland, and Slovenia, and ARGE ALP, an economic forum of alpine regions of Austria, Northern Italy, Southern Germany, and Switzerland. Economical and cultural relationship are also strong with neighbouring Italian regions Friuli-Venezia Giulia, South Tyrol, Trentino, and Veneto.\nFurthermore, Lombardy is part of the economic heart of Europe and of the so-called Blue Banana. Milan is, together with London, Hamburg, Frankfurt, Munich and Paris, one of the six European economic capitals. The European Union has developed the Central Europe program in 2014\u20132020 to foster cooperation between Lombardy and other northern Italian regions and several countries in central Europe.\nThe region can be broadly divided into three economic areas: Milan, where the services sector comprises 65.3% of employment; the provinces of Varese, Como, Lecco, Monza and Brianza, Bergamo and Brescia, the latter having the highest value added in industry in Europe, where there is a highly industrialised economy and a rich agricultural sector; and the provinces of Sondrio, Pavia, Cremona, Mantova and Lodi, where there is consistent agricultural activity and an above-average development of the services sector.\nIn the tertiary sector, the weight of trade and finance is significant. The Italian Stock Exchange is based in Milan, one of the main European financial centres. In the early 21st century, two new business districts, Porta Nuova and CityLife, were built in Milan in the space of a decade, radically changing the skyline of the city. Banking, transport, communication and business services activities are also important. Milan is also a global hub for event management and trade fairs. Fiera Milano operates the most important trade fair organiser in Italy and the world's fourth largest exhibition hall in Rho, were international exhibitions like Milan Furniture Fair, EICMA, EMO take place on 400,000 square metres of exhibition areas with more than 4\u00a0million visitors in 2018. Milan hosted the Universal Exposition in 1906 and 2015.\nAgriculture.\nThe productivity of agriculture is enhanced by the use of fertilisers and the traditional abundance of water, which has been boosted since the Middle Ages by the construction of irrigation systems that were partly designed by Leonardo da Vinci. Lower plains are used for fodder crops, cereals (rice, wheat and maize) and sugar beet. Lombardy is one of the main European regions for rice production and together with Piedmont, produces 93% of Italian rice. Cultivation is concentrated in the provinces of Pavia (, Milan (), Lodi and Mantua (). Produce of the higher plains includes cereals, vegetables, fruit trees and mulberries. Fruits and wine are produced in upland areas such as the Prealps and Alps sectors in the north.\nLombardy is a centre of animal breeding, which includes dairy cows (36%) and pigs (50%). The region's dairy industry produces 30% of Italian milk, which is used to produce different types of cheese, totalling about 4,715,130 tonnes, 36% of Italian cheese production.\nA variety of cured sausages is produced in Lombardy, like Salame Milano, Salame bergamasco, Salame mantovano, Salame di Varzi, Bastardei, Salam casalin, Salame Brianza, Salame pancettato.\nVineyards cover . The most important product is the sparkling wines Franciacorta and Oltrep\u00f2 Pavese, which are produced using the same traditional method as Champagne, unlike other Italian sparkling wines, which use the charmat method. Lombardy ranks 9 of 20 in the production of DOC and DOCG wines with . Lombardy also produces still red, white and ros\u00e9 wines made from a variety of grapes, including Nebbiolo wines in the Valtellina region and Trebbiano di Lugana white wines produced with the \"Chiaretto\"-style ros\u00e9 along the shores of Lake Garda. The wine region currently has 15 (DOC), 3 (DOCG) and 13 designations. The region annually produces around of wine.\nBrescia is also the main production centre of Italian caviar. The world's largest sturgeon farm is located in Calvisano, about south of the city centre, producing 25 tonnes of caviar annually, which is exported worldwide. The main activity in Canneto sull'Oglio is the nursery production of broad-leaved plants, for which much land is dedicated.\nAerospace and defence.\nItaly is a major exporter of heavy helicopters (over ) with a market share of about 30%. The headquarters of Leonardo Helicopters Division (ex-AgustaWestland) is in Lombardy, and is responsible for about a third of the company's orders. The region also has a plant of Leonardo Aircraft Division (ex-Aermacchi). The main helicopter design, production and training facilities are located in Cascina Costa di Samarate, Vergiate and Sesto Calende. The company's aircraft division manufactures military training aircraft in Venegono Superiore.\nThe world's oldest firearms manufacturer, Beretta, is located in Gardone Val Trompia. Other firearms manufacturers in the region are Tanfoglio and Pedersoli. Ammunition is produced by Fiocchi. The former OTO Melara, now part of Leonardo Electronics Division in Brescia, produces small-calibre naval and airborne weapons.\nAutomotive.\nThere is no longer any car production in Lombardy; the factories of mass-market manufacturers Alfa Romeo, Autobianchi and Innocenti having been closed, abandoned or demolished. Iveco continues to manufacture light trucks Daily in Suzzara and makes EuroCargo lorries in Brescia. Same-Deutz Fahr manufactures tractors under the brands SAME and Lamborghini in Treviglio, and BCS Group makes tractors in Abbiategrasso.\nThe best-known automotive-parts suppliers are Brembo, Bergamo (ceramic brake systems); Pirelli, Milan (tyres); and Magneti Marelli, Corbetta (electronic systems, powertrain).\nMotorcycles from Lombardy:\nElectronics.\nThe largest European semiconductor company STMicroelectronics employs 5,600 people at its plant in a suburb of Milan. Manufacturers of general-purpose integrated circuits Agrate Brianza, which employs 4,500, and Cornaredo, which employs 1,100, have R&amp;D and production facilities.\nSAES Getters in Lainate produce getters, alkaline metal dispensers, cathodes and materials for thermal management. Their products are used in various devices such as X-ray tubes, microwave tubes, solid-state lasers, electron sources, photomultipliers, radio-frequency amplification systems, night-vision devices, pressure sensors, gyroscopes for navigation systems and MEMS devices.\nMagneti Marelli has headquarters and manufactures automotive electronics in Corbetta. Leonardo Electronics Division in Nerviano designs and develops airborne radar and computers, space equipment. Candy Hoover and Whirlpool (brands: Whirlpool, Indesit, Ariston, Hot Point, Ignis) make home appliances in Lombardy.\nEnergy.\nIn Lombardy, in 2015, electricity consumption per inhabitant amounted to 6,374 Wh. In the same year, gross energy production reached 41 GWh per 10,000 inhabitants and 26% of electricity consumption was covered by energy from renewable sources. There are 488 hydroelectric plants, 1,056 thermoelectric plants, 7 wind plants and 94,202 photovoltaic plants. The length of power lines in the region in 2014 is , of which are 220 kV and are 380 kV.\nFashion.\nMilan is a fashion capital of the world. Lombardy has always been an important centre for silk and textile production, notably the cities of Pavia, Vigevano and Cremona. Milan is one of the fashion capitals of the world; the city has approximately 12,000 companies, 800 showrooms and 6,000 sales outlets; the city hosts the headquarters of global fashion houses. The best-known high-class shopping district is Quadrilatero della moda.\nIn 2009, Milan was regarded as the world fashion capital, surpassing New York, Paris and London. Most of the major Italian fashion brands, such as Luxottica, Valentino, Versace, Prada, Armani, Dolce &amp; Gabbana and Zegna are currently headquartered in Milan. Buttons are manufactured in the industrial districts of Grumello del Monte and Palosco.\nFurniture.\nFurniture is manufactured in the industrial district around Brianza, which has an annual turnover of about \u20ac2 billion from 1,700 companies. The furniture factories, which have about 40,000 employees, are mainly concentrated in Lissone, Meda, Cant\u00f9 and Mariano Comense. This district has close relations with Milan's design industry. A number of large furniture exhibitions take place in Milan, including \"Salone del Mobile Milano\".\nTourism.\nIn the most dynamic and busiest of Italian regions it is not possible, on the basis of the figures, to distinguish tourists in the strict sense from those who travel for business. In 2019, 40,482,939 arrivals were recorded. Non-residents contributed to 51.8% of arrivals and 57.4% of presences.\nLombardy has a rich, diverse cultural heritage ranging from prehistory to the present day. Artefacts from the Roman period and the Renaissance can be found in museums and churches. Major tourist destinations in the region include (in order of arrivals as of 2013[ [update]]):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAmong the natural beauties, the pre-Alpine lakes on whose shores patrician villas, vegetable gardens, gardens, terraces and ancient villages alternate with dense clusters of second homes must be ranked first. The coastal locations are connected by scheduled shipping routes. Villa d'Este in Cernobbio and other villas in the Como area host world-famous people: financial magnates, film stars, writers, heads of state, singers and stylists.\nOther important tourist flows concern the Alpine valleys (in particular Valtellina) and the numerous historical-artistic cities, rich in monuments and testimonies of the Middle Ages and the Italian Renaissance.\nAmong the most visited places are the Pinacoteca di Brera (336,981 visitors), Leonardo da Vinci's \"Last Supper\" (330,071), the Archaeological Museum of Sirmione with the Grottoes of Catullus (216,612), the Scaligero Castle (202,066), Certosa di Pavia (approximately 200,000) and Villa Carlotta (170,260).\nUnemployment.\nThe unemployment rate of Lombardy stood at 4.3% in 2023. In that year, regional unemployment was one of the lowest in Italy.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOne-sixth of the Italian population, about 10 million people, live in Lombardy (16.2% of the national population; 2% of the European Union population). Lombardy is the second most populous region in the European Union (EU).\nThe population is highly concentrated in the Milan metropolitan area (2,029 inh./km2) and the Alpine foothills that compose the southern section of the provinces Varese, Como, Lecco, Monza and Brianza and Bergamo, (1,200 inh./km2). A lower average population density (250 inh./km2) is found in the Po Valley and the lower Brescia valleys; much lower densities (fewer than 60 inh./km2) inhabit the northern mountain areas and the southern Oltrep\u00f2 Pavese subregion.\nThe growth of the regional population was particularly sustained during the 1950s\u20131960s, due to a prolonged economic boom, high birth rates and strong migration inflows\u2014especially from southern Italy. Since the 1980s, Lombardy has become the destination of a large number of international migrants. As of 2021[ [update]], the Italian National Institute of Statistics (ISTAT) estimated that 1,190,889 foreign-born people live in Lombardy, equal to 11.9% of the total population.\nReligion.\nThe primary religion is Roman Catholicism. Over the centuries, the Catholic dioceses of Lombardy have given birth to ten popes: Pope John XIV, Pope Alexander II, Pope Urban III, Pope Celestine IV, Pope Pius IV, Pope Gregory XIV, Pope Innocent XI, Pope Pius XI, Pope John XXIII and Pope Paul VI. \nThe structure of the Lombard Catholic dioceses is historical. Of the ten dioceses, eight date back to the Roman Empire, only Crema and Vigevano were created in the 16th century to reflect political needs, and it does not appear that any diocesan seat was ever suppressed. The diocese of Lugano was created in the 19th century to separate the Swiss parishes which since ancient times had been dependent on the dioceses of Como and Milan.\nIn Lombardy there are two main Catholic liturgical rites: the Ambrosian Rite (used in the Milanese archdiocese, but also used in the parishes of Val Taleggio in the province of Bergamo) and the Roman Rite. The Milanese diocese, comprising approximately half of the faithful of the region, is the metropolitan see, while the others are its suffragans.\nSignificant religious minorities in Lombardy include Evangelicals, Orthodox Christians, as well as Jews, Buddhists, Sikhs and Muslims.\nGovernment and politics.\nGovernment.\nLombardy has a system of representative democracy in which the President of the Region (') is the head of government and of a pluriform multi-party system. Executive power is vested in the regional government (') and legislative power is vested in the Regional Council (\"\").\nLike the other regions of Italy with ordinary statutes, the region has been provided for since 1948 by articles 114 and 115 of the Constitution of Italy, but only with law no. 281 of 16 May 1970 having as its object \"Financial measures for the implementation of the Regions with ordinary statute\", did it implement its functions. The law, which aimed to implement the process of administrative decentralization envisaged by article 5 and article 118 of the Constitution, started the process.\nThe Council is elected for a five-year term, but, if the President suffers a vote of no confidence, resigns or dies, under the \"simul stabunt, simul cadent\" clause introduced in 1999 (literally \"they will stand together or they will fall together\"), also the Council is dissolved and a snap election is called. The Regional Cabinet (\"Giunta Regionale\") is presided by the President of the Region (\"Presidente della Regione\"), who is elected for a five-year term, and is currently composed by 17 members: the President and 16 regional Assessors, including a Vice President (\"Vice Presidente\"), while 4 under-secretaries (\"Sottosegretari\") help the President but have no voting rights in the cabinet meetings.\nPolitics.\nFrom 1945 to the early 1990s, the moderate Christian Democrats maintained a large majority of the popular support and control of the most important cities and provinces from the end of the Second World War. The opposition Italian Communist Party was a considerable presence only in southern Lombardy and in the working-class districts of Milan; their base, however, was increasingly eroded by the rival centrist Italian Socialist Party until the \"Mani Pulite\" corruption scandal, which spread from Milan to the whole of Italy, almost completely erased the old political class.\nThis, together with general disaffection for the central government, led to the sudden growth of the secessionist Northern League. Since 2002, Lombardy has remained strongly conservative in six general elections. The regional capital Milan elected progressive Giuliano Pisapia at the 2011 municipal elections and the 2013 regional elections saw a narrow victory for the centre-right coalition.\nOn 22 October 2017, a non-binding autonomy referendum took place in Lombardy. The turnout was 38.3%, of which 95.3% voted in favour.\nAdministrative divisions.\nLombardy is divided into 1,502 \"comuni\" (the region with the largest number of \"comuni\" in the entire national territory), distributed in twelve administrative subdivisions (eleven provinces plus the Metropolitan City of Milan). The largest province is that of Brescia, the smallest that of Monza and Brianza. The exclave of Campione d'Italia also belongs to the region, a \"comune\" entirely surrounded by Swiss territory and part of the province of Como.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSymbols.\nThe symbols of Lombardy are, pursuant to the region's statute of autonomy, the flag, the coat of arms, the banner and the celebration of 29 May.\nThe official coat of arms of Lombardy consists of a Camunian rose, an ancient solar symbol common to some proto-Celtic peoples, present in 94 of the approximately 140,000 Rock Drawings in Valcamonica, in the province of Brescia. These engravings were made from the Mesolithic (approximately 8th-6th millennium BC) to the Iron Age (1st millennium BC) by various ancient peoples, including the Camunni. The engravings made by the latter, including the rose of the same name, were made during the Iron Age.\nThe Camunian rose on the region's coat of arms is made of argent, symbolizing light. In the background, the green colour represents the Po Valley. Officially adopted together with the banner with regional law n. 85 of 12 June 1975, the coat of arms was introduced on the proposal of the then councilor for culture Alessandro Fontana and was designed in the same year by Pino Tovaglia, Bob Noorda, Roberto Sambonet and Bruno Munari.\nThe banner consists of a reproduction of the Carroccio, a large four-wheeled chariot bearing the city insignia around which the militias of the Medieval communes of northern Italy gathered and fought, whose autonomy it represented, and of the coat of arms of the region. The dimensions of the Lombardy banner are and the ribbons and tie are in the national colours of Italy.\nSince 29 January 2019 the Lombardy region has adopted the coat of arms with the Camunian rose as its official flag, thus attesting to the established practice in public offices and events.\nThe regional festival of Lombardy, which was established with regional law n. 15 of 26 November 2013, is celebrated on 29 May in memory of the victory of the Lombard League over the imperial troops of Frederick Barbarossa in the battle of Legnano, an armed clash which took place on 29 May 1176 in the surroundings of the city of the same name which ended to the hegemonic plan of the German emperor over the medieval municipalities of northern Italy. After the decisive defeat of Legnano, the emperor accepted a six-year armistice (the so-called \"Venice truce\"), until the Peace of Constance, following which the medieval municipalities of northern Italy agreed to remain faithful to the Empire in exchange for full local jurisdiction over their territories.\nSociety.\nCuisine.\nLombard cuisine is the style of cooking in the Northern Italian region of Lombardy. The historical events of its provinces and the diversity of its territories resulted in a varied culinary tradition. First courses in Lombard cuisine range from risottos to soups and stuffed pasta (in broth or not), and a large choice of second-course meat or fish dishes, due to the many lakes and rivers of Lombardy.\nThe cuisine of the various Lombardy provinces can be united by the following traits: prevalence of rice and stuffed pasta over dry pasta, both butter and olive oil for cooking, dishes cooked for a long time, as well as the widespread use of pork, milk and dairy products, and egg-based preparations; to which is added the consumption of polenta, common to the whole Northern Italy.\nRice is popular in Lombardy; the region is the largest in Europe for rice production and in particular the province of Pavia, where over are cultivated. Rice is often used in soups and \"risotti\", such as \"risotto alla milanese\", with saffron. In Monza, a popular recipe adds pieces of sausages to the risotto, while in Pavia they eat Carthusian risotto, according to the legend created by the monks of the Certosa, which is based on crayfish, carrots and onions. They also eat risotto with eye beans, a version with sausage and bonarda, and risotto with common hops (\u00fcrtis in Pavese dialect). Polenta is common throughout the region.\nRegional cheeses include \"Robiola\", \"Crescenza\", \"Taleggio\", \"Gorgonzola\" and \"Grana Padano\". Butter and cream are used. Single-pot dishes, which take little work to prepare, are popular. Common types of pasta include Casoncelli in Brescia and Bergamo and Pizzoccheri in Valtellina. In Mantua, festivals feature \"tortelli di zucca\" (ravioli with pumpkin filling) accompanied by melted butter and followed by turkey stuffed with chicken or other stewed meats. Among typical regional desserts is Nocciolini di Canzo\u2014dry biscuits. Common in the whole Insubria area are \"bruscitti\", originating from Altomilanese, which consist of a braised meat dish cut very thin and cooked in wine and fennel seeds, historically obtained by stripping leftover meat.\nTypical dishes and products.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWines.\nLombardy wine is the Italian wine produced in Lombardy. The region is known particularly for its sparkling wines made in the Franciacorta and Oltrep\u00f2 Pavese areas. Lombardy also produces still red, white and ros\u00e9 wines made from a variety of local and international grapes, including Nebbiolo wines in the Valtellina region and Trebbiano di Lugana white wines produced with the \"Chiaretto\" style ros\u00e9 along the shores of Lake Garda. The wine region currently has 22 (DOC), 5 (DOCG) and at least 13 designations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguages.\nLombard language is widely used in Lombardy, in diglossia with Italian. Lombard is a language belonging to the Gallo-Italic group within the Romance languages characterized by a Celtic linguistic substratum and a Lombardic linguistic superstratum. It is a cluster of homogeneous varieties used by at least 3,500,000 native speakers in Lombardy and some areas of neighbouring regions, such as the eastern part of Piedmont and the southern Switzerland cantons of Ticino and Grisons. The language is also spoken in Santa Catarina in Brazil by Lombard immigrants from the Province of Bergamo, in Italy.\nThe Celtic linguistic substratum of modern Lombard and the neighbouring languages of Northern Italy is self-evident and so the Lombard language is classified as a Gallo-Italic language (from the ancient Roman name for the Celts, Gauls). Roman domination shaped the dialects spoken in the area, which was called Cisalpine Gaul by the Romans, and much of the lexicon and grammar of the Lombard language have their origin in Latin. However, that influence was not homogeneous since idioms of different areas were influenced by previous linguistic substrata, and each area was marked by a stronger or weaker Latinisation or the preservation of ancient Celtic characteristics.\nThe main varieties of the Lombard language are Western Lombard (spoken in the provinces of Varese, Como, Lecco, Sondrio, Monza and Brianza, Milan, Lodi and Pavia), Eastern Lombard (in the provinces of Bergamo and Brescia, in Cremasco, in Upper Mantua and in the Lecco municipalities of Val San Martino), the Alpine Lombard (in Ticino and in Italian Grisons, in the north of Lombardy and Piedmont and in some areas of Trentino) and the Southern Lombard, in transition with the Emilian language (in the provinces of Cremona and Mantua); in the southern part of the province of Mantua and in Casalasco (south-eastern area of the province of Cremona) Emilian language is spoken.\nThe Lombard language should not be confused with that of the Lombards \u2013 Lombardic language, a Germanic language extinct since the Middle Ages. Lombard is considered a minority language that is structurally separate from Italian by both Ethnologue and the UNESCO \"Red Book on Endangered Languages\". However, Italy and Switzerland do not recognize Lombard speakers as a linguistic minority. Traditionally, the Lombard dialects have been classified into the Eastern, Western, Alpine and Southern Lombard dialects.\nCulture.\nArt and architecture.\nFrom prehistory to the classical era.\nThe first artistic evidence in Lombardy dates back to the Mesolithic period when, at the end of the W\u00fcrm glaciation, the historical cycle of the Rock Drawings in Valcamonica began, which continued and subsequently expanded in the Neolithic and the Copper Age to end only in Roman and medieval times. The Camunian cycle is considered one of the most important testimonies of prehistory worldwide and is therefore included in the list of World Heritage Site.\nFurthermore, further finds have been found of the presence of prehistoric populations in the Lombardy territory, also included in the world heritage of humanity with the serial site of the \"Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps\", with several locations located in Lombardy.\nThe Celts left evidence scattered throughout the archaeological museums of the region, while the Etruscan presence is attested in the Mantua area. Following the Roman conquest, the artistic evolution of the region veered towards the styles of the conquerors from the late republican period to the Roman imperial era: monumental remains of this historical era can be seen in Brescia () and Milan ().\nFrom late antiquity to the modern era.\nIn the late ancient period, the Lombardy territory acquired importance, with Milan being the capital of the Western Roman Empire, and consequently, the artistic production also increased, of which evidence remains especially in sacred architecture with the construction of Early Christian churches, particularly in Milan.\nThe subsequent early medieval period, coeval with and following the Migration Period, will be of capital importance for the development of regional art: the stylistic features of barbarian art introduced by the new populations in fact brought a decisive contribution, merging with late ancient models (which are maintained with continuity) as well as thanks to Byzantine influences, for the creation of a truly Lombard art. In fact, upon leaving the early medieval period, we began to talk about artistic styles specific to Lombardy such as the Lombard Romanesque.\nNoteworthy examples of the Lombard Romanesque style are the work of the Comacine masters, in particular in the Basilica of Sant'Ambrogio and Basilica of San Michele Maggiore and in the Basilica of Sant'Abbondio, in the Como area. The most important contribution between the 6th and 8th centuries came from the Lombards who, occupying a large part of Italy, established their capital in Pavia and made Lombardy the fulcrum of their kingdom bringing their art with them, of which there remain both significant testimonies (in particular in Brescia, Monza, Pavia and Castelseprio) and a substantial influence on subsequent artistic developments.\nIn the Lombard area, the Carolingian period saw substantial artistic continuity with the previous Lombard period. The lower production of monumental buildings typical of these centuries is counterbalanced by numerous minor artefacts of great value, such as the Cross of Agilulf, the Cross of Desiderius and the Gospel Book of Theodelinda. Also in Lombardy are some of the greatest expressions of Lombard sculpture, such as the slab with peacock in the Museum of Santa Giulia in Brescia or the Plutei of Theodota in the Pavia Civic Museums. The following centuries, as already mentioned, were characterized by artistic styles typical of Lombardy such as the Lombard Romanesque, the Lombard Gothic, the Lombard Renaissance and the Lombard Seicento. Finally, we must not forget, especially during the Renaissance, the contributions and stimuli left in local art by some great Renaissance masters who worked in Milan at the Sforza court, such as Filarete, Donato Bramante and Leonardo da Vinci and in Mantua at the Gonzaga court, like Andrea Mantegna and Giulio Romano.\nContemporary age.\nIn February 1910 the painters Umberto Boccioni, Carlo Carr\u00e0, Giacomo Balla, Gino Severini and Luigi Russolo signed the \"Manifesto dei pittori futuristi\" in Milan and in April of the same year the \"Manifesto tecnico della pittura futurista,\", which they contributed, together with others posters signed in other Italian cities, to found the artistic movement of Futurism. Upon the death of Umberto Boccioni in 1916, Carr\u00e0 and Severini found themselves in a phase of evolution towards cubist painting, consequently, the Milanese group disbanded, moving the headquarters of the movement from Milan to Rome, with the consequent birth of the \"second Futurism\".\nLombardy was the birthplace of another important artistic movement of the 20th century, the Novecento, which was born in Milan at the end of 1922. It was started by a group of artists composed of Mario Sironi, Achille Funi, Leonardo Dudreville, Anselmo Bucci, Emilio Malerba, Pietro Marussig and Ubaldo Oppi who, at the Pesaro Gallery in Milan, joined together in the new movement baptized Novecento by Bucci. These artists, who felt they were translators of the spirit of the 20th century, came from different experiences and artistic currents, but linked by a common sense of \"return to order\" in art after the avant-garde experiments especially of Futurism: in this sense this artistic movement also adopted the name of simplified Neoclassicism. The Novecento movement also manifested itself in literature with Massimo Bontempelli and above all in architecture with the famous architects Giovanni Muzio, Gi\u00f2 Ponti, Paolo Mezzanotte and others. Some of the works of the major Lombard artists of the 20th century are exhibited at the Museo del Novecento in Milan.\nHistorical and artistic villages.\nLombardy has many small and picturesque villages, 26 of them have been selected by (), a non-profit private association of small Italian towns of strong historical and artistic interest, that was founded on the initiative of the Tourism Council of the National Association of Italian Municipalities. The Lombard villages that are members of the association I Borghi pi\u00f9 belli d'Italia (\"The most beautiful villages in Italy\") are:\nLiterature.\nThe first texts written in the vernacular Lombard language date back to the 13th century. These are mainly works of a didactic-religious nature; an example is the \"Sermon Divin\" by Pietro da Barsegap\u00e8, which narrates the Passion of Jesus. Very important is the contribution to Lombard literature of Bonvesin de la Riva, who wrote, among other works, the \"Liber di Tre Scricciur\", the \"De magnalibus urbis Mediolani\" (\"The Wonders of Milan\"), and an etiquette, the \"De quinquaginta curialitatibus ad mensam\" (\"Fifty table courtesies\").\nFrom the 15th century, the prestige of literary Tuscan began to supplant the use of northern vernaculars which had been used, although influenced by the Florentine vernacular, also in chancellor and administrative contexts. Despite this, starting from this century, there began to be the first signs of a true Lombard literature, with literary compositions in the Lombard language both in the western part of the region and in the eastern one.\nThe 17th century also saw the emergence of the figure of the playwright Carlo Maria Maggi, who created, among other things, the Milanese mask of Meneghino. Also in the 17th century, the first \"bosinade\" were born, occasional popular poems written on loose sheets of paper and posted in squares or read (or even sung) in public; they had great success and widespread diffusion until the first decades of the 20th century. Milanese literature had a strong development in the 18th century: some important names emerged, including the famous poet Giuseppe Parini, who wrote some compositions in the Lombard language.\nThe beginning of the 19th century was dominated by the figure of Carlo Porta, recognized by many as the most important author of Lombard literature, and also included among the greatest poets of Italian national literature. With him, some of the highest peaks of literary expressiveness in the Lombard language were reached, which clearly emerged in works such as \"La Ninetta del Verzee\", \"Desgrazzi de Giovannin Bongee\", \"La guerra di pret\" e \"Lament del Marchionn de gamb avert\". Milanese poetic production took on such important dimensions that in 1815 the scholar Francesco Cherubini published a four-volume anthology of Lombard literature, which included texts written from the 17th century to his day.\nMain sights.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMuseums and art galleries.\nLombardy has more than 300 museums in subjects such as ethnographic, historical, technical-scientific, artistic and naturalistic fields. Among the region's most famous museums are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMusic.\nEach of Lombardy's 12 provinces has its own musical traditions. Bergamo is famous for being the birthplace of Gaetano Donizetti and home of the Teatro Donizetti; Brescia hosts the 1709 Teatro Grande; Cremona is regarded as the origin of the violin and is home to several of the most prestigious luthiers; and Mantua was one of the founding and most important cities in 16th- and 17th-century opera and classical music.\nOther cities such as Lecco, Lodi, Varese and Pavia (Teatro Fraschini) also have rich musical traditions, but Milan is the centre of the Lombard musical scene. It was the workplace of Giuseppe Verdi, one of the most famous and influential 19th-century opera composers. The province has acclaimed theatres, such as the Piccolo Teatro and the Teatro Arcimboldi; however, the most famous is the 1778 Teatro alla Scala (popularly La Scala), the world's most famous opera house.\nUNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nThere are ten UNESCO World Heritage sites wholly or partially located in Lombardy. Some of these comprise several individual objects in different locations. One of the entries has been listed as natural heritage and the others are cultural heritage sites.\nAt Monte San Giorgio on the border with Swiss canton Ticino just south of Lake Lugano, a wide range of marine Triassic fossils have been found. During the Triassic period, 245\u2013230 million years ago, the area was a shallow tropical lagoon. Fossils include reptiles, fish, crustaceans and insects.\nThe Rock Drawings in Valcamonica date to between 8000BC and 1000BC, covering prehistoric periods from the Epipaleolithic and Mesolithic to the Iron Age, and constitute the largest collections of prehistoric petroglyphs in the world. The collection was recognized by UNESCO in 1979 and was Italy's first recognized World Heritage Site. UNESCO has formally recognized more than 140,000 figures and symbols, but new discoveries have increased the number of catalogued incisions to between 200,000 and 300,000. The petroglyphs are spread on all surfaces of the valley, but concentrated in the areas of Darfo Boario Terme, Capo di Ponte, Nadro, Cimbergo and Paspardo.\nPrehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps are a series of prehistoric pile dwelling (or stilt house) settlements in and around the Alps built from about 5000 to 500 BC on the edges of lakes, rivers or wetlands. In 2011, 111 sites located variously in Switzerland (56), Italy (19), Germany (18), France (11), Austria (5) and Slovenia (2) were added to the UNESCO World Heritage Site list. In Slovenia, these were the first World Heritage Sites to be listed for their cultural value. Excavations conducted at some of the sites have yielded evidence regarding prehistoric life and the way communities interacted with their environment during the Neolithic and Bronze Ages in Alpine Europe. These settlements are a unique group of exceptionally well-preserved and culturally rich archaeological sites, which constitute one of the most important sources for the study of early agrarian societies in the region.\nAnother multi-centred site, Longobards in Italy, Places of Power (568\u2013774 A.D.) consists of seven locations across mainland Italy which illustrate the history of the Lombard period. Two of the sites are in modern-day Lombardy: the fortifications (the \"castrum\" and the Torba Tower), and the church of Santa Maria \"foris portas\" (\"outside the gates\") has Byzantinesque frescoes at Castelseprio, and the monastic complex of San Salvatore-Santa Giulia at Brescia. The UNESCO site at Brescia also includes the remains of its Roman forum, the best-preserved in northern Italy.\nThe Church and Dominican Convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan with \"The Last Supper\" by Leonardo da Vinci represent architectural and painting styles of the 15th-century Renaissance period. The towns Mantua and Sabbioneta are also listed as a combined World Heritage site relating to this period, here focussing more on town-planning aspects of the time than on architectural detail. While Mantua was rebuilt in the 15th and 16th centuries, according to Renaissance principles, Sabbioneta was planned as a new town in the 16th century.\nThe Sacri Monti of Piedmont and Lombardy are a group of nine sites in northwest Italy, two of which are in Lombardy. The concept of holy mountains can be found elsewhere in Europe. These sites were created as centres of pilgrimage by placing chapels in the natural landscape and were loosely modelled on the topography of Jerusalem. In Lombardy, Sacro Monte del Rosario di Varese and Sacro Monte della Beata Vergine del Soccorso, which were built in the early-to mid-17th century, mark the architectural transition from the late Renaissance to the Baroque style.\nCrespi d'Adda is a historic settlement and an outstanding example of the 19th and early 20th-century \"company towns\" built in Europe and North America by enlightened industrialists to meet the workers' needs. The site is still intact and is partly used for industrial purposes, although changing economic and social conditions now threaten its survival. Since 1995 it has been on UNESCO's list of World Heritage Sites.\nMantua and Sabbioneta represent two approaches of Renaissance period town planning. Mantua (pictured), originating in Roman times and preserving structures from the 11th century, was renovated in the 15th and 16th centuries. On the other hand, Sabbioneta was founded in the second half of the 16th century by Vespasiano I Gonzaga and built with a grid plan, according to the period's vision of an ideal city.\nThe Rhaetian Railway in the Albula/Bernina Landscapes is mostly located in the Swiss canton Grisons, but extends over the border into Tirano. The site is listed because of the complex railway engineering (tunnels, viaducts and avalanche galleries) necessary to take the narrow-gauge railway across the main chain of the Alps. The two railway lines were opened in several stages between 1904 and 1910.\nThe is a transnational system of fortifications that were built by the Republic of Venice on its mainland domains (\"Stato da Terra\") and its territories stretching along the Adriatic coast (\"Stato da Mar\"). This site includes the fortified city Bergamo.\nSport.\nThe most popular sport in Lombardy is football. Lombardy has some of the most-successful men's football teams in the country. In the 2023\u20132024 Serie A season, Lombardy hosts 4 out of 20 teams: A.C. Milan and Inter Milan (both based in Milan) and Atalanta (based in Bergamo); Monza. Other big teams of the region are Brescia, Como, Lecco, Feralpisal\u00f2 and Cremonese playing in the 2023\u20132024 Serie B; AlbinoLeffe, Pro Patria, A.C. Renate, Lumezzane, Giana Erminio, Pro Sesto and Pergolettese playing in the 2023\u20132024 Serie C.\nMilan, along with Manchester, is one of only two cities in Europe that is home to two European Cup/Champions League winning teams: Serie A football clubs AC Milan and Inter. They are two of the most successful clubs in the world of football in terms of international trophies. Both teams have also won the FIFA Club World Cup (formerly the Intercontinental Cup). With a combined ten Champions League titles, Milan is only second to Madrid as the city with the most European Cups. Both teams play at the UEFA 5-star-rated Giuseppe Meazza Stadium, more commonly known as the San Siro, that is one of the biggest stadiums in Europe, with a seating capacity of over 80,000. The Meazza Stadium has hosted four European Cup/Champions League finals, most recently in 2016, when Real Madrid defeated Atl\u00e9tico Madrid 5\u20133 in a penalty shoot-out.\nOlimpia Milano (based in Milan) is the most successful men's basketball team in Italy. In the 2023-24 LBA season 4 teams out of 16 are from Lombardy (Olimpia Milano, Pallacanestro Brescia, Pallacanestro Varese, Guerino Vanoli Basket). Olimpia Milano have won 27 Italian League championships, six Italian National Cups, one Italian Super Cup, three European Champions Cups, one FIBA Intercontinental Cup, three FIBA Saporta Cups, two FIBA Kora\u0107 Cups and many junior titles. The team play at the Mediolanum Forum, with a capacity of 12,700, where it has been hosted the final of the 2013\u201314 Euroleague. In some cases, the team also plays at the PalaDesio, with a capacity of 6,700.\nMilan is also home to Italy's oldest American football team: Rhinos Milano, who have won five Italian Super Bowls. The team plays at the Velodromo Vigorelli, with a capacity of 8,000. Another American football team that uses the same venue is the Seamen Milano, who will join the professional European League of Football in 2023. Bergamo Lions have won Italian Super Bowls more than any other team 12 times. They won the Eurobowl in 2000, 2001 and 2002, while losing to the Vienna Vikings in the finals of 2004 and 2005 Eurobowl. Legnano Frogs were European Football League champions in 1989 (with two participations in the Eurobowl final) and won six Italian Football League titles (with 11 participations in the Italian Super Bowl).\nMilan will host the 2026 Winter Olympics alongside Cortina d'Ampezzo. The Giro d'Italia, a famous annual bicycle race, usually ends in Milan. Amatori Rugby Milano, the most decorated rugby team in Italy, was founded in Milan in 1927. Alpine skiing is also important for the region; the FIS Alpine Ski World Cup holds an annual race in Bormio. The Monza Circuit, located near Milan, hosts the Formula One Italian Grand Prix. The circuit is located inside the Royal Villa of Monza park. It is one of the world's oldest car racing circuits. The capacity for the Formula One races is currently over 113,000. It has hosted a Formula One race nearly every year since the first year of competition, with the exception of 1980. Milan will host the Winter Olympic and Paralympic games for the first time in 2026, together with Cortina d'Ampezzo.\nTraditions and folklore.\nThere are numerous traditional festivals and meetings in Lombardy: cities and towns offer calendars full of events, some of which have ancient origins.\nThe Oh bej! Oh bej! is held in Milan on 7 and 8 December each year and commemorates the appointment of Saint Ambrose as bishop of the city.\nThe Ambrosian Carnival () is celebrated in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Milan and in the territories of some of the neighbouring dioceses. It lasts until the first Saturday of Lent.\nThe Bagolino Carnival (), of very ancient tradition, is celebrated in Bagolino, an ancient village that retains its medieval architectural characteristics and located in the Caffaro Valley, in the province of Brescia.\nThe Palio di Legnano is held in the city of the same name and in the Metropolitan City of Milan, on the last Sunday of May. It is the historical re-enactment which celebrates the victory of the Lombard League over the emperor Frederick Barbarossa in the battle of Legnano on 29 May 1176. The event includes a medieval pageant through the streets of the city and finally a horse race between the eight contrade in which Legnano is divided.\nThe historical re-enactment of the oath of Pontida is held in Pontida, in the province of Bergamo, on 7 March and commemorates the legendary oath of the Lombard League which should have been the prelude to the victorious war of the Lombard municipalities against Barbarossa.\nTransport.\nAirports.\nThe airport service in Lombardy is made up of 4 main airports and represents the most important airport system in Italy. In the surroundings of Milan there are three airports dedicated to normal civilian traffic (Milan Malpensa Airport and Milan Linate Airport, managed by SEA, and Milan Bergamo Airport by SACBO). \nOverall, the Milan airport system handles traffic of over 51.4\u00a0million passengers and around 700,000 tons of goods every year and is the first in Italy in terms of passenger volume and cargo volume (the second Italian airport system is Rome with 44.4\u00a0million passengers in 2023). The Milan Malpensa Airport, with over 700 thousand tons, confirms the national leadership, processing 70% of the country's air cargo.\nLastly, Bresso Airfield is a general aviation airport, operated by Aero Club Milano. Since 1960 the airport mostly serves as a general aviation airfield for flying club activity, touristic flights and air taxi. It also hosts a base of the state helicopter emergency service \"Elisoccorso\".\nGhedi Air Base is a base of the Italian Air Force in Ghedi, about from Brescia. It is home to the 6\u00ba Stormo of the Italian Air Force with the 102\u00ba Gruppo (\"Papero\"), the 154\u00ba Gruppo (\"Diavoli Rossi\") and the 155\u00ba Gruppo (\"Le linci\") equipped with the Tornado IDS. It is one of six active air bases in five European countries with B61 nuclear bombs in underground WS3 Weapon Storage and Security System inside aircraft shelters. and as of 2019 housed more than 40 nuclear weapons.\nRail.\nThe Lombardy railway network has 428 stations and extends for approximately . The network is mainly managed by RFI; of railway lines are under concession to Ferrovienord, while the Parma-Suzzara and Suzzara-Ferrara lines, although partially falling within Lombardy ( and 11 stations), are under concession to Ferrovie Emilia Romagna.\nThe national and international railway service is mainly ensured by Trenitalia and to a lesser extent by Nuovo Trasporto Viaggiatori, TGV and Deutsche Bahn. The regional territory has three high-speed lines: Turin\u2013Milan high-speed railway, Milan\u2013Bologna high-speed railway and Milan\u2013Verona high-speed railway.\nMilan is the core of Lombardy's regional train network. The regional service is the responsibility of Trenord, a company founded on 3 May 2011 and jointly owned by the Ferrovie Nord Milano and Trenitalia, which operates on both the RFI and Ferrovie Nord Milano networks, which have the Milan Passerby railway as their main interconnection hub. The Trenitalia Tper company operates on the FER network.\nMilano Centrale railway station, with 110 million passengers per year, is the largest and eighth busiest railway station in Europe and the second busiest in Italy after Roma Termini. Milano Cadorna and Milano Porta Garibaldi stations are respectively the seventh and the eleventh busiest stations in Italy. Milano Centrale railway station is the largest railway station in Europe by volume.\nAs of September 2025, the Milan suburban railway service, operated by Trenord, comprises 12 S lines connecting the metropolitan area with the city centre, with possible transfers to all the metro lines. Most S lines run through the Milan Passerby railway, commonly referred to as \"il Passante\" and served by double-decker trains every 4/8 minutes in the central underground section.\nRoads.\nThe motorway network in Lombardy extends for to which approximately of state highways are added. The A4 motorway crosses the entire regional territory for from east to west, connecting the cities of Brescia, Bergamo, Monza and Milan. It is characterized by particularly intense traffic throughout the year and is flanked by the BreBeMi, which connects Brescia to the Milan external east ring road of Milan passing through Treviglio, rather than Bergamo. \nThe Milan ring road system is the largest in Italy, long in total and is made up of three ring roads: West, East and North. The A1, A7, A35, A8 and A9 connect Lombardy with Switzerland. The \"Autostrada dei Laghi\" (\"Lakes Motorway\"), connecting Milan to Lake Como and Lake Maggiore, and now parts of the A8 and A9 motorways, was devised by Piero Puricelli and was inaugurated in 1924. It is the first motorway built in the world. In the region there are also the A21, A22, A36 motorways, the A53 and A54 Pavia ring roads, the Bergamo ring road system, the Brescia south ring road, the Brescia west ring road, the Varese ring road system and the of Como ring road (A59).\nUnderground.\nThe cities of Milan and Brescia have underground systems. Milan has the most extensive metro network in Italy, with 5 lines in operation (M1, M2, M3, M4 and M5). Milan Metro has a daily ridership of 1.15\u00a0million, the largest in Italy as well as one of the largest in Europe. It is operated by Azienda Trasporti Milanesi.\nThe architectural project of the Milan Metro, created by Franco Albini and Franca Helg, and the signs, designed by Bob Noorda, received the Compasso d'Oro award in 1964. Within the European Union it is the seventh largest network in terms of kilometres.\nNavigation.\nEven though it is not surrounded by the sea, the region has a naval system that develops on the lakes, along the rivers and Navigli. The most important waterway system in Lombardy is part of the Po Valley-Veneto one which allows navigation from Casale Monferrato to Venice along the Po river. In this waterway system, the most important ports in Lombardy are those of Cremona and Mantua.\nNavigation on the lakes has a predominantly tourist function and takes place regularly on scheduled routes. The scheduled shipping routes cover and are frequented by over 10 million travellers annually. The connections are managed by the Gestione Governativa Navigazione Laghi.\nNotable people.\nVirgil, Pliny the Elder, Ambrose, Gerolamo Cardano, Caravaggio, Claudio Monteverdi, Antonio Stradivari, Cesare Beccaria, Alessandro Volta, Alessandro Manzoni, and popes John XXIII and Paul VI originated in the area of modern-day Lombardy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43808", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43808", "title": "George Pullman", "text": "American engineer and businessman (1831\u20131897)\nGeorge Mortimer Pullman (March 3, 1831 \u2013 October 19, 1897) was an American engineer and industrialist. He designed and manufactured the Pullman sleeping car and founded a company town in Chicago for the workers who manufactured it. This ultimately led to the Pullman Strike due to the high rent prices charged for company housing and low wages paid by the Pullman Company. His Pullman Company also hired black men to staff the Pullman cars, known as Pullman porters, who provided elite service and were compensated only in tips.\nStruggling to maintain profitability during an 1894 downturn in manufacturing demand, he halved wages and required workers to spend long hours at the plant, but did not lower prices of rents and goods in his company town. He gained presidential support by Grover Cleveland for the use of federal military troops which left 30 strikers dead in the violent suppression of workers there to end the Pullman Strike of 1894. A national commission was appointed to investigate the strike, which included assessment of operations of the company town. In 1898, the Supreme Court of Illinois ordered the Pullman Company to divest itself of the town, which became a neighborhood of the city of Chicago.\nEarly life.\nPullman was born in 1831 in Brocton, New York, the son of Emily Caroline (Minton) and carpenter James Lewis Pullman (known as Lewis). His family moved to Albion, New York, along the Erie Canal in 1845, so his father could help widen the canal. His father had invented a machine using jack screws that could move buildings or other structures out of the way and onto new foundations and had patented it in 1841. By that time, packet boats carried people on day excursions along the canal, plus travellers and freight craft would be towed across the state along the busy canal.\nPullman attended local schools and helped his father, learning other skills that contributed to his later success. In 1853, Lewis died, and George took over his business at the age of 22.\nCareer.\nPullman was a clerk for a country merchant. Pullman took over the family business. In 1856, Pullman won a contract with the State of New York to move 20 buildings out of the way of the widening canal.\nChicago.\nDuring the 1850s, the streets in Chicago often resembled a swamp, as the city had been built to too low an elevation on the shore of Lake Michigan. The city undertook to re-engineer its sewage system to clear the surface of the unwanted and often pathogenic standing water. This project necessitated the raising of the street level an average of over a metre.\nAs the streets rose above the front doors of the adjacent buildings, the buildings needed to be demolished and rebuilt or else physically raised so as to adjust to the newly raised level of the street. In 1859 Pullman and his Albion-based business partner Charles Moore moved to Chicago to raise one such building, the Matteson House, a large brick hotel. Pullman and Moore went on to raise several more Chicago buildings before becoming part of a consortium that raised the entire ninety-eight-metre-long block of four and five storey brick and stone buildings on the north side of Lake Street between Clark and La Salle Streets, a feat depicted by Edward Mendel in a large lithograph. In 1861 Pullman contracted with the Ely and Smith partnership to raise the six storey high Tremont House. Pullman contracted to raise these and many other large buildings in Chicago, and his firm raised the buildings on average six feet without causing them any damage and often times while the buildings were still fully operational, with people entering and exiting them and conducting business within.\nPullman sleeping car.\nPullman developed a railroad sleeping car, the Pullman sleeper or \"palace car\". These were designed after the packet boats that travelled the Erie Canal of his youth in Albion. The first one was finished in 1864.\nAfter President Abraham Lincoln was assassinated, Pullman arranged to have his body carried from Washington, D.C., to Springfield on a sleeper, for which he gained national attention, as hundreds of thousands of people lined the route in homage. Lincoln's body was carried on the Presidential train car that Lincoln himself had commissioned that year. Pullman had cars in the train, notably for the President's surviving family. Orders for his new car began to pour into his company. The sleeping cars proved successful although each cost more than five times the price of a regular railway car. They were marketed as \"luxury for the middle class\".\nIn 1867, Pullman introduced his first \"hotel on wheels,\" the \"President\", a sleeper with an attached kitchen and dining car. The food rivaled the best restaurants of the day and the service was impeccable. A year later in 1868, he launched the \"Delmonico\", the world's first sleeping car devoted to fine cuisine. The \"Delmonico\" menu was prepared by chefs from New York's famed Delmonico's Restaurant.\nBoth the \"President\" and the \"Delmonico\" and subsequent Pullman sleeping cars offered first-rate service. The company hired African-American freedmen as Pullman porters. Many of the men had been former domestic slaves in the South. Their new roles required them to act as porters, waiters, valets, and entertainers, all rolled into one person. As they were paid relatively well and got to travel the country, the position became considered prestigious, and Pullman porters were respected in the black communities.\nPullman believed that if his sleeper cars were to be successful, he needed to provide a wide variety of services to travelers: collecting tickets, selling berths, dispatching wires, fetching sandwiches, mending torn trousers, converting day coaches into sleepers, etc. Pullman believed that former house slaves of the plantation South had the right combination of training to serve the businessmen who would patronize his \"Palace Cars\". Pullman became the biggest single employer of African Americans in post-Civil War America.\nIn 1869, Pullman bought out the Detroit Car and Manufacturing Company. Pullman bought the patents and business of his eastern competitor, the Central Transportation Company in 1870. In the spring of 1871, Pullman, Andrew Carnegie, and others bailed out the financially troubled Union Pacific; they took positions on its board of directors. By 1875, the Pullman firm owned $100,000 worth of patents, had 700 cars in operation, and had several hundred thousand dollars in the bank.\nOn February 25, 1881 Pullman posted a newspaper notice that stated he had formed a syndicate to buy controlling stock in the Northern Pacific Railroad. The syndicate, led by Pullman, was named the Oregon Improvement Company and key members were Pullman and William J. Endicott, Jr. The syndicate was led by Henry Villard who stated in his memoirs that he could not be a member of the syndicate for legal reasons. Henry Villard convinced Frederic Billings, the president of Northern Pacific Railroad, to sell his shares to the syndicate which acquired 60% of the railroad. Billings sold 50,000 shares that he had purchased for $1.50 and sold for $50 per share. Billings was in poor health and had Brights disease and was convinced he should retire. Henry Villard became the new president of the Northern Pacific Railroad. Soon after this, the towns of Pullman and Endicott in Whitman County, Washington State were named for the two key members of the Oregon Improvement Company. The intention at the time was probably to encourage the Northern Pacific Railroad to build a railroad line to Whitman County in Washington State.\nIn 1887, Pullman designed and established the system of \"vestibuled trains,\" with cars linked by covered gangways instead of open platforms. The vestibules were first put in service on the Pennsylvania Railroad trunk lines.\nThe French social scientist Paul de Rousiers (1857\u20131934), who visited Chicago in 1890, wrote of Pullman's manufacturing complex, \"Everything is done in order and with precision. One feels that some brain of superior intelligence, backed by a long technical experience, has thought out every possible detail.\"\nPullman company town.\nIn 1880, Pullman bought , near Lake Calumet some south of Chicago, on the Illinois Central Railroad for $800,000. \nPullman hired Solon Spencer Beman to design his new plant there. Trying to solve the issue of labor unrest and poverty, he also built a company town adjacent to his factory; it featured housing, shopping areas, churches, theaters, parks, hotel and library for his factory employees. The 1300 original structures were entirely designed by Solon Spencer Beman. The centerpiece of the complex was the Administration Building and a man-made lake. The Hotel Florence, named for Pullman's daughter, was built nearby.\nPullman believed that the country air and fine facilities, without agitators, saloons and city vice districts, would result in a happy, loyal workforce. The model planned community became a leading attraction for visitors who attended the World's Columbian Exposition of 1893. It attracted nationwide attention. The national press praised Pullman for his benevolence and vision. According to mortality statistics, it was one of the most healthful places in the world.\nThe industrialist still expected the town to make money as an enterprise. By 1892, the community, profitable in its own right, was valued at over $5 million. Pullman ruled the town like a feudal baron. Pullman prohibited independent newspapers, public speeches, town meetings or open discussion. His inspectors regularly entered homes to inspect for cleanliness and could terminate workers' leases on ten days' notice. The church stood empty since no approved denomination would pay rent, and no other congregation was allowed. He prohibited private charitable organizations. In 1885 Richard Ely wrote in \"Harper's Weekly\" that the power exercised by Otto Von Bismarck (known as the unifier of modern Germany), was \"utterly insignificant when compared with the ruling authority of the Pullman Palace Car Company in Pullman\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are born in a Pullman house, fed from the Pullman shops, taught in the Pullman school, catechized in the Pullman Church, and when we die we shall go to the Pullman Hell.\nThe Pullman community is a historic district that has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nIn the 1930s, Hotel Florence, named for Pullman's daughter, was one of the most popular brothels in the city.\nMarktown, Indiana, Clayton Mark's planned worker community, was developed nearby.\nPullman Strike.\nIn 1894, when manufacturing demand fell off, Pullman cut jobs and wages and increased working hours in his plant to lower costs and keep profits, but he did not lower rents or prices in the company town. The workers eventually launched a strike. When violence broke out, he gained the support of President Grover Cleveland for the use of United States troops. Cleveland sent in the troops, who harshly suppressed the strike in action that caused many injuries, over the objections of the Illinois governor, John Altgeld.\nIn the winter of 1893\u201394, at the start of a depression, Pullman decided to cut wages by 30%. This was not unusual in the age of the robber barons, but he didn't reduce the rent in Pullman, because he had guaranteed his investors a 6% return on their investments in the town. A workman might make $9.07 in a fortnight, and the rent of $9 would be taken directly out of his paycheck, leaving him with just 7 cents to feed his family. One worker later testified: \"I have seen men with families of eight or nine children crying because they got only three or four cents after paying their rent.\" Another described conditions as \"slavery worse than that of Negroes of the South\".\nOn May 12, 1894, the workers went on strike.\nThe American Railway Union was led by Eugene Victor Debs, a pacifist and socialist who later founded the Socialist Party of America and was its candidate for president in five elections. Under the leadership of Debs, sympathetic railroad workers across the nation tied up rail traffic to the Pacific. The so-called \"Debs Rebellion\" had begun.\nArcade Building with strikers and soldiers Debs gave Pullman five days to respond to the union demands but Pullman refused even to negotiate (leading another industrialist to yell, \"The damned idiot ought to arbitrate, arbitrate and arbitrate! ...A man who won't meet his own men halfway is a God-damn fool!\"). Instead, Pullman locked up his home and business and left town.\nOn June 26, all Pullman cars were cut from trains. When union members were fired, entire rail lines were shut down, and Chicago was besieged. One consequence was a blockade of the federal mail, and Debs agreed to let isolated mail cars into the city. Rail owners mixed mail cars into all their trains however, and then called in the federal government when the mail failed to get through.\nDebs could not pacify the pent-up frustrations of the exploited workers, and violence broke out between rioters and the federal troops that were sent to protect the mail. On July 8, soldiers began shooting strikers. That was the beginning of the end of the strike. By the end of the month, 34 people had been killed, the strikers were dispersed, the troops were gone, the courts had sided with the railway owners, and Debs was in jail for contempt of court.\nPullman's reputation was soiled by the strike, and then officially tarnished by the presidential commission that investigated the incident. The national commission report found Pullman's paternalism partly to blame and described Pullman's company town as \"un-American\". The report condemned Pullman for refusing to negotiate and for the economic hardships he created for workers in the town of Pullman. \"The aesthetic features are admired by visitors, but have little money value to employees, especially when they lack bread.\" The State of Illinois filed suit, and in 1898, the Supreme Court of Illinois forced the Pullman Company to divest ownership in the town, which was annexed to Chicago.\nDeath and burial.\nOn October 19, 1897, Pullman died of a heart attack in Chicago, Illinois. He was 66 years old. Pullman was buried at Graceland Cemetery in Chicago, Illinois. George and his wife Hattie had four children: Florence, Harriett, George Jr. and Walter Sanger Pullman.\nBurial.\nFearing that some of his former employees or other labor supporters might try to dig up his body, his family arranged for his remains to be placed in a lead-lined mahogany coffin, which was then sealed inside a block of concrete. At the cemetery, a large pit had been dug at the family plot. At its base and walls were 18 inches of reinforced concrete. The coffin was lowered, and covered with asphalt and tar paper. More concrete was poured on top, followed by a layer of steel rails bolted together at right angles, and another layer of concrete. The entire burial process took two days. His monument, featuring a Corinthian column flanked by curved stone benches, was designed by Solon Spencer Beman, the architect of the company town of Pullman.\nFreemasonry.\nPullman was initiated into Freemasonry in Renovation Lodge No. 97 in Albion, New York. He was also member of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry and received the honorary 33rd degree within that body.\nPublic projects.\nPullman was identified with various public enterprises, among them the Metropolitan elevated railway system of New York. It was constructed and opened to the public by a corporation of which he was president.\nThe Pullman Company merged in 1930 with Standard Steel Car Company to become Pullman-Standard, which built its last car for Amtrak in 1982. After delivery the Pullman-Standard plant stayed in limbo, and eventually shut down. In 1987, its remaining assets were absorbed by Bombardier.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43809", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43809", "title": "Ottonian Art", "text": ""}
{"id": "43810", "revid": "49425883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43810", "title": "Charles Yerkes", "text": "American financier (1837\u20131905)\nCharles Tyson Yerkes Jr. ( ; June 25, 1837 \u2013 December 29, 1905) was an American financier. He played a part in developing mass-transit systems in Chicago and London.\nPhiladelphia.\nYerkes was born into a Quaker family in the Northern Liberties, a district adjacent to Philadelphia, on June 25, 1837. His mother, Elizabeth Link Yerkes, died of puerperal fever when he was five years old, and soon thereafter his father Charles Tyson Yerkes Sr. remarried a non-Quaker and was therefore expelled from the Society of Friends. After finishing a two-year course at Philadelphia's Central High School, Yerkes began his business career at the age of 17 as a clerk for a local grain brokerage. In 1859, aged 22, he began his own brokerage business and registered with the Philadelphia Stock Exchange.\nBy 1865, he had begun banking and specialized in selling municipal, state, and government bonds. Relying on his bank president father's associations, his political acquaintances, and his own acumen, Yerkes became well-known as a businessman. While serving as a financial agent for the City of Philadelphia's treasurer, Joseph F. Marcer, Yerkes risked public money in a large-scale stock speculation. This speculation ended calamitously when the Great Chicago Fire started a financial panic. Left insolvent and unable to make payment to the City of Philadelphia, Yerkes was convicted of larceny and sentenced to thirty-three months in Eastern State Penitentiary.\nIn an attempt to remain out of prison, he attempted to blackmail two influential Pennsylvania politicians. The blackmail plan initially failed; the damaging information concerning the politicians was eventually made public and politicians, including then-President Ulysses S. Grant, feared that the revelations might harm their prospects during the upcoming elections. Yerkes was promised a pardon if he would deny the accusations he had made. He agreed to these terms and was released after serving seven months in prison.\nChicago.\nIn 1881 Yerkes traveled to Fargo in the Dakota Territory to obtain a divorce from his wife. Later that year, he remarried and relocated to Chicago. There, he opened a stock and grain brokerage but soon became involved with planning the city's public transportation system. In 1886, Yerkes and his business partners used a complex financial deal to acquire control of the North Chicago Street Railway and then followed this with a series of further takeovers until he controlled a majority of Chicago's street railway systems on the north and west sides. Yerkes was not averse to using bribery and blackmail to obtain his objectives.\nIn an effort to improve his public reputation, Yerkes decided in 1892 to fund the world's largest telescope after being lobbied by the astronomer George Ellery Hale and University of Chicago president William Rainey Harper. He had intended initially to finance only a telescope but agreed eventually to fund an entire observatory. He contributed more than $500,000 to the University of Chicago to establish what would become known as Yerkes Observatory, located in Williams Bay, Wisconsin.\nIn 1895, Yerkes purchased the Republican partisan newspaper, the \"Chicago Inter Ocean\", using the publication to publicize his political agenda.\nYerkes began a campaign for longer streetcar franchises in 1895, but Illinois governor John Peter Altgeld vetoed the franchise bills. Yerkes renewed the campaign in 1897, and, after a hard-fought struggle, secured from the Illinois Legislature a bill granting city councils the right to approve extended franchises. The so-called franchise war then shifted to the Chicago City Council \u2014 a venue in which Yerkes ordinarily thrived. A partially reformed council and Mayor Carter Harrison IV, however, ultimately defeated Yerkes, with the swing votes coming from aldermen \"Hinky Dink\" Kenna and \"Bathhouse\" John Coughlin.\nIn 1899, Yerkes sold the majority of his Chicago transport stocks and relocated to New York.\nArt collection.\nWhile living in Chicago, Yerkes became an art collector, relying on Sarah Tyson Hallowell (1846\u20131924) to advise him for his purchases. After the Chicago World's Fair in 1893, she tried to interest him in the works of Auguste Rodin, which were part of the loan exhibition of French art. Because the subject matter was controversial, Yerkes initially refused the works, but he soon changed his mind and acquired two Rodin marbles, \"Cupid and Psyche\" and \"Orpheus\", for his Chicago mansion, the first two of Rodin's works known to have been sold to an American collector. Yerkes' art collection also included paintings by Frans Hals, works by the French academic painters, such as \"Pygmalion and Galatea\" by Jean-L\u00e9on G\u00e9r\u00f4me and works by William-Adolphe Bouguereau and members of the Barbizon School. In 1904, he published a two volume catalog of his collection, which by that time was in New York:\nLondon.\nIn August 1900, Yerkes became involved with the development of the London underground railway system after riding along the route of one proposed line and surveying the city of London from the summit of Hampstead Heath. He established the Underground Electric Railways Company of London to take control of the District Railway and the partly built Baker Street and Waterloo Railway, Charing Cross, Euston and Hampstead Railway, and Great Northern, Piccadilly and Brompton Railway. Yerkes employed complex financial arrangements similar to those that he had used in the United States to raise the funds necessary to construct the new lines and electrify the District Railway (now known as the District line). In one of his last great triumphs, Yerkes managed to thwart an attempt by J. P. Morgan to become involved with the London underground railway. Yerkes did not live to see his London tube lines in operation. The now Bakerloo and Piccadilly lines opened in 1906, a few months after his death, and the Charing Cross line (now part of the Northern line) the next summer.\nDeath and legacy.\nYerkes died in the hotel Waldorf Astoria in New York on December 29, 1905, of kidney disease. The events of Yerkes's life served as a model for Theodore Dreiser's novels \"The Financier\", \"The Titan\", and \"The Stoic\", in which Yerkes was fictionalized as Frank Cowperwood.\nThe crater Yerkes on the Moon is named in his honor.\nPictures of Yerkes and his second wife Mary were painted by his favorite artist Jan van Beers (National Portrait Gallery, Washington, D.C.). His wife, the daughter of Thomas Moore of Philadelphia, was also painted in 1892 by the Swiss-born American artist Adolfo M\u00fcller-Ury (1862\u20131947). In 1893 M\u00fcller-Ury painted from miniatures portraits of Yerkes's Quaker grandparents, Mr. and Mrs. Silas Yerkes. In 1906, his widow Mary Adelaide married playwright and raconteur Wilson Mizner; they were divorced the next year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43813", "revid": "32001896", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43813", "title": "Eigenspace", "text": ""}
{"id": "43814", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43814", "title": "Java transaction service", "text": "The Java Transaction Service (JTS) is a specification for building a transaction manager that maps onto the Object Management Group (OMG) Object Transaction Service (OTS) used in the Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) architecture. It uses General Inter-ORB Protocol (IIOP) to propagate the transactions between multiple JTS transaction managers."}
{"id": "43815", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43815", "title": "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles", "text": "American media franchise\n \nTeenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (TMNT) is an American media franchise created by comic book artists Kevin Eastman and Peter Laird. It follows Leonardo, Donatello, Raphael, and Michelangelo, four anthropomorphic turtle brothers trained in \"ninjutsu\" who fight evil in New York City. The franchise encompasses printed media, television series, feature films, video games, and merchandise.\nThe franchise began as a comic book, \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\", which Eastman and Laird conceived as a parody of elements popular in superhero comics at the time. The first issue was published in 1984 by Eastman and Laird's company Mirage Studios and was a surprise success. In 1987, Eastman and Laird licensed the characters to Playmates Toys, which developed a line of \"Turtles\" action figures. About US$1.1 billion of \"Turtles\" toys were sold between 1988 and 1992, making them the third-bestselling toy figures ever at the time.\nThe action figures were promoted with an animated series, which premiered in 1987 and ran for almost a decade. It was succeeded by several other television series. The first \"Turtles\" video game was released in 1989, the first of several developed by the Japanese company Konami. The first \"Turtles\" film, released in 1990, became the highest-grossing independent film up to that point.\nEastman sold his share of the \"Turtles\" franchise to Laird in 2000. In 2009, Laird sold it to Viacom, now Paramount Skydance Corporation. The franchise has continued with a new comic book series, television series, films and video games.\nHistory.\n1983\u20131986: Conception and first comics.\nThe comic book authors Kevin Eastman and Peter Laird met in Massachusetts and began working on illustrations together. In 1983, Laird invited Eastman to move in with him in Dover, New Hampshire. That November, Eastman drew a masked turtle standing on its hind legs armed with nunchucks to make Laird laugh. Laird added the words \"teenage mutant\". The concept parodied several elements popular in superhero comics of the time \u2014 the teenagers of \"New Teen Titans,\" the mutants of \"Uncanny X-Men\" and the ninja skills of \"Daredevil\" \u2014 combined with the comic tradition of funny animals such as Howard the Duck.\nEastman and Laird developed the concept into a comic book. They considered giving the turtles Japanese names, but instead named them after the Italian Renaissance artists Leonardo, Donatello, Raphael and Michelangelo, which Laird said \"felt just quirky enough to fit the concept\". They developed a backstory referencing further elements of \"Daredevil\": like Daredevil, the Turtles are altered by radioactive material, and their sensei, Splinter, is a play on Daredevil's sensei, Stick.\nIn March 1984, Eastman and Laird founded a comic book company, Mirage Studios, in their home. Using money from a tax refund and a loan from Eastman's uncle, they printed copies of the first issue of \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\" and advertised it in \"Comics Buyer's Guide.\" This attracted the interest of comic distributors, and all 3,000 copies were sold in a few weeks. Sales of further issues continued to climb.\n1987\u20131989: Toys, animation and video games.\nIn 1987, Eastman and Laird licensed \"Turtles\" to Playmates Toys. Between 1988 and 1997, Playmates produced \"Turtles\" toys including around 400 figures and dozens of vehicles and playsets. About US$1.1 billion toys were sold in four years, making \"Turtles\" the third-bestselling toy figures ever at the time, behind \"GI Joe\" and \"Star Wars\".\nInfluenced by the success of \"G.I. Joe\", \"He-Man\" and \"Transformers\", which had promoted toy lines with animated series, Playmates worked with the animation studio Murakami-Wolf-Swenson to produce the first \"Turtles\" animated series, which premiered in 1987 and ran for almost a decade. It introduced \"Turtles\" elements such as their color-coded masks, catchphrases, love of pizza and distinct personalities. To make it acceptable to parents and television networks, the series had a lighter tone than the comics, with no expletives, less violence and less threatening villains. In the United Kingdom and some other European regions, the franchise was renamed \"Teenage Mutant Hero Turtles\" due to the violent connotations of the word \"ninja\".\nThe first \"Turtles\" video game was released for the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) in 1989, the first of several developed by the Japanese company Konami. It sold approximately four million copies, making it one of the bestselling NES games. In response to concerns that the series was drifting from its origins, Eastman and Laird published an editorial in the comic in 1989, writing: \"We've allowed the wacky side to happen, and enjoy it very much. All the while, though, we've kept the originals very much ours.\" Eastman later said they regretted approving some projects, and Laird wrote of his dislike for the softer tone of the animated series.\n1990s: First films, franchise expansion and commercial peak.\nThe franchise reached its commercial peak in the early 1990s. The first \"Turtles\" film was released in 1990, featuring costumes designed by Jim Henson's Creature Shop. It was based more closely on the comic than the animated series, with a darker tone. It was the fourth-highest-grossing film of 1990 and broke the record for the highest-grossing independent film, earning more than US$200 million worldwide.\nA second film, \"The Secret of the Ooze\", was released in 1991. With a rushed production and a lighter tone, it received weaker reviews and was less successful at the box office. \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles III\" (1993) was aimed at the Japanese market, the largest foreign market for US films at the time, but failed to see release there and had weaker reviews and sales.\nIn 1990, a stage musical featuring the Turtles as a rock band, \"Coming Out of Their Shells\", played 40 shows across the United States. The musical was sponsored by Pizza Hut and promoted with an appearance on \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\". A soundtrack album and VHS were released. After the animated series ended, a live-action television series, \"\", was created in 1997 with Saban Entertainment. It introduced a fifth, female turtle, Venus de Milo. The series was canceled after one season. Eastman later said he liked the series, while Laird said it was the only \"Turtles\" project he \"truly regrets\".\n2000s\u2013present: Relaunches and sale to Viacom.\nEastman sold his share of the \"Turtles\" franchise to Laird in 2000. In 2003, 4Kids Entertainment launched a new animated series, which ran for seven seasons, concluding in 2009. Laird had a role in the production, creating a closer adaptation of the original comic. A computer-animated \"Turtles\" film, \"TMNT\", was released in 2007.\nOn October 21, 2009, it was announced that Laird had sold the franchise to Viacom. He said he had tired of working on \"Turtles\", writing: \"I am no longer that guy who carries his sketchbook around with him and draws in it every chance he gets.\" In August 2011, IDW Publishing launched a new \"Turtles\" comic series, with Eastman as co-writer and illustrator. A third animated series premiered in September 2012 on Nickelodeon, and ran for five seasons before ending in 2017. A live-action \"Turtles\" film directed by Jonathan Liebesman and produced by Michael Bay was released in August 2014. It received negative reviews but was a box-office success. A sequel, \"\", directed by Dave Green, was released in June 2016. It it was a box-office bomb and the third film was canceled.\nA fourth animated series, \"Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\", premiered in 2018 and ran for two seasons. A was released in 2022 on Netflix. \"\", an animated film directed by Jeff Rowe and produced by Seth Rogen, was released in August 2023; several critics named it the best \"Turtles\" film. A followup series, \"Tales of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\", premiered in 2024 on Paramount+.\nCharacters.\nIn most versions, the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles are created when four baby turtles are exposed to radioactive ooze, mutating them into humanoids. They fight evil in New York City, where they reside in the sewers. \nLeonardo, the leader, is the most disciplined and skilled turtle. An expert swordsman, he wields two \"katana\" and wears a blue bandana. Raphael, the strongest and most quick-tempered turtle, wears a red bandana and uses a pair of \"sai\". Donatello uses his intellect to invent gadgets and vehicles. He wears a purple bandana and uses a \"b\u014d\" staff. Michelangelo is the least disciplined and most fun-loving, and is usually portrayed as the fastest and most agile. He wears an orange bandana and uses nunchucks.\nSplinter is a mutant rat who is the wise adoptive father of the Turtles and teaches them \"ninjutsu\". In some iterations, he was once the pet rat of ninja master Hamato Yoshi; in others, he is a mutated Yoshi. The Turtles are assisted by April O'Neil, who is variously depicted as a news reporter, lab assistant or genius computer programmer. In most versions, she is pursued romantically by Casey Jones, a hockey mask-wearing vigilante who usually becomes an ally of the Turtles.\nThe Turtles' nemesis is the Shredder, a criminal mastermind clad in samurai-like armor, who leads the ninja clan known as the Foot Clan. His real identity is usually the ninja Oroku Saki. In most versions, the Shredder's second in command is Karai, a skilled martial artist; in some iterations she is the Shredder's daughter. In some versions, the Shredder allies with Baxter Stockman, a mad scientist, and Krang, an alien warlord from Dimension X. Krang was introduced in the original animated series, was inspired by the Utrom race from the comics, and is sometimes depicted as an Utrom himself. Also created for the series were the Shredder's buffoonish henchmen, Bebop and Rocksteady, a mutant warthog and rhinoceros.\nComics.\nMirage Studios (1984\u20132014).\nEastman and Laird's \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\" premiered in May 1984, at a comic book convention held at a local Sheraton Hotel in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. It was published by their company Mirage Studios in an oversized magazine-style format using black and white artwork on cheap newsprint, limited to a print run of 3000 copies. It was initially intended as a one-shot, but due to its popularity it became an ongoing series.\nAfter publication was temporarily assumed by Image Comics for the third volume, Laird (by then the sole owner of the franchise) and Lawson relaunched the main series at Mirage with a fourth volume in 2001. Following the sale of the franchise to Nickelodeon in late 2009, Laird retained the right to continue the Mirage series, but no issues have been released since the release of issue #32 in 2014, and Mirage Studios was wound down in 2021.\nThe main Mirage series was published for 129 issues across four volumes. Additional one-shot issues and miniseries were also published. Mirage published a companion book, \"Tales of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\", designed to fill in the gaps of continuity in the \"TMNT\" universe.\nArchie Comics (1988\u20131995).\nFrom 1988 to 1995, Archie Comics published \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Adventures\", a series aimed at a younger audience. Initially adapting episodes of the first animated series, it soon moved to original storylines. The main series ran for 72 issues; in addition, there were numerous annuals, specials and miniseries. An ongoing spin-off series, \"Mighty Mutanimals\", features a team of supporting characters.\nImage Comics (1996\u20131999).\nIn 1996, Image Comics co-founder Erik Larsen, seeing that there were no \"TMNT\" comics in active publication, oversaw a relaunch of the comics through Highbrow Productions, his studio at Image, with writing by Gary Carlson and art by Frank Fosco. This third volume of the main series, intended as a continuation of the Mirage comics, saw Splinter become a bat, Donatello a cyborg, Leonardo lose a hand and Raphael become scarred and assume the identity of the new Shredder. The series was canceled in 1999 after 23 issues without a conclusion. In 2018, IDW began reprinting the series in full color as \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Urban Legends\", and commissioned Carlson and Fusco to create three additional issues to tie up the unfinished story.\nDreamwave Productions (2003).\nA monthly comic inspired by the 2003 TV series was published by Dreamwave Productions from June to December 2003. It was written by Peter David and illustrated by LeSean Thomas. In the first four issues, which were the only ones directly adapted from the TV series, the story was told from the perspectives of April, Baxter, Casey, and a pair of New York City police officers.\nIDW Publishing (2011\u2013present).\nIn 2011, IDW Publishing acquired the license to publish new collections of Mirage storylines and a new ongoing series. The first issue of the new series was released in August of that year. Eastman and Tom Waltz wrote the book, and Eastman and Dan Duncan provided the art. In 2017 issue #73 of the comic was published, making it the longest-running comic series in the franchise's history. In addition to the main series and spin-offs set within its continuity, IDW also published comics based on the 2012 \"Turtles\" animated series and the 2018 animated series, \"Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\". The volume one of the series ended in April 2024 at issue #150, while volume two was released three months later in July.\nManga.\nThe Turtles have appeared in several \"manga\" series.\nComic strip.\nA daily comic strip written and illustrated by Dan Berger began in 1990. It featured an adventure story Monday through Friday and activity puzzles on weekends (with fan art appearing later). The comic strip was published in syndication until its cancelation in December 1996. It was published in more than 250 newspapers at its highest point in popularity.\nTelevision series.\nFirst animated series (1987\u20131996).\nDebuting in 1987 as a five-part miniseries and becoming a regular Saturday-morning syndicated series on October 1, 1988, the first animated series follows the adventures of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles and their allies as they battle the Shredder, Krang, and numerous other villains and criminals in New York City. The property was changed considerably from the darker-toned comics, to make it more suitable for children and families. Produced by Fred Wolf Films, the series ran for ten seasons and ended in 1996.\nOriginal video animation (1996).\nIn addition to the American series, a Japan-exclusive two-episode anime original video animation (OVA) series was made in 1996, titled \"Mutant Turtles: Choujin Densetsu-hen\". The OVA is similar in tone to the 1987 TV series and uses the same voices from TV Tokyo's Japanese dub of the 1987 TV series. It featured the Turtles as superheroes, that gained costumes and superpowers with the use of Mutastones, while Shredder, Bebop and Rocksteady gained supervillain powers with the use of a Dark Mutastone.\nLive-action series (1997\u20131998).\nIn 1997\u20131998, a live-action series, \"Ninja Turtles: The Next Mutation,\" aired on Fox. It introduced a female turtle, Venus de Milo, skilled in the mystical arts of the \"shinobi\". The \"Next Mutation\" Turtles made a guest appearance on \"Power Rangers in Space\". \"The Next Mutation\" was canceled after one season of 26 episodes.\nSecond animated series (2003\u20132009).\nIn 2003, a new \"TMNT\" series produced by 4Kids Entertainment began airing on the \"FoxBox\" (later renamed \"4Kids TV\") programming block. It later moved to \"The CW4Kids\" block. The series was co-produced by Mirage Studios, and Mirage owned one-third of the rights to the series. Mirage's significant stake in creative control resulted in a cartoon that hews more closely to the original comics, creating a darker and more mature tone than the 1987 cartoon, though still considered appropriate for younger viewers. This series lasted until 2009, ending with a feature-length television film, \"Turtles Forever\", which was produced for the 25th anniversary of the franchise.\nThird animated series (2012\u20132017).\nNickelodeon acquired the global rights to \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\" from the Mirage Group and 4Kids Entertainment, Inc. and produced a new CGI-animated \"TMNT\" television series. The 2012 version is characterized by anime-like iconography and emphasis on mutagen continuing to wreak havoc on the everyday lives of the Turtles and their enemies; in addition, the tone of this version is similar to the original series, but also features a handful of serious episodes as well. The series ran for five seasons and ended in 2017.\nFourth animated series (2018\u20132020).\n\"Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\" was the second Nickelodeon-produced animated series in the franchise and premiered in September 2018. It returned to using 2D animation, while also using some anime iconography, and was characterized by its lighter humor. The series aired between 2018 and 2020, and was followed by a released on Netflix in 2022.\nFifth animated series (2024\u2013present).\nA two-season 2D animated television series spin-off of the \"\" film, \"Tales of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\", was released in 2024 for Paramount+, produced by Point Grey, who also produced the film.\nFilms.\nThe Turtles have starred in eight theatrical feature films. The first three are live-action features produced in the early 1990s: \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\" (1990), \"\" (1991), and \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles III\" (1993). The Turtles were played by various actors in costumes featuring animatronic heads, initially produced by Jim Henson's Creature Shop. The computer-animated sequel \"TMNT\" was released in 2007.\nA reboot, \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\", produced by Platinum Dunes, Nickelodeon Movies, and Paramount Pictures was released in 2014. A sequel, ', was released in 2016. In 2022 Nickelodeon Movies released ' as a sequel to the animated series of the same name. A computer-animated reboot, \"\", was released in 2023.\nMerchandise.\nThe franchise generated merchandise sales of $ in 1988 and $ in 1989. By May 1990, it had generated $ in domestic retail revenues. By 1994, it was the most merchandisable franchise, having generated total revenue of $6 billion in merchandise sales up until then. The brand generated more than $1 billion in retail sales from 2003 to 2005.\nToys.\nDuring the run of the 1987 TV series, Playmates Toys produced hundreds of \"TMNT\" action figures, along with vehicles, playsets, and accessories, becoming one of the top collectibles for children. Staff artists at Northampton, Massachusetts-based Mirage Studios provided conceptual designs for many of the figures, vehicles, and playsets and creator credit can be found in the legal text printed on the back of the toy packaging. In addition, Playmates produced a series of \"TMNT\"/\"Star Trek\" crossover figures, due to Playmates holding the \"Star Trek\" action-figure license at the time. Playmates employed many design groups to develop looks and styles for the toy line, including Bloom Design, White Design, Pangea Corporation, Robinson-Clarke, and McHale Design. The marketing vice president of Playmates, Karl Aaronian, was largely responsible for assembling the team of designers and writers, including John Schulte and John Besmehn, who provided the seminal writing and copy for the toy line, which in turn, filtered through to the various iterations of the television series.\nNever before in toy history did an action-figure line have such an impact for over two decades, generating billions of dollars in licensing revenue. The series was highly popular in the UK, where in the run-up to Christmas, the Army &amp; Navy Store in London's Lewisham devoted its entire basement to everything Turtle, including games, videos, costumes, and other items. Playmates continued to produce \"TMNT\" action figures based on the 2003 animated series. The 2007 film \"TMNT\" also gave Playmates a new source from which to make figures, while National Entertainment Collectibles Association produced a series of high-quality action figures based on character designs from the original Mirage comics. In 2012, a new toy line and a new classic toy line from Playmates were announced to be released.\nVideo games.\nIn 1989, the Japanese company Konami released the first \"TMNT\" game for the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES). It was followed in the same year by a \"TMNT\" arcade game, which was ported to the NES as \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: The Arcade Game.\" In 1991, Konami released ' for the NES, and another arcade game, \",\" which was ported to the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) in 1992. Later in 1992, Konami released ' for the Sega Genesis, using many elements from \"Turtles in Time\".\nKonami also released a series of \"TMNT\" games for the handheld Game Boy console: ' (1990), ' (1991) and ' (1993). A PC game, ' was also released. Konami's last entries during the original run were \"\", a set of one-on-one fighting game released for the NES, SNES, and Genesis; each version is a wholly distinct game, sharing only the title and genre in common.\nIn September 2002, Konami also acquired the license to adapt the 2003 TV series into a video game franchise, resulting in a new series of games with 3D gameplay inspired by the old \"TMNT\" beat 'em up games, consisting of \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2003 video game)\", ', ', and \"\".\nIn 2006, Ubisoft acquired the rights for \"TMNT\" games, beginning with a game based on the 2007 animated feature film, along with a distinct game for the Game Boy Advance similar in style to the Konami arcade games. A beat 'em up game \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Arcade Attack\" was released for the Nintendo DS in 2009, to coincide with the series' 25th anniversary.\nIn 2013, Activision released the downloadable game \", based on the 2012 TV series and developed by Red Fly Studio for the Xbox Live Arcade, PlayStation Network and Steam.\nIn 2016, Activision and PlatinumGames developed \" for the PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, Xbox One, Xbox 360, and PC. The game is described as a third-person, team-based brawler. The campaign is playable either single-player or co-op and has an original story written by Tom Waltz, IDW comic writer and editor. The art style is based on longtime \"TMNT\" comic artist Mateus Santolouco.\n\"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Legends\", a free-to-play Role-playing video game was released by Ludia in summer 2016 for iPhone, iPad, Android, and Kindle Fire. It is based on the 2012 TV series.\nThe turtles are playable characters in the DC Comics fighting game \"Injustice 2\" as a part of the \"Fighter Pack 3\" DLC, with Corey Krueger, Joe Brugie, Ben Rausch and Ryan Cooper voicing their roles.\nThe 1987 versions of Leonardo, Michelangelo, April O'Neil and Shredder appear as playable characters in the 2021 platform fighting game \"Nickelodeon All-Star Brawl\"; the 2023 sequel, \"Nickelodeon All-Star Brawl 2\", features Raphael and Donatello, as well as the returning April. In the games, Cam Clarke, Townsend Coleman, Barry Gordon, Rob Paulsen, and Jim Cummings reprise their roles from the 1987 animated series while Abby Trott voices April. The turtles also appeared as playable characters in the 2017 fighting game \"Brawlhalla\".\nThe beat 'em up \"\" was released in June 2022. It is inspired by the 1987 \"Turtles\" animated series and the early Konami games.\nIn March 2023, Paramount Global announced that a AAA video game based on \"The Last Ronin\", a 5-issue miniseries that was published from 2020 to 2022, was in development. Doug Rosen, senior vice president for games and emerging media at Paramount Global, mentioned the game will a single player third-person Action-RPG with elements taken from the recent \"God of War\" games. It is currently being developed by an unnamed studio and would likely be a \"few years off\" from release, according to Rosen. In August 2023, it was revealed that the game would be developed by Black Forest Games, published by THQ Nordic, and release on PlayStation 5, Xbox Series X/S, and Windows.\nIn other media.\nTabletop role playing game.\nIn 1985, Palladium Books published \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles &amp; Other Strangeness\". It is a standalone game, but uses the many key mechanics from Palladium's Megaversal system and is compatible with material from other Palladium games. It introduced rules for creating anthropomorphic animal mutants. Examples of mutants are included in the appendices as potential antagonists, including the Terror Bears, Caesars Weasels, and Sparrow Eagles, as well as including stats for the Turtles and other characters. A series of supplements were released over the next few years, which remained in print until, due to the cost of maintaining the license, Palladium decided to end its license with Mirage Studios in January 2000.\nFood tie-ins.\nDuring the height of their popularity, the Turtles had a number of food tie-ins. There were also four \"TMNT\" mail away items available to order from Hostess and Royal OOZE Gelatin Desserts, distributed by Nabisco under \"Royal Gelatin\" in three different flavors: orange, strawberry, and lime. Shreddies was a Canadian cereal with \"TMNT\"-themed box art and promos. One example of a \"TMNT\" prize was rings featuring a character from the cartoon (1992). Chef Boyardee also released a canned pasta with the pasta in the shapes of the four turtles. There were multiple versions of the pasta released, including one with Shredder added into the shapes. Customers could mail away for an exclusive Shredder action figure that was darker than the standard Playmates figure, it was shipped in a plastic baggy. This Shredder is one of the more valuable \"TMNT\" action figures today.\nConcert tours.\nTo capitalize on the Turtles' popularity, a concert tour was held in 1990, premiering at Radio City Music Hall on August 17. The \"Coming Out of Their Shells\" tour featured live-action turtles playing music as a band (Donatello on keyboards; Leonardo on bass guitar; Raphael on drums and saxophone; and Michelangelo on guitar) on stage around a familiar plotline: April O'Neil is kidnapped by the Shredder, and the Turtles have to rescue her. The story had a very Bill &amp; Ted-esque feel, with its theme of the power of rock n' roll literally defeating the enemy, in the form of the Shredder (who only rapped about how he hates music) trying to eliminate all music. A pay-per-view special highlighting the concert was shown, and a studio album was also released. A behind-the-scenes video, \"The Making Of the Coming Out of Their Shells Tour\", depicts the characters as real-life people without explaining the mechanics of the faces and costumes. A second tour, Gettin' Down in Your Town, was less successful.\nRoller coasters and amusement rides.\nNickelodeon Universe at American Dream Meadowlands in East Rutherford, New Jersey, which opened in 2019, contains several \"TMNT\" themed rides, including two coasters that broke world records upon their opening. The \"TMNT\" Shellraiser, a Gerstlauer Euro-Fighter, is the steepest roller coaster in the world at 121.5 degrees. The Shredder, a spinning roller coaster themed to the Shredder, is the world's longest free-spinning coaster where riders could spin the car freely along the track, with a length of and a maximum height of .\nNickelodeon Universe at Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota, also contains rides themed to the \"TMNT\" franchise. These include Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Shell Shock, a roller coaster that opened in 2012, and Shredder's Mutant Masher, a pendulum ride that opened in 2015.\nIn the Dream Island in Moscow, one of the nine zones is themed after \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles\", licensed from Paramount.\nMajaland Gda\u0144sk in Osowa, Gda\u0144sk, which opened in 2024, contains ride Lot \u017b\u00f3\u0142wiem themed after \"TMNT\", as well tie-ins to franchise, thanks to the signing of an agreement between the Nickelodeon and park's owner, Momentum Leisure.\nParodies.\nAlthough \"TMNT\" had originated as something of a parody, the comic's explosive success led to a wave of small-press, black and white comic parodies of \"TMNT\" itself, including \"Adolescent Radioactive Black Belt Hamsters\", \"Pre-Teen Dirty-Gene Kung-Fu Kangaroos\", and a host of others. Dark Horse Comics' \"Boris the Bear\" was launched in response to these \"TMNT\" clones; its first issue was titled \"Boris the Bear Slaughters the Teenage Radioactive Black Belt Mutant Ninja Critters\". Once the Turtles broke into the mainstream, parodies also proliferated in other media, such as in satire magazines \"Cracked\" and \"Mad\" and numerous TV series of the period. The satirical British television series \"Spitting Image\" featured a recurring sketch \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turds\". \"Samurai Pizza Cats\" is also considered a parody of the Turtles franchise, including a line in the opening theme song 'they've got more fur than any turtle ever had', and an episode 1 reference to 'A retirement home for aging ninja turtles'.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43816", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43816", "title": "Teenage Mutant Hero Turtles", "text": ""}
{"id": "43817", "revid": "1256342860", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43817", "title": "TMNT", "text": ""}
{"id": "43818", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43818", "title": "Java XML", "text": "Application programming interface\nIn computing, Java XML APIs were developed by Sun Microsystems, consisting separate computer programming application programming interfaces (APIs).\nApplication programming interfaces.\nOnly the Java API for XML Processing (JAXP) is a required API in Enterprise Java Beans Specification 1.3.\nA number of different open-source software packages implement these APIs:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43820", "revid": "11570102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43820", "title": "John Coughlin (alderman)", "text": "Former Chicago alderman\nJohn Joseph Coughlin (August 15, 1860 \u2013 November 11, 1938), known as \"Bathhouse John\" or \"the Bath\", was an American politician who served as alderman from Chicago's 1st ward from 1892 until his death. Representing the Chicago Loop and in later years its environs, he represented what was often called the \"world's richest ward\". Alongside his partner, fellow 1st ward alderman Michael \"Hinky Dink\" Kenna, he controlled the ward for most of the first half of the 20th century.\nA part of 1st ward politics for about 50 years, he was a charismatic and eccentric figure who was well-known across the city and adored by his constituents; he and Kenna constructed a machine that would last the better part of the 20th century. He was the longest serving alderman in Chicago history until November 2014 when his record was surpassed by Edward M. Burke of the 14th ward. Notoriously corrupt, he and Kenna led the \"Gray Wolves\", a group that attracted much scorn from reformers; he and Kenna in particular were notorious across the nation and globe. He and Kenna were known as the \"Lords of the Levee\" after the Levee vice district that provided them with funds and support in exchange for protection from law enforcement.\nIn addition to politics Coughlin was known for his outlandish fashion, eccentric poetry, and horse racing. His poetry and horse racing in particular would come to dominate the later part of his life; his horse-racing interests increasingly drained his money, which his horses failed to recoup at the racetrack, and he died penniless.\nEarly life.\nJohn Joseph Coughlin was born August 15, 1860 in Chicago to Johanna (n\u00e9e Hanley) and Michael Coughlin. Michael, a native of County Roscommon, had come to the 1st ward in 1857, and owned a moderately-successful grocery at Polk and Wells before it burned down in the Great Chicago Fire. Coughlin never seemed concerned about the poverty the fire caused his family, remarking:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Why, money didn't mean anything to me. I'm glad that fire came along and burned the store. Say, if not for that bonfire I might have been a rich man's son and gone to Yale\u2014and never amounted to nothing!\nCoughlin acquired his nicknames as a result of working in a bathhouse as a masseur. Eventually he was able to purchase a tavern and several bathhouses of his own.\nPolitical career.\nCoughlin's tenure was marked by a large amount of corruption, in which he, Kenna, and 19th ward alderman Johnny Powers led the Gray Wolves, a group of notorious aldermen. In the late 19th century Chicago would award franchises to private companies for construction of such utilities as gas and public transit, the latter of which would prove contentious in Chicago. Businesses seeking such lucrative contracts would bribe and otherwise work with the aldermen in a practice known as \"boodling\". Such antics ultimately led to the creation of the reform organization Municipal Voters' League to run and endorse candidates in opposition to the Gray Wolves. Despite being almost invariably excoriated by the Municipal Voters' League Coughlin himself was re-elected 19 times and never defeated, running unopposed in his last four elections. Indifferent if not enthused about his reputation for corruption, upon being accused of corruption he demanded a retraction not for the charge of graft but for the claim he was born in Waukegan.\nEntry into politics.\nCoughlin was elected alderman as a Democrat from Chicago's First Ward on April 5, 1892 despite having no prior experience in public service. Coughlin and his partner, fellow First Ward alderman Michael \"Hinky Dink\" Kenna, were known as the \"Lords of the Levee\", a district which was part of their ward. The Levee was known as being a vice-ridden section of Chicago and home to many saloons, gambling dens, prostitutes, pimps, and flop houses.\n1890s.\nIn 1894 Coughlin was unanimously nominated as the Democratic nominee in what Lloyd Wendt and Herman Kogan would later call \"the briefest political convention in Chicago's history\" and was reported by the \"Chicago Herald\" as lasting \"only a few minutes as the delegates were in a hurry to get away to attend a prize fight.\" However, rival Billy Skakel, who specialized in offering and soliciting gambling on fraudulent stock quotations and hated Coughlin for allowing local Prince Hal Varnell to cut into his turf, formed his own Independent Democratic Party. Working with Sol van Praag, who had ambitions of his own to rule the 1st ward, he ran as a rival to Coughlin for the race\nand was endorsed by such publications as \"Mixed Drinks: The Saloon Keepers' Journal\". Fearing for his career despite Kenna's insistence that he would win, Coughlin visited Mayor John Patrick Hopkins, who unsuccessfully asked Skakel to withdraw from the race. Coughlin then presented a petition to get Skakel's name removed from the ballot, which was initially accepted by the election board but would later be overturned by a local judge and backfire on Coughlin. Nevertheless, Kenna\nreassured Coughlin of victory and used his organizational skills to bribe the homeless with fifty cents, as much food as desired, and a place to stay for each voter.\nKenna also suggested that Coughlin visit Hopkins once again and remind him of how the duo had helped him. After Hopkins once again pled with Skakel to withdraw to no avail, he ordered the police department in the 1st ward to detain any Skakel supporters seen and to close any saloons supporting Skakel immediately at midnight. Kenna also recruited members of the notorious Quincy Street gang to protect any voters of Coughlin, noting that the police would ignore any tactics used to that effect, preceding von Praag, who had had a similar idea, by a few hours.\nCoughlin would win the election with 2,671 votes while independent Republican J. Irving Pearce received 1,261 and Skakel received 1,046. The tactics used in the election received much scorn in the press, with the \"Chicago Tribune\" writing that\n\"Bathhouse John's election was secured by methods which would have disgraced even the worst river parishes of Louisiana,\" but neither Coughlin nor Kenna cared about such reception.\nKenna ran for alderman in 1895, but van Praag and Skakel took vengeance for the events of 1894 and with the help of a controversial franchise to the Ogden Gas Company aided Republican candidate Francis P. Gleason to defeat him. Coughlin retaliated for the loss by introducing an ordinance banning fighting in the city the night before van Praag had a gloved fight scheduled in the ward. Although the ordinance had passed but was found to not be able to stop the fight, the previous ordinance banning only bare-knuckled fighting was argued by attorneys to be able to stop the fight, and Coughlin arranged for the top fighters to be arrested immediately before the semifinals. Knowing of the impending police intervention the fight's manager called it off, damaging the Skakelites' credibility.\nThe 1895 elections had produced a Republican mayor and a Republican majority in the City Council, both of whom Charles Tyson Yerkes would fight in his efforts to construct the Loop during the Chicago Traction Wars. Kenna, recouping his forces in preparation for the 1897 race, saw that Coughlin would serve as a vital tool for Yerkes, and arranged for an alliance between him and Powers. As the 1st ward contained the locations of most of the targets of boodling, including the Loop, Coughlin found himself sponsoring most of the corrupt measures. However, Powers had betrayed Coughlin by December, collaborating with Yerkes and the Republican majority to the exclusion of Coughlin and introducing most of Yerkes's ordinances. Coughlin and Kenna took their revenge on Powers by defeating his bid for the chair of the Cook County Democratic Party Central Committee in favor of free silverite Tommy Gahan. Emboldened by this victory Coughlin introduced an ordinance to grant the General Electric Company a streetcar franchise that included Jackson Street, a valuable street that would fetch a high price from Yerkes, passing the ordinance over Mayor George Bell Swift's veto.\nKenna unseated Gleason in 1897 to take office in the City Council, alongside Carter Harrison Jr. for the mayoralty. In the meantime Yerkes had tired of buying streets individually in the city and wanted to go to the Illinois General Assembly in order to get the State to grant him franchises across the City. This united the reformers, who felt that the City was being deprived of tax dollars, and the corrupt aldermen, who saw their sources of profit vanish, to oppose Yerkes's efforts. Harrison was the leader of this opposition, but while he made Coughlin his leader in the Council he felt as if reformers were better suited to directly attack Yerkes. He decided to make Coughlin the leader of opposition of a bill in the General Assembly to allow the seven gas companies of Chicago to merge into one and form a monopoly. In such capacities Coughlin won some begrudging admiration from the reformers, although he did not fully believe in reform.\nFirst Ward Ball.\nCoughlin and Kenna were also the hosts of the First Ward Ball, an annual political fundraiser which brought together safecrackers, sex workers, gangsters, politicians, businessmen, gamblers, and a variety of other types. The event raised more than $50,000 a year for the two First Ward aldermen until it was closed down in 1909 by Mayor Fred Busse. By the time it was banned, the ball was so large that it had to be held in the Chicago Coliseum, the city's major convention center. Besides its notoriety in attracting many unsavory characters it often ended with the police having to curb disorderly conduct bordering on rioting.\n1914 Challenge by Marion Drake.\nIn 1914 local suffrage for women in Chicago elections portended a possible shift in city power, by woman candidates and women's votes. Coughlin was strongly challenged by Marion Drake, an attorney and legal secretary. Despite local Chicago and nationwide attention to the race, Coughlin again held the alderman seat. \nProhibition.\nIn 1923 the number of aldermen a Chicago ward was entitled to was reduced from two to one, in concert with the number of wards being increased from 35 to 50. Kenna stepped down in favor of Coughlin after this change, but remained as 1st ward committeeman.\nCoughlin was opposed to Prohibition, introducing a motion in the Council to praise New York Governor Al Smith for repealing the law enforcing Prohibition and encouraging Illinois to do the same. In anticipation for the ratification of the 21st amendment he introduced an ordinance providing for the licensing of liquor. The Berghoff in his ward was the first bar in Chicago to receive a liquor license after Prohibition was repealed.\nLater career.\nBy 1933 a report on Coughlin's unopposed run in that year's aldermanic election by the Associated Press described him as a \"Vestige of a past era\" and \"the epitome of a vanishing [type of] American\". At that time the longest-serving municipal legislator in the country by his own estimate, he decried that Council business distracted him from his poetry.\nAfter 46 years as alderman of the First Ward, Coughlin died in office at age 78 of pneumonia at Mercy Hospital in Chicago on November 11, 1938. He was buried at Calvary Cemetery in Evanston.\nAfter a vacancy in the position Kenna would be elected unopposed to assume the office of 1st Ward alderman. Coughlin's death had caused a surge of factionalism within the 1st ward, and Kenna was thought to be the best candidate to ensure peace.\nPersonal life.\nCoughlin was an eccentric figure in Chicago politics, known for his erratic behavior, flashy fashion, poetry, and horse racing. His boisterous personality and large figure often stood in contrast to the comparative meekness and small stature of his partner Kenna. When Harrison asked Kenna whether Coughlin was crazy or on drugs, Kenna replied that \"John isn't dotty and he ain't full of dope. To tell you th' God's truth, Mr. Mayor, they ain't found a name for it yet.\"\nFashion.\nHaving grown up in poverty, Coughlin liked to dress himself in ostentatious fashions, often contracting the services of costumers for vaudevillian actors. He was known to prefer bright colors.\nPoetry.\nCoughlin was known for his poetry, which was often considered of dubious quality. Such was his infamy in poetry that it was common practice for Chicagoans to pen doggerel and facetiously credit it to Coughlin, a practice he allowed.\nOne of his poems, known as \"Dear Midnight of Love\", was penned during a vacation in Denver. Coughlin set the poem to music and had the daughter of a friend sing it after Emma Calv\u00e9 refused, performing it at the Chicago Opera House on October 8.\nHorses.\nCoughlin was known for his endeavors in horse racing, and was often successful in it. Ultimately, however, they failed and he died penniless.\nColorado Springs.\nCoughlin opened Zoo Park in Colorado Springs, Colorado, in 1906. He had first vacationed in Colorado Springs in 1900 and fell in love with it, spending most of his summers there. One of the main attractions of Zoo Park was an elephant named Princess Alice, which had been granted from Chicago's Lincoln Park Zoo after Coughlin convinced his fellow aldermen that owning another elephant was a waste of taxpayer money. However, the rise of reformers dried up Coughlin's Chicago revenue, and combined with declining attendance at Zoo Park and the destruction by fire of Coughlin's summer residence in 1914 his stay became more difficult, and he ultimately left Colorado for good upon its passing of Prohibition.\nLegacy.\nA 2012 retrospective by NBC News Chicago ranked Coughlin and Kenna as the 3rd and 4th most corrupt public officials in Illinois history, behind William Hale Thompson and Paul Powell.\nThe last surviving link to Coughlin and Kenna was Anthony C. Laurino, who had served as an assistant precinct captain under their tutelage and later serve as alderman of the 39th ward from 1965 to 1994, dying in 1999.\nThe 1st ward continued its corruption throughout the 20th century until it was moved north in 1993 and the Loop and areas divided among several wards.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43821", "revid": "11570102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43821", "title": "Michael Kenna (politician)", "text": "American politician\nMichael Kenna (August 20, 1857 \u2013 October 9, 1946), also known as \"Hinky Dink\", was an American politician who served as alderman from Chicago's 1st ward from 1897 to 1923 and again from 1939 to 1943. In addition to his position as alderman he was committeeman of the 1st Ward for the Democratic Party from 1893 to 1944. Representing the Chicago Loop and later its environs in such capacities, he led what was often called the \"world's richest ward\". He and his partner, fellow 1st Ward alderman \"Bathhouse John\" Coughlin, controlled the ward for most of the first half of the 20th century.\nA part of 1st Ward politics for more than 60 years, Kenna possessed great influence on the municipal affairs of Chicago, being able to make or break the prospects of Democratic candidates for the mayoralty. In large part with Kenna's help Coughlin would serve as alderman from the ward for 46 years. Possessing such influence despite his short stature and unassuming presence, he and Coughlin constructed a political machine that would last for the better part of the 20th century.\nKenna was notoriously corrupt; he, Coughlin, and several other aldermen led what was known as the \"Gray Wolves\", a group that attracted much scorn from reformers. He and Coughlin in particular were infamous across the nation and globe. Of particular note were his tactics involving bribing homeless people to vote as desired and performing voter fraud for his candidates. He was also intimate with several figures of organized crime in the city; he and Coughlin were known as the \"Lords of the Levee\" after the Levee vice district in the 1st Ward which provided them with the financial and political support of sex workers, pimps, tavern owners, and gamblers in exchange for protection from law enforcement.\nEarly life.\nMichael Kenna was born in the late 1850s to Catherine (n\u00e9e Ferrel) and John Kenna, both immigrants from County Cork. He was born at the corner of Polk and Sholto (modern-day Carpenter) streets at the edge of \"Connelly's Patch\" on Chicago's Near West Side. At age 10 he left school and began selling newspapers. At age 12, by then an orphan, he borrowed $50 from a barkeeper and purchased a newsstand at the corner of Monroe and Dearborn Streets. He was so successful that he was able to pay back the loan within a month, and would sell newspapers at the stand until 1877. According to legend, it was at this time that Kenna got the nickname \"Hinky Dink\" from \"Chicago Tribune\" publisher Joseph Medill due to his small stature; as an adult he stood tall. Kenna variously professed ignorance of the nickname's origin or claimed that it arose at \"th' old swimming hole.\" He was also known as \"the little fellow\". In 1879 he moved to Leadville, Colorado, to work for a newspaper in the area, returning to Chicago in 1881.\nPolitical career.\n1st Ward.\nAt the close of the 19th century Chicago had a reputation of bad morals, central to which was the 1st Ward, home to a teeming vice district. It was also home to Chicago's central business district, which would later be called \"the Loop\" after the looping elevated railroad trackage constructed in it in the late 1890s. Due to the presence of the Loop the 1st Ward was often known as the \"world's richest\" ward, a fact which Coughlin would use to fire back at critics of his tenure. As the first half of the 20th century progressed the 1st Ward would expand southward to also encompass most of the surrounding Near South Side.\nAt the time of Kenna's ascendancy the vice elements of the 1st Ward and throughout the city were protected by \"King Mike\" McDonald, who had lived in the city since the late 1850s and controlled its gambling since shortly thereafter, and was credited with first saying \"there's a sucker born every minute.\" However, by 1890, his reign began to end and a power vacuum started developing.\nCorruption was not uncommon in late 19th-century Chicago; aldermen would charge for licenses and infrastructural projects within their wards, a practice known as \"boodling\". A group of aldermen including Kenna and Coughlin known as the \"Gray Wolves\" were particularly infamous for their propensities towards boodling. Supporters of the pair said that Kenna and Coughlin were unfairly targeted by the reformers and yet reelected by their constituents every election cycle.\nEarly career.\nUpon his return to Chicago Kenna opened a saloon on Clark Street known as the Workingman's Exchange where he doled out meals to the indigent in exchange for votes. Above the Workingman's Exchange was the Alaska Hotel, which could provide space for 300 men, and up to 600 during elections. By 1882 his saloon was a success and he was a fixture in the 1st Ward Democratic organization under Chesterfield Joe Mackin; his work in securing Grover Cleveland's victory in the 1884 election led Mackin to make him captain of his precinct immediately prior to being imprisoned for fraud related to that election. It was at this time that Kenna first encountered John Coughlin, although the two would not become close friends for a while. Coughlin, who had in his early life served as a bathhouse masseur, was popularly known as \"Bathhouse John\" or \"The Bath\". When Coughlin was first elected as alderman in 1892, Kenna helped the campaign as he normally would but did not make any extra effort. When Carter Harrison III ran for mayor in 1893, Kenna was to quick to support him while Coughlin was one of the last holdouts, straining relations between the two. However, Harrison's betrayal of Kenna by prosecuting him for gambling just like others in the 1st Ward, as well as the rise of the detested rival Billy Skakel, led Kenna to reconsider an alliance with Coughlin as McDonald's influence started to wane. In 1893, Kenna proposed an alliance which Coughlin readily accepted. Coughlin was the public face of the machine while Kenna would work in the background.\nKenna started the new organization by proposing that a defense fund be organized from protection money from brothel keepers and gamblers to legally defend members of the organization who got into trouble. From such fund two lawyers would be retained at $10,000 a year to represent organization members; Kenna and Coughlin themselves paid the initial $10,000. The future judge John R. Caverly, who would later preside over the trial of Leopold and Loeb, received his first fees from this fund.\nFor the special mayoral election triggered by Harrison's assassination, Kenna and Coughlin broke with traditional Harrison supporters by supporting John Patrick Hopkins. Kenna is noted as a member of the Cook County Democratic Party Central Committee for the 1st Ward as of December 21, 1893, serving alongside John P. Leindecker. He succeeded James Walsh, who had been an alderman from the 10th ward from 1883 to 1885.\nAn early example of Kenna's organizational skills was the 1894 aldermanic election. Coughlin was unanimously nominated as the Democratic nominee in what Lloyd Wendt and Herman Kogan would later call \"the briefest political convention in Chicago's history\" and was reported by the \"Chicago Herald\" as lasting \"only a few minutes as the delegates were in a hurry to get away to attend a prize fight.\" However, rival Billy Skakel, who specialized in offering and soliciting gambling on fraudulent stock quotations and hated Coughlin for allowing local Prince Hal Varnell to cut into his turf, formed his own Independent Democratic Party. Working with Sol van Praag, who had ambitions of his own to rule the 1st Ward, he ran as a rival to Coughlin for the race and was endorsed by such publications as \"Mixed Drinks: The Saloon Keepers' Journal\". Fearing for his career despite Kenna's insistence that he would win, Coughlin visited Hopkins, who unsuccessfully asked Skakel to withdraw from the race. Coughlin then presented a petition to get Skakel's name removed from the ballot, which was initially accepted by the election board but would later be overturned by a local judge and backfire on Coughlin. Nevertheless, Kenna reassured Coughlin of victory and used his organizational skills to bribe the homeless with fifty cents, as much food as desired, and a place to stay for each voter. Kenna also suggested that Coughlin visit Hopkins once again and remind him of how the duo had helped him avoid scandal in a gas-boodling concern. After Hopkins once again pled with Skakel to withdraw to no avail, he ordered the police department in the 1st Ward to detain any Skakel supporters seen and to close any saloons supporting Skakel immediately at midnight. Kenna also recruited members of the Quincy Street gang to protect any voters of Coughlin, noting that the police would ignore any tactics used to that effect; in such efforts he preceded van Praag, who had had a similar idea, by a few hours. Coughlin would win the election with 2,671 votes while independent Republican J. Irving Pearce received 1,261 and Skakel received 1,046. The tactics used in the election received much scorn in the press, with the \"Chicago Tribune\" writing that \"Bathhouse John's election was secured by methods which would have disgraced even the worst river parishes of Louisiana\", but neither Coughlin nor Kenna cared about such reception.\nEntry into City Council.\nVan Praag and Skakel would get revenge when Kenna ran for alderman in 1895. Prior to the election, the City Council had passed an ordinance granting the dubious Ogden Gas Company the rights to manufacture, distribute, and sell gas for 50 years. The resultant Ogden Gas Scandal sparked an outrage in Chicagoans and would prove a disaster to the local Democratic party and especially Kenna's aldermanic aspirations. Irked about the events of 1894, van Praag and Skakel backed the Republican candidate Francis P. Gleason in the race, and a few days before the election Kenna found much of his vote-getting money having been spent to get the Ogden Gas ordinance passed while van Praag had much money of his own. Kenna ended up losing to Gleason by 366 votes. The papers rejoiced in his defeat, with the \"Chicago Tribune\" writing him the following poem:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I t'ink\" Said Hink- Y Dink, \"I'll take a drink.\"\nIt was found after the election that van Praag and Skakel had aided Gleason by giving the local Republican party the names and addresses of hundreds of Kenna's registered voters who were deceased or lived outside of the Ward; the Republicans then had the illegitimate names struck from the register.\nThe 1895 elections produced a Republican mayor and a Republican majority in the City Council, both of whom Charles Tyson Yerkes would fight in his efforts to construct rapid transit in the Loop during the Chicago Traction Wars. Kenna, recouping his forces in preparation for the 1897 race, saw that Coughlin could be of great use for Yerkes, and arranged for an alliance between him and rival 19th Ward alderman John Powers. However, Powers betrayed Coughlin by December, collaborating with Yerkes and the Republican majority to the exclusion of Coughlin and introducing most of Yerkes's ordinances which by custom should have been introduced by Coughlin. Coughlin and Kenna took their revenge on Powers by defeating his bid for the chair of the Cook County Democratic Party Central Committee in favor of free silverite Tommy Gahan.\nKenna was successful in entering the City Council in 1897. That same year Carter Harrison IV would be elected mayor in large part due to Kenna's organizational skills in the 1st Ward. Kenna repeated his tactics of paying the homeless for votes, much to the horror of the Republican-dominated Special Committee for the Detection and Prevention of Vote Frauds. Despite the best efforts of Republican Congressman William Lorimer to arrest those of dubious voter credentials, Kenna continued to attract homeless voters from other parts of the city. The Saturday before the election Harry G. Darrow, the proprietor of the new saloon The Bon Ton, issued an invitation for its grand opening, claiming that Kenna, Coughlin, and Harrison would be present. Coughlin came and socialized with the guests but Kenna and Harrison refused to come. Nevertheless, Kenna openly displayed his gambling affiliation in response to a condemnation to that effect by the reform-minded Municipal Voters' League (MVL), stating \"Sure, I associate with gamblers. Why shouldn't I? I like a good game myself.\" Kenna defeated Gleason by 4,373 votes to 1,811 and took office on April 19.\nImmediately upon assumption of office as a reward for his work for Harrison he was made Chairman of the Police committee, and was a member of the committees of Railroads; Gas, Oil, and Electricity; the Water Department; Elections; and Markets, which were considered among the best committees of the Council. Kenna made his introduction to the Council by quietly introducing an order for an ambulance division in the police department.\nInfluence and notoriety.\nAfter his election to the City Council Kenna's organizational prowess became known nationwide, to the extent that Tammany Hall boss Richard Croker asked his help to get Robert Van Wyck elected as the Mayor of the new City of Greater New York. He succeeded, and Van Wyck won with a plurality of 86,000 votes. His notoriety extended across the globe; people from England came and wrote the book \"If Christ came to Chicago\", lambasting several Chicago politicians and Kenna and Coughlin in particular.\nIn 1901 he and four other saloonkeepers were arrested for violating ordinances regarding saloon hours. The arrest came after deputy state health inspector Jacob Ball investigated the saloons in the 1st Ward and found almost 1,000 homeless people lodged in 18 saloons. The prosecutor in the case, Thomas F. Scully, was unprepared to prosecute the case and Kenna was acquitted by the jury, leading to Scully's suspension for thirty days. A 1902 editorial on Coughlin referred to his \"sole claim to even political strength [as] rest[ing] on his being a parasitical partner\" of Kenna.\nIn the 1911 Chicago mayoral election Kenna backed Harrison, allowing him to get the Democratic nomination; when Democrats under the chieftain Roger Sullivan supported his opponent Charles Merriam in the general election, Kenna and the 1st Ward gave Harrison the margin of victory needed to win. Things would turn out differently in 1915 Scandal had befallen the duo with an expos\u00e9 on the exploits of the Levee, leading to county judge John Owens's insisting that Kenna and Coughlin be ejected from the Democratic committee. Harrison acquiesced to these demands, declaring that Kenna's and Coughlin's careers were finished unless they towed the line and supported his entire slate of candidates, including Owens. Angry about this turn of events, the two joined Sullivan in leading a rebellion against Harrison that several other Democrats would join, including Powers and the nascent Anton Cermak. In that same election he selected Scully as the candidate for county judge against Owens despite several red-light district leaders supporting the latter, and successfully worked hard to get him elected. Harrison was defeated in the 1915 mayoral primary by the Sullivan-backed candidate Robert M. Sweitzer, who lost the general election to William Hale Thompson, an avowed enemy of Kenna and Coughlin.\nLord of the Levee.\nThe 1st Ward was home to a vice district known as \"the Levee\", which was named for a nearby wharf and contained some of the best-known brothels in Chicago. Among the brothels in the area was the Everleigh Club owned by the eponymous Everleigh sisters who had arrived from Omaha. It was well known internationally for its opulence and sex workers to the point where it was a point of pride for many Chicagoans. The club, Kenna, and Coughlin were inexorably linked in the imagination of people around the world. It was an important source of protection money for the two aldermen; one of the sisters stated that she had paid Coughlin over $100,000 over the course of 12 years, and Kenna and Coughlin ended up collecting over $15 million in graft from the Levee.\nAfter the events of 1895, Kenna and Coughlin were particularly conscious of the need for a cash flow to finance their endeavors. They were discussing ideas at the Workingmen's Exchange shortly before Christmas when they stumbled on an idea. A party had been held annually for \"Lame Jimmy\", a disabled musician in Carrie Watson's establishment, since the late 1880s. These parties were initially held in what would become Freiberg's Hall on east 22nd Street (modern-day Cermak Road), and were marked by joy and peace with policemen being honored guests. However, a confrontation between police officers at the 1895 event resulted in an outcry against the event and it was banned. Realizing the potential in such an event, Coughlin suggested that the duo revive it under their tutelage. Although Kenna was not particularly keen on the idea, he figured it was not worth the trouble to stop Coughlin from pursuing it.\nWhat resulted was the First Ward Ball, an annual fundraiser which quickly exceeded the excesses of the Lame Jimmy parties. The inaugural ball was held at the 7th Regiment Armory. Known as Coughlin's \"Derby\", it continued to grow in the early 20th century. Its reputation grew such that public pressure forced Mayor Fred Busse to withhold its liquor license in 1909; an event was still held at the Coliseum, but only 3,000 people attended.\nUpon his election as mayor in 1915, Thompson opened up the city to vice and liquor. However, it was clear that Thompson controlled these areas, and the duo's rule over the ward remained insecure. In particular, Big Jim Colosimo, who was a trusted precinct captain, started to surpass Coughlin and Kenna and would soon take over representing the interests of vice. Within the ward the two were nevertheless safe as Thompson refused to challenge them directly, Colosimo remained on good enough terms with them, and the relief of vice obligations allowed them to concentrate on other matters. Both Kenna and Coughlin were present at Colosimo's funeral in 1920.\nProhibition.\nAfter alcoholic beverages were prohibited in the United States in 1920, The Workingman's Exchange had to close and Kenna ran a candy, sandwich, and cigar store in its place. In 1923 the Illinois General Assembly reduced the number of aldermen per ward from two to one, with the new Council to that effect taking office on April 16. Kenna, who never cared much for Council meetings, stepped aside to leave the alderman's position of the 1st Ward to Coughlin. Coughlin would find that the legislation increased his voting power in the council, while Kenna stated that he was content in his cigar store, where he hung up pictures of friends and prominent figures in the 1st Ward.\nThe power of the duo began to diminish in the 1920s as mobsters such as Johnny Torrio and Al Capone began to take control of the ward. Capone, who had originally worked for Torrio, would fight his way to the top of the vice scene in the area, and throughout the city. Capone had no need for the two and could have removed them from politics if he wanted. However, Capone took a liking to them, having noticed their previous loyalty to both Colosimo and Torrio. This increased the stature of the pair as Capone had prestige in the politics of the time, and Kenna had a position in the Cook County Democratic Party equal to Cermak, who was the president of the Cook County Board of Commissioners and known as the \"Mayor of Cook County\".\nCermak was elected mayor in 1931, and given that Capone had recently been convicted for tax evasion the duo hoped that from their ardent support of Cermak they could regain lost glory. However, Cermak turned out to spurn the old style of urban feudalism that had characterized their reign. Throughout the 1930s the new Democratic organization gave committeemen new powers but also subordinated them to the machine. It limited Coughlin's voting power such that the MVL insisted that he had mellowed his record, to which Coughlin responded with indignation and Kenna jocularly suggested that Coughlin sue them. In the later years of Coughlin's life Kenna prevented some of the younger members of the 1st Ward organization from attempting to take Coughlin's aldermanic seat before his death.\nReturn to City Council and later years.\nCoughlin died of pneumonia on November 11, 1938. Kenna was elected unopposed to fill his vacancy in the following year's aldermanic election. Coughlin's death had caused a surge of factionalism within the 1st Ward, and Kenna was thought to be the best candidate to ensure peace. Rich and aging, he had no desire to return to the City Council but was assured that his involvement would be minimal. Three opponents initially tried to contest him, but all had withdrawn by February 9.\nHe received a special ovation at the inaugural ceremony of the new Council on April 12. He rarely spoke at Council meetings and would soon stop coming altogether, sending his orders of the Council via his secretary Joe Clark. At that point Kenna was a figurehead, being present for name value and with power being held by others within the 1st Ward. For the last ten years of his tenure \"de facto\" power of the 1st Ward was held by a gang run by Jack Guzik, who used Coughlin as a figurehead prior to his death and Kenna thereafter. Throughout this time the Democratic organization considered Clark as the acting committeeman.\nKenna declined reelection to the Council in 1943. Two candidates appeared to take his seat. John Budinger had previously been alderman of the then-4th ward from 1910 to 1912 and a County Commissioner, and had the backing of the Democratic organization. James McVittie was the owner of an electroplating business and had the endorsements of the Business Men's Committee and Better Government Association. The contest was particularly aggressive; both candidates' petitions were contested in court, and McVittie accused Budinger of being falsely registered as a 1st Ward voter and actually living in Woodlawn, with the Business Men's Committee threatening to challenge Budinger if he attempted to vote in the 1st Ward. Budinger overwhelmingly won the election in the first round with what McVittie's supporters claimed were illegal and illegitimate tactics such as voter intimidation and took office April 9. Kenna stepped down as 1st Ward committeeman in 1944, effective April of that year. He endorsed Fred M. Morelli as his successor, and Morelli would be unopposed to succeed him as Democratic leader of the ward.\nIn 1943 historians Lloyd Wendt and Herman Kogan released the book \"Lords of the Levee\", which concerns Coughlin and Kenna's activities. During the research for the book the pair interviewed Kenna and relatives of Coughlin. Kenna, who had the book read to him by an assistant, complained that he does not appear in the first 20 pages.\nPersonal life and death.\nKenna was a teetotaler. In his later years Kenna lived in hotels in the Loop. He died on October 9, 1946, at the Blackstone Hotel of diabetes and myocarditis.\nKenna was a millionaire at the time of his death. His heirs fought over his estate. Although Kenna left his heirs $33,000 to be used to erect a mausoleum for his remains to repose in, his heirs took all of the money and bought him an $85 tombstone instead.\nLegacy.\nIt was thought that after Kenna stepped down the 1st Ward would be moved south and the Loop would be divided across multiple wards. Upon redistricting in 1948, the 1st Ward was combined with the erstwhile \"Bloody 20th\" Ward across the Chicago River's south branch. The 1st Ward committeemen of both parties resigned in favor of their counterparts of the old 20th Ward, largely due to the fact that the old 20th could have outvoted the old 1st. Nevertheless, the 1st Ward's reputation would last long after Kenna's death; by the 1980s it was well associated with organized crime. In 1991 allies of Mayor Richard M. Daley proposed, and the City Council approved, a redistricting that renumbered much of the 1st Ward as the 42nd Ward at the request of businesses in the area, who felt that the 1st Ward had gained too much of a negative connotation. As of 2019[ [update]] the 42nd Ward alderman is Brendan Reilly and the 1st Ward alderman is Daniel La Spata.\nThe last surviving link to Kenna and Coughlin was Anthony C. Laurino, who served as an assistant precinct captain under their tutelage and would later serve as alderman of the 39th Ward from 1965 to 1994, dying in 1999. Laurino, who was known for dealing mainly in the matters of the 39th Ward rather than those across the city, expressed pride in his political practices and credited the two for teaching them to him.\nDavid K. Fremon argues in his book \"Chicago Politics Ward by Ward\" that while Coughlin and Kenna \"are generally viewed as living cartoon characters[,]... both were astute men in their time. Were they to appear today [in 1988], they would probably have made their fortunes through law, insurance, or real estate[.]\" Reflecting on their tenure, reformer Paul Douglas noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here were two men of the people who rose to power not merely by brawn and self-assertiveness but also by acting as the very human friends of people in poverty and trouble. They fed the hungry and got jobs for the unemployed. They protected those in trouble with the law. In return, like the \"condottieri\" of the medieval cities, they demanded and obtained loyalty and obedience. ... Can [reformers] meet the human needs which the blundering Bath and the Shrewd Hink served, and do so without the corruption that they practiced?\nA 2012 retrospective by NBC News Chicago ranked Kenna and Coughlin as the 3rd and 4th most corrupt public officials in Illinois history, behind Thompson and Illinois Secretary of State Paul Powell.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43822", "revid": "38469862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43822", "title": "Luise Gottsched", "text": "German poet, playwright, essayist and translator\nLuise Adelgunde Victorie Gottsched (n\u00e9e Kulmus; 11 April 1713 \u2013 26 June 1762) was a German poet, playwright, essayist, and translator, and is often considered one of the founders of modern German theatrical comedy.\nBiography.\nShe was born in Danzig (Gda\u0144sk) in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. She became acquainted with her husband, the poet and author Johann Christoph Gottsched, when she sent him some of her own works. He apparently was impressed, and a long correspondence eventually led to marriage. After marriage, Luise continued to write and publish, and was also her husband's faithful helper in his literary labours. Her uncle was the anatomist Johann Adam Kulmus.\nWorks.\nShe wrote several popular comedies, including \"Das Testament\", and translated \"The Spectator\" (9\u00a0volumes, 1739\u20131743), Alexander Pope's \"Rape of the Lock\" (1744) and other English and French works. After her death her husband edited her \"S\u00e4mtliche kleinere Gedichte\" with a memoir (1763).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43823", "revid": "30809286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43823", "title": "Robert Altman", "text": "American filmmaker (1925\u20132006)\nRobert Bernard Altman ( ; February 20, 1925 \u2013 November 20, 2006) was an American filmmaker. He is considered an enduring figure from the New Hollywood era, known for directing subversive and satirical films with overlapping dialogue and ensemble casts. Over his career he received numerous accolades including an Academy Honorary Award, two BAFTAs, a Primetime Emmy Award and a Golden Globe as well as nominations for seven competitive Academy Awards.\nAltman was nominated for five Academy Awards for Best Director for the war comedy \"M*A*S*H\" (1970), the musical film \"Nashville\" (1975), the Hollywood satire \"The Player\" (1992), the dark comedy \"Short Cuts\" (1993), and the murder mystery \"Gosford Park\" (2001). He is also known for directing \"Brewster McCloud\" (1970), \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" (1971), \"The Long Goodbye\" (1973), \"California Split\" (1974), \"Thieves Like Us\" (1974), \"3 Women\" (1977), \"A Wedding\" (1978), \"Popeye\" (1980), \"Secret Honor\" (1984), \"The Company\" (2003), and \"A Prairie Home Companion\" (2006).\nAlso known for his work on television, he directed the HBO political mockumentary miniseries \"Tanner '88\" (1988) for which he won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series. He also directed the HBO television film \"The Laundromat\" (1985). On stage, he directed the Broadway revival of the Ed Graczyk play \"Come Back to the 5 &amp; Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean\" (1981) and later the 1982 film of the same name. He directed the West End revival of Arthur Miller's penultimate play \"Resurrection Blues\" (2006).\nIn 2006, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences recognized Altman's body of work with an Academy Honorary Award. He never won a competitive Oscar despite seven nominations. His films \"M*A*S*H\", \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\", \"The Long Goodbye\" and \"Nashville\" have been selected for the United States National Film Registry. Altman is one of four filmmakers whose films have won the Golden Bear at Berlin, the Golden Lion at Venice, and the Palme d'Or at Cannes (the other three being Henri-Georges Clouzot, Michelangelo Antonioni, and Jafar Panahi).\nEarly life.\nAltman was born on February 20, 1925, in Kansas City, Missouri, the son of Helen (n\u00e9e Matthews), a \"Mayflower\" descendant from Nebraska, and Bernard Clement Altman, a wealthy insurance salesman and amateur gambler who came from an upper-class family. Altman's ancestry was German, English and Irish; his paternal grandfather, Frank Altman Sr., anglicized the spelling of the family name from \"Altmann\" to \"Altman\". Altman had a Catholic upbringing, but he did not continue to follow or practice the religion as an adult, although he has been referred to as \"a sort of Catholic\" and a Catholic director. He was educated at Jesuit schools, including Rockhurst High School, in Kansas City. He graduated from Wentworth Military Academy in Lexington, Missouri in 1943.\nSoon after graduation, Altman joined the United States Army Air Forces at the age of 18. During World War II, he flew more than 50 bombing missions as a co-pilot of a B-24 Liberator with the 307th Bomb Group in Borneo and the Dutch East Indies.\nUpon his discharge in 1947, he moved to California. He worked in publicity for a company that had invented a tattooing machine to identify dogs. He entered filmmaking on a whim, selling a script to RKO for the 1948 picture \"Bodyguard\", which he co-wrote with George W. George. Altman's immediate success encouraged him to move to New York City, where he attempted to forge a career as a writer. Having enjoyed little success, he returned to Kansas City in 1949 and accepted a job as a director and writer of industrial films for the Calvin Company. He directed some 65 industrial films and documentaries for the Calvin Company. Through his early work on industrial films, he experimented with narrative technique and developed his characteristic use of overlapping dialogue. In February 2012, an early Calvin film directed by Altman, \"Modern Football\" (1951), was found by filmmaker Gary Huggins.\nAltman also had a career directing plays and operas parallel to his film career. While he was employed by the Calvin Company, he began directing plays at the Resident Theatre of the Jewish Community Center. These plays allowed him to work with local actors, such as fellow future director Richard C. Sarafian, whom he directed in a production of Richard Harrity's \"Hope Is the Thing with Feathers\". Sarafian would later marry Altman's sister and follow him to Hollywood.\nCareer.\n1957\u20131969: Directorial debut and early work.\nAltman's first forays into television directing were on the DuMont drama series \"Pulse of the City\" (1953\u20131954), and an episode of the 1956 western series \"The Sheriff of Cochise\". In 1956, he was hired by a local businessman to write and direct a feature film in Kansas City on juvenile delinquency. The film, titled \"The Delinquents\", made for $60,000, was purchased by United Artists for $150,000, and released in 1957. While primitive, this teen exploitation film contained the foundations of Altman's later work in its use of casual, naturalistic dialogue. With its success, Altman moved from Kansas City to California for the last time. He co-directed \"The James Dean Story\" (1957), a documentary rushed into theaters to capitalize on the actor's recent death and marketed to his emerging cult following. Both works caught the attention of Alfred Hitchcock who hired Altman as a director for his CBS anthology series \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\". After just two episodes, Altman resigned due to differences with a producer, but this exposure enabled him to forge a successful television career. Over the next decade Altman worked prolifically in television (and almost exclusively in series dramas) directing multiple episodes of \"Whirlybirds\", \"The Millionaire\", \"U.S. Marshal\", \"The Troubleshooters\", \"The Roaring 20s\", \"Bonanza\", \"Bus Stop\", \"Kraft Mystery Theater\", \"Combat!\", as well as single episodes of several other notable series including \"Hawaiian Eye\", \"Maverick\" (the fourth season episode \"Bolt From the Blue\" also written by Altman and starring Roger Moore), \"Lawman\", \"Surfside 6\", \"Peter Gunn\", and \"Route 66\".\nBy the 1960s, Altman established himself as a television director due to his ability to work quickly and efficiently on a limited budget. Though he was frequently fired from television projects for refusing to conform to network mandates, Altman always was able to land new assignments. In 1964, the producers decided to expand \"Once Upon a Savage Night\", one of his episodes of \"Kraft Suspense Theatre\", for release as a television film under the title \"Nightmare in Chicago\". In a 1963 episode, \"The Hunt\", his cast included James Caan and Bruce Dern.\nTwo years later, Altman was hired to direct the low-budget space travel feature \"Countdown\", but was fired within days of the project's conclusion because he had refused to edit the film to a manageable length. He worked with Caan again, who led the cast with Robert Duvall. He did not direct another film until \"That Cold Day in the Park\" (1969), which was a critical and box-office disaster. During the decade, Altman began to express political subtexts within his works. In particular, he expressed anti-war sentiments regarding the Vietnam War. Because of this, Altman's career would somewhat suffer as he came to be associated with the anti-war movement.\n1970\u20131979: Breakthrough and stardom.\nIn 1969, Altman was offered the script for \"M*A*S*H\", an adaptation of a little-known Korean War-era novel satirizing life in the armed services; more than a dozen other filmmakers had passed on it. Altman had been hesitant to take the production, and the shoot was so tumultuous that Elliott Gould and Donald Sutherland tried to have Altman fired over his unorthodox filming methods. Nevertheless, \"M*A*S*H\" was widely hailed as a classic upon its 1970 release. It won the at the 1970 Cannes Film Festival and netted five Academy Award nominations. It was Altman's highest-grossing film, released during a time of increasing anti-war sentiment in the United States. The Academy Film Archive preserved \"M*A*S*H\" in 2000.\nNow recognized as a major talent, Altman notched critical successes with \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" (1971), a revisionist Western in which the mordant songs of Leonard Cohen underscore a gritty vision of the American frontier; \"Images\", his single, Bergman-inspired attempt at making a horror film; \"The Long Goodbye\" (1973), a controversial adaptation of the Raymond Chandler novel (scripted by Leigh Brackett) now ranked as a seminal influence on the neo-noir subgenre; \"Thieves Like Us\" (1974), an adaptation of the Edward Anderson novel previously filmed by Nicholas Ray as \"They Live by Night\" (1949); \"California Split\" (1974), a gambling comedy-drama shot partially on location in Reno, Nevada; and \"Nashville\" (1975), which had a strong political theme set against the world of country music. The stars of the film wrote their own songs; Keith Carradine won an Academy Award for the song \"I'm Easy\". Altman's next film, \"Buffalo Bill and the Indians, or Sitting Bull's History Lesson\", won the Golden Bear at the 28th Berlin International Film Festival.\nAlthough his films were often met with divisive notices, and some, like \"A Perfect Couple\" and \"Quintet\" were widely panned, many of the prominent film critics of the era (including Pauline Kael, Vincent Canby and Roger Ebert) remained steadfastly loyal to his directorial style throughout the decade. Audiences took some time to appreciate his films, and he did not want to have to satisfy studio officials. In 1970, following the release of \"M*A*S*H,\" he founded Lion's Gate Films to have independent production freedom. Altman's company is not to be confused with the current Lionsgate, a Canada/U.S. entertainment company. The films he made through his company included \"Brewster McCloud\", \"A Wedding\", and \"3 Women\".\n1980\u20131991: Career fluctuations.\nIn 1980, he directed the musical film \"Popeye\". Produced by Robert Evans and written by Jules Feiffer, the film was based on the comic strip / cartoon of the same name and starred Shelley Duvall and the comedian Robin Williams in his film debut. Designed as a vehicle to increase Altman's commercial clout following a series of critically acclaimed but commercially unsuccessful low-budget films in the late 1970s (including \"3\u00a0Women\", \"A\u00a0Wedding\", and \"Quintet\"), the production was filmed on location in Malta. It was soon beleaguered by heavy drug and alcohol use among most of the cast and crew, including the director; Altman reportedly clashed with Evans, Williams (who threatened to leave the film), and songwriter Harry Nilsson (who departed midway through the shoot, leaving Van Dyke Parks to finish the orchestrations). Although the film grossed $60\u00a0million worldwide on a $20\u00a0million budget and was the second highest-grossing film Altman had directed to that point, it failed to meet studio expectations and was considered a box office disappointment.\nIn 1981, the director sold Lion's Gate to producer Jonathan Taplin after his political satire \"Health\" (shot in early 1979 for a Christmas release) was shelved by longtime distributor 20th Century Fox following tepid test and festival screenings throughout 1980. The departure of longtime Altman partisan Alan Ladd Jr. from Fox also played a decisive role in forestalling the release of the film.\nUnable to secure major financing in the post-New Hollywood blockbuster era because of his mercurial reputation and the particularly tumultuous events surrounding the production of \"Popeye\", Altman returned to television and theater between films. His first project after \"Popeye\" was \"2 by South\", a double bill of plays by unknown playwright Frank South, \"Rattlesnake in a Cooler\" and \"Precious Blood\". The production debuted in Los Angeles and transferred off-Broadway, before Altman adapted it as a pair of television films. Altman's next project was to revive Ed Graczyk's play, \"Come Back to the 5 &amp; Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean\". Like \"2 by South\", Altman adapted his production as a film. The film, which starred Cher, Karen Black, and Sandy Dennis, played at film festivals before its independent theatrical release; Altman turned down several distribution deals to keep the film under his control.115\nIn 1982, after finishing work on \"Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean\", Altman travelled to Dallas to film his next film, \"Streamers\". The film, adapted by David Rabe from his hit play, was shot in only 18 days. Its 1983 release made it Altman's third theatrical adaptation in as many years. Afterwards, he began teaching a course on his films at the University of Michigan, where he concurrently staged his first production of Igor Stravinsky's \"The Rake's Progress\". He also co-wrote John Anderson's 1983 hit single \"Black Sheep\".\nAfter the critical success of his three successive theatrical adaptations, Altman attempted to return to Hollywood with the teen comedy \"O.C. and Stiggs\" (1985). Like \"Popeye\", the chaotic production was characterized by tension between Altman and the studio, MGM. Altman travelled to Arizona to shoot away from the executives and the screenwriters, whom he banned from the set. There he shot the film in the summer of 1983, but poor test screenings, chaos within the studio, and changing ownership delayed the film's release. It finally received a belated limited commercial release in 1987, four years after it was shot. The British Film Institute later referred to it as \"probably Altman's least successful film\".\nWhile \"O.C. and Stiggs\" was shelved, Altman returned to theatrical adaptations and to the University of Michigan to film \"Secret Honor\", using his students as crew members. Based on a one man-play about former president Richard Nixon, the film starred Philip Baker Hall as the ex-president. In 2008, the University of Michigan Library acquired Altman's archive. Adapted by Altman and Sam Shepard for The Cannon Group from Shepard's Pulitzer Prize-nominated play, \"Fool for Love\" (1985) featured the playwright-actor alongside Kim Basinger, Harry Dean Stanton, and Randy Quaid; it fared better than most of his films from the era, earning $900,000 domestically on a $2\u00a0million budget and positive reviews from Roger Ebert and Vincent Canby.\nDisappointed by his string of critical and commercial failures, including the still-unreleased \"O.C. and Stiggs\", Altman moved to Paris. There, he shot another television film, \"The Laundromat\", which he completed before \"Fool for Love\". He then wrote and directed \"Beyond Therapy\", which proved to be one of his biggest failures. Altman then mounted his second production of \"The Rake's Progress\", this time at the prestigious Op\u00e9ra de Lille. The Op\u00e9ra was undergoing financial collapse at the time, and its failure to regain money through ambitious productions caused it close later that year. Altman also used a selection from Jean-Phillipe Rameau's \"Les Bor\u00e9ades\" as the basis for his contribution to \"Aria\", which was shown at the 1987 Cannes Film Festival to mixed reception. Altman made his next television film, \"Basements\", based on two plays by Harold Pinter. Though Pinter wrote the screenplay himself, this film became the latest of Altman's failures. The long-awaited release of \"O.C. and Stiggs\" that year was also panned.\nAltman finally regained a modicum of critical favor in 1988 for his television work. He returned to America early that year to shoot the mockumentary show \"Tanner '88\" (1988), a collaboration with Garry Trudeau set in the milieu of a United States presidential campaign, for which he earned a Primetime Emmy Award. The series was shot on the actual campaign trail and featured several real candidates. During the show's run, Altman's television production of \"The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial\" aired. Though it received high acclaim, it would be his last television film. In 1990, Altman directed \"Vincent &amp; Theo\", a biographical film about Vincent van Gogh that was intended as a television miniseries for broadcast in the United Kingdom. A theatrical version of the film was a modest success in the United States, marking a significant turning point in the director's critical resurgence.\n1992\u20132006: Resurgence and final films.\nHe revitalized his career in earnest with \"The Player\" (1992), a satire of Hollywood. Co-produced by the influential David Brown (\"The Sting\", \"Jaws\", \"Cocoon\"), the film was nominated for three Academy Awards, including Best Director. While he did not win the Oscar, he was awarded Best Director by the Cannes Film Festival, BAFTA, and the New York Film Critics Circle.\nAltman then directed \"Short Cuts\" (1993), an ambitious adaptation of several short stories by Raymond Carver, which portrayed the lives of various citizens of Los Angeles over the course of several days. The film's large cast and intertwining of many different storylines were similar to his large-cast films of the 1970s; he won the Golden Lion at the 1993 Venice International Film Festival and another Oscar nomination for Best Director.\nBetween shooting and editing \"Short Cuts\", Altman made his return to opera as the director and co-librettist of \"McTeague\". Altman was hired on the project by William Bolcom, who had been commissioned with his regular librettist, Arnold Weinstein, to write an opera by the Lyric Opera of Chicago. Bolcom, a teacher at the University of Michigan, had admired Altman's first production of \"The Rake's Progress\" a decade prior and asked him for help adapting Frank Norris's novel. After finishing \"Short Cuts\", Altman directed two episodes of \"Great Performances\". The first was an R&amp;B revue; the second was a television adaptation of \"McTeague\".\nThe rest of the 1990s saw limited success for Altman. His 1994 release \"Pr\u00eat-\u00e0-Porter\" (also known as \"Ready to Wear\") garnered significant pre-release publicity, but was a commercial and critical flop, though it got several nominations for year-end awards, including two Golden Globe nominations and won the National Board of Review award for Best Acting By An Ensemble. In 1996, Altman directed \"Kansas City\", expressing his love of 1930s jazz through a complicated kidnapping story. Altman encouraged the film's on-set musicians to improvise, and unused footage of their performances formed the basis for Altman's third episode of \"Great Performances\". The film received lukewarm-to-positive reviews, but made next to nothing at the box office, as did the 1998 legal thriller \"The Gingerbread Man\". Though his 1997 anthology series \"Gun\" had a high-profile cast, it was cancelled after only six episodes.\nHe did close the decade on a high note, with 1999's \"Cookie's Fortune\", a quirky black comedy about the suicide of a wealthy dowager, his first film in almost 6 years to make back its budget, and which earned him generally positive praise from critics. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1999. Though Altman's first film of the new millennium, \"Dr. T &amp; the Women\", received only moderate reviews and middling financial success. His next film, \"Gosford Park\" (2001), was included on many critics' lists of the ten best films of that year. A large-cast, British country house murder mystery, it won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay (Julian Fellowes) plus six more nominations, including two for Altman, as Best Director and Best Picture.\nAltman returned to the stage twice more. In 2004 He reunited with Bolcom, Weinstein, and the Lyric Opera to adapt his 1978 film, \"A Wedding\", as an opera. It was generally well received. His final stage production was poorly received. In 2006, Altman travelled to England to direct the West End debut of Arthur Miller's final play, \"Resurrection Blues\" at the Old Vic Theatre. At this time, the Old Vic was managed by Kevin Spacey, and the production starred Maximilian Schell, James Fox, Neve Campbell, Matthew Modine, and Jane Adams. However, despite the pedigree of all involved, the production was an abject failure with poor reviews and behind-the-scenes bickering.\nWorking with independent studios such as the now-shuttered Fine Line, Artisan (which was absorbed into today's Lionsgate), and USA Films (now Focus Features), gave Altman the edge in making the kinds of films he always wanted to make without studio interference. \"The Company\", a film about the Joffrey Ballet in Chicago, featured a cast composed mainly of actual dancers. The film had been conceived by star Neve Campbell, an ex ballerina, and written by Altman's longtime friend, Barbara Turner. Altman directed a follow-up to \"Tanner '88\" for the Sundance Channel, reuniting him with Michael Murphy as an older Jack Tanner. A film version of Garrison Keillor's public radio series \"A Prairie Home Companion\" was released in June\u00a02006. Altman was still developing new projects up until his death, including a film based on \"\" (1997).\nIn 2006, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences awarded Altman an Academy Honorary Award for Lifetime Achievement. During his acceptance speech, he revealed that he had received a heart transplant approximately ten or eleven years earlier. The director then quipped that perhaps the academy had acted prematurely in recognizing the body of his work, as he felt like he might have four more decades of life ahead of him.\nDirecting style and technique.\nAltman's particular style of filmmaking covered many genres \u2014 referred to as \"Altmanesque\" \u2014 but usually with a \"subversive\" or \"anti-Hollywood\" twist which typically relied on satire and humor to express his personal views. Actors especially enjoyed working under his direction because he encouraged them to improvise. He preferred large ensemble casts for his films, and developed a multitrack recording technique which produced overlapping dialogue from multiple actors. This produced a more natural, more dynamic, and more complex experience for the viewer. He also used highly mobile camera work and zoom lenses to enhance the activity taking place on the screen. Critic Pauline Kael, writing about his directing style, said that Altman could \"make film fireworks out of next to nothing\" and calls his method for making movies as \"a step toward a new kind of movie naturalism.\"\nMaverick and auteur.\nFollowing his successful career in television, Altman began his new career in the film industry when he was in middle-age. He understood the creative limits imposed by the television medium, and now set out to direct and write films which would express his personal visions about American society and Hollywood. His films would later be described as \"auteuristic attacks\" and \"idiosyncratic variations\" of traditional films, typically using subtle comedy or satire as a way of expressing his observations.\nHis films were typically related to political, ideological, and personal subjects, and Altman was known for \"refusing to compromise his own artistic vision.\" He has been described as \"anti-Hollywood,\" often ignoring the social pressures that affected others in the industry, which made it more difficult for him to get many of his films seen. He said his independence as a filmmaker helped him overall:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I don't think there's a filmmaker alive, or who ever lived, who's had a better shake than I've had. I've never been without a project and it's always been a project of my own choosing. So I don't know how much better it could be. I have not become a mogul, I don't build castles and I don't have a vast personal fortune, but I have been able to do what I've wanted to do and I've done it a lot.\n\"Altman was a genuine movie maverick,\" states author Ian Freer, because he went against the commercial conformity of the film industry: \"He was the scourge of the film establishment, and his work generally cast an astute, scathing eye over the breadth of American culture, often exploding genres and character archetypes; Altman was fascinated by people with imperfections, people as they really are, not as the movies would have you believe.\" Director Alan Rudolph, during a special tribute to Altman, refers to his moviemaking style as \"Altmanesque.\"\nWith his independent style of directing, he developed a bad reputation among screenwriters and those on the business side of films. He admits, \"I have a bad reputation with writers, developed over the years: 'Oh, he doesn't do what you write, blah blah blah.' ... Ring Lardner was very pissed off with me,\" for not following his script.18 Nor did Altman get along well with studio heads, once punching an executive in the nose and knocking him into a swimming pool because he insisted he cut six minutes from a film he was working on.9\nHis reputation among actors was better. With them, his independence sometimes extended to his choice of actors, often going against consensus. Cher, for instance, credits him for launching her career with both the stage play and film, \"Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean\" (1982). \"Without Bob I would have never had a film career. Everyone told him not to cast me. Everyone. ... Nobody would give me a break. I am convinced that Bob was the only one who was brave enough to do it.\" Others, like Julianne Moore, describes working with him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDirector Robert Dornhelm said Altman \"looked at film as a pure, artistic venue.\" With \"Short Cuts\" (1993), for instance, the distributor \"begged him\" to cut a few minutes from the length, to keep it commercially viable: \"Bob just thought the antiChrist was trying to destroy his art. They were well-meaning people who wanted him to get what he deserved, which was a big commercial hit. But when it came down to the art or the money, he was with the art.\"438\nSally Kellerman, noting Altman's willful attitude, looked back with regret at giving up a chance to act in one of his films:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I had just finished filming \"Last of the Red Hot Lovers\" when Bob called me one day at home. \"Sally, do you want to be in my picture after next?\" he asked. \"Only if it's a good part,\" I said. He hung up on me.\nBob was as stubborn and arrogant as I was at the time, but the sad thing is that I cheated myself out of working with someone I loved so much, someone who made acting both fun and easy and who trusted his actors. Bob loved actors. Stars would line up to work for nothing for Bob Altman.\nThemes and subjects.\nUnlike directors whose work fits within various film genres, such as Westerns, musicals, war films, or comedies, Altman's work has been defined as more \"anti-genre\" by various critics. This is partly due to the satirical and comedy nature of many of his films. Geraldine Chaplin, daughter of Charlie Chaplin, compared the humor in his films to her father's films:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They're funny in the right way. Funny in a critical way \u2014 of what the world is and the world we live in. They were both geniuses in their way. They alter your experience of reality. They have their world and they have their humor. That humor is so rare.287\nAltman made it clear that he did not like \"storytelling\" in his films, contrary to the way most television and mainstream film are made. According to Altman biographer Mitchell Zuckoff, \"he disliked the word 'story,' believing that a plot should be secondary to an exploration of pure (or, even better, impure) human behavior.\"xiii Zuckoff describes the purposes underlying many of Altman's films: \"He loved the chaotic nature of real life, with conflicting perspectives, surprising twists, unexplained actions, and ambiguous endings. He especially loved many voices, sometimes arguing, sometimes agreeing, ideally overlapping, a cocktail party or a street scene captured as he experienced it.xiii Julianne Moore, after seeing some of his movies, credits Altman's style of directing for her decision to become a film actress, rather than a stage actress:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I felt it really strongly. And I thought, \"I don't know who this guy is, but that's what I want to do. I want to do that kind of work.\" From then on I'd see his films whenever I could, and he was always my absolute favorite director, for what he said thematically and emotionally and how he felt about people.324\nFilm author Charles Derry writes that Altman's films \"characteristically contain perceptive observations, telling exchanges, and moments of crystal clear revelation of human folly.\" Because Altman was an astute observer of society and \"especially interested in people,\" notes Derry, many of his film characters had \"that sloppy imperfection associated with human beings as they are, with life as it is lived.\" As a result, his films are often an indirect critique of American society.\nFor many of Altman's films, the satirical content is evident: \"M*A*S*H\" (1970), for example, is a satirical black comedy set during the Korean War; \"McCabe &amp; Mrs. Miller\" (1971) is a satire on Westerns; author Matthew Kennedy states that \"Nashville\" (1975) is a \"brilliant satire of America immediately prior to the Bicentennial\"; \"A Wedding\" (1978) is a satire on American marriage rituals and hypocrisy; Altman himself said that \"The Player\" (1992) was \"a very mild satire\" about the Hollywood film industry, and Vincent Canby agreed, stating that \"as a satire, \"The Player\" tickles. It doesn't draw blood.\" The satire of his films sometimes led to their failure at the box office if their satirical nature was not understood by the distributor. Altman blames the box office failure of \"The Long Goodbye\" (1973), a detective story, on the erroneous marketing of the film as a thriller:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When the picture opened, it was a big, big flop. ... I went to David Picker and said, \"You can't do this. No wonder the fucking picture is failing. It's giving the wrong impression. You make it look like a thriller and it's not, it's a satire.\nSimilarly, Altman also blames the failure of \"O.C. &amp; Stiggs\" on its being marketed as a typical \"teenage movie,\" rather than what he filmed it as, a \"satire of a teenage movie,\" he said.\nImprovisation dialogue.\nAltman favored stories expressing the interrelationships among several characters, being more interested in character motivation than in intricate plots. He therefore tended to sketch out only a basic plot for the film, referring to the screenplay as a \"blueprint\" for action. By encouraging his actors to improvise dialogue, Altman thus became known as an \"actor's director,\" a reputation that attracted many notable actors to work as part of his large casts. Performers enjoy working with Altman in part because \"he provides them with the freedom to develop their characters and often alter the script through improvisation and collaboration,\" notes Derry. Richard Baskin says that \"Bob was rather extraordinary in his way of letting people do what they did. He trusted you to do what you did and therefore you would kill for him.\"\n282 Geraldine Chaplin, who acted in \"Nashville\", recalls one of her first rehearsal sessions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He said, \"Have you brought your scripts?\" We said yes. He said, \"Well, throw them away. You don't need them. You need to know who you are and where you are and who you're with.\" ... It was like being onstage with a full house every second. All the circus acts you had inside your body you'd do just for him.282\nAltman regularly let his actors develop a character through improvisation during rehearsal or sometimes during the actual filming. Such improvisation was uncommon in film due to the high cost of film production which requires careful planning, precise scripts, and rehearsal, before costly film was exposed. Nevertheless, Altman preferred to use improvisation as a tool for helping his actors develop their character. Altman said that \"once we start shooting it's a very set thing. Improvisation is misunderstood. We don't just turn people loose.\" Although he tried to avoid dictating an actor's every move, preferring to let them be in control:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I cast a film, most of my creative work is done. I have to be there to turn the switch on and give them encouragement as a father figure, but they do all the work. ... All I'm trying to do is make it easy on the actor, because once you start to shoot, the actor is the artist. ... I have to give them confidence and see that they have a certain amount of protection so they can be creative. ... I let them do what they became actors for in the first place: to create.\nCarol Burnett remembers Altman admitting that many of the ideas in his films came from the actors. \"You never hear a director say that. That was truly an astonishing thing,\" she said.328 Others, such as Jennifer Jason Leigh, became creatively driven:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He would inspire you out of sheer necessity to come up with stuff that you didn't know you were capable of, that you didn't know you had in you. He was so genuinely mischievous and so damn funny.435\nKrin Gabbard adds that Altman enjoyed using actors \"who flourish as improvisers,\" such as Elliott Gould, who starred in 5 of his films, including \"M*A*S*H\", \"The Long Goodbye\" and \"California Split\". Gould recalls that when filming \"M*A*S*H\", his first acting job with Altman, he and costar Donald Sutherland didn't think Altman knew what he was doing. He wrote years later, \"I think that in hindsight, Donald and I were two elitist, arrogant actors who really weren't getting Altman's genius.\"174 Others in the cast immediately appreciated Altman's directing style. Ren\u00e9 Auberjonois explains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We thought that's the way movies were. That they were that joyous an experience. If you had any kind of career, you quickly saw that most directors don't really trust actors, don't really want to see actors acting. That was the difference with Bob Altman. He loved actors and wanted to see acting.175\nUnlike television and traditional films, Altman also avoided \"conventional storytelling,\" and would opt for showing the \"busy confusion of real life,\" observes Albert Lindauer. Among the various techniques to achieve this effect, his films often include \"a profusion of sounds and images, by huge casts or crazy characters, multiple plots or no plots at all, ... and a reliance on improvisation.\" A few months before he died, Altman tried to summarize the motives behind his filmmaking style:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I equate this work more with painting than with theater or literature. Stories don't interest me. Basically, I'm more interested in behavior. I don't direct, I watch. I have to be thrilled if I expect the audience to be thrilled. Because what I really want to see from an actor is something I've never seen before, so I can't tell them what it is. I try to encourage actors not to take turns. To deal with conversation as conversation. I mean, that's what the job is, I think. It's to make a comfort area so that an actor can go beyond what he thought he could do.8\nSound techniques.\nAltman was one of the few filmmakers who \"paid full attention to the possibilities of sound\" when filming. He tried to replicate natural conversational sounds, even with large casts, by wiring hidden microphones to actors, then recording them talking over each other with multiple soundtracks. During the filming, he wore a headset to ensure that important dialogue could be heard, without emphasizing it. This produced a \"dense audio experience\" for viewers, allowing them to hear multiple scraps of dialogue, as if they were listening in on various private conversations. Altman recognized that although large casts hurt a film commercially, \"I like to see a lot of stuff going on.\"\nAltman first used overlapping soundtracks in \"M*A*S*H\" (1970), a sound technique which film author Michael Barson describes as \"a breathtaking innovation at the time.\" He developed it, Altman said, to force viewers to pay attention and become engaged in the film as if they were an active participant. According to some critics, one of the more extreme uses of the technique is in \"McCabe and Mrs. Miller\" (1971), also considered among his finest films.\nFilm historian/scholar Robert P. Kolker pointed out that the aural and visual simultaneity in Altman's films was critical as that represented an emphasis on the plurality of events, which required viewers to become active spectators.\nEnsemble casts.\nOverlapping dialogue among large groups of actors adds complexity to Altman's films, and they were often criticized as appearing haphazard or disconnected on first viewing. Some of his critics changed their minds after seeing them again. British film critic David Thomson gave \"Nashville\" (1975) a bad review after watching it the first time, but later wrote, \"But going back to \"Nashville\" and some of the earlier films, ... made me reflect: It remains enigmatic how organized or purposeful \"Nashville\" is. ... The mosaic, or mix, permits a freedom and a human idiosyncrasy that Renoir might have admired.\" During the making of the film, the actors were inspired, and co-star Ronee Blakley was convinced of the film's ultimate success:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Yes, I did think it was going to be great, all the work was so good, every actor was inspired, and Altman's team was intensely competent, and he was that rare kind of genius who knows what works and what doesn't at the moment it is happening.\nThomson later recognized those aspects as being part of Altman's style, beginning with \"M*A*S*H\" (1970): \"\"MASH\" began to develop the crucial Altman style of overlapping, blurred sound and images so slippery with zoom that there was no sense of composition. That is what makes \"Nashville\" so absorbing.\" Altman explained that to him such overlapping dialogue in his films was closer to reality, especially with large groups: \"If you've got fourteen people at a dinner table, it seems to me it's pretty unlikely that only two of them are going to be talking.\" Pauline Kael writes that Altman, \"the master of large ensembles, loose action, and overlapping voices, demonstrates that ... he can make film fireworks out of next to nothing.\"\nPhotography.\nAltman's distinctive style of directing carried over into his preferences for camerawork. Among them was his use of widescreen compositions, intended to capture the many people or activities taking place on screen at the same time. For some films, such as \"McCabe and Mrs. Miller\", he created a powerful visual atmosphere with cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond, such as scenes using fluid camerawork, zoom lenses, and a smoky effect using special fog filters. Director Stanley Kubrick told Altman that \"the camerawork was wonderful,\" and asked, \"How did you do it?\"\nIn \"Nashville\", Altman used sets with noticeable colors of reds, whites and blues. For \"The Long Goodbye\", he insisted that Zsigmond keep the camera mobile by mounting it to moving objects. Zsigmond states that Altman \"wanted to do something different\" in this film, and told him he \"wanted the camera to move \u2014 all the time. Up. down. In and out. Side to side.\" Cinematographer Roger Deakins, discussing his use of zoom lenses, commented, \"I would find it quite exciting to shoot a film with a zoom lens if it was that observational, roving kind of look that Robert Altman was known for. He'd put the camera on a jib arm and float across the scene and pick out these shots as he went along \u2013 quite a nice way of working.\"\nZsigmond also recalls that working with Altman was fun:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We rather enjoyed doing things \"improv.\" Altman is a great improviser. During the first few days of the shoot, he would \"create\" different approaches on a moment's notice. He would show me how he wanted the camera to move \u2014 always move. Which was fun. The actors loved it, and I was always challenged to find ways to shoot what Altman came up with.\nVilmos Zsigmond's cinematography in \"McCabe and Mrs. Miller\" received a nomination by the British Academy Film Awards.\nMusic scores.\nWhen using music in his films, Altman was known to be highly selective, often choosing music that he personally liked. Director Paul Thomas Anderson, who worked with him, notes that \"Altman's use of music is always important,\" adding, \"Bob loved his music, didn't he? My God, he loved his music\". Since he was a \"great fan\" of Leonard Cohen's music, for example, saying he would \"just get stoned and play that stuff\" all the time he used three of his songs in \"McCabe and Mrs. Miller\" (1971), and another for the final scene in \"A Wedding\" (1978).\nFor \"Nashville\" (1975), Altman had numerous new country music songs written by his cast to create a realistic atmosphere. He incorporated a \"hauntingly repeated melody\" in \"The Long Goodbye\" (1973), and employed Harry Nilsson and Van Dyke Parks to score \"Popeye\" (1980).347\nA number of music experts have written about Altman's use of music, including Richard R. Ness, who wrote about the scores for many of Altman's films in an article, considered to be a valuable resource for understanding Altman's filmmaking technique. Similarly, cinema studies professor Krin Gabbard wrote an analysis of Altman's use of jazz music in \"Short Cuts\" (1993), noting that few critics have considered the \"importance of the music\" in the film.\nJazz was also significant in \"Kansas City\" (1996). In that film, the music is considered to be the basis of the story. Altman states that \"the whole idea was not to be too specific about the story,\" but to have the film itself be \"rather a sort of jazz.\" Altman's technique of making the theme of a film a form of music, was considered \"an experiment nobody has tried before,\" with Altman admitting it was risky. \"I didn't know if it would work. ... If people 'get it,' then they really tend to like it.\"\nInfluence.\nDirectors who are influenced by Altman include Paul Thomas Anderson, Wes Anderson, Judd Apatow, Richard Linklater, Alejandro Gonz\u00e1lez I\u00f1\u00e1rritu, Noah Baumbach, David Gordon Green, Phil Lord and Christopher Miller, the Safdie brothers, Harmony Korine,Michael Winterbottom. and James Gunn. Altman gave several directors, including Alan Rudolph, Reza Badiyi, and Richard C. Sarafian, their starts in filmmaking.\nFrequent collaborators.\nThroughout his lifetime, Altman, like most directors, often cast certain actors in many of his feature films. Actors who have performed in his films 3 or more times in either lead, supporting or cameo roles include Michael Murphy (7), Shelley Duvall (7), Bert Remsen (7), Paul Dooley (6), Elliott Gould (5), Rene Auberjonois (5), Jeff Goldblum (4), Lily Tomlin (4), Lyle Lovett (4), Henry Gibson (4), David Arkin (4), John Schuck (4), Tim Robbins (3), Robert Duvall (3), Keith Carradine (3), Sally Kellerman (3), Geraldine Chaplin (3), Ann Ryerson (3), Belita Moreno (3), Richard E. Grant (3) and Craig Richard Nelson (3).\nAwards and honors.\nAltman received various awards and nominations including seven Academy Award nominations winning the Honorary Oscar in 2006. He received seven British Academy Film Award nominations winning twice for \"The Player\" (1992), and \"Gosford Park\" (2001). He received the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for \"Tanner '88\" (1988). He also received five Golden Globe Award nominations winning the Golden Globe Award for Best Director for \"Gosford Park\". He also received various awards from film festivals including the Cannes Film Festival's prestigious Palme d'Or for \"M*A*S*H\" and the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Director for \"The Player\". He has also received the Berlin International Film Festival's Golden Bear, and the Venice Film Festival's Golden Lion. In 1994, he received the Directors Guild of America Lifetime Achievement Award.\nDirected Academy Award performancesUnder Altman's direction, these actors have received Academy Award nominations for their performances in their respective roles.\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\nAltman was married three times: His first wife was LaVonne Elmer. They were married from 1947 to 1949, and had a daughter, Christine. His second wife was Lotus Corelli. They were married from 1950 to 1955, and had two sons, Michael and Stephen. At fifteen, Michael wrote the lyrics to \"Suicide Is Painless\", the theme song to Altman's film, \"M*A*S*H\". Stephen is a production designer who often worked with his father. Altman's third wife was Kathryn Reed. They were married from 1957 until his death in 2006. They had two sons, Robert and Matthew. Altman became the stepfather to Konni Reed when he married Kathryn.\nKathryn Altman, who died in 2016, co-authored a book about Altman that was published in 2014. She had served as a consultant and narrator for the 2014 documentary \"Altman\", and had spoken at many retrospective screenings of her husband's films.\nHomes.\nIn the 1960s, Altman lived for years in Mandeville Canyon in Brentwood, California. He resided in Malibu throughout the 1970s, but sold that home and the Lion's Gate production company in 1981. \"I had no choice\", he told \"The New York Times\". \"Nobody was answering the phone\" after the flop of \"Popeye\". He moved his family and business headquarters to New York City, but eventually moved back to Malibu, where he lived until his death.\nPolitical views.\nIn November\u00a02000, Altman claimed that he would move to Paris if George W. Bush were elected, but joked that he had meant Paris, Texas, when it came to pass. He noted that \"the state would be better off if he (Bush) is out of it.\" Altman was an outspoken marijuana user, and served as a member of the NORML advisory board. He was also an atheist and an anti-war activist. He was one of numerous public figures, including linguist Noam Chomsky and actress Susan Sarandon, who signed the \"Not in Our Name\" declaration opposing the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Julian Fellowes believes that Altman's anti-war and anti-Bush stance cost him the Best Director Oscar for \"Gosford Park\".478\nAltman despised the television series \"M*A*S*H\" which followed his 1970 film, citing it as being the antithesis of what his movie was about, and citing its anti-war messages as being \"racist\". In the 2001 DVD commentary for \"M*A*S*H\", he stated clearly the reasons for which he disapproved of the series.\nDeath and legacy.\nAltman died from leukemia at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles on November 20, 2006, at age 81.\nFellow film director Paul Thomas Anderson dedicated his 2007 film \"There Will Be Blood\" to Altman. Anderson had worked as a standby director on \"A Prairie Home Companion\" for insurance purposes in the event the ailing 80-year-old Altman would be unable to finish shooting.\nDuring a celebration tribute to Altman a few months after his death, he was described as a \"passionate filmmaker\" and auteur who rejected convention, creating what director Alan Rudolph called an \"Altmanesque\" style of films. He preferred large casts of actors and natural overlapping conversations, and encouraged his actors to improvise and express their innate creativity without fear of failing. Lily Tomlin compared him to \"a great benign patriarch who was always looking out for you as an actor,\" adding that \"you're not afraid to take chances with him.\"\nMany of his films are described as \"acid satires and counterculture character studies that redefined and reinvigorated modern cinema.\" Although his films spanned most film genres, such as Westerns, musicals, war films, or comedies, he was considered \"anti-genre,\" and his films were \"candidly subversive.\" He was known to hate the \"phoniness\" he saw in most mainstream films, and \"he wanted to explode them\" through satire.\nActor Tim Robbins, who starred in a number of Altman's films, describes some of the unique aspects of his directing method:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He created a unique and wonderful world on his sets, ... where the mischievous dad unleashed the \"children actors\" to play. Where your imagination was encouraged, nurtured, laughed at, embraced and Altman-ized. A sweet anarchy that many of us hadn't felt since the schoolyard, unleashed by Bob's wild heart.\nAltman's personal archives are located at the University of Michigan, which include about 900\u00a0boxes of personal papers, scripts, legal, business and financial records, photographs, props and related material. Altman had filmed \"Secret Honor\" at the university, as well as directed several operas there.\nSince 2009, the Robert Altman Award is awarded to the director, casting director, and ensemble cast of films at the yearly Independent Spirit Awards.\nIn 2014, a feature-length documentary film, \"Altman,\" was released, which looks at his life and work with film clips and interviews.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43824", "revid": "40078639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43824", "title": "Assata Shakur", "text": "American political activist (1947\u20132025)\nAssata Olugbala Shakur ( ; born JoAnne Deborah Byron, July 16, 1947 \u2013 September 25, 2025) was an American political activist, revolutionary, and fugitive who was a member of the Black Panther Party, and later the Black Liberation Army in 1971. In 1977, she was convicted of the first-degree murder of New Jersey State Trooper Werner Foerster during a shootout on the New Jersey Turnpike in 1973. She escaped from prison in 1979 and was wanted by the FBI, with a $1 million reward for information leading to her capture, and an additional $1 million reward offered by the New Jersey attorney general. She was never caught and remained a fugitive for 45 years.\nBorn in Flushing, Queens, Shakur grew up in New York City and Wilmington, North Carolina. After running away from home several times, she was taken in by an aunt, who later acted as one of her lawyers. Shakur became involved in political activism while attending the Borough of Manhattan Community College and the City College of New York. After graduation, she adopted the name Assata Shakur and briefly joined the Black Panther Party before becoming a member of the BLA.\nBetween 1971 and 1973, Shakur was charged with several crimes, leading to a multi-state manhunt. On May 2, 1973, Shakur, along with BLA members Zayd Malik Shakur and Sundiata Acoli, were stopped on the New Jersey Turnpike. The incident escalated into a shootout with State Troopers Werner Foerster and James Harper. Foerster was killed and Harper was wounded; Zayd Shakur was killed, and both Assata Shakur and Acoli were wounded. At her 1977 trial, Shakur was convicted on multiple charges, including the murder of Foerster and the assault of Harper, and was sentenced to life plus 26 to 33 years in prison. Shakur maintained that she could not have fired the shots that wounded Harper and killed Foerster, as her right arm had been injured by police gunfire early in the confrontation.\nWhile serving her sentence at the Clinton Correctional Facility for Women in New Jersey, Shakur escaped in 1979 with the assistance of members of the BLA and the May 19th Communist Organization. She was granted political asylum in Cuba in 1984, where she resided for the remainder of her life despite ongoing efforts by the U.S. government to secure her extradition. In 2013, the FBI added her to its FBI Most Wanted Terrorists list under the name Joanne Deborah Chesimard, making her the first woman to be listed. Shakur died on September 25, 2025, at the age of 78, according to the Cuban Foreign Ministry.\nEarly life and education.\nAssata Shakur was born JoAnne Deborah Byron, in Flushing, Queens, on July 16, 1947. She lived for three years with her mother, schoolteacher Doris E. Johnson, and retired grandparents, Lula and Frank Hill. \nIn 1950, Shakur's parents divorced, and she moved with her grandparents to Wilmington, North Carolina. After elementary school, Shakur moved back to Queens to live with her mother and stepfather (her mother had remarried); she attended Parsons Junior High School. Shakur still frequently visited her grandparents in the South. Her family struggled financially and argued frequently; Shakur spent little time at home. \nShe often ran away, staying with strangers and working for short periods of time, until she was taken in by her mother's sister, Evelyn A. Williams, a civil rights worker who lived in Manhattan. Shakur called her Aunt Evelyn the heroine of her childhood, as she was constantly introducing her to new areas of knowledge. She said her aunt was \"very sophisticated and knew all kinds of things. She was right up my alley because i [\"sic\"] was forever asking all kinds of questions. I wanted to know everything. She would give me a book and say, 'Read this,' and i would eat up that book like it was ice cream.\" Williams often took her niece to museums, theaters, and art galleries.\nShakur converted to Catholicism as a child and attended the all-girls Cathedral High School for six months before transferring to public high school, which she attended for a while before dropping out. Her aunt helped her to later earn a General Educational Development (GED) degree.\nShakur later wrote that teachers seemed surprised when she answered a question in class, as if not expecting black people to be intelligent and engaged. She said she was taught a sugar-coated version of history that ignored the oppression suffered by people of color, especially in the United States. In , she wrote: \"I didn't know what a fool they had made out of me until i grew up and started to read real history.\"\nShakur attended Borough of Manhattan Community College (BMCC) and then the City College of New York (CCNY) in the mid-1960s, where she became involved in many political activities, civil rights protests, and sit-ins. \nShe traced her interest in communism to a 1964 debate about the Vietnam War with several African students attending Columbia University:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I continued saying the first thing that came into my head: that the U.S. was fighting communists because they wanted to take over everything. When someone asked me what communism was, i opened my mouth to answer, then realized i didn't have the faintest idea. My image of a communist came from a cartoon. It was a spy with a black trench coat and a black hat pulled down over his face, slinking around corners... I felt like a bona fide clown... I knew i didn't know what the hell communism was, and yet i'd been dead set against it... I never forgot that day... Only a fool lets somebody else tell him who his enemy is.\nIn 1967, she was arrested for the first time \u2014 with 100 other BMCC students \u2014 on charges of trespassing. The students had chained and locked the entrance to a college building to protest the low numbers of black faculty and the lack of a Black Studies program.\nBlack Panther Party and Black Liberation Army.\nAfter attending CCNY, Shakur moved to Oakland, California, where she joined the Black Panther Party (BPP), and worked to organize protests and community education programs. After returning to New York City, she led the BPP chapter in Harlem, coordinating the Free Breakfast for Children program, free clinics, and community outreach. But she soon left the party, disliking the macho behavior of the men and believing that the BPP members and leaders lacked knowledge and understanding of African-American history.\nShakur joined the Black Liberation Army (BLA), an offshoot whose members were inspired by the Vietcong and the Algerian independence fighters of the Battle of Algiers. They mounted a campaign of guerilla activities against the U.S. government, using such tactics as planting bombs, holding up banks, and murdering drug dealers and police.\nShe began using the name \"Assata Olugbala Shakur\" in 1971, rejecting JoAnne Chesimard as a \"slave name\". Assata is a West African name, derived from Aisha, said to mean \"she who struggles\", while Shakur means \"thankful one\" in Arabic. Olugbala means \"savior\" in Yoruba. She identified as an African and felt her old name no longer fit: \"It sounded so strange when people called me JoAnne. It really had nothing to do with me. I didn't feel like no JoAnne, or no Negro, or no amerikan. I felt like an African woman.\"\nAllegations and manhunt.\nOn April 6, 1971, Shakur was shot in the stomach during a struggle with a guest at the Statler Hilton Hotel in Midtown Manhattan. According to police, Shakur knocked on the door of a guest's room, asked \"Is there a party going on here?\", then displayed a revolver and demanded money. In 1987, Shakur confirmed to a journalist that there was a drug connection in this incident but refused to elaborate.\nShe was booked on charges of attempted robbery, assault, reckless endangerment, and possession of a deadly weapon, then released on bail. Shakur is alleged to have said that she was glad that she had been shot; afterward, she was no longer afraid to be shot again.\nFollowing an August 23, 1971, bank robbery in Queens, Shakur was sought for questioning. A photograph of a woman (who was later alleged to be Shakur) wearing thick-rimmed black glasses, with a high hairdo pulled tightly over her head, and pointing a gun, was widely displayed in banks. The New York Clearing House Association paid for full-page ads displaying material about Shakur. In 1987, when asked in Cuba about police allegations that the BLA gained funds by conducting bank robberies and theft, Shakur responded, \"There were expropriations, there were bank robberies.\"\nOn December 21, 1971, Shakur was named by the New York City Police Department as one of four suspects in a hand grenade attack that destroyed a police car and injured two officers in Maspeth, Queens. When a witness identified Shakur and Andrew Jackson from FBI photographs, a 13-state alarm was issued three days after the attack. Law enforcement officials in Atlanta, Georgia, said that Shakur and Jackson had lived together in Atlanta for several months in the summer of 1971.\nShakur was wanted for questioning for wounding a police officer on January 26, 1972, who was attempting to serve a traffic summons in Brooklyn. After an $89,000 Brooklyn bank robbery on March 1, 1972, a \"Daily News\" headline asked: \"Was that JoAnne?\" Shakur was identified as wanted for questioning after a September 1, 1972, bank robbery in the Bronx. \nOn September 14, 1972, Monsignor John Powis alleged that Shakur was involved in an armed robbery at Our Lady of the Presentation Church in Brownsville, Brooklyn. Shakur and two men entered the church under the guise of asking for a letter of recommendation for a job. Powis was ordered to open the church's safe. When Powis struggled to open the safe, one of the robbers reportedly said \"We usually just blow the heads off White men\". After the safe was opened, Powis was tied up, gagged, had a hood put over his head, and then was locked in the bathroom. Powis identified Shakur in photographs shown to him by the police and stated that he didn't know her, but had heard of her because she was reportedly involved in the murder of a White real estate agent on Howard Avenue in Brooklyn a few weeks prior.\nIn 1972, Shakur became the subject of a nationwide manhunt after the FBI alleged that she led a Black Liberation Army cell that had conducted a \"series of cold-blooded murders of New York City police officers\". The FBI said these included the \"execution style murders\" of New York City Police Officers Joseph Piagentini and Waverly Jones on May 21, 1971, and NYPD officers Gregory Foster and Rocco Laurie on January 28, 1972. Shakur was alleged to have been directly involved with the Foster and Laurie murders, and involved tangentially with the Piagentini and Jones murders.\nSome sources identify Shakur as the \"de facto\" head of the BLA after the arrest of co-founder Dhoruba Moore. Robert Daley, Deputy Commissioner of the New York City Police, for example, described Shakur as \"the final wanted fugitive, the soul of the gang, the mother hen who kept them together, kept them moving, kept them shooting\". Years later, some police officers argued that her importance in the BLA had been exaggerated by the police. One officer said that they had created a \"myth\" to \"demonize\" Shakur because she was \"educated\", \"young and pretty\".\nAs of February 17, 1972, when Shakur was identified as one of four BLA members on a short trip to Chattanooga, Tennessee, she was wanted for questioning (along with Robert Vickers, Twyman Meyers, Samuel Cooper, and Paul Stewart) in relation to police killings, a Queens bank robbery, and the grenade attack on police. Shakur was reported as one of six suspects in the ambushing of four policemen\u2014two in Jamaica, Queens, and two in Brooklyn\u2014on January 28, 1973.\nOn April 16, 1981, Shakur was allegedly in the back seat of a van connected with a burglary. After the vehicle was pulled over, two men stepped out of the vehicle and opened fire on NYPD officers John Scarangella and Richard Rainey. The two men were charged with the murder of Officer Scarangella and attempted murder of Officer Rainey.\nBy June 1973, an apparatus that would become the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTF) was issuing nearly daily briefings on Shakur's status and the allegations against her.\nAccording to Kathleen Cleaver and George Katsiaficas, the FBI and local police \"initiated a national search-and-destroy mission for suspected BLA members, collaborating in stakeouts that were the products of intensive political repression and counterintelligence campaigns like NEWKILL\". They \"attempted to tie Assata to every suspected action of the BLA involving a woman\". The JTTF would later serve as the \"coordinating body in the search for Assata and the renewed campaign to smash the BLA\", after her escape from prison. After her capture, however, Shakur was not charged with any of the crimes for which she was purportedly the subject of the manhunt.\nShakur and others claim that she was targeted by the FBI's COINTELPRO as a result of her involvement with the black liberation organizations. Specifically, documentary evidence suggests that Shakur was targeted by an investigation named CHESROB, which \"attempted to hook former New York Panther Joanne Chesimard (Assata Shakur) to virtually every bank robbery or violent crime involving a black woman on the East Coast\". Although named after Shakur, CHESROB (like its predecessor, NEWKILL) was not limited to Shakur.\nYears later when she was living in Cuba, Shakur was asked about the BLA's alleged involvement in the killings of police officers. She said, \"In reality, armed struggle historically has been used by people to liberate themselves... But the question lies in when do people use armed struggle... There were people [in the BLA] who absolutely took the position that it was just time to resist, and if black people didn't start to fight back against police brutality and didn't start to wage armed resistance, we would be annihilated.\"\nNew Jersey Turnpike shootout.\nOn May 2, 1973, at about 12:45 a.m., Assata Shakur, along with Zayd Malik Shakur and Sundiata Acoli, were stopped on the New Jersey Turnpike in East Brunswick by State Trooper James Harper\u2014backed up by Trooper Werner Foerster in a second patrol vehicle\u2014for driving with a broken tail light. Also, the vehicle was \"slightly\" exceeding the speed limit. Recordings of Trooper Harper calling the dispatcher were played at the trials of both Acoli and Assata.\nThe stop occurred south of what was then the Turnpike Authority administration building. Acoli was driving the two-door vehicle, Assata was seated in the right front seat, and Zayd was in the right rear seat. Trooper Harper asked the driver for identification, noticed a discrepancy, asked him to get out of the car, and questioned him at the rear of the vehicle.\nWith the questioning of Acoli, accounts by participants of the confrontation begin to differ. According to initial police statements, at this point one or more of the suspects had begun firing with semiautomatic handguns, and Trooper Foerster fired four times before falling mortally wounded. At Acoli's trial, Harper testified that the gunfight started \"seconds\" after Foerster arrived at the scene. Harper further testified that Foerster reached into the vehicle, pulled out and held up a semi-automatic pistol and ammunition magazine, and said, \"Jim, look what I found,\" while facing Harper at the rear of the vehicle. \nThe police ordered Assata and Zayd to put their hands on their laps and not to move. Harper said that Assata reached down to the right of her right leg, pulled out a pistol, and shot him in the shoulder, after which he retreated behind his vehicle. Questioned by prosecutor C. Judson Hamlin, Harper said he saw Foerster shot just as Assata was hit by bullets from Harper's gun. In his opening statement to a jury, Hamlin said that Acoli shot Foerster with a .38 caliber semiautomatic pistol and used Foerster's own gun to \"execute him\". According to the testimony of State Police investigators, two jammed semi-automatic pistols were discovered near Foerster's body.\nAcoli drove the car, a white Pontiac LeMans with Vermont license plates\u2014which contained Assata, who was wounded, and Zayd, who was dead or dying\u2014 down the road. The vehicle was chased by three patrol cars, and the booths down the turnpike were alerted. Acoli stopped and exited the car and, after being ordered to halt by a trooper, fled into the woods as the trooper emptied his gun. Assata walked toward the trooper with her bloodied arms raised in surrender. Acoli was captured after a 36-hour manhunt\u2014involving 400 people, state police helicopters, and bloodhounds. Zayd's body was found in a nearby gully along the road.\nAccording to a New Jersey Police spokesperson, Assata was on her way to a \"new hideout in Philadelphia\" and \"heading ultimately for Washington\". A book found in the vehicle was said to contain a list of potential BLA targets. Assata testified that she was on her way to Baltimore for a job as a bar waitress.\nWith gunshot wounds in both arms and a shoulder, Assata was moved to Middlesex General Hospital under \"heavy guard\" and was reported to be in \"serious condition\". Trooper Harper was wounded in the left shoulder, reported in \"good\" condition, and given a protective guard at the hospital. Assata was interrogated and arraigned from her hospital bed. Her defense team alleged that her medical care during this period was \"substandard\". \nShe was transferred from Middlesex General Hospital in New Brunswick to Roosevelt Hospital in Edison after her lawyers obtained a court order from Judge John Bachman. She was transferred a few weeks later to Middlesex County Workhouse.\nDuring an interview, Assata discussed her treatment by the police and medical staff at Middlesex General Hospital. She said the police beat and choked her and were \"doing everything that they could possibly do as soon as the doctors or nurses would go outside\".\nCriminal charges and dispositions.\nBetween 1973 and 1977, in New York and New Jersey, Assata Shakur was indicted ten times, resulting in seven different criminal trials. She was charged with two bank robberies, the kidnapping of a Brooklyn heroin dealer, the attempted murder of two Queens police officers stemming from a January 23, 1973, failed ambush, and eight other felonies related to the Turnpike shootout. Of these trials, three resulted in acquittals, one in a hung jury, one in a change of venue, one in a mistrial due to pregnancy, and one in a conviction. Three indictments were dismissed without trial.\nBronx bank robbery mistrial.\nIn December 1973, Shakur was tried for a September 29, 1972, $3,700 robbery of the Manufacturer's Hanover Trust Company in the Bronx, along with co-defendant Kamau Sadiki (born Fred Hilton). In light of the pending murder prosecution against Shakur in New Jersey state court, her lawyers requested that the trial be postponed for six months to permit further preparation. Judge Lee P. Gagliardi denied a postponement, and the Second Circuit denied Shakur's petition for mandamus. In protest, the lawyers stayed mute, and Shakur and Sadiki conducted their own defense. Seven other BLA members were indicted by District Attorney Eugene Gold in connection with the series of holdups and shootings on the same day, who\u2014according to Gold\u2014represented the \"top echelon\" of the BLA as determined by a year-long investigation.\nThe prosecution's case rested largely on the testimony of two men who had pleaded guilty to participating in the holdup. The prosecution called four witnesses: Avon White and John Rivers, both of whom had already pled guilty to the robbery, and the manager and teller of the bank. White and Rivers, although having pled guilty, had not yet been sentenced for the robbery and were promised that the charges would be dropped in exchange for their testimony. \nWhite and Rivers testified that Shakur had guarded one of the doors with a .357 magnum pistol and that Sadiki had served as a lookout and drove the getaway truck during the robbery. Neither White nor Rivers was cross-examined due to the defense attorney's refusal to participate in the trial. Shakur's aunt and lawyer, Evelyn Williams, was cited for contempt of court after walking out of the courtroom after many of her attempted motions were denied. The trial was delayed for a few days after Shakur was diagnosed with pleurisy.\nDuring the trial, the defendants were escorted to a \"holding pen\" outside the courtroom several times after shouting complaints and epithets at Judge Gagliardi. While in the holding pen, they listened to the proceedings over loudspeakers. Both defendants were repeatedly cited for contempt of court and eventually barred from the courtroom, where the trial continued in their absence. A contemporary \"New York Times\" editorial criticized Williams for failing to maintain courtroom \"decorum,\" comparing her actions to William Kunstler's recent contempt conviction for his actions during the \"Chicago Seven\" trial.\nSadiki's lawyer, Robert Bloom, attempted to have the trial dismissed and then postponed due to new \"revelations\" regarding the credibility of White, a former co-defendant, by then working for the prosecution. Bloom had been assigned to defend Sadiki/Hilton over the summer, but White was not disclosed as a government witness until right before the trial. Judge Gagliardi instructed both the prosecution and the defense not to bring up Shakur or Sadiki's connections to the BLA, saying they were \"not relevant\". Gagliardi denied requests by the jurors to pose questions to the witnesses\u2014either directly or through him\u2014and declined to provide the jury with information they requested about how long the defense had been given to prepare, saying it was \"none of their concern\". This trial resulted in a hung jury and then a mistrial, when the jury reported to Gagliardi that they were hopelessly deadlocked for the fourth time.\nBronx bank robbery retrial.\nThe retrial was delayed for one day to give the defendants more time to prepare. The new jury selection was marked by attempts by Williams to be relieved of her duties, owing to disagreements with Shakur as well as with Hilton's attorney. Judge Arnold Bauman denied the application, but directed another lawyer, Howard Jacobs, to defend Shakur while Williams remained the attorney of record. Shakur was ejected following an argument with Williams, and Hilton left with her as jury selection continued. \nAfter the selection of twelve jurors (60 were excused), Williams was allowed to retire from the case, with Shakur officially representing herself, assisted by lawyer Florynce Kennedy. In the retrial, White testified that the six alleged robbers had saved their hair clippings to create disguises, and identified a partially obscured head and shoulder in a photo taken from a surveillance camera as Shakur's. Kennedy objected to this identification on the grounds that the prosecutor, assistant United States attorney Peter Truebner, had offered to stipulate that Shakur was not depicted in any of the photographs. \nAlthough both White and Rivers testified that Shakur was wearing overalls during the robbery, the person identified as Shakur in the photograph was wearing a jacket. The defense attempted to discredit White on the grounds that he had spent eight months in Matteawan Hospital for the Criminally Insane in 1968, and White countered that he had faked insanity (by claiming to be Allah in front of three psychiatrists) to get transferred out of prison.\nShakur personally cross-examined the witnesses, getting White to admit that he had once been in love with her; the same day, one juror (who had been frequently napping during the trial) was replaced with an alternate. During the retrial, the defendants repeatedly left or were thrown out of the courtroom. Both defendants were acquitted in the retrial; six jurors interviewed after the trial stated that they did not believe the two key prosecution witnesses. Shakur was immediately returned to Morristown, New Jersey, under a heavy guard following the trial. Louis Chesimard (Shakur's ex-husband) and Paul Stewart, the other two alleged robbers, had been acquitted in June.\nTurnpike shootout mistrial.\nThe Turnpike shootout proceedings continued with Judge John E. Bachman in Middlesex County. New Jersey Superior Court Judge Leon Gerofsky ordered a change of venue in 1973 from Middlesex to Morris County, New Jersey, saying \"it was almost impossible to obtain a jury here comprising people willing to accept the responsibility of impartiality so that defendants will be protected from transitory passion and prejudice.\" Morris County had a far smaller black population than Middlesex County. On this basis, Shakur unsuccessfully attempted to move the trial to federal court.\nBefore jury selection was complete, it was discovered that Shakur was pregnant. Due to the possibility of miscarriage, the prosecution successfully requested a mistrial for Shakur; Acoli's trial continued.\nAttempted murder dismissal.\nShakur and four others (including Fred Hilton, Avon White, and Andrew Jackson) were indicted in the State Supreme Court in the Bronx on December 31, 1973, on charges of attempting to shoot and kill two policemen\u2014Michael O'Reilly and Roy Polliana, who were wounded but had since returned to duty\u2014in an ambush in St. Albans, Queens, on January 28, 1973. On March 5, 1974, two new defendants (Jeannette Jefferson and Robert Hayes) were named in an indictment involving the same charges. On April 26, while Shakur was pregnant, New Jersey Governor Brendan Byrne signed an extradition order to move Shakur to New Jersey to face two counts of attempted murder, attempted assault, and possession of dangerous weapons related to the alleged ambush; however, Shakur declined to waive her right to an extradition hearing, and asked for a full hearing before Middlesex County Court Judge John E. Bachman.\nShakur was extradited to New York City on May 6, arraigned on May 11 (pleading not guilty), and remanded to jail by Justice Albert S. McGrover of the State Supreme Court, pending a pretrial hearing on July 2. In November 1974, New York State Supreme Court Justice Peter Farrell dismissed the attempted murder indictment because of insufficient evidence, declaring \"The court can only note with disapproval that virtually a year has passed before counsel made an application for the most basic relief permitted by law, namely an attack on the sufficiency of the evidence submitted by the grand jury.\"\nKidnapping trial.\nShakur was indicted on May 30, 1974, on the charge of having robbed a Brooklyn bar and kidnapping bartender James E. Freeman for ransom. Shakur and co-defendant Ronald Myers were accused of entering the bar with pistols and shotguns, taking $50 from the register, kidnapping the bartender, leaving a note demanding a $20,000 ransom from the bar owner, and fleeing in a rented truck. Freeman was said to have later escaped unhurt. The text of Shakur's opening statement in the trial is reproduced in her autobiography. Shakur and co-defendant Ronald Myers were acquitted on December 19, 1975, after seven hours of jury deliberation, ending a three-month trial in front of Judge William Thompson.\nQueens bank robbery trial.\nIn July 1973, after being indicted by a grand jury, Shakur pleaded not guilty in Federal Court in Brooklyn to an indictment related to a $7,700 robbery of the Bankers Trust Company bank in Queens on August 31, 1971. Judge Jacob Mishlerset set a tentative trial date of November 5 that year. The trial was delayed until 1976, when Shakur was represented by Stanley Cohen and Evelyn Williams. In this trial, Shakur acted as her own co-counsel and told the jury in her opening testimony:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOne bank employee testified that Shakur was one of the bank robbers. Three other bank employees, including two tellers, testified that they were uncertain. The prosecution showed surveillance photos of four of the six alleged robbers, contending that one of them was Shakur wearing a wig. Shakur was forcibly subdued and photographed by the FBI on the judge's order, after having refused to cooperate, believing that the FBI would use photo manipulation. A subsequent judge determined that the manners in which the photos were obtained violated Shakur's rights and ruled the new photos inadmissible. \nIn her autobiography, Shakur recounts being beaten, choked, and kicked on the courtroom floor by five marshals, as Williams narrated the events to ensure they would appear on the court record. Shortly after deliberation began, the jury asked to see all the photographic exhibits taken from the surveillance footage. The jury determined that a widely circulated FBI photo allegedly showing Shakur participating in the robbery was not her.\nShakur was acquitted after seven hours of jury deliberation on January 16, 1976, and was immediately remanded back to New Jersey for the Turnpike trial. The actual transfer took place on January 29. She was the only one of the six suspects in the robbery to be brought to trial. Andrew Jackson and two others indicted for the same robbery pleaded guilty. Jackson was sentenced to five years in prison and five years' probation. Another was shot and killed in a gunfight in Florida on December 31, 1971, and the last remained at large at the time of Shakur's acquittal.\nTurnpike shootout retrial.\nBy the time she was retried in 1977, Acoli had already been convicted of shooting and murdering Foerster. The prosecution argued that Assata had fired the bullets that had wounded Harper, while the defense argued that the now deceased Zayd had fired them. Based on New Jersey law, if Shakur's presence at the scene could be considered as \"aiding and abetting\" the murder of Foerster, she could be convicted even if she had not fired the bullets which had killed him.\nA total of 289 articles had been published in the local press relating to the various crimes with which Shakur had been accused. Shakur again attempted to move the trial to federal court. The United States District Court for the District of New Jersey denied the petition and also denied Shakur an injunction against the holding of trial proceedings on Fridays. An en banc panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit affirmed.\nThe nine-week trial was widely publicized and was even reported on by the Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union (TASS). During the trial, hundreds of civil rights campaigners demonstrated outside of the Middlesex County courthouse each day.\nFollowing the 13-minute opening statement by Edward J. Barone, the first assistant Middlesex County prosecutor (directing the case for the state), William Kunstler (the chief of Shakur's defense staff) moved immediately for a mistrial, calling the eight-count grand jury indictment \"adversary proceeding solely and exclusively under the control of the prosecutor\", whom Kunstler accused of \"improper prejudicial remarks\"; Judge Theodore Appleby, noting the frequent defense interruptions that had characterized the previous days' jury selection, denied the motion.\nOn February 23, Shakur's attorneys filed papers asking Judge Appleby to subpoena FBI Director Clarence Kelley, Senator Frank Church and other federal and New York City law enforcement officials to testify about the FBI Counter Intelligence Program, which they alleged was designed to harass and disrupt black activist organizations. Kunstler had previously been successful in subpoenaing Kelley and Church for the trials of American Indian Movement (AIM) members charged with murdering FBI agents. The motion (argued March 2)\u2014which also asked the court to require the production of memos, tapes, documents, and photographs of alleged COINTELPRO involvement from 1970 to 1973\u2014was denied.\nShakur herself was called as a witness on March 15, the first witness called by the defense; she denied shooting either Harper or Foerster, and also denied handling a weapon during the incident. She was questioned by her own attorney, Stuart Ball, for under 40 minutes, and then cross-examined by Barone for less than two hours (see the Witnesses section below). Ball's questioning ended with the following exchange:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnder cross-examination, Shakur was unable to explain how three magazines of ammunition and 16 live shells had gotten into her shoulder bag; she also admitted to knowing that Zayd Shakur carried a gun at times, and specifically to seeing a gun sticking out of Acoli's pocket while stopping for supper at a Howard Johnson's restaurant shortly before the shooting. Shakur admitted to carrying an identification card with the name \"Justine Henderson\" in her billfold the night of the shootout, but denied using any of the aliases on the long list that Barone proceeded to read.\nDefense attorneys.\nShakur's defense attorneys were William Kunstler (the chief of Shakur's defense staff), Stuart Ball, Robert Bloom, Raymond A. Brown, Stanley Cohen (who died of unknown causes early on in the Turnpike trial), Lennox Hinds, Florynce Kennedy, Louis Myers, Laurence Stern, and Evelyn Williams, Shakur's aunt. Of these attorneys, Kunstler, Ball, Cohen, Myers, Stern and Williams appeared in court for the turnpike trial. Kunstler became involved in Shakur's trials in 1975, when contacted by Williams, and commuted from New York City to New Brunswick every day with Stern.\nHer attorneys, in particular Lennox Hinds, were often held in contempt of court, which the National Conference of Black Lawyers cited as an example of systemic bias in the judicial system. The New Jersey Legal Ethics Committee also investigated complaints against Hinds for comparing Shakur's murder trial to \"legalized lynching\" undertaken by a \"kangaroo court\". Hinds' disciplinary proceeding reached the U.S. Supreme Court in \"Middlesex County Ethics Committee v. Garden State Bar Ass'n\" (1982). According to Kunstler's autobiography, the sizable contingent of New Jersey State Troopers guarding the courthouse were under strict orders from their commander, Col. Clinton Pagano, to completely shun Shakur's defense attorneys.\nJudge Appleby also threatened Kunstler with dismissal and contempt of court after he delivered an October 21, 1976, speech at nearby Rutgers University that in part discussed the upcoming trial, but later ruled that Kunstler could represent Shakur. Until obtaining a court order, Kunstler was forced to strip naked and undergo a body search before each visit with Shakur\u2014during which Shakur was shackled to a bed by both ankles. Judge Appleby also refused to investigate a burglary of her defense counsel's office that resulted in the disappearance of trial documents, amounting to half of the legal papers related to her case. Her lawyers also claimed that their offices were secretly recorded.\nWitnesses.\nSundiata Acoli, Assata Shakur, Trooper Harper, and a New Jersey Turnpike driver who saw part of the incident were the only surviving witnesses. Acoli did not testify or make any pre-trial statements, nor did he testify in his own trial or give a statement to the police. The driver traveling north on the turnpike testified that he had seen a State Trooper struggling with a Black man between a white vehicle and a State Trooper car, whose revolving lights illuminated the area.\nShakur testified that Trooper Harper shot her after she raised her arms to comply with his demand. She said that the second shot hit her in the back as she turned to avoid it, and that she fell onto the road for the duration of the gunfight before crawling back into the backseat of the Pontiac\u2014which Acoli drove down the road and parked. She testified that she remained there until State Troopers dragged her onto the road.\nTrooper Harper's official reports state that after he stopped the Pontiac, he ordered Acoli to the back of the vehicle for Trooper Foerster\u2014who had arrived on the scene\u2014to examine his driver's license. The reports then state that after Acoli complied, and as Harper was looking inside the vehicle to examine the registration, Trooper Foerster yelled and held up an ammunition magazine as Shakur simultaneously reached into her red pocketbook, pulled out a 9mm handgun and fired at him. Trooper Harper's reports then state that he ran to the rear of his car and shot at Shakur who had exited the vehicle and was firing from a crouched position next to the vehicle.\nJury.\nA total of 408 potential jurors were questioned during the \"voir dire\", which concluded on February 14. All of the 15 jurors\u2014ten women and five men\u2014were white, and most were under thirty years old. Five jurors had personal ties to State Troopers (one girlfriend, two nephews, and two friends). A sixteenth female juror was removed before the trial formally opened, when it was determined that Sheriff Joseph DeMarino of Middlesex County, while a private detective several years earlier, had worked for a lawyer who represented the juror's husband. Judge Appleby repeatedly denied Kunstler's requests for DeMarino to be removed from his responsibilities for the duration of the trial \"because he did not divulge his association with the juror\".\nOne prospective juror was dismissed for reading \"Target Blue\", a book by Robert Daley, a former New York City Deputy Police Commander, which dealt in part with Shakur and had been left in the jury assembly room. Before the jury entered the courtroom, Judge Appleby ordered Shakur's lawyers to remove a copy of \"\" by Alex Haley from a position on the defense counsel table easily visible to jurors. The \"Roots\" TV miniseries adapted from the book and shown shortly before the trial was believed to have evoked feelings of \"guilt and sympathy\" with many white viewers.\nShakur's attorneys sought a new trial on the grounds that one jury member, John McGovern, had violated the jury's sequestration order. Judge Appleby rejected Kunstler's claim that the juror had violated the order. McGovern later sued Kunstler for defamation; Kunstler eventually publicly apologized to McGovern and paid him a small settlement. Additionally, in his autobiography, Kunstler alleged that he later learned from a law enforcement agent that a New Jersey State Assembly member had addressed the jury at the hotel where they were sequestered, urging them to convict Shakur.\nMedical evidence.\nA key element of Shakur's defense was medical testimony meant to demonstrate that she was shot with her hands up and that she would have been subsequently unable to fire a weapon. A neurologist testified that the median nerve in Shakur's right arm was severed by the second bullet, making her unable to pull a trigger. Neurosurgeon Dr. Arthur Turner Davidson, Associate Professor of Surgery at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, testified that the wounds in her upper arms, armpit and chest, and severed median nerve that instantly paralyzed her right arm, would only have been caused if both arms were raised, and that to sustain such injuries while crouching and firing a weapon (as described in Trooper Harper's testimony) \"would be anatomically impossible\".\nDavidson based his testimony on an August 4, 1976, examination of Shakur and on X-rays taken immediately after the shootout at Middlesex General Hospital. Prosecutor Barone questioned whether Davidson was qualified to make such a judgment 39 months after the injury; Barone proceeded to suggest (while a female Sheriff's attendant acted out his suggestion) that Shakur was struck in the right arm and collar bone and \"then spun around by the impact of the bullet so an immediate second shot entered the fleshy part of her upper left arm\" to which Davidson replied, \"Impossible.\"\nDr. David Spain, a pathologist from Brookdale Community College, testified that her bullet scars as well as X-rays supported her claim that her arms were raised, and that there was \"no conceivable way\" the first bullet could have hit Shakur's clavicle if her arm was down.\nJudge Appleby eventually cut off funds for any further expert defense testimony. Shakur, in her autobiography, and Williams, in \"Inadmissible Evidence\", both claim that it was difficult to find expert witnesses for the trial, because of the expense and because most forensic and ballistic specialists declined on the grounds of a conflict of interest when approached because they routinely performed such work for law enforcement officials.\nOther evidence.\nAccording to Angela Davis, neutron activation analysis that was administered after the shootout showed no gunpowder residue on Shakur's fingers and forensic analysis performed at the Trenton, New Jersey, crime lab and the FBI crime labs in Washington, D.C., did not find her fingerprints on any weapon at the scene. According to tape recordings and police reports made several hours after the shoot-out, when Harper returned on foot to the administration building 200\u00a0yards (183\u00a0m) away, he did not report Foerster's presence at the scene; no one at headquarters knew of Foerster's involvement in the shoot-out until his body was discovered beside his patrol car, more than an hour later.\nConviction and sentencing.\nOn March 24, the jurors listened for 45 minutes to a rereading of testimony of the State Police chemist regarding the blood found at the scene, on the LeMans, and Shakur's clothing. That night, the second night of jury deliberation, the jury asked Judge Appleby to repeat his instructions regarding the four assault charges 30 minutes before retiring for the night, which led to speculation that the jury had decided in Shakur's favor on the remaining charges, especially the two counts of murder. \nAppleby reiterated that the jury must consider separately the four assault charges (atrocious assault and battery, assault on a police officer acting in the line of duty, assault with a deadly weapon, and assault with intent to kill), each of which carried a total maximum penalty of 33 years in prison. The other charges were: first-degree murder (of Foerster), second-degree murder (of Zayd Shakur), illegal possession of a weapon, and armed robbery (related to Foerster's service revolver). The jury also asked Appleby to repeat the definitions of \"intent\" and \"reasonable doubt\".\nShakur was convicted on all eight counts: two murder charges and six assault charges. Upon hearing the verdict, Shakur said\u2014in a barely audible voice\u2014\"I am ashamed that I have even taken part in this trial\", and that the jury was racist and had \"convicted a woman with her hands up.\" When Judge Appleby told the court attendants to \"remove the prisoner,\" Shakur herself replied: \"The prisoner will walk away on her own feet.\" After Joseph W. Lewis, the jury foreman, read the verdict, Kunstler asked that the jury be removed before alleging that one juror had violated the sequestration order (as detailed above).\nAt the post-trial press conference, Kunstler blamed the verdict on racism, stating that \"the white element was there to destroy her\". When asked by a reporter why, if that were the case, it took the jury 24 hours to reach a verdict, Kunstler replied, \"That was just a pretense.\" A few minutes later the prosecutor Barone disagreed with Kunstler's assessment saying the trial's outcome was decided \"completely on the facts\".\nAt Shakur's sentencing hearing on April 25, Appleby sentenced her to 26 to 33 years in state prison (10 to 12 for the four counts of assault, 12 to 15 for robbery, 2 to 3 for armed robbery, plus 2 to 3 for aiding and abetting the murder of Foerster), to be served consecutively with her mandatory life sentence. However, Appleby dismissed the second-degree murder of Zayd Shakur, as the New Jersey Supreme Court had recently narrowed the application of the law. Appleby finally sentenced Shakur to 30 days in the Middlesex County Workhouse for contempt of court, concurrent with the other sentences, for refusing to rise when he entered the courtroom. To become eligible for parole, Shakur would have had to serve a minimum of 25 years, which would have included her four years in custody during the trials.\nNelson murder dismissal.\nIn October 1977, New York State Superior Court Justice John Starkey dismissed murder and robbery charges against Shakur related to the death of Richard Nelson during a hold-up of a Brooklyn social club on December 28, 1972, ruling that the state had delayed too long in bringing her to trial. Judge Starkey said, \"People have constitutional rights, and you can't shuffle them around.\" The case was delayed in being brought to trial as a result of an agreement between the governors of New York and New Jersey as to the priority of the charges against Shakur. \nThree other defendants were indicted in relation to the same holdup: Melvin Kearney died in 1976 from an eight-floor fall while trying to escape from the Brooklyn House of Detention. Twymon Myers was killed by police while a fugitive. Andrew Jackson, the charges against whom were dismissed when two prosecution witnesses could not identify him in a lineup.\nAttempted robbery dismissal.\nOn November 22, 1977, Shakur pleaded not guilty to an attempted armed robbery indictment stemming from the 1971 incident at the Statler Hilton Hotel. Shakur was accused of attempting to rob a Michigan man staying at the hotel of $250 of cash and personal property. The prosecutor was C. Richard Gibbons. The charges were dismissed without trial.\nImprisonment.\nAfter the Turnpike shootings, Shakur was briefly held at the Garden State Youth Correctional Facility in Yardville, Burlington County, New Jersey, and later moved to Rikers Island Correctional Institution for Women in New York City where she was kept in solitary confinement for 21 months. Shakur's only daughter, Kakuya Shakur, was conceived with Kamau Sadiki during Shakur's trial. Kakuya was born on September 11, 1974, in the \"fortified psychiatric ward\" at Elmhurst General Hospital in Queens, where Shakur stayed for a few days before being returned to Rikers Island. \nIn her autobiography, Shakur claims that she was beaten and restrained by several large female officers after refusing a medical exam from a prison doctor shortly after giving birth. After a bomb threat was made against Judge Appleby, Sheriff Joseph DeMarino lied to the press about the exact date of her transfer to Clinton Correctional Facility for Women; he later claimed the threat to be the cause of his falsification. She was also transferred from the Clinton Correctional Facility for Women to a special area staffed by women guards at the Garden State Youth Correctional Facility, where she was the only female inmate, for \"security reasons\". \nWhen Kunstler first took on Shakur's case (before meeting her), he described her basement cell as \"adequate\", which nearly resulted in his dismissal as her attorney. On May 6, 1977, Judge Clarkson Fisher, of the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey, denied Shakur's request for an injunction requiring her transfer from the all-male facility to Clinton Correctional Facility for Women; the Third Circuit affirmed.\nOn April 8, 1978, Shakur was transferred to Alderson Federal Prison Camp in Alderson, West Virginia, where she met Puerto Rican nationalist Lolita Lebr\u00f3n and Mary Alice, a Catholic nun, who introduced Shakur to the concept of liberation theology. At Alderson, Shakur was housed in the Maximum Security Unit, which also contained several members of the Aryan Sisterhood as well as Sandra Good and Lynette Fromme, followers of Charles Manson.\nOn February 20, 1979, after the Maximum Security Unit at Alderson was closed, Shakur was transferred to the Clinton Correctional Facility for Women in New Jersey. According to her attorney Lennox Hinds, Shakur \"understates the awfulness of the condition in which she was incarcerated\", which included vaginal and anal searches. Hinds argues that \"in the history of New Jersey, no woman pretrial detainee or prisoner has ever been treated as she was, continuously confined in a men's prison, under twenty-four-hour surveillance of her most intimate functions, without intellectual sustenance, adequate medical attention, and exercise, and without the company of other women for all the years she was in custody\".\nShakur was identified as a political prisoner as early as October 8, 1973, by Angela Davis, and in an April 3, 1977, \"The New York Times\" advertisement purchased by the \"Easter Coalition for Human Rights\". An international panel of seven jurists were invited by Hinds to tour a number of U.S. prisons, and concluded in a report filed with the United Nations Commission on Human Rights that the conditions of her solitary confinement were \"totally unbefitting any prisoner\". Their investigation, which focused on alleged human rights abuses of political prisoners, cited Shakur as \"one of the worst cases\" of such abuses and including her in \"a class of victims of FBI misconduct through the COINTELPRO strategy and other forms of illegal government conduct who as political activists have been selectively targeted for provocation, false arrests, entrapment, fabrication of evidence, and spurious criminal prosecutions\". Amnesty International, however, did not regard Shakur as a former political prisoner.\nEscape.\nIn early 1979, \"the Family\", a group of BLA members, began to plan Shakur's escape from prison. They financed this by stealing $105,000 from a Bamberger's store in Paramus, New Jersey. On November 2, 1979, Shakur escaped the Clinton Correctional Facility for Women in New Jersey when three members of the Black Liberation Army visiting her drew concealed .45-caliber pistols and a stick of dynamite, seized two correction officers as hostages, commandeered a van and (with the assistance of members of the May 19th Communist Organization) made their escape. No one was injured during the prison break, including the officers held as hostages who were left in a parking lot. \nAccording to later court testimony, Shakur lived in Pittsburgh until August 1980, when she flew to the Bahamas. Mutulu Shakur, Silvia Baraldini, Sekou Odinga, and Marilyn Buck were charged with assisting in her escape; Ronald Boyd Hill was also held on charges related to the escape. In part for his role in the event, Mutulu was named on July 23, 1982, as the 380th addition to the FBI's Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list, where he remained for the next four years until his capture in 1986. State correction officials disclosed in November 1979 that they had not run identity checks on Shakur's visitors and that the three men and one woman who assisted in her escape had presented false identification to enter the prison's visitor room, before which they were not searched. Mutulu Shakur and Buck were convicted in 1988 of several robberies as well as the prison escape.\nAt the time of the escape, Kunstler had just started to prepare her appeal. After her escape, Shakur lived as a fugitive for several years. The FBI circulated wanted posters throughout the New York\u2013New Jersey area; her supporters hung \"Assata Shakur is Welcome Here\" posters in response. In New York, three days after her escape, more than 5,000 demonstrators organized by the National Black Human Rights Coalition carried signs with the same slogan. At the rally, a statement from Shakur was circulated condemning U.S. prison conditions and calling for an independent \"New Afrikan\" state.\nFor years after Shakur's escape, the movements, activities and phone calls of her friends and relatives\u2014including her daughter walking to school in upper Manhattan\u2014were monitored by investigators in an attempt to ascertain her whereabouts. In July 1980, FBI director William H. Webster said that the search for Shakur had been frustrated by residents' refusal to cooperate, and a \"New York Times\" editorial opined that the department's commitment to \"enforce the law with vigor\u2014but also with sensitivity for civil rights and civil liberties\" had been \"clouded\" by an \"apparently crude sweep\" through a Harlem building in search of Shakur. \nIn particular, one pre-dawn April 20, 1980, raid on 92 Morningside Avenue, during which FBI agents armed with shotguns and machine guns broke down doors and searched through the building for several hours while preventing residents from leaving, was seen by residents as having \"racist overtones\". In October 1980, New Jersey and New York City Police denied published reports that they had declined to raid a Bedford\u2013Stuyvesant, Brooklyn building where Shakur was suspected to be hiding for fear of provoking a racial incident. Following her escape, Shakur was also charged with unlawful flight to avoid imprisonment.\nPolitical asylum in Cuba.\nIn 1984, Shakur was in Cuba having traveled to the country from Mexico according to former FBI Assistant Director John Miller. That year she was granted political asylum there. The Cuban government paid approximately $13 a day toward her living expenses. In 1985, her daughter, Kakuya, who had been raised by Shakur's mother in New York, came to live with her. In 1987 her presence in Cuba became widely known when she agreed to be interviewed by \"Newsday\".\nIn an open letter, Shakur said Cuba was \"One of the Largest, Most Resistant and Most Courageous \"Palenques\" (Maroon Camps) that has ever existed on the Face of this Planet\". She said Fidel Castro was a \"hero of the oppressed\" and referred to herself as a \"20th century escaped slave\". Shakur is also known to have worked as an English-language editor for Radio Havana Cuba.\nBooks.\nIn 1987 she published ', which was written in Cuba. Her autobiography has been cited in relation to critical legal studies and critical race theory. The book does not give a detailed account of her involvement in the BLA or the events on the New Jersey Turnpike, except to say that the jury \"[c]onvicted a woman with her hands up!\" It gives an account of her life beginning with her youth in the South and New York. Shakur challenges traditional styles of literary autobiography and offers a perspective on her life that is not easily accessible to the public. \nThe book was published by Lawrence Hill &amp; Company in the United States and Canada but the copyright is held by Zed Books Ltd. of London due to \"Son of Sam\" laws, which restrict who can receive profits from a book. In the six months preceding the publications of the book, Evelyn Williams, Shakur's aunt and attorney, made several trips to Cuba and served as a go-between with Hill. Her autobiography was republished in Britain in 2014 and a dramatized version performed on BBC Radio 4 in July 2017.\nIn 1993 she published a second book, \"Still Black, Still Strong\", with Dhoruba bin Wahad and Mumia Abu-Jamal.\nIn 2005 SUNY Press released \"The New Abolitionists: (Neo)Slave Narratives and Contemporary Prison Writings\", edited and with an added introduction by Joy James, in which Shakur's \"Women in Prison: How We Are\" is featured.\nExtradition attempts.\nIn 1997 Carl Williams, the superintendent of the New Jersey State Police, wrote a letter to Pope John Paul II asking him to raise the issue of Shakur's extradition during his talks with President Fidel Castro. During the pope's visit to Cuba in 1998, Shakur agreed to an interview with NBC journalist Ralph Penza. Shakur later published an extensive criticism of the NBC segment, which inter-spliced footage of Trooper Foerster's grieving widow with an FBI photo connected to a bank robbery of which Shakur had been acquitted. \nIn March 1998, New Jersey Governor Christine Todd Whitman asked U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno to do whatever it would take to return Shakur from Cuba. Later in 1998, U.S. media widely reported claims that the United States State Department had offered to lift the Cuban embargo in exchange for the return of 90 U.S. fugitives, including Shakur.\nIn September 1998, the United States Congress passed a non-binding resolution, asking Cuba for the return of Shakur as well as 90 fugitives believed by Congress to be residing in Cuba; House Concurrent Resolution 254 passed 371\u20130 in the House and by unanimous consent in the Senate. The Resolution was due in no small part to the lobbying efforts of Governor Whitman and New Jersey Representative Bob Franks. Before the passage of the Resolution, Franks stated: \"This escaped murderer now lives a comfortable life in Cuba and has launched a public relations campaign in which she attempts to portray herself as an innocent victim rather than a cold-blooded murderer.\"\nIn September 1998, in an open letter to Castro, chair of the Congressional Black Caucus Representative Maxine Waters of California said that many members of the Caucus, including herself, were against Shakur's extradition and had mistakenly voted for the bill, which was placed on the accelerated suspension calendar, generally reserved for non-controversial legislation. In the letter, Waters explained her opposition, calling COINTELPRO \"illegal, clandestine political persecution.\"\nOn May 2, 2005, the 32nd anniversary of the Turnpike shootings, the FBI classified her as a domestic terrorist, increasing the reward for assistance in her capture to $1 million, the largest reward placed on an individual in the history of New Jersey. New Jersey State Police superintendent Rick Fuentes said \"she is now 120 pounds of money.\" The bounty announcement reportedly caused Shakur to \"drop out of sight\" after having previously lived relatively openly, including having her home telephone number listed in her local telephone directory. New York City Councilman Charles Barron, a former Black Panther, called for the bounty to be rescinded. \nThe New Jersey State Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation had an agent officially assigned to her case while she was an escapee. Calls for Shakur's extradition increased following Fidel Castro's 2006\u20132008 transfer of presidential duties. In a May 2005 television address, Castro had called Shakur a victim of racial persecution, saying \"They wanted to portray her as a terrorist, something that was an injustice, a brutality, an infamous lie.\" \nIn 2013, the FBI announced it had added Shakur to its list of 'Most Wanted Terrorists', the first time that a woman was so designated. The reward for her capture and return was doubled to $2 million.\nIn June 2017, President Donald Trump gave a speech \"cancelling\" the Cuban thaw policies of his predecessor Barack Obama. A condition of making a new deal between the United States and Cuba is the release of political prisoners and the return of fugitives from justice. Trump specifically called for the return of \"the cop-killer Joanne Chesimard\".\nPersonal life and death.\nIn April 1967, she married Louis Chesimard, a fellow student-activist at CCNY, in a Catholic wedding ceremony. Their married life ended within a year; they divorced in December 1970 and Chesimard was granted an annulment. In her 320-page memoir, Shakur gave one paragraph to her marriage, saying that it ended over their differing views of gender roles.\nShakur's daughter, Kakuya Shakur, was born during her trial for murder. Kakuya's father is Kamau Sadiki, another codefendant in the case.\nShakur was widely described as rapper Tupac Shakur's godmother.\nAccording to the Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Assata Shakur died in Havana on September 25, 2025, following health problems. She was 78.\nCultural influence and legacy.\n\"The Guardian\" describes Shakur as \"an icon of Black liberation\", noting that \"her life and memoir inspired racial justice movements for decades.\" Shakur's writings have influenced the 2020s Black Lives Matter movement. In their obituaries, \"The New York Times\" and \"Rolling Stone\" called Shakur a folk hero. BBC News described her as a hero to many US left wing activists. ABC News noted that she \"continued to be a top priority for law enforcement officials in the United States over more than four decades\". Shakur also served as a symbol for fraught Cuba\u2013United States relations. Academic Joy James described Shakur as \"extraordinary\" for surviving in exile despite the U.S. bounty on her, and for being a leader not tied to a male counterpart, unlike other Black female revolutionaries of her era. Her reputation exceeded that of all other East Coast Panthers.\nAccording to academic Dylan Rodriguez, to many \"U.S. radicals and revolutionaries\" Shakur represents a \"venerated (if sometimes fetishized) signification of liberatory desire and possibility\". In 2008, a Bucknell University professor included Shakur in a course on \"African-American heroes\"\u2014along with figures such as Harriet Tubman, Sojourner Truth, John Henry, Malcolm X, and Angela Davis. Her autobiography is studied together with those of Angela Davis and Elaine Brown, the only women activists of the Black Power movement who have published book-length autobiographies. Rutgers University professor H. Bruce Franklin, who excerpts Shakur's book in a class on \"Crime and Punishment in American Literature,\" describes her as a \"revolutionary fighter against imperialism.\"\nIn 2015, Black Lives Matter Global Network Foundation co-founder Alicia Garza wrote: \"When I use Assata's powerful demand in my organizing work, I always begin by sharing where it comes from, sharing about Assata's significance to the Black Liberation Movement, what its political purpose and message is, and why it's important in our context.\" Upon Assata's death, Black Lives Matter Grassroots Inc. vowed to fight in her memory, and Black Lives Matter organizer Malkia Cyril expressed sorrow, stating, \"The world in this era needs the kind of courage and radical love she practiced if we are going to survive it\". The Chicago-based Black activist group Assata's Daughters is named in her honor. In April 2017, former San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick's foundation donated $25,000 to the group. The National Conference of Black Lawyers and Mos Def are among the professional organizations and entertainers to support Assata Shakur; the \"Hands Off Assata\" campaign is organized by Dream Hampton.\nA documentary film about Shakur, \"Eyes of The Rainbow\", written and directed by Cuban filmmaker Gloria Rolando, appeared in 1997. The official premiere of the film in Havana in 2004 was promoted by Casa de las Am\u00e9ricas, the main cultural forum of the Cuban government. \"Assata aka Joanne Chesimard\" is a 2008 biographical film directed by Fred Baker. The film premiered at the San Diego Black Film Festival and starred Assata Shakur herself.\nNumerous musicians have composed and recorded songs about her or dedicated to her: Common recorded \"A Song for Assata\" on his album \"Like Water for Chocolate\" (2000) after traveling to Havana to meet with Shakur personally. Nas listed her name in the booklet of his album \"Untitled,\" among important black figures who inspired the album. Digable Planets, The Underachievers and X-Clan have also recorded songs about Shakur. Shakur has been described as a \"rap music legend\" and a \"minor cause celebre\". Actress Teyana Taylor said that her character in the 2025 movie, \"One Battle After Another\", was based on Shakur.\nControversies related to honoring Shakur's legacy.\nOn December 12, 2006, the Chancellor of the City University of New York, Matthew Goldstein, directed City College's president, Gregory H. Williams, to remove the \"unauthorized and inappropriate\" designation of the \"Guillermo Morales/Assata Shakur Community and Student Center\", which was named by students in 1989. A student group won the right to use the lounge after a campus shutdown over proposed tuition increases. CUNY was sued by student and alumni groups after removing the plaque. As of April 7, 2010, the presiding judge has ruled that the issues of students' free speech and administrators' immunity from suit \"deserve a trial\".\nFollowing controversy, in 1995, Borough of Manhattan Community College renamed a scholarship that had previously been named for Shakur. Black NJ State Trooper Anthony Reed, who has left the force, sued the police force because, among other things, persons had hung posters of Shakur, altered to include Reed's badge number, in a Newark barracks. He felt it was intended to insult him, as she had killed an officer, and that the act was \"racist in nature\".\nIn 2015, New Jersey's Kean University dropped hip-hop artist Common as a commencement speaker because of police complaints. Members of the State Troopers Fraternal Association of New Jersey expressed their anger over Common's \"A Song For Assata\". In July 2017, the Women's March official Twitter feed celebrated Shakur's birthday, leading to criticism from some media outlets.\nUpon her death, the Chicago Teachers' Union released a post on Twitter honoring her, which received immediate criticism for commemorating a convicted murderer whose crime left a police officer dead. Among others, New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy labeled the CTU's post as \"shameful and depraved,\" though others such as former Ohio state senator Nina Turner and the Democratic Socialists of America released similar statements commemorating Shakur's life and celebrating her actions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43825", "revid": "1584262", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43825", "title": "Andie MacDowell", "text": "American actress and model (born 1958)\nRosalie Anderson MacDowell (born April 21, 1958) is an American actress and former fashion model. MacDowell is known for her starring film roles in romantic comedies and dramas. She has modeled for Calvin Klein and has been a spokeswoman for L'Or\u00e9al since 1986.\nHer early films include \"\" (1984) and the Brat Pack vehicle film \"St. Elmo's Fire\" (1985). Her breakout role was in \"Sex, Lies, and Videotape\" (1989) which earned her the Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead and a nomination for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress \u2013 Motion Picture Drama. She then starred in a series of films including \"Green Card\" (1990), \"Groundhog Day\" (1993), \"Short Cuts\" (1993), \"Four Weddings and a Funeral\" (1994), \"Unstrung Heroes\" (1995), \"Michael\" (1996), \"Multiplicity\" (1996), and \"The Muse\" (1999).\nMacDowell played supporting film roles in \"Beauty Shop\" (2005), \"Footloose\" (2011), \"Magic Mike XXL\" (2015), \"The Last Laugh\" (2019), \"Ready or Not\" (2019), \"The Other Zoey\" (2024) and \"Red Right Hand\" (2024). She starred in a number of independent films, most notable \"Love After Love\" (2017) She co-starred opposite her daughter Margaret Qualley in the Netflix miniseries \"Maid\" (2021) for which she was nominated for a Golden Globe Award. In 2023, MacDowell began starring in the Hallmark Channel fantasy drama series, \"The Way Home\".\nEarly life.\nMacDowell was born on April 21, 1958, in Gaffney, South Carolina, to Pauline \"Paula\" Johnston (n\u00e9e Oswald), a music teacher, and Marion St. Pierre MacDowell, a lumber executive who had studied forestry at the University of the South. Her parents called her Rose. She has three older sisters and they are of English, Irish, Scottish and Scots-Irish ancestry. Her mother was an alcoholic, and her parents divorced when she was six. MacDowell's mother died of a heart attack in 1981 at age 53 after living sober for a year. \nWhen MacDowell was eight, her father remarried; this union lasted until his death. MacDowell graduated from Gaffney High School in 1976, then went on to attend Winthrop University for two years before moving briefly to Columbia, South Carolina.\nCareer.\n1978\u20131988: Modeling career.\nAfter having been spotted by a representative from Wilhelmina Models while she was on a trip to Los Angeles, MacDowell signed a modeling contract with Elite Model Management in New York City in 1978. Elite sent her to model in Paris for a year and a half.\nIn the early 1980s, MacDowell modeled for \"Vogue\" magazine and appeared in ad campaigns for Yves Saint Laurent, Vassarette, Armani perfume, Sabeth-Row, Mink International, Anne Klein, and Bill Blass. A series of billboards in Times Square and national television commercials for Calvin Klein won attention and led to her 1984 film debut in \"\". In this role, MacDowell's lines were dubbed by Glenn Close because her Southern accent was considered too pronounced for her role as Jane. In 1985, MacDowell filled a supporting role as a doctor in \"St. Elmo's Fire\". In 1988 she made her television debut starring in the Italian miniseries \"The Secret of the Sahara\". Since 1986, MacDowell has appeared in print and television advertisements for cosmetic and haircare company L'Or\u00e9al. \n1989\u20131999: Breakthrough and stardom.\nMacDowell studied method acting with teachers from the Actors Studio in addition to working privately with coaches Harold Guskin and Warren Robertson. Four years later, director Steven Soderbergh cast her in the independent film \"Sex, Lies, and Videotape\" (1989). For her breakthrough role as Ann, the repressed married woman, MacDowell received positive reviews from critics. Her performance earned her an Independent Spirit Award, a Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award, and a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress, among other award nominations.\nAfter her big break with \"Sex, Lies, and Videotape\", MacDowell went on to star in the romantic comedy film \"Green Card\" directed by Peter Weir. The screenplay focuses on an American woman who enters into a marriage of convenience with a Frenchman so he can obtain a green card and remain in the United States. The performance gained her Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress in a Motion Picture \u2013 Musical or Comedy. The following year she starred alongside John Malkovich in the crime comedy-drama \"The Object of Beauty\", and opposite Bruce Willis in the action comedy \"Hudson Hawk\". In 1992, MacDowell played the leading role in the mystery thriller film \"Ruby Cairo\". The film fared poorly at the box office, grossing only $608,866 in the United States during its limited run opposite $24 million production budget. Later that year she made a cameo appearance in the satirical black comedy mystery film \"The Player\" directed by Robert Altman.\nIn 1993, MacDowell achieved stardom due to the box office success of director Harold Ramis's fantasy romantic comedy film \"Groundhog Day\", starring opposite Bill Murray. Critics were enamored with MacDowell's performance. Gene Siskel said that she lit up the screen when she was on. Janet Maslin called her a \"thorough delight\", saying that MacDowell's performance offered a comforting, comedic presence. Hal Hinson said that the on-screen chemistry between MacDowell and Murray was \"otherworldly\" and that she was a perfect fit for comedy. For her performance she won the Saturn Award for Best Actress. Later that year, MacDowell starred in the Robert Altman-directed comedy-drama film \"Short Cuts\". The film received critical acclaim. MacDowell received Golden Globe Special Ensemble Cast Award, Volpi Cup for Best Ensemble Cast, as well nomination for Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actress.\nIn 1994, MacDowell co-starred in the British romantic comedy film \"Four Weddings and a Funeral\" opposite Hugh Grant. The film was made in six weeks, cost under \u00a33 million, and became an unexpected success and the highest-grossing British film in history at the time, with worldwide box office total of $245.7 million. For her performance, she received another Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress in a Motion Picture \u2013 Musical or Comedy. Later that year she starred alongside Madeleine Stowe in the Western film \"Bad Girls\": it was a box office disappointment, grossing $23 million worldwide. The following year, MacDowell had the leading role in the comedy-drama \"Unstrung Heroes\" directed by Diane Keaton. The film earned positive reviews from critics.\nIn 1996, MacDowell appeared in two movies: first was the science fiction comedy film \"Multiplicity\" released on July 17, 1996. It received mixed reviews from critics, and grossed a worldwide total of $37 million at the box office, significantly less than its $45 million budget. Later that year she acted opposite John Travolta in the fantasy comedy film \"Michael\". The film received mixed to negative reviews, but was a box office success grossing $119.7 million worldwide. The following year she starred in the drama film \"The End of Violence\". In 1997 she received an Honorary C\u00e9sar at the 22nd C\u00e9sar Awards. In 1998 she appeared in the independent drama \"Shadrach\" and returned to the romantic comedy genre with \"Just the Ticket\", also making her producing debut. In 1999, MacDowell appeared in another box office disappointment, science fiction comedy film \"Muppets from Space\", and starred opposite Albert Brooks in his directed comedy film, \"The Muse\".\n2000\u20132009: Career fluctuations.\nIn 2000, MacDowell starred in the war drama film \"Harrison's Flowers\". The film received mixed reviews, but Roger Ebert praised her performance writing: \"Andie MacDowell is a sympathetic actress who finds plausible ways to occupy this implausible role.\" The following year she appeared in two romantic comedy films: \"Town &amp; Country\" alongside Warren Beatty and Diane Keaton, and received star-billing in \"Crush\". After 12 release date changes, \"Town &amp; Country\" was released in theaters on April 27, 2001, nearly three years after filming began, receiving negative reviews from critics and was one of the biggest box office flops in American film history, grossing a little over $10 million worldwide from a $105 million budget. Also in 2001, she made her first television appearance in more that ten years starring in the anthology film \"On the Edge\" and the Primetime Emmy Award-nominated comedy-drama \"Dinner with Friends\". The following year she starred in the unsuccessful CBS drama pilot \"Jo\", playing the title character. Also that year she starred in the action thriller film \"Ginostra\".\nDuring the 2000s, MacDowell acted primarily on television and in independent films. In 2003, she guest-starred in an episode of ABC legal drama series \"The Practice\". In 2005 she made her return to the big screen, playing a supporting role in the comedy film \"Beauty Shop\". She also starred in the Irish drama film \"Tara Road\", and the Anjelica Huston-directed \"Hallmark Hall of Fame\" television film \"Riding the Bus with My Sister\". She later appeared in the films \"Intervention\" (2007), \"Inconceivable\" (2008), and \"The Six Wives of Henry Lefay\" (2009).\n2010\u20132019: Supporting roles.\nIn 2010, MacDowell starred in two Lifetime Television movies based on the books of the same name by Patricia Cornwell: \"At Risk\" and \"The Front\", and had the recurring role in the short-lived Fox drama series \"Lone Star\". The following year she played supporting roles in the films \"Monte Carlo\" and \"Footloose\". In 2012 she starred in the comedy-drama film \"Mighty Fine\". Also in 2012, she co-starred in the short-lived ABC Family comedy-drama series \"Jane by Design\", and guest-starred on \"30 Rock\". From 2013 to 2015, she appeared in the Hallmark Channel drama series \"Cedar Cove\", based on Debbie Macomber's book series of the same name.\nIn 2015, MacDowell played a cougar in the comedy-drama film \"Magic Mike XXL\". The following year she starred in the ABC drama pilot \"Model Woman\", which is inspired by the Ford Models agency and the notorious modeling wars of the 1970s. The following year she received rave reviews for her leading performance in the independent drama film \"Love After Love\". David Ehrlich from \"IndieWire\" wrote in his review: \"Andie MacDowell Gives the Performance of Her Life\" while Nell Minow called her \"a radiant\", and Jeannette Catsoulis of \"The New York Times\" \"a remarkable\". Also that year she co-starred in the films \"Only the Brave\" and \"Christmas Inheritance\", and returned to Hallmark with the television movie \"At Home in Mitford\". In 2018, MacDowell starred in and produced the Hallmark Hall of Fame film \"The Beach House\", directed by Roger Spottiswoode and based on the novel by Mary Alice Monroe. Also in 2018, she co-starred in the romantic drama \"Paper Year\".\nIn 2019, MacDowell co-starred opposite Richard Dreyfuss and Chevy Chase in the comedy film \"The Last Laugh\" for Netflix. Later that year she appeared in the black comedy horror film \"Ready or Not\", The film was a critical and commercial success. In 2019, she also starred in the BBC sitcom \"Cuckoo\", and appeared in the Hulu miniseries \"Four Weddings and a Funeral\". \n2020\u2013present.\nIn 2020, MacDowell starred in the survival thriller television series \"Wireless\" and the romantic comedy television film \"Dashing in December\". She later starred opposite Frank Grillo in the Western film \"No Man's Land\" and guest-starred an episode of NBC sitcom \"Mr. Mayor\" playing a fictionalized version of herself. In 2021, MacDowell starred alongside her daughter, Margaret Qualley, in the Netflix miniseries \"Maid\", playing her mother with an undiagnosed mental health disorder. For her performance, MacDowell received positive reviews from critics, and a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actress \u2013 Series, Miniseries or Television Film. The following year she appeared in the films \"Along for the Ride\" and \"Good Girl Jane\". In 2023 she starred in the comedy-drama film \"My Happy Ending\", playing a famous star who finds herself in a British hospital room with three other women who help her.\nIn 2023, MacDowell began starring in the Hallmark Channel fantasy drama series, \"The Way Home\". Later in 2023 she appeared in the romantic comedy film \"The Other Zoey\" and in 2024 starred opposite Orlando Bloom in the action thriller \"Red Right Hand\". Marya E. Gates, in her review for \"RogerEbert.com\", wrote: \"MacDowell also reaches these rarified heights, giving her best performances in years. Reigning over her kingdom from a large red brick mansion, complete with a roaring fireplace, oak-paneled built-in bookcases, and leather armchairs, Big Cat is the kind of baddie who cuts the thumbs off of men who cross her with her own shears in one scene, then uses the hot bodies of her underlings for sexual pleasure in the next. And MacDowell savors every line. A southern broad herself, she knows the power of a whisper and a threat veiled in niceties.\"\nOn November 20, 2025, \"Deadline\" announced that MacDowell would appear in a Netflix film adaptation of Katherine Center's novel \"The Bodyguard\".\nPersonal life.\nIn 1986, MacDowell married Paul Qualley, a rancher and fellow former model. The two met while posing for Gap ads. They had a son, Justin, and two daughters, Rainey, an actress and singer, and Margaret, also an actress.\nMacDowell and Qualley divorced in 1999. Following her divorce from Qualley, MacDowell entered a year-long relationship with actor Dennis Quaid. In 1999, MacDowell reconnected with a former high school classmate, Rhett Hartzog. They married in November 2001, and divorced in October 2004. As of 2013, she resided in Marina del Rey, California. Since 2023, she has resided on the coast of South Carolina.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43826", "revid": "51070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43826", "title": "Jakarta Servlet", "text": "Jakarta EE programming language class\n \nA Jakarta Servlet, formerly Java Servlet is a Java software component that extends the capabilities of a server. Although servlets can respond to many types of requests, they most commonly implement web containers for hosting web applications on web servers and thus qualify as a server-side servlet web API. Such web servlets are the Java counterpart to other dynamic web content technologies such as PHP and ASP.NET.\nIntroduction.\nA Jakarta Servlet is a Java class in Jakarta EE that conforms to the Jakarta Servlet API, a standard for implementing Java classes that respond to requests. Servlets could in principle communicate over any client\u2013server protocol, but they are most often used with HTTP. In principle, any servlets can extend the class; however, realistically speaking, all servlets extend the class. Thus \"servlet\" is often used as shorthand for \"HTTP servlet\". Thus, a servlet can be used to add dynamic content to a web server using the Java platform. The generated content is commonly HTML, but may be other data such as XML and more commonly, JSON. \nThe Jakarta Servlet API has, to some extent, been superseded by two standard Java technologies for web services: \nA is an object that receives a request and generates a response based on that request. The basic codice_1 package defines Java objects to represent servlet requests and responses, as well as objects to reflect the servlet's configuration parameters and execution environment.\nThe Servlet API, contained in the Java package hierarchy , defines the expected interactions of the web container and a servlet.\nThe package defines HTTP-specific subclasses of the codice_2. This package includes session management objects that track multiple requests and responses between the web server and a client.\nServlets can maintain state in session variables across many server transactions by using HTTP cookies, or URL mapping. There are several ways of creating a servlet and using URL mapping with a servlet. Before servlet 3.0 specification (Tomcat 7.0), configuring the web.xml to map a servlet to a URL was the only option. For applications using the servlet 3.0 specification or later, the codice_3 annotation can be used to map any servlet to one or more URL patterns.\nServlets may be packaged in a WAR file as a web application. \nA web container is required for deploying and running a servlet. A web container (also known as a servlet container) is essentially the component of a web server that interacts with the servlets. The web container is responsible for managing the lifecycle of servlets, mapping a URL to a particular servlet and ensuring that the URL requester has the correct access rights.\nServlets can be generated automatically from Jakarta Server Pages (JSP) by the Jakarta Server Pages compiler. The difference between servlets and JSP is that servlets typically embed HTML inside Java code, while JSPs embed Java code in HTML. In general, when using JSPs, embedding Java code in JSP is considered bad practice. Instead, a better approach would be to move the back-end logic from the JSP to the Java code in the codice_1. This ensures that the codice_1 is only responsible for processing, and the JSP is only responsible for presenting the HTML, allowing for a clear separation of concerns and conformance to the single-responsibility principle.\nWhile the direct usage of servlets to generate HTML (as shown in the example below) has become rare, the higher level MVC web framework in Jakarta EE (Faces) still explicitly uses the servlet technology for the low level request/response handling via the . \nA somewhat older usage is to use servlets in conjunction with JSPs in a pattern called \"Model 2\", which is a flavor of the model\u2013view\u2013controller.\nHistory.\nThe Java Servlet API was first publicly announced at the inaugural JavaOne conference in May 1996. About two months after the announcements at the conference, the first public implementation was made available on the JavaSoft website. This was the first alpha of the Java Web Server (JWS; then known by its codename \"Jeeves\") which would eventually be shipped as a product on June 5, 1997.\nIn his blog on java.net, Sun veteran and GlassFish lead Jim Driscoll details the history of servlet technology. James Gosling first thought of servlets in the early days of Java, but the concept did not become a product until December 1996 when Sun shipped JWS. This was before what is now Jakarta EE was made into a specification.\nThe Servlet1 specification was created by Pavni Diwanji while she worked at Sun Microsystems, with version 1.0 finalized in June 1997. Starting with version 2.2, the specification was developed under the Java Community Process.\nLife cycle of a servlet.\nThree methods are central to the life cycle of a servlet. These are codice_6, codice_7, and codice_8.\nThey are implemented by every servlet and are invoked at specific times by the server.\nThe following is a typical user scenario of these methods.\nExample.\nThe following example servlet prints how many times its codice_7 method was called.\nNote that codice_19 is a subclass of codice_2, an implementation of the codice_1 interface.\nThe codice_7 method of codice_19 class dispatches requests to the methods codice_24, codice_25, codice_26, codice_27, and so on; according to the HTTP request. In the example below codice_7 is overridden and does not distinguish which HTTP request method it serves.\nimport java.io.IOException;\nimport jakarta.servlet.ServletConfig;\nimport jakarta.servlet.ServletException;\nimport jakarta.servlet.http.HttpServlet;\nimport jakarta.servlet.http.HttpServletRequest;\nimport jakarta.servlet.http.HttpServletResponse;\npublic class ServletLifeCycleExample extends HttpServlet {\n private Integer sharedCounter;\n @Override\n public void init(final ServletConfig config) throws ServletException {\n super.init(config);\n getServletContext().log(\"init() called\");\n sharedCounter = 0;\n @Override\n protected void service(final HttpServletRequest request, final HttpServletResponse response) throws ServletException, IOException {\n getServletContext().log(\"service() called\");\n int localCounter;\n synchronized (sharedCounter) {\n sharedCounter++;\n localCounter = sharedCounter;\n response.getWriter().write(\"Incrementing the count to \" + localCounter); // accessing a local variable\n response.getWriter().flush(); // flush response\n @Override\n public void destroy() {\n getServletContext().log(\"destroy() called\");\nContainer servers.\nThe specification for Servlet technology has been implemented in many products. See a list of implementations on the web container page.\nThere are also other types of servlet containers such as those for SIP servlets, e.g., SailFin.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43829", "revid": "1307785430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43829", "title": "179", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 179 (CLXXIX) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aurelius and Verus (or, less frequently, year 932 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 179 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43830", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43830", "title": "178", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 178 (CLXXVIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Scipio and Rufus (or, less frequently, year 931 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 178 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43831", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43831", "title": "177", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 177 (CLXXVII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Commodus and Plautius (or, less frequently, year 930 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 177 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43832", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43832", "title": "176", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 176 (CLXXVI) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Proculus and Aper (or, less frequently, year 929 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 176 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43833", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43833", "title": "174", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 174 (CLXXIV) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gallus and Flaccus (or, less frequently, year 927 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 174 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArt and Science.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43834", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43834", "title": "173", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 173 (CLXXIII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Severus and Pompeianus (or, less frequently, year 926 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 173 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43835", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43835", "title": "172", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 172 (CLXXII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Scipio and Maximus (or, less frequently, year 925 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 172 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43836", "revid": "4761363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43836", "title": "171", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 171 (CLXXI) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in Rome as the Year of the Consulship of Severus and Herennianus (or, less frequently, year 924 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 171 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43839", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43839", "title": "Santorum Amendment", "text": "Failed amendment to US 2001 education bill\nThe Santorum Amendment was a failed proposed amendment to the 2001 education funding bill (which became known as the No Child Left Behind Act) that promoted the teaching of intelligent design while questioning the academic standing of evolution in US public schools. (It was proposed by Republican Rick Santorum, then a United States Senator for Pennsylvania.) In response, a coalition of 96 scientific and educational organizations wrote a letter to the conference committee, urging that the amendment be stricken from the final bill and arguing that evolution is regarded as fact in the scientific fields and that the amendment creates the misperception of evolution not being fully accepted in the scientific community and thus weakening science education. The words of the amendment survive in modified form in the bill's conference committee report but do not carry the weight of law. As one of the Discovery Institute intelligent design campaigns it became a cornerstone in the intelligent design movement's \"teach the controversy\" campaign.\nHistory.\nThe origin of the amendment can be traced back to 2000, when leading intelligent design (ID) proponents through the Discovery Institute, a conservative Christian think tank that is the hub of the intelligent design movement, held a congressional briefing in Washington, D.C., to promote their agenda to lawmakers. Sen. Rick Santorum was one of intelligent design's most vocal supporters on Capitol Hill.\nOne result of this briefing was that in 2001 Senator Santorum proposed incorporating pro-intelligent design language, crafted in part by the Discovery Institute's Center for Science and Culture, into the No Child Left Behind bill. It portrayed evolution as generating \"much continuing controversy\" and not widely accepted, using the Discovery Institute's Teach the Controversy method.\nIn proposing the amendment, Santorum addressed the Congress:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSantorum then went on to quote David DeWolf, a Senior Fellow of the Discovery Institute's Center for Science and Culture, as how the Institute's agenda was justified and would benefit students.\nPhillip E. Johnson, retired UC Berkeley law professor, leading proponent of intelligent design, founding advisor of the Discovery Institute's Center for Science and Culture, and \"father\" of the intelligent design movement, assisted Santorum in phrasing the amendment. Johnson says that he is the author of the original amendment.\nOn June 14, 2001, the amendment was passed as part of the education funding bill by the Senate on a vote of 91-8. This was hailed as a major victory by proponents of intelligent design and other creationists; for instance an email newsletter by the Discovery Institute contained the sentence \"Undoubtedly this will change the face of the debate over the theories of evolution and intelligent design in America ... It also seems that the Darwinian monopoly on public science education, and perhaps the biological sciences in general, is ending.\" Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas cited the amendment as vindicating the 1999 Kansas school board decision (since overturned) to eliminate evolution questions from state tests.\nThe House version of the bill H.R. 1 did not contain the amendment, which meant that a conference committee had to decide its ultimate fate.\nScientists and educators feared that by singling out biological evolution as very controversial, the amendment could create the impression that a substantial scientific controversy about evolution exists, leading to a lessening of academic rigor in science curricula. A coalition of 96 scientific and educational organizations signed a letter to this effect to the conference committee, urging that the amendment be stricken from the final bill, which it was, but intelligent design supporters on the conference committee preserved it in the bill's legislative history.\nWhile the amendment did not become law, a version of it appears in the Conference Report as an explanatory text about the legislative history and purposes of the bill. However, it has no legal force per se. The final text of the Santorum Amendment as included in the Conference Report reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDespite the amendment lacking the weight of law, the conference report is constantly cited by the Discovery Institute and other ID supporters as providing federal sanction for intelligent design. In response to criticisms of the Institute stating that the amendment was a federal education policy requiring inclusion of alternatives to evolution be taught, which it was not, in 2003 intelligent design's three most prominent legislators, John Boehner, Judd Gregg and Santorum provided a letter to the Discovery Institute giving it the go ahead to invoke the amendment as evidence of \"Congress's rejection of the idea that students only need to learn about the dominant scientific view of controversial topics\". This letter was also sent to executives on the Ohio Board of Education and the Texas Board of Education, both of which were subject to Discovery Institute intelligent design campaigns at the time.\nScientific community's response.\nThe position of scientists and science educators has been that although evolution has generated a great deal of political and philosophical debate it is, in the scientific fields, regarded as fact. They said that the amendment creates a misperception that evolution is not fully accepted in the scientific community, and thus weakens science curricula. As a response, a coalition of 96 scientific and educational organizations wrote a letter to the conference committee, urging that the amendment be stricken from the final bill.\nIn addition, opponents of the amendment cite the stated agenda of the Discovery Institute's Phillip Johnson use of the \"Wedge strategy\" to \"affirm the reality of God by challenging the domination of materialism and naturalism in the world of the mind\" and thereby return Christian creationism in the guise of intelligent design to public school classrooms. Along with the Academic Bill of Rights, the Santorum Amendment and its \"Teach the Controversy\" approach is viewed by some academics as a threat to academic freedom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43846", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43846", "title": "Organ donation", "text": "Process of voluntarily giving away organs\nOrgan donation is defined as the process when a person authorizes an organ of their own to be removed and transplanted to another person, legally, either by consent while the donor is alive, through a legal authorization for deceased donation made prior to death, or for deceased donations through the authorization by the legal next of kin.\nDonation may be for research or, more commonly, healthy transplantable organs and tissues may be donated to be transplanted into another person.\nCommon transplantations include kidneys, heart, liver, pancreas, intestines, lungs, bones, bone marrow, skin, and corneas. Some organs and tissues can be donated by living donors, such as a kidney or part of the liver, part of the pancreas, part of the lungs or part of the intestines, but most donations occur after the donor has died.\nIn 2019, Spain had the highest donor rate in the world at 46.91 per million people, followed by the US (36.88 per million), Croatia (34.63 per million), Portugal (33.8 per million), and France (33.25 per million).\nAs of February 2, 2019, there were 120,000 people waiting for life-saving organ transplants in the United States. Of these, 74,897 people were active candidates waiting for a donor. While views of organ donation are positive, there is a large gap between the numbers of registered donors compared to those awaiting organ donations on a global level.\nTo increase the number of organ donors, especially among underrepresented populations, current approaches include the use of optimized social network interventions, exposing tailored educational content about organ donation to target social media users. August 13 is observed as World Organ Donation Day to raise awareness about the importance of organ donation.\nProcess in the United States.\nOrgan donors are usually dead at the time of donation, but may be living. For living donors, organ donation typically involves extensive testing before the donation, including psychological evaluation to determine whether the would-be donor understands and consents to the donation. On the day of the donation, the donor and the recipient arrive at the hospital, just like they would for any other major surgery.\nFor dead donors, the process begins with verifying that the person is undoubtedly deceased, determining whether any organs could be donated, and obtaining consent for the donation of any usable organs. Normally, nothing is done until the person has already died, although if death is inevitable, it is possible to check for consent and to do some simple medical tests shortly beforehand, to help find a matching recipient.\nThe verification of death is normally done by a neurologist (a physician specializing in brain function) that is not involved in the previous attempts to save the patient's life. This physician has nothing to do with the transplantation process. Verification of death is often done multiple times, to prevent doctors from overlooking any remaining sign of life, however small. After death, the hospital may keep the body on a mechanical ventilator and use other methods to keep the organs in good condition. The donor's estate and their families are not charged for any expenses related to the donation.\nThe surgical process depends upon which organs are being donated. The body is normally restored to as normal an appearance as possible, so that the family can proceed with funeral rites and either cremation or burial.\nThe lungs are highly vulnerable to injury and thus the most difficult to preserve, with only 15\u201325% of donated organs used.\nHistory.\nThe first living organ donor in a successful transplant was Ronald Lee Herrick (1931\u20132010), who donated a kidney to his identical twin brother Richard (1931\u20131963) in 1954. The lead surgeon, Joseph Murray, and the nephrologist, John Merrill, won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1990 for advances in organ transplantation.\nThe youngest organ donor was a baby with anencephaly, born in 2014, who lived for only 100 minutes and donated his kidneys to an adult with renal failure. The oldest known cornea donor was a 107-year-old Scottish woman, whose corneas were donated after her death in 2016. The oldest known organ donor for an internal organ was an Italian woman, who donated her liver after she died in 2022 in Florence at the age of 100 years, 10 month and one day.\nThe oldest altruistic living organ donor was an 85-year-old woman in Britain, who donated a kidney to a stranger in 2014 after hearing how many people needed to receive a transplant.\nResearchers were able to develop a novel way to transplant human fetal kidneys into anephric rats to overcome a significant obstacle in impeding human fetal organ transplantations. The human fetal kidneys demonstrated both growth and function within the rats.\nBrain donation.\nDonated brain tissue is a valuable resource for research into brain function, neurodiversity, neuropathology and possible treatments. Both divergent and healthy control brains are needed for comparison. Brain banks typically source tissue from donors who had registered with them before their death, since organ donor registries focus on tissue meant for transplantation. In the United States the nonprofit Brain Donor Project facilitates this process.\nLegislation and global perspectives.\nThe laws of different countries allow potential donors to permit or refuse donation, or give this choice to relatives. The frequency of donations varies among countries.\nConsent process.\nThe term consent is typically defined as a subject adhering to an agreement of principles and regulations; however, the definition becomes difficult to execute concerning the topic of organ donation, mainly because the subject is incapable of consent due to death or mental impairment. There are two types of consent being reviewed; explicit consent and presumed consent. Explicit consent consists of the donor giving direct consent through proper registration depending on the country. The second consent process is presumed consent, which does not need direct consent from the donor or the next of kin. Presumed consent assumes that donation would have been permitted by the potential donor if permission was pursued. Of possible donors an estimated twenty-five percent of families refuse to donate a loved one's organs.\nOpt-in versus opt-out.\nAs medical science advances, the number of people who could be helped by organ donors increases continuously. As opportunities to save lives increase with new technologies and procedures, the demand for organ donors rises faster than the actual number of donors. To respect individual autonomy, voluntary consent must be determined for the individual's disposition of their remains following death. There are two main methods for determining voluntary consent: \"opt in\" (only those who have given explicit consent are donors) and \"opt out\" (anyone who has not refused consent to donate is a donor). In terms of an opt-out or presumed consent system, it is assumed that individuals do intend to donate their organs to medical use when they expire. Opt-out legislative systems dramatically increase effective rates of consent for donation as a consequence of the default effect. For example, Germany, which uses an opt-in system, has an organ donation consent rate of 12% among its population, while Austria, a country with a very similar culture and economic development, but which uses an opt-out system, has a consent rate of 99.98%.\nOpt-out consent, otherwise known as \"deemed\" consent, support refers to the notion that the majority of people support organ donation, but only a small percentage of the population are actually registered, because they fail to go through the actual step of registration, even if they want to donate their organs at the time of death. This could be resolved with an opt-out system, where many more people would be registered as donors when only those who object consent to donation have to register to be on the non-donation list.\nFor these reasons, countries, such as Wales, have adopted a \"soft opt-out\" consent, meaning if a citizen has not clearly made a decision to register, then they will be treated as a registered citizen and participate in the organ donation process. Likewise, opt-in consent refers to the consent process of only those who are registered to participate in organ donation. Currently, the United States has an opt-in system, but studies show that countries with an opt-out system save more lives due to more availability of donated organs. The current opt-in consent policy assumes that individuals are not willing to become organ donors at the time of their death, unless they have documented otherwise through organ donation registration.\nRegistering to become an organ donor heavily depends on the attitude of the individual; those with a positive outlook might feel a sense of altruism towards organ donation, while others may have a more negative perspective, such as not trusting doctors to work as hard to save the lives of registered organ donors. Some common concerns regarding a presumed consent (\"opt-out\") system are sociologic fears of a new system, moral objection, sentimentality, and worries of the management of the objection registry for those who do decide to opt-out of donation. Additional concerns exist with views of compromising the freedom of choice to donate, conflicts with extant religious beliefs and the possibility of posthumous violations of bodily integrity. Even though concerns exist, the United States still has a 95 percent organ donation approval rate. This level of nationwide acceptance may foster an environment where moving to a policy of presumed consent may help solve some of the organ shortage problem, where individuals are assumed to be willing organ donors unless they document a desire to \"opt-out\", which must be respected.\nBecause of public policies, cultural, infrastructural and other factors, presumed consent or opt-out models do not always translate directly into increased effective rates of donation. The United Kingdom has several different laws and policies for the organ donation process, such as consent of a witness or guardian must be provided to participate in organ donation. This policy was consulted on by Department of Health and Social Care in 2018, and was implemented starting May 20, 2020.\nIn terms of effective organ donations, in some systems like Australia (14.9 donors per million, 337 donors in 2011), family members are required to give consent or refusal, or may veto a potential recovery even if the donor has consented. Some countries with an opt-out system like Spain (40.2 donors per million inhabitants), Croatia (40.2 donors/million) or Belgium (31.6 donors/million) have high donor rates, however some countries such as Greece (6 donors/million) maintain low donor rates even with this system. The president of the Spanish National Transplant Organisation has acknowledged Spain's legislative approach is likely not the primary reason for the country's success in increasing the donor rates, starting in the 1990s.\nLooking to the example of Spain, which has successfully adopted the presumed consent donation system, intensive care units (ICUs) must be equipped with enough doctors to maximize the recognition of potential donors and maintain organs while families are consulted for donation. The characteristic that enables the Spanish presumed consent model to be successful is the resource of transplant coordinators; it is recommended to have at least one at each hospital where opt-out donation is practiced to authorize organ procurement efficiently.\nPublic views are crucial to the success of opt-out or presumed consent donation systems. In a study done to determine if health policy change to a presumed consent or opt-out system would help to increase donors, an increase of 20 to 30 percent was seen among countries who changed their policies from some type of opt-in system to an opt-out system. Of course, this increase must have a great deal to do with the health policy change, but also may be influenced by other factors that could have impacted donor increases.\nTransplant Priority for Willing Donors, also known as the \"donor-priority rule\", is a newer method and the first to incorporate a \"non-medical\" criterion into the priority system to encourage higher donation rates in the opt-in system. Initially implemented in Israel, it allows an individual in need of an organ to move up the recipient list. Moving up the list is contingent on the individual opting-in prior to their need for an organ donation. The policy applies nonmedical criteria when allowing individuals who have previously registered as an organ donor, or whose family has previously donated an organ, priority over other possible recipients. It must be determined that both recipients have identical medical needs prior to moving a recipient up the list. While incentives like this in the opt-in system do help raise donation rates, they are not as successful in doing so as the opt-out, presumed consent default policies for donation.\nArgentina.\nOn November 30, 2005, the Congress introduced an opt-out policy on organ donation, where all people over 18 years of age will be organ donors unless they or their family state otherwise. The law was promulgated on December 22, 2005, as \"Law 26,066\".\nOn July 4, 2018, the Congress passed a law removing the family requirement, making the organ donor the only person that can block donation. It was promulgated on July 4, 2018, as Law Justina or \"Law 27,447\".\nBrazil.\nA campaign by Sport Club Recife has led to waiting lists for organs in north-east Brazil to drop almost to zero; while according to the Brazilian law the family has the ultimate authority, the issuance of the organ donation card and the ensuing discussions have however eased the process.\nCanada.\nIn 2001, the Government of Canada announced the formation of the Canadian Council for Donation and Transplantation, whose purpose would be to advise the Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health on activities relating to organ donation and transplantation. The deputy ministers of health for all provinces and territories with the exception of Qu\u00e9bec decided to transfer the responsibilities of the Canadian Council for Donation and Transplantation to Canadian Blood Services.\nIn Qu\u00e9bec, an organization called Transplant Qu\u00e9bec is responsible for managing all organ donation; H\u00e9ma-Qu\u00e9bec is responsible for tissue donation. Consent for organ donation by an individual is given by either registering with the organ donation registry established by the , signing and affixing the sticker to the back of one's health insurance card, or registering with either or .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n In 2017, the majority of transplants completed were kidney transplants. Canadian Blood Services has a program called the kidney paired donation, where transplant candidates are matched with compatible living donors from all over Canada. It also gives individuals an opportunity to be a living donor for an anonymous patient waiting for a transplant. As of December 31, 2017, there were 4,333 patients on the transplant waitlist. In 2017, there were a total of 2,979 transplants, including multi-organ transplants; 242 patients died while on the waitlist. 250 Canadians die on average waiting for transplant organs every year.\nEach province has different methods and registries for intent to donate organs or tissues as a deceased donor. In some provinces, such as Newfoundland and Labrador and New Brunswick organ donation registration is completed by completing the \"Intent to donate\" section when applying or renewing one's provincial medical care. In Ontario, one must be 16 years of age to register as an organ and tissue donor and register with ServiceOntario. Alberta requires that a person must be 18 years of age or older and register with the Alberta Organ and Tissue Donation Registry.\nOpt-out donation in Canada.\nNova Scotia, Canada, is the first jurisdiction in North America to introduce an automatic organ donation program unless residents opt out; what the province refers to as deemed consent. The Human Organ and Tissue Act was introduced on April 2, 2019. With the legislation, all people who have been Nova Scotia residents for a minimum of 12 consecutive months, with appropriate decision-making capacity and are over 18 years of age are considered potential donors and will be automatically referred to donation programs if they are determined to be good candidates. In the case of persons under 18 years of age and people without appropriate decision-making capacity, they will only be considered as organ donors if their parent, guardian or decision-maker opts them into the program. The legislation took effect on January 18, 2021.\nChile.\nOn January 6, 2010, the \"Law 20,413\" was promulgated, introducing an opt-out policy on organ donation, where all people over 18 years of age will be organ donors unless they state their negative.\nColombia.\nOn August 4, 2016, the Congress passed the \"Law 1805\", which introduced an opt-out policy on organ donation where all people will be organ donors unless they state their negative. The law came into force on February 4, 2017.\nEurope.\nWithin the European Union, organ donation is regulated by member states. As of 2010, 24 European countries have some form of presumed consent (opt-out) system, with the most prominent and limited opt-out systems in Spain, Austria, and Belgium yielding high donor rates. Spain had the highest donor rate in the world, 46.9 per million people in the population, in 2017. This is attributed to multiple factors in the Spanish medical system, including identification and early referral of possible donors, expanding criteria for donors and standardised frameworks for transplantation after circulatory death.\nIn England, individuals who wish to donate their organs after death can use the Organ Donation Register, a national database. The government of Wales became the first constituent country in the UK to adopt presumed consent in July 2013. The opt-out organ donation scheme in Wales went live on December 1, 2015, and is expected to increase the number of donors by 25%. In 2008, the UK discussed whether to switch to an opt-out system in light of the success in other countries and a severe British organ donor shortfall. In Italy if the deceased neither allowed nor refused donation while alive, relatives will pick the decision on his or her behalf despite a 1999 act that provided for a proper opt-out system. In 2008, the European Parliament overwhelmingly voted for an initiative to introduce an EU organ donor card to foster organ donation in Europe.\nLandstuhl Regional Medical Center (LRMC) has become one of the most active organ donor hospitals in all of Germany, which otherwise has one of the lowest organ donation participation rates in the Eurotransplant organ network. LRMC, the largest U.S. military hospital outside the United States, is one of the top hospitals for organ donation in the Rhineland-Palatinate state of Germany, even though it has relatively few beds compared to many German hospitals. According to the German organ transplantation organization, (DSO), 34 American military service members who died at LRMC (roughly half of the total number who died there) donated a total of 142 organs between 2005 and 2010. In 2010 alone, 10 of the 12 American service members who died at LRMC were donors, donating a total of 45 organs. Of the 205 hospitals in the DSO's central region\u2014which includes the large cities of Frankfurt and Mainz\u2014only six had more organ donors than LRMC in 2010.\nScotland conforms to the Human Tissue Authority Code of Practice, which grants authority to donate organs, instead of consent of the individual. This helps to avoid conflict of implications and contains several requirements. To participate in organ donation, one must be listed on the Organ Donor Registry (ODR). If the subject is incapable of providing consent, and is not on the ODR, then an acting representative, such as a legal guardian or family member can give legal consent for organ donation of the subject, along with a presiding witness, according to the Human Tissue Authority Code of Practice. Consent or refusal from a spouse, family member, or relative is necessary for a subject is incapable.\nAustria participates in the \"opt-out\" consent process, and have laws that make organ donation the default option at the time of death. In this case, citizens must explicitly \"opt out\" of organ donation. Yet in countries such as U.S.A. and Germany, people must explicitly \"opt in\" if they want to donate their organs when they die. In Germany and Switzerland there are Organ Donor Cards available.\nIn May 2017, Ireland began the process of introducing an \"opt-out\" system for organ donation. Minister for Health, Simon Harris, outlined his expectations to have the Human Tissue Bill passed by the end of 2017. This bill would put in place the system of \"presumed consent\".\nThe Mental Capacity Act is another legal policy in place for organ donation in the UK. The act is used by medical professionals to declare a patient's mental capacity. The act claims that medical professionals are to \"act in a patient's best interest\", when the patient is unable to do so.\nIndia.\nIndia has a fairly well developed corneal donation programme; however, donation after brain death has been relatively slow to take off. Most of the transplants done in India are living related or unrelated transplants. To curb organ commerce and promote donation after brain death the government enacted a law called \"The Transplantation of Human Organs Act\" in 1994 that brought about a significant change in the organ donation and transplantation scene in India. Many Indian states have adopted the law and in 2011 further amendment of the law took place. Despite the law there have been stray instances of organ trade in India and these have been widely reported in the press. This resulted in the amendment of the law further in 2011. Deceased donation after brain death have slowly started happening in India and 2012 was the best year for the programme.\nThe year 2013 has been the best yet for deceased organ donation in India. A total of 845 organs were retrieved from 310 multi-organ donors resulting in a national organ donation rate of 0.26 per million population(Table 2).\nIn the year 2000 through the efforts of a non-governmental organization called MOHAN Foundation state of Tamil Nadu started an organ sharing network between a few hospitals. The MOHAN Foundation also set up similar sharing network in the state of Andhra Pradesh and these two states were at the forefront of deceased donation and transplantation programme for many years. As a result, retrieval of 1,033 organs and tissues were facilitated in these two states.\nSimilar sharing networks came up in the states of Maharashtra and Karnataka; however, the numbers of deceased donation happening in these states were not sufficient to make much impact. In 2008, the Government of Tamil Nadu put together government orders laying down procedures and guidelines for deceased organ donation and transplantation in the state. These brought in almost thirty hospitals in the programme and has resulted in significant increase in the donation rate in the state. With an organ donation rate of 1.15 per million population, Tamil Nadu is the leader in deceased organ donation in the country. The small success of Tamil Nadu model has been possible due to the coming together of both government and private hospitals, non-governmental organizations and the State Health Department. Most of the deceased donation programmes have been developed in southern states of India. The various such programmes are as follows:\nIn the year 2012 besides Tamil Nadu other southern states too did deceased donation transplants more frequently. An online organ sharing registry for deceased donation and transplantation is used by the states of Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Both these registries have been developed, implemented and maintained by MOHAN Foundation. However. National Organ and Tissue Transplant Organization (NOTTO) is a National level organization set up under Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India and only official organization.\nOrgan selling is legally banned in Asia. Numerous studies have documented that organ vendors have a poor \"quality of life\" (QOL) following kidney donation. However, a study done by Vemuru reddy \"et al\" shows a significant improvement in Quality of life contrary to the earlier belief. Live related renal donors have a significant improvement in the QOL following renal donation using the WHO QOL BREF in a study done at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences from 2006 to 2008. The quality of life of the donor was poor when the graft was lost or the recipient died.\nIn India, there are six types of life saving organs that can be donated to save the life of a patient. These include Kidneys, Liver, Heart, Lungs, Pancreas and Intestine. Off late, uterus transplant has also been started in India. However, uterus is not a life saving organ as per the Transplantation of Human Organs Act (2011).\nRecently a scoring system, Seth-Donation of Organs and Tissues (S-DOT) score, has been developed to assess hospitals for best practices in tissue donation and organ donation after brain death.\nIran.\nOnly one country, Iran has eliminated the shortage of transplant organs\u2014and only Iran has a working and legal payment system for organ donation. It is also the only country where organ trade is legal. The way their system works is, if a patient does not have a living relative or who are not assigned an organ from a deceased donor, apply to the nonprofit Dialysis and Transplant Patients Association (Datpa). The association establishes potential donors, those donors are assessed by transplant doctors who are not affiliated with the Datpa association. The government gives a compensation of $1,200 to the donors and aid them a year of limited health-insurance. Additionally, working through Datpa, kidney recipients pay donors between $2,300 and $4,500. Importantly, it is illegal for the medical and surgical teams involved or any 'middleman' to receive payment. Charity donations are made to those donors whose recipients are unable to pay. The Iranian system began in 1988 and eliminated the shortage of kidneys by 1999. Within the first year of the establishment of this system, the number of transplants had almost doubled; nearly four-fifths were from living unrelated sources. Nobel Laureate economist Gary Becker and Julio Elias estimated that a payment of $15,000 for living donors would alleviate the shortage of kidneys in the U.S.\nIsrael.\nSince 2008, signing an organ donor card in Israel has provided a potential medical benefit to the signer. If two patients require an organ donation and have the same medical need, preference will be given to the one that had signed an organ donation card. (This policy was nicknamed \"Don't give, don't get\".) Organ donation in Israel increased after 2008.\nJapan.\nThe rate of organ donation in Japan is significantly lower than in Western countries. This is attributed to cultural reasons, some distrust of western medicine, and a controversial organ transplantation in 1968 that provoked a ban on cadaveric organ donation that would last thirty years. Organ donation in Japan is regulated by a 1997 organ transplant law, which defines \"brain death\" and legalized organ procurement from brain dead donors.\nNetherlands.\nThe Netherlands sends everyone living in the country a postcard when they turn 18 (and everyone living in the country when the 2020 law came into effect), and one reminder if they do not reply. They may choose to donate, not to donate, to delegate the choice to family, or to name a specific person. If they do not reply to either notice, they are considered a donor by default. A family cannot object unless there is reason to show the person would not have wanted to donate. If a person cannot be found in the national donor registry, because they are travelling from another country or because they are undocumented, their organs are not harvested without family consent. Organs are not harvested from people who die an unnatural death without the approval of the local attorney general.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand law allows live donors to participate in altruistic organ donation only. In the five years to 2018, there were 16 cases of liver donation by live donors and 381 cases of kidney donation by live donors. New Zealand has low rates of live donation, which could be due to the fact that it is illegal to pay someone for their organs. The Human Tissue Act 2008 states that trading in human tissue is prohibited, and is punishable by a fine of up to $50,000 or a prison term of up to 1 year. The Compensation for Live Organ Donors Act 2016, which came into force in December 2017, allows live organ donors to be compensated for lost income for up to 12 weeks post-donation.\nNew Zealand law also allows for organ donation from deceased individuals. In the five years to 2018, organs were taken from 295 deceased individuals. Everyone who applies for a driver's licence in New Zealand indicates whether or not they wish to be a donor if they die in circumstances that would allow for donation. The question is required to be answered for the application to be processed, meaning that the individual must answer yes or no, and does not have the option of leaving it unanswered. However, the answer given on the drivers license does not constitute informed consent, because at the time of drivers license application not all individuals are equipped to make an informed decision regarding whether to be a donor, and it is therefore not the deciding factor in whether donation is carried out or not. It is there to simply give indication of the person's wishes. Family must agree to the procedure for donation to take place.\nA 2006 bill proposed setting up an organ donation register where people can give informed consent to organ donations and clearly state their legally binding wishes. However, the bill did not pass, and there was condemnation of the bill from some doctors, who said that even if a person had given express consent for organ donation to take place, they would not carry out the procedure in the presence of any disagreement from grieving family members.\nThe indigenous population of New Zealand also have strong views regarding organ donation. Many Maori people believe organ donation is morally unacceptable due to the cultural need for a dead body to remain fully intact. However, because there is not a universally recognised cultural authority, no one view on organ donation is universally accepted in the Maori population. They are, however, less likely to accept a kidney transplant than other New Zealanders, despite being overrepresented in the population receiving dialysis.\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, the 2006 provision of the Organ Transplant Act introduced a monetary incentive equivalent to US$4,500 to the surviving family of brain-death donors; the reward is intended as consolation and compensation for funeral expenses and hospital fees.\nSri Lanka.\nOrgan donation in Sri Lanka was ratified by the Human Tissue Transplantation Act No. 48 of 1987. Sri Lanka Eye Donation Society, a non-governmental organization established in 1961 has provided over 60,000 corneas for corneal transplantation, for patients in 57 countries. It is one of the major suppliers of human eyes to the world, with a supply of approximately 3,000 corneas per year.\nUnited Kingdom.\nWales.\nSince December 2015, Human Transplantation (Wales) Act 2013 passed by the Welsh Government has enabled an opt-out organ donation register, the first country in the UK to do so. The legislation is 'deemed consent', whereby all citizens are considered to have no objection to becoming a donor, unless they have opted out on this register.\nEngland.\nThe Organ Donation (Deemed Consent) Act 2019 established opt-out organ donation in England, also known as Max and Keira's law, when came into effect in May 2020. It means adults in England will be automatically be considered potential donors unless they chose to opt out or are excluded.\nScotland.\nThe Human Tissue (Authorisation) (Scotland) Act 2019 established opt-out organ donation in Scotland in March 2021.\nNorthern Ireland.\nThe Organ and Tissue Donation (Deemed Consent) Act (Northern Ireland) 2022 established opt-out organ donation in 2023.\nDependencies.\nIn Jersey, the Capacity and Self-Determination (Jersey) Law 2016 established an opt-out register on July 1, 2019.\nin Guernsey, the Human Tissue and Transplantation (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law, 2020 established opt-out organ donation in 2023.\nIn the Isle of Man, the Human Tissue and Organ Donation Act 2021 has provisions to establish opt-out organ donation, which have not been enacted.\nUnited States.\nOver 121,000 people in need of an organ are on the U.S. government waiting list. This crisis within the United States is growing rapidly because on average there are only 30,000 transplants performed each year. More than 8,000 people die each year from lack of a donor organ, an average of 22 people a day. Between the years 1988 and 2006 the number of transplants doubled, but the number of patients waiting for an organ grew six times as large.\nIn the past presumed consent was urged to try to decrease the need for organs. The Uniform Anatomical Gift Act of 1987 was adopted in several states, and allowed medical examiners to determine if organs and tissues of cadavers could be donated. By the 1980s, several states adopted different laws that allowed only certain tissues or organs to be retrieved and donated, some allowed all, and some did not allow any without consent of the family. In 2006 when the UAGA was revised, the idea of presumed consent was abandoned. In the United States today, organ donation is done only with consent of the family or donator themselves.\nIn most states, residents can register to become organ donors through the Department of Motor Vehicles. The driver's license will serve as a legal donor card for the registered donor. U.S. Residents may also choose to register as organ, eye, and tissue donors through a national registry maintained by Donate Life America. The national website is RegisterMe.org The national registry allows residents to create a login, password, and edit their donation choice by organ. The most common transplants consists of only six (6) organs: heart, lungs, liver, kidney, pancreas, and small intestines. One healthy donor can potentially save up to eight (8) lives through transplants, using the two lungs and two kidneys separately. The most needed organ for transplants overall are kidneys, due to the high rate of hypertension (HTN) or high blood pressure and diabetes which can lead to end-stage renal disease.\nAccording to economist Alex Tabarrok, the shortage of organs has increased the use of so-called expanded criteria organs, or organs that used to be considered unsuitable for transplant. Five patients that received kidney transplants at the University of Maryland School of Medicine developed cancerous or benign tumors which had to be removed. The head surgeon, Dr. Michael Phelan, explained that \"the ongoing shortage of organs from deceased donors, and the high risk of dying while waiting for a transplant, prompted five donors and recipients to push ahead with the surgery.\" Several organizations such as the American Kidney Fund are pushing for opt-out organ donation in the United States.\nDonor Leave Laws.\nIn addition to their sick and annual leave, federal executive agency employees are entitled to 30 days paid leave for organ donation. Thirty-two states (excluding only Alabama, Connecticut, Florida, Kentucky, Maine, Michigan, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee, Vermont, and Wyoming) and the District of Columbia also offer paid leave for state employees. Five states (California, Hawaii, Louisiana, Minnesota, and Oregon) require certain private employers to provide paid leave for employees for organ or bone marrow donation, and seven others (Arkansas, Connecticut, Maine, Nebraska, New York, South Carolina, and West Virginia) either require employers to provide unpaid leave, or encourage employers to provide leave, for organ or bone marrow donation.\nA bill in the US House of Representatives, the Living Donor Protection Act (introduced in 2016, then reintroduced in 2017), would amend the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 to provide leave under the act for an organ donor. If successful, this new law would permit \"eligible employee\" organ donors to receive up to 12 work weeks of leave in a 12-month period.\nTax incentives.\nNineteen US states and the District of Columbia provide tax incentives for organ donation. The most generous state tax incentive is Utah's tax credit, which covers up to $10,000 of unreimbursed expenses (travel, lodging, lost wages, and medical expenses) associated with organ or tissue donation. Idaho (up to $5,000 of unreimbursed expenses) and Louisiana (up to $7,500 of 72% of unreimbursed expenses) also provide donor tax credits. Arkansas, the District of Columbia, Louisiana and Pennsylvania provide tax credits to employers for wages paid to employees on leave for organ donation. Thirteen states (Arkansas, Georgia, Iowa, Massachusetts, Mississippi, New Mexico, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Rhode Island and Wisconsin) have a tax deduction for up to $10,000 of unreimbursed costs, and Kansas and Virginia offer a tax deduction for up to $5,000 of unreimbursed costs.\nStates have focused their tax incentives on unreimbursed costs associated with organ donation to ensure compliance with the National Organ Transplant Act of 1984. NOTA prohibits, \"any person to knowingly acquire, receive, or otherwise transfer any human organ for valuable consideration for use in human transplantation.\" However, NOTA exempts, \"the expenses of travel, housing, and lost wages incurred by the donor of a human organ in connection with the donation of the organ,\" from its definition of \"valuable consideration\".\nWhile offering income tax deductions has been the preferred method of providing tax incentives, some commentators have expressed concern that these incentives provide disproportionate benefits to wealthier donors. Tax credits, on the other hand, are perceived as more equitable since the after tax benefit of the incentive is not tied to the marginal tax rate of the donor.\nAdditional tax favored approaches have been proposed for organ donation, including providing: tax credits to the families of deceased donors (seeking to encourage consent), refundable tax credits (similar to the earned income credit) to provide greater tax equity among potential donors, and charitable deductions for the donation of blood or organs.\nOther financial incentives.\nAs stated above, under the National Organ Transplant Act of 1984, granting monetary incentives for organ donation is illegal in the United States. However, there has been some discussion about providing fixed payment for potential live donors. In 1988, regulated paid organ donation was instituted in Iran and, as a result, the renal transplant waiting list was eliminated. Critics of paid organ donation argue that the poor and vulnerable become susceptible to transplant tourism. Travel for transplantation becomes transplant tourism if the movement of organs, donors, recipients or transplant professionals occurs across borders and involves organ trafficking or transplant commercialism. Poor and underserved populations in underdeveloped countries are especially vulnerable to the negative consequences of transplant tourism because they have become a major source of organs for the 'transplant tourists' that can afford to travel and purchase organs.\nIn 1994 a law was passed in Pennsylvania which proposed to pay $300 for room and board and $3,000 for funeral expenses to an organ donor's family. Developing the program was an eight-year process; it is the first of its kind. Procurement directors and surgeons across the nation await the outcomes of Pennsylvania's program. There have been at least nineteen families that have signed up for the benefit. Due to investigation of the program, however, there has been some concern whether the money collected is being used to assist families. Nevertheless, funeral aids to induce post-mortem organ donation have also received support from experts and the general public, as the incentives present more ethical values, such as honoring the deceased donor or preserving voluntariness, and potentially increase donation willingness.\nSome organizations, such as the National Kidney Foundation, oppose financial incentives associated with organ donation claiming, \"Offering direct or indirect economic benefits in exchange for organ donation is inconsistent with our values as a society.\" One argument is it will disproportionately affect the poor. The $300\u20133,000 reward may act as an incentive for poorer individuals, as opposed to the wealthy who may not find the offered incentives significant. The National Kidney Foundation has noted that financial incentives, such as this Pennsylvania statute, diminish human dignity.\nMorocco.\nOrgan and tissue donation in Morocco is governed by Law No. 16-98, enacted by Dahir No. 1-99-208 on 16 September 1999 (Official Bulletin No. 4726).\nTo ensure that donations are voluntary, the legislation forbids any financial remuneration and governs the donation, removal, and transplantation of human organs for medical or research purposes.Only close family members may make living contributions; posthumous donations are permitted if the donor gave their approval while still alive or if family members concur after two separate medical professionals have verified the donor's brain death.Any violation of the law, such as the illegal transplantation or organ sale, is penalized by jail time and hefty fines.\nSaudi Arabia.\nAccording to its Human Organ Donation Law, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia provides legal backing for both living and deceased donors, following Royal Decree published on 1 April 2021 by the Council of Ministers, which took place on 30 March 2021. The law includes provisions that outline the organ donation process; donor consent; medical determination of death; hospital responsibilities; and penalties for non-compliance. Islamic law (Sharia) governs organ donation and prohibits any type of material or financial reward. Public donations from deceased individuals require either the express consent of the deceased or the consent of the next of kin if the deceased is unavailable to provide consent. All public activities, donor lists, and transplant logistics are held by the SCOT (Saudi Center for Organ Transplantation).\nEgypt.\nLaw No. 5 of 2010, which governs the regulation of organ and human tissue donation and transplantation in Egypt, strictly prohibits any trade in human organs while permitting donation whether from living or deceased donors under stringent legal and medical conditions. \nIn the case of posthumous donation, it may take place only if the donor has previously given explicit consent before death, and provided that a medical committee formally certifies death in accordance with the established criteria of brain death. However, because of administrative, moral, and religious barriers, the law has not yet been fully implemented. Discussions over the establishment of a national organ donor registry and the efficient enforcement of the law are still going on, and public awareness initiatives have been planned.\nBioethical issues.\nDeontological.\nDeontological issues are issues about whether a person has an ethical duty or responsibility to take an action. Nearly all scholars and societies around the world agree that voluntarily donating organs to sick people is ethically permissible. Although nearly all scholars encourage organ donation, fewer scholars believe that all people are ethically required to donate their organs after death. Similarly, nearly all religions support voluntary organ donation as a charitable act of great benefit to the community. Certain small faiths such as Jehovah's Witnesses and Shinto are opposed to organ donation based upon religious teachings; for Jehovah's Witnesses, this opposition is absolute whereas there exists increasing flexibility among Shinto scholars. Romani people are also often opposed to organ donation based on prevailing spiritual beliefs and not religious views per se. Issues surrounding patient autonomy, living wills, and guardianship make it nearly impossible for involuntary organ donation to occur.\nFrom the standpoint of deontological ethics, the primary issues surrounding the morality of organ donation are semantic in nature. The debate over the definitions of life, death, human, and body is ongoing. For example, whether or not a brain-dead patient ought to be kept artificially animate to preserve organs for donation is an ongoing problem in clinical bioethics. In addition, some have argued that organ donation constitutes an act of self-harm, even when an organ is donated willingly.\nFurther, the use of cloning to produce organs with a genotype identical to the recipient is a controversial topic, especially considering the possibility for an entire person to be brought into being for the express purpose of being destroyed for organ procurement. While the benefit of such a cloned organ would be a zero-percent chance of transplant rejection, the ethical issues involved with creating and killing a clone may outweigh these benefits. However, it may be possible in the future to use cloned stem-cells to grow a new organ without creating a new human being.\nA relatively new field of transplantation has reinvigorated the debate. Xenotransplantation, or the transfer of animal (usually pig) organs into human bodies, promises to eliminate many of the ethical issues, while creating many of its own. While xenotransplantation promises to increase the supply of organs considerably, the threat of organ transplant rejection and the risk of xenozoonosis, coupled with general anathema to the idea, decreases the functionality of the technique. Some animal rights groups oppose the sacrifice of an animal for organ donation and have launched campaigns to ban them.\nTeleological.\nOn teleological or utilitarian grounds, the moral status of \"black market organ donation\" relies upon the ends, rather than the means. In so far as those who donate organs are often impoverished and those who can afford black market organs are typically well-off, it would appear that there is an imbalance in the trade. In many cases, those in need of organs are put on waiting lists for \"legal\" organs for indeterminate lengths of time\u2014many die while still on a waiting list.\nOrgan donation is fast becoming an important bioethical issue from a social perspective as well. While most first-world nations have a legal system of oversight for organ transplantation, the fact remains that demand far outstrips supply. Consequently, there has arisen a black market trend often referred to as \"transplant tourism.\" The issues are weighty and controversial. On the one hand are those who contend that those who can afford to buy organs are exploiting those who are desperate enough to sell their organs. Many suggest this results in a growing inequality of status between the rich and the poor. On the other hand, are those who contend that the desperate should be allowed to sell their organs and that preventing them from doing so is merely contributing to their status as impoverished. Further, those in favor of the trade hold that exploitation is morally preferable to death, and in so far as the choice lies between abstract notions of justice on the one hand and a dying person whose life could be saved on the other hand, the organ trade should be legalized. Conversely, surveys conducted among living donors postoperatively and in a period of five years following the procedure have shown extreme regret in a majority of the donors, who said that given the chance to repeat the procedure, they would not. Additionally, many study participants reported a decided worsening of economic condition following the procedure. These studies looked only at people who sold a kidney in countries where organ sales are already legal.\nA consequence of the black market for organs has been a number of cases and suspected cases of organ theft, including murder for the purposes of organ theft. Proponents of a legal market for organs say that the black-market nature of the current trade allows such tragedies and that regulation of the market could prevent them. Opponents say that such a market would encourage criminals by making it easier for them to claim that their stolen organs were legal.\nLegalization of the organ trade carries with it its own sense of justice as well. Continuing black-market trade creates further disparity on the demand side: only the rich can afford such organs. Legalization of the international organ trade could lead to increased supply, lowering prices so that persons outside the wealthiest segments could afford such organs as well.\nExploitation arguments generally come from two main areas:\n\"The New Cannibalism\" is a phrase coined by anthropologist Nancy Scheper-Hughes in 1998 for an article written for The New Internationalist. Her argument was that the actual exploitation is an ethical failing, a human exploitation; a perception of the poor as organ sources which may be used to extend the lives of the wealthy.\nEconomic drivers leading to increased donation are not limited to areas such as India and Africa, but also are emerging in the United States. Increasing funeral expenses combined with decreasing real value of investments such as homes and retirement savings which took place in the 2000s have purportedly led to an increase in citizens taking advantage of arrangements where funeral costs are reduced or eliminated.\nBrain death versus cardiac death.\nBrain death may result in legal death, but still with the heart beating and with mechanical ventilation, keeping all other vital organs alive and functional for a certain period of time. Given long enough, patients who do not fully die in the complete biological sense, but who are declared brain dead, will usually start to build up toxins and wastes in the body. In this way, the organs can eventually dysfunction due to coagulopathy, fluid or electrolyte and nutrient imbalances, or even fail. Thus, the organs will usually only be sustainable and viable for acceptable use up until a certain length of time. This may depend on factors such as how well the patient is maintained, any comorbidities, the skill of the healthcare teams and the quality their facilities. A major point of contention is whether transplantation should be allowed at all if the patient is not yet fully biologically dead, and if brain death is acceptable, whether the person's whole brain needs to have died, or if the death of a certain part of the brain is enough for legal and ethical and moral purposes.\nMost organ donation for organ transplantation is done in the setting of brain death. However, in Japan this is a fraught point, and prospective donors may designate either brain death or cardiac death \u2013 see organ transplantation in Japan. In some nations such as Belgium, France, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Singapore and Spain, everyone is automatically an organ donor unless they opt out of the system. Elsewhere, consent from family members or next-of-kin is required for organ donation. The non-living donor is kept on ventilator support until the organs have been surgically removed. If a brain-dead individual is not an organ donor, ventilator and drug support is discontinued and cardiac death is allowed to occur.\nIn the United States, where since the 1980s the Uniform Determination of Death Act has defined death as the irreversible cessation of the function of either the brain or the heart and lungs, the 21st century has seen an order-of-magnitude increase of donation following cardiac death. In 1995, only one out of 100 dead donors in the nation gave their organs following the declaration of cardiac death. That figure grew to almost 11 percent in 2008, according to the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients. That increase has provoked ethical concerns about the interpretation of \"irreversible\" since \"patients may still be alive five or even 10 minutes after cardiac arrest because, theoretically, their hearts could be restarted, [and thus are] clearly not dead because their condition was reversible.\"\nGender inequality.\nThe majority of organ donors are women. For example, in the United States, 62% of kidney donors and 53% of liver donors are women. According to an international study published in 2023, which included countries from North America, Europe, and Central Asia, 60-65% of living donors in many countries are women. In the United States, for example, data from the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (UNOS) in 2021 showed that women represent about 63% of living organ donors. only 22% of women on dialysis were placed on the kidney transplant waitlist, compared to 30% of men. This disparity persisted even though women had fewer medical comorbidities than men. In India, women constitute 74% of kidney donors and 60.5% of liver donors. Additionally, the number of female organ recipients is conspicuously lower than that of male recipients. In the U.S., 35% of liver recipients and 39% of kidney recipients are women. In India, the figures are 24% and 19% respectively.\nA study published in 2022 partially explained these disparities through the higher prevalence of certain diseases in men, immune responses related to childbirth in women, and the mismatch in size between the donor and recipient. These disparities may also be attributed to social and cultural factors, as women are often more willing to support family members, in addition to public health policies that have not given enough attention to addressing these disparities.\nPolitical issues.\nThere are also controversial issues regarding how organs are allocated to recipients. For example, some believe that livers should not be given to alcoholics in danger of reversion, while others view alcoholism as a medical condition like diabetes. Faith in the medical system is important to the success of organ donation. Brazil switched to an opt-out system and ultimately had to withdraw it because it further alienated patients who already distrusted the country's medical system. Adequate funding, strong political will to see transplant outcomes improve, and the existence of specialized training, care and facilities also increase donation rates. Expansive legal definitions of death, such as Spain uses, also increase the pool of eligible donors by allowing physicians to declare a patient to be dead at an earlier stage, when the organs are still in good physical condition. Allowing or forbidding payment for organs affects the availability of organs. Generally, where organs cannot be bought or sold, quality and safety are high, but supply is not adequate to the demand. Where organs can be purchased, the supply increases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Iran adopted a system of paying kidney donors in 1988 and within 11 years it became the only country in the world to clear its waiting list for transplants.\u2014\u200a\nHealthy humans have two kidneys, but can live a healthy life with only one. This enables living donors (\"inter vivos\") to give a kidney to someone who needs it, with little to no long-term risk. The most common transplants are to close relatives, but people have given kidneys to other friends. The rarest type of donation is the undirected donation whereby a donor gives a kidney to a stranger. Less than a few hundred of such kidney donations have been performed. In recent years, searching for altruistic donors via the internet has also become a way to find life saving organs. However, internet advertising for organs is a highly controversial practice, as some scholars believe it undermines the traditional list-based allocation system.\nBlack market organ donation.\nThe issue of the black market for organs being legalized has become a widespread debate because if this happens then individuals will most likely be coerced into selling their organs. Additionally, even if there were to become regulations against it most individuals who would be coerced into doing this would most likely be unable to afford legal protection.\nThe National Transplant Organization of Spain is one of the most successful in the world (Spain has been the world leader in organ donation for decades), but it still cannot meet the demand, as 10% of those needing a transplant die while still on the transplant list. Donations from corpses are anonymous, and a network for communication and transport allows fast extraction and transplant across the country. Spanish law uses an opt-out system, where every person is assumed to be a donor and must consciously opt out. Because family members still can forbid the donation, carefully trained doctors ask the family for permission, making it very similar in practice to the United States system.\nIn the overwhelming majority of cases, organ donation is not possible for reasons of recipient safety, match failures, or organ condition. Even in Spain, which has the highest organ donation rate in the world, there are only 35.1 actual donors per million people, and there are hundreds of patients on the waiting list. This rate compares to 24.8 per million in Austria, where families are rarely asked to donate organs, and 22.2 per million in France, which\u2014like Spain\u2014has a presumed-consent system.\nPrison inmates.\nIn the United States, prisoners are not discriminated against as organ recipients and are equally eligible for organ transplants along with the general population. A 1976 U.S. Supreme Court case ruled that withholding health care from prisoners constituted \"cruel and unusual punishment\". United Network for Organ Sharing, the organization that coordinates available organs with recipients, does not factor a patient's prison status when determining suitability for a transplant.\nAn organ transplant and follow-up care can cost the prison system up to one million dollars. If a prisoner qualifies, a state may allow compassionate early release to avoid high costs associated with organ transplants. However, an organ transplant may save the prison system substantial costs associated with dialysis and other life-extending treatments required by the prisoner with the failing organ. For example, the estimated cost of a kidney transplant is about $111,000. A prisoner's dialysis treatments are estimated to cost a prison $120,000 per year.\nBecause donor organs are in short supply, there are more people waiting for a transplant than available organs. When a prisoner receives an organ, there is a high probability that someone else will die waiting for the next available organ. A response to this ethical dilemma states that felons who have a history of violent crime, who have violated others' basic rights, have lost the right to receive an organ transplant, though it is noted that it would be necessary \"to reform our justice system to minimize the chance of an innocent person being wrongly convicted of a violent crime and thus being denied an organ transplant\".\nPrisons typically do not allow inmates to donate organs to anyone but immediate family members. There is no law against prisoner organ donation; however, the transplant community has discouraged use of prisoner's organs since the early 1990s due to concern over prisons' high-risk environment for infectious diseases. Physicians and ethicists also criticize the idea because a prisoner is not able to consent to the procedure in a free and non-coercive environment, especially if given inducements to participate. However, with modern testing advances to more safely rule out infectious disease and by ensuring that there are no incentives offered to participate, some have argued that prisoners can now voluntarily consent to organ donation just as they can now consent to medical procedures in general. With careful safeguards, and with over 2\u00a0million prisoners in the U.S., they reason that prisoners can provide a solution for reducing organ shortages in the U.S.\nWhile some have argued that prisoner participation would likely be too low to make a difference, one Arizona program started by former Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio encourages inmates to voluntarily sign up to donate their heart and other organs. As of 2015, there have been over 16,500 participants. Similar initiatives have been started in other US states. In 2013, Utah became the first state to allow prisoners to sign up for organ donation upon death.\nReligious viewpoints.\nThere are several different religions that have different perspectives. Muslims have a conflicting view regarding the issue, with half believing that it is against the religion. Muslims are commanded to seek medical attention when in need and saving life is a very important factor of the Islamic religion. Christianity is lenient on the topic of organ donation, and believe it is a service of life.\nAll major religions accept organ donation in at least some form on either utilitarian grounds (\"i.e.\", because of its life-saving capabilities) or deontological grounds (\"e.g.\", the right of an individual believer to make his or her own decision). Most religions, among them the Roman Catholic Church, support organ donation on the grounds that it constitutes an act of charity and provides a means of saving a life. One religious group, The Jesus Christians, became known as \"The Kidney Cult\" because more than half its members had donated their kidneys altruistically. Jesus Christians claim altruistic kidney donation is a great way to \"Do unto others what they would want you to do unto them.\" Some religions impose certain restrictions on the types of organs that may be donated and/or on the means by which organs may be harvested and/or transplanted. For example, Jehovah's Witnesses require that organs be drained of any blood due to their interpretation of the Hebrew Bible/Christian Old Testament as prohibiting blood transfusion, and Muslims require that the donor have provided written consent in advance. A few groups disfavor organ transplantation or donation; notably, these include Shinto and the Romani.\nOrthodox Judaism considers organ donation obligatory if it will save a life, as long as the donor is considered dead as defined by Jewish law. In both Orthodox Judaism and non-Orthodox Judaism, the majority view holds that organ donation is permitted in the case of irreversible cardiac rhythm cessation. In some cases, rabbinic authorities believe that organ donation may be mandatory, whereas a minority opinion considers any donation of a live organ as forbidden.\nOrgan shortfall.\nThe demand for organs significantly surpasses the number of donors everywhere in the world. There are more potential recipients on organ donation waiting lists than organ donors. In particular, due to significant advances in dialysis techniques, patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) can survive longer than ever before. Because these patients do not die as quickly as they used to, and as kidney failure increases with the rising age and prevalence of high blood pressure and diabetes in a society, the need especially for kidneys rises every year.\nAs of March 2014[ [update]], about 121,600 people in the United States are on the waiting list, although about a third of those patients are inactive and could not receive a donated organ. Wait times and success rates for organs differ significantly between organs due to demand and procedure difficulty. As of 2007[ [update]], three-quarters of patients in need of an organ transplant were waiting for a kidney, and as such kidneys have much longer waiting times. As stated by the Gift of Life Donor Program website, the median patient who ultimately received an organ waited 4 months for a heart or lung\u2014but 18 months for a kidney, and 18\u201324 months for a pancreas because demand for these organs substantially outstrips supply. An increased prevalence of self-driving cars could exacerbate this problem: In the US, 13% of organ donations come from car crash victims, and autonomous vehicles are projected to reduce the frequency of car crashes.\nIn Australia, there are 10.8 transplants per million people, about a third of the Spanish rate. The Lions Eye Institute, in Western Australia, houses the Lions Eye Bank. The Bank was established in 1986 and coordinates the collection, processing and distribution of eye tissue for transplantation. The Lions Eye Bank also maintains a waitlist of patients who require corneal graft operations.\nAbout 100 corneas are provided by the Bank for transplant each year, but there is still a waiting list for corneas. \"To an economist, this is a basic supply-and-demand gap with tragic consequences.\" Approaches to addressing this shortfall include:\nIn hospitals, organ network representatives routinely screen patient records to identify potential donors shortly in advance of their deaths. In many cases, organ-procurement representatives will request screening tests (such as blood typing) or organ-preserving drugs (such as blood pressure drugs) to keep potential donors' organs viable until their suitability for transplants can be determined and family consent (if needed) can be obtained. This practice increases transplant efficiency, as potential donors who are unsuitable due to infection or other causes are removed from consideration before their deaths, and decreases the avoidable loss of organs. It may also benefit families indirectly, as the families of unsuitable donors are not approached to discuss organ donation.\nDoctors and patients are sometimes hesitant to accept organs from people who died of brain tumours. However, an analysis of the UK donor registry found no evidence of cancer transmission across more than 750 donations, including people with high-grade tumours. This suggests that it may be safe to increase the use of organs from people who died of a brain tumour, which could help reduce organ shortfall.\nDistribution.\nThe United States has two agencies that govern organ procurement and distribution within the country. The United Network for Organ Sharing and the Organ Procurement and Transplant Network (OPTN) regulate Organ Procurement Organizations (OPO) with regard to procurement and distribution ethics and standards. OPOs are non-profit organizations charged with the evaluation, procurement and allocation of organs within their Designated Service Area (DSA). Once a donor has been evaluated and consent obtained, provisional allocation of organs commences. UNOS developed a computer program that automatically generates donor specific match lists for suitable recipients based on the criteria that the patient was listed with. OPO coordinators enter donor information into the program and run the respective lists. Organ offers to potential recipients are made to transplant centers to make them aware of a potential organ. The surgeon will evaluate the donor information and make a provisional determination of medical suitability to their recipient. Distribution varies slightly between different organs but is essentially very similar. When lists are generated many factors are taken into consideration; these factors include: distance of transplant center from the donor hospital, blood type, medical urgency, wait time, donor size and tissue typing. For heart recipients medical urgency is denoted by a recipients \"Status\" (Status 1A, 1B and status 2). Lungs are allocated based on a recipients Lung Allocation Score (LAS) that is determined based on the urgency of clinical need as well as the likelihood of benefit from the transplant. Livers are allocated using both a status system and MELD/PELD score (Model for End-stage Liver Disease/Pediatric End-stage Liver Disease). Kidney and pancreas lists are based on location, blood type, Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) typing and wait time. When a recipient for a kidney or pancreas has no direct antibodies to the donor HLA the match is said to be a 0 ABDR mismatch or zero antigen mismatch. A zero mismatch organ has a low rate of rejection and allows a recipient to be on lower doses of immunosuppressive drugs. Since zero mismatches have such high graft survival these recipients are afforded priority regardless of location and wait time. UNOS has in place a \"Payback\" system to balance organs that are sent out of a DSA because of a zero mismatch.\nLocation of a transplant center with respect to a donor hospital is given priority due to the effects of Cold Ischemic Time (CIT). Once the organ is removed from the donor, blood no longer perfuses through the vessels and begins to starve the cells of oxygen (ischemia). Each organ tolerates different ischemic times. Hearts and lungs need to be transplanted within 4\u20136 hours from recovery, liver about 8\u201310 hours and pancreas about 15 hours; kidneys are the most resilient to ischemia. Kidneys packaged on ice can be successfully transplanted 24\u201336 hours after recovery. Developments in kidney preservation have yielded a device that pumps cold preservation solution through the kidneys vessels to prevent Delayed Graft Function (DGF) due to ischemia. Perfusion devices, often called kidney pumps, can extend graft survival to 36\u201348 hours post recovery for kidneys. Recently similar devices have been developed for the heart and lungs, in an effort to increase distances procurement teams may travel to recover an organ.\nSuicide.\nPeople who die by suicide have a higher rate of donating organs than average. One reason is lower negative response or refusal rate by the family and relatives, but the explanation for this remains to be clarified. In addition, donation consent is higher than average from people who have died by suicide.\nAttempted suicide is a common cause of brain death (3.8%), mainly among young men. Organ donation is more common in this group compared to other causes of death. Brain death may result in legal death, but still with the heart beating, and with mechanical ventilation all other vital organs may be kept completely alive and functional, providing optimal opportunities for organ transplantation.\nControversies.\nIn 2008, California transplant surgeon Hootan Roozrokh was charged with dependent adult abuse for prescribing what prosecutors alleged were excessive doses of morphine and sedatives to hasten the death of a man with adrenal leukodystrophy and irreversible brain damage, to procure his organs for transplant. The case brought against Roozrokh was the first criminal case against a transplant surgeon in the US, and resulted in his acquittal. Further, Roozrokh successfully sued for defamation stemming from the incident.\nAt California's Emanuel Medical Center, neurologist Narges Pazouki said an organ-procurement organization representative pressed her to declare a patient brain-dead before the appropriate tests had been done. In September 1999, eBay blocked an auction for \"one functional human kidney\" which had reached a highest bid of $5.7\u00a0million. Under United States federal laws, eBay was obligated to dismiss the auction for the selling of human organs, which is punishable by up to five years in prison and a $50,000 fine.\nOn June 27, 2008, Indonesian Sulaiman Damanik, 26, pled guilty in a Singapore court for sale of his kidney to CK Tang's executive chair, Tang Wee Sung, 55, for 150\u00a0million rupiah (US$17,000). The Transplant Ethics Committee must approve living donor kidney transplants. Organ trading is banned in Singapore and in many other countries to prevent the exploitation of \"poor and socially disadvantaged donors who are unable to make informed choices and suffer potential medical risks.\" Toni, 27, the other accused, donated a kidney to an Indonesian patient in March, alleging he was the patient's adopted son, and was paid 186\u00a0million rupiah (US$21,000).\nPublic service announcements.\nMarketing for organ donation must walk a fine line between stressing the need for organ donation and not being too forceful. If the marketing agent is too forceful, then the target of the message will react defensively to the request. According to psychological reactance theory, a person will perceive their freedom threatened and will react to restore the freedom. According to Ashley Anker, the use of transportation theory has a positive effect on target reactions by marketing attempts. When public service announcements use recipient-focused messages, targets were more transported because potential donors experience empathy for the potential recipient.\nAwareness about organ donation leads to greater social support for organ donation, in turn leading to greater registration. By starting with promoting college students' awareness of organ donation and moving to increasing social support for organ donation, the more likely people will be to register as organ donors.\nThe United States Department of Health funded a study by the University of Wisconsin Hospital to increase efforts to increase awareness and the number of registered donors by pursuing members of the university and their family and friends through social media. The results of the study showed a 20% increase in organ donation by creating support and awareness through social media.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43848", "revid": "698799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43848", "title": "Cybill Shepherd", "text": "American actress and former model (born 1950)\nCybill Lynne Shepherd (born February 18, 1950) is an American actress, singer and former model. Her film debut and breakthrough role came as Jacy Farrow in Peter Bogdanovich's coming-of-age drama \"The Last Picture Show\" (1971) alongside Jeff Bridges. She also had roles as Kelly in Elaine May's \"The Heartbreak Kid\" (1972), Betsy in Martin Scorsese's \"Taxi Driver\" (1976), and Nancy in Woody Allen's \"Alice\" (1990).\nOn television, her first major role was as Colleen Champion in the one season of the night-time drama \"The Yellow Rose\" (1983). Shepherd played Madelyn Hayes on the detective comedy-drama \"Moonlighting\" (1985\u20131989) opposite Bruce Willis, for which she won two Golden Globes for Best Actress in a Television Series - Musical or Comedy out of three such nominations. She later starred as Cybill Sheridan on \"Cybill\" (1995\u20131998), for which she won her third Golden Globe Award as Best Actress in a Television Series - Musical or Comedy. Her later television roles included Phyllis Kroll on \"The L Word\" (2007\u20132009), Madeleine Spencer on \"Psych\" (2008\u20132013), Cassie in the television film \"The Client List\" (2010), and Linette Montgomery on \"The Client List\" (2012\u20132013).\nEarly life and career.\nShepherd was born February 18, 1950, in Memphis, Tennessee. She is the second of three children. She had an older sister, Terry, and has a younger brother, William. Cybill was named with a blend of her grandfather Cy and her father Bill's names. While attending East High School, Shepherd won the \"Miss Teenage Memphis\" title and represented the city at the 1966 Miss Teenage America pageant at age 16, where she won the congeniality award. She competed at the 1968 \"Model of the Year\" contest at age 18, resulting in fashion model assignments through high school and afterwards.\nAccording to Shepherd's autobiography, a 1970 \"Glamour\" magazine cover caught the eye of film director Peter Bogdanovich. His then-wife, Polly Platt, claimed that when she saw the cover in a check-out line in a Ralphs grocery store in southern California, he said \"That's Jacy,\" referring to the role Bogdanovich was casting\u2014and ultimately given to Shepherd\u2014in \"The Last Picture Show\" (1971).\nCelebrity.\nHer first film was \"The Last Picture Show\", also starring Jeff Bridges and Timothy Bottoms. The film became a critical and box office hit, earning eight Academy Awards nominations and winning two. Shepherd was nominated for a Golden Globe. In 1972, Shepherd was cast opposite Charles Grodin in \"The Heartbreak Kid\". She played Kelly, a young woman for whom Grodin's character falls while on his honeymoon in Miami. Directed by Elaine May and written by Neil Simon, it was another critical and box office hit. Also in 1972, Shepherd posed as a Kodak Girl for the camera manufacturer's then-ubiquitous cardboard store poster displays.\nIn 1974, Shepherd again teamed up with Peter Bogdanovich for the title role in \"Daisy Miller\", based on the Henry James novella. The film\u2014a period piece set in Europe\u2014was a box office failure. That same year, she launched a singing career, releasing a studio album \"Cybill Does It...To Cole Porter\" for MCA Records. It was panned by \"Village Voice\" critic Robert Christgau, who wrote: \"Her voice is surprisingly pleasant, but you'd never know how these songs sparkle. Since Cole didn't like to . . . do it with (or 'to') women very much, maybe the 'do' is as hostile as it sounds.\"\nIn 1975, she made \"At Long Last Love\", a film musical directed by Bogdanovich. The film received scathing negative reviews, named by many as the worst major film of the year, and Shepherd herself received negative reviews.\nShepherd returned with good reviews for her supporting work in Martin Scorsese's \"Taxi Driver\" (1976). According to Shepherd, Scorsese had requested a \"Cybill Shepherd type\" for the role. She portrayed Betsy, a volunteer for a presidential candidate with whom Robert De Niro's character, Travis Bickle, becomes infatuated.\nA series of less-successful roles followed, including \"The Lady Vanishes\" (1979), a remake of Alfred Hitchcock's 1938 film. Already sitting in on an acting class taught by Stella Adler, Shepherd was offered work at a dinner theater in Norfolk, Virginia, and turned to friend Orson Welles for advice. He encouraged her to get experience on stage in front of an audience, anywhere but Los Angeles or New York City, away from the harsh big-city critics so she moved back to her home town of Memphis to work in regional theatre.\nIn 1981, Shepherd appeared in a play directed by Orson Bean, \"Vanities\", staged in St. Louis, Missouri.\nReturn to Hollywood.\nIn 1982, Shepherd returned to New York and to the stage when she played alongside James MacArthur in a theatre tour of \"Lunch Hour\" by Jean Kerr. The following year, Shepherd went back to Los Angeles and was cast as Colleen Champion in the NBC television drama \"The Yellow Rose\" (1983), opposite Sam Elliott. Although critically acclaimed, the series lasted only one season. A year later, Shepherd was cast as Maddie Hayes on \"Moonlighting\" (1985\u20131989), a role that defined her career. The producers knew that her role depended on having \"chemistry\" with her co-star, and involved her in the selection of Bruce Willis. A lighthearted combination of mystery and comedy, the series won Shepherd two Golden Globe Awards.\nShe starred in \"Chances Are\" (1989) with Robert Downey Jr. and Ryan O'Neal, receiving excellent reviews. She then reprised her role as Jacy in \"Texasville\" (1990), the sequel to \"The Last Picture Show\" (1971), as the original cast (and director Peter Bogdanovich) reunited 20 years after filming the original. She appeared in Woody Allen's \"Alice\" (1990) and Eugene Levy's \"Once Upon a Crime\" (1992), as well as several television films. In 1997, she won her third Golden Globe award for \"Cybill\" (1995\u20131998), a television sitcom in which the title character, Cybill Sheridan, an actress struggling with hammy roles in B movies and bad soap operas, was loosely modeled on herself, including portrayals of her two ex-husbands and her then-teenage daughter.\nIn 2000, Shepherd's bestselling autobiography, \"Cybill Disobedience: How I Survived Beauty Pageants, Elvis, Sex, Bruce Willis, Lies, Marriage, Motherhood, Hollywood, and the Irrepressible Urge to Say What I Think\", written in collaboration with Aimee Lee Ball, was published. That same year, Shepherd hosted a short-lived syndicated talk show version of the book \"Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus\", but left the show in early 2001. In 2003, she guest-starred on \"8 Simple Rules\" as the sister of Cate Hennessy (portrayed by Katey Sagal). She has played Martha Stewart in two television films: ' (2003) and ' (2005).\nFrom 2007 until it ended, Shepherd appeared on \"The L Word\" as Phyllis Kroll for the show's final three seasons. In 2008, she joined the cast of \"Psych\" as main character Shawn Spencer's mother, Madeleine Spencer. On November 7, 2008, Shepherd guest-starred in a February episode of the CBS drama \"Criminal Minds\". In 2010 Shepherd appeared in an episode of \"No Ordinary Family\" and in November of the same year she guest-starred in an episode of \"$\u266f*! My Dad Says\".\nShepherd appeared alongside Jennifer Love Hewitt in the 2010 television film \"The Client List\" and then in the 2012-13 series based on the film.\nIn July 2012, Shepherd made her Broadway debut in the revival of Gore Vidal's \"The Best Man\" at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theatre alongside James Earl Jones, John Stamos, John Larroquette, Kristin Davis, and Elizabeth Ashley to positive reviews.\nShepherd appeared as a mother grieving the death of her daughter in \"Do You Believe?\" (2015), a Christian-themed movie produced by Pure Flix Entertainment.\nIn 2017, she took on a role as an ex-cop senior struggling with illness who unexpectedly finds love on a road trip in the direct-to-cable \"Being Rose\".\nIn 2023, Shepherd starred in the Lifetime film \",\" where she portrayed Nancy Brophy, opposite Steve Guttenberg as Daniel Brophy, in a dramatization of the Murder of Daniel Brophy.\nPersonal life.\nShepherd began a relationship with Peter Bogdanovich on the set of \"The Last Picture Show\", during his marriage to Polly Platt, whom Bogdanovich subsequently divorced. The relationship between the young star and her director lasted eight years. In her autobiography, Shepherd revealed that she called her mother in 1978, crying and unhappy with the way her life and career were going. Her mother replied, \"Cybill, come home.\" Shepherd went home to Memphis, where she met and began dating David M. Ford, a local auto parts dealer and nightclub entertainer. She became pregnant, and the couple married that year. Their daughter, Clementine Ford, was born in 1979. The marriage ended in divorce in 1982.\nIn 1987, Shepherd became pregnant by chiropractor Bruce Oppenheim and married him. They had twins named Ariel and Zachariah Shepherd Oppenheim born during the fourth season of \"Moonlighting\". The couple divorced in 1990. She had an intimate relationship with author Larry McMurtry, whom she once called the love of her life.\nIn June 2012, Shepherd became engaged to psychologist Andrei Nikolajevic. By 2015, the engagement had been called off.\nPolitical activism.\nThroughout her career, Shepherd has been an activist for issues such as gay rights and abortion rights. In 2009, she was honored by the Human Rights Campaign in Atlanta with one of two National Ally for Equality awards. She has been an advocate for same-sex marriage.\nShe was present at the opening of the National Civil Rights Museum in her hometown of Memphis, to which she lent financial support.\nReligious beliefs.\nShepherd was raised Christian, but stated that she eventually \"lost touch\" with the religion. In a 2007 interview with \"Metro Weekly\", she described herself as being \"a goddess-worshipping Christian Pagan Buddhist\".\nIn October 2014, Shepherd said that she had reconnected with her Christian faith.\nAwards.\nEmmy Awards.\nNominations:\nIn her autobiography, Shepherd addressed rumors that she was jealous of her co-stars Bruce Willis and Christine Baranski for winning Emmy awards while she has not: \"The grain of truth in this controversy was that of course I was envious. Who doesn't want to win an Emmy?\"\nGolden Globe Awards.\nWins:\nNominations:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43849", "revid": "18953656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43849", "title": "The Apartment", "text": "1960 film by Billy Wilder\nThe Apartment is a 1960 American romantic comedy film directed and produced by Billy Wilder from a screenplay he co-wrote with I. A. L. Diamond. Jack Lemmon stars as an insurance clerk who, in hopes of climbing the corporate ladder, allows his superiors to use his Upper West Side apartment to conduct their extramarital affairs. He becomes attracted to an elevator operator (Shirley MacLaine) in his office building, unaware that she is having an affair with the head of personnel (Fred MacMurray). Ray Walston and Edie Adams feature in supporting roles.\n\"The Apartment\" was distributed by United Artists to widespread critical acclaim and was a commercial success, despite controversy owing to its subject matter. It became the 8th highest-grossing film of 1960. At the 33rd Academy Awards, the film was nominated for ten awards and won five, including Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Screenplay. Lemmon, MacLaine, and Jack Kruschen were nominated for Best Actor, Best Actress, and Best Supporting Actor respectively, and Lemmon and MacLaine won Golden Globe Awards for their performances. \"Promises, Promises\", a 1968 Broadway musical by Burt Bacharach, Hal David, and Neil Simon, was based on the film.\n\"The Apartment\" has come to be regarded as one of the greatest films ever made, appearing in lists by the American Film Institute and \"Sight and Sound\" magazine. In 1994, it was one of 25 films selected for inclusion to the Library of Congress National Film Registry.\nPlot.\nC.C. \"Bud\" Baxter is a lonely office worker at an insurance company in New York City. To climb the corporate ladder, he allows four company managers to take turns borrowing his Upper West Side apartment for their extramarital affairs. Baxter meticulously juggles the \"booking\" schedule, but the steady stream of women convinces his neighbors that he is a playboy.\nBaxter solicits glowing performance reviews from the four managers and submits them to personnel director Jeff Sheldrake, who then promises to promote him provided that Sheldrake also earns use of the apartment for his own affairs starting that night. As compensation for this short notice, he gives Baxter two tickets to see \"The Music Man\". Bud asks Fran Kubelik, an elevator operator in the office building to whom he is attracted, to join him. She agrees, but first has dinner with a \"former fling\", who turns out to be Sheldrake. When Sheldrake tells her that he plans to divorce his wife to be with her, they head to Baxter's apartment, while Baxter waits outside the theater.\nDuring the company's raucous Christmas Eve party, Sheldrake's secretary, Miss Olsen, tells Fran that her boss has had numerous affairs with other female employees, including herself. Fran confronts Sheldrake at Baxter's apartment; he claims he loves her, but heads back to his family in White Plains.\nRealizing that Fran is the woman Sheldrake has been taking to his apartment, Baxter lets himself be picked up by a married woman at a local bar. When they arrive at his apartment, he discovers Fran passed out on his bed from an overdose of sleeping pills. He ditches the woman from the bar and enlists his neighbor Dr. Dreyfuss to revive Fran. Baxter implies that he was responsible for the incident; Dreyfuss scolds him for philandering and advises him to \"be a \"mensch\".\"\nFran spends two days recuperating in Baxter's apartment, during which a bond develops between them, especially after he confesses to an earlier suicide attempt over unrequited love. Fran says that she has always suffered bad luck in her love life. \nAs Baxter prepares a romantic dinner, one of the managers arrives for a tryst. Baxter persuades him and his companion to leave, but the manager recognizes Fran and later informs his colleagues. They are annoyed that they have not had the same ready access to the apartment since Baxter's promotion. When Fran's brother-in-law Karl shows up at the office building looking for her, the managers send him to the apartment. Baxter deflects Karl's anger over Fran's wayward behavior by once again assuming all responsibility. Karl punches him, and as she leaves, Fran kisses Baxter for protecting her.\nWhen Sheldrake learns that Miss Olsen told Fran about his affairs, he fires her; she retaliates by spilling all to Sheldrake's wife, who promptly throws him out. Sheldrake welcomes this as an excuse to pursue Fran, although she hints that she is losing interest. Having promoted Baxter to an even higher position, Sheldrake expects Baxter to lend him the key to his apartment yet again so that he can take Fran there. Instead, Baxter gives him back the key to the building's \"executive washroom\", proclaiming that he has decided to become a \"mensch\", and quits the firm. He decides to move out of the apartment and begins to pack his belongings.\nThat night at a New Year's Eve party, Sheldrake indignantly tells Fran about Baxter quitting, disclosing that Baxter refused to let him use his apartment, particularly with Fran. She abandons Sheldrake and runs to the apartment. At the door, Fran hears an apparent gunshot, but Baxter opens the door holding a bottle of just-opened champagne. Baxter declares his love for Fran. As she prepares to resume a game of gin rummy that they had left unfinished earlier, she smiles, hands him the cards and says, \"Shut up and deal\".\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Jack Lemmon as Calvin Clifford (CC) \"Buddy Boy\" Baxter, an office worker\nProduction.\nImmediately following the success of 1959's \"Some Like It Hot\", Wilder and Diamond wished to make another film with Jack Lemmon. Wilder had originally planned to cast Paul Douglas as Sheldrake; however, after he died unexpectedly, Fred MacMurray took his place.\nThe initial concept was inspired by \"Brief Encounter\" by No\u00ebl Coward, in which Laura Jesson (Celia Johnson) meets Alec Harvey (Trevor Howard) for a tryst in his friend's apartment, which ends up thwarted. However, Wilder was unable to make the comedy about adultery he envisioned in the 1940s due to Hays Code restrictions. Wilder and Diamond also based the film partially on a Hollywood scandal in which agent Jennings Lang was shot by producer Walter Wanger for having an affair with Wanger's wife, actress Joan Bennett; during the affair, Lang had used a low-level employee's apartment for trysts. Another element of the plot was based on the experience of one of Diamond's friends, who returned home after breaking up with his girlfriend to find that she had committed suicide in his bed.\nAlthough Wilder generally required his actors to adhere exactly to the script, he allowed Lemmon to improvise in two scenes. In one, he squirts a bottle of nasal spray across the room, and in the other he sings while cooking spaghetti (which he strains through the strings of a tennis racket). In another scene, where Lemmon was supposed to mime being punched, he failed to move correctly and was accidentally knocked down. Wilder chose to use the shot in the film. Lemmon also caught a cold (he was supposed to come down with in the script) when one scene on a park bench was filmed on a bitter autumn night.\nArt director Alexandre Trauner used forced perspective to create the set of a large insurance company office. The set appeared to be a very long room full of desks and workers; however, successively smaller people and desks were used, ending up with children. He designed the set of Baxter's apartment to appear smaller and shabbier than the spacious apartments that usually appeared in films of the day. He used items from thrift stores and even some of Wilder's own furniture for the set.\nMusic.\nThe film's title theme, written by Charles Williams and originally titled \"Jealous Lover\", was first heard in the 1949 film \"The Romantic Age\". A recording by Ferrante &amp; Teicher, released as \"Theme from \"The Apartment\"\", reached #10 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart later in 1960.\nReception.\nThe film made double its $3 million budget at the US and Canadian box office in 1960. Critics were split on \"The Apartment\". \"Time\" and \"Newsweek\" praised it, as did \"The New York Times\" film critic Bosley Crowther, who called the film \"gleeful, tender, and even sentimental\" and Wilder's direction \"ingenious\". \"Esquire\" critic Dwight Macdonald gave the film a poor review, calling it \"a paradigm of corny avantgardism\". Others took issue with the film's controversial depictions of infidelity and adultery, with critic Hollis Alpert of the \"Saturday Review\" dismissing it as \"a dirty fairy tale\".\nMacMurray, having generally played guileless characters, related that after the film's release he was accosted by women in the street who berated him for making a \"dirty filthy movie\", and one of them hit him with her purse.\nIn 2001, \"Chicago Sun-Times\" film critic Roger Ebert gave the film four stars out of four, and added it to his Great Movies list. The film critic Clarisse Loughrey has identified it as one of her two favorite movies, along with the 2010 film \"Boy\". The film holds a 93% rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 103 reviews with an average rating of 8.8/10; the site's consensus states that \"Director Billy Wilder's customary cynicism is leavened here by tender humor, romance, and genuine pathos\". On Metacritic, the film has a score of 94 out of 100 based on 21 reviews, and was awarded the \"Must-See\" badge.\nAwards and nominations.\nAlthough Lemmon did not win the Oscar, Kevin Spacey dedicated his Oscar for \"American Beauty\" (1999) to Lemmon's performance. According to the behind-the-scenes feature on the \"American Beauty\" DVD, the film's director, Sam Mendes, had watched \"The Apartment\" (among other classic American films) as inspiration in preparation for shooting his film.\nWithin a few years after \"The Apartment\"'s release, the routine use of black-and-white film in Hollywood ended. Since \"The Apartment\" only two black-and-white movies have won the Academy Award for Best Picture: \"Schindler's List\" (1993) and \"The Artist\" (2011) (\"Oppenheimer\" was in partial black and white).\nIn 1994, \"The Apartment\" was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. In 2002, a poll of film directors conducted by \"Sight and Sound\" magazine listed the film as the 14th greatest film of all time (tied with \"La Dolce Vita\"). In the 2012 poll by the same magazine directors voted the film 44th greatest of all time. The film was included in \"\"The New York Times\" Guide to the Best 1,000 Movies Ever Made\" in 2002. In 2006, \"Premiere\" voted this film as one of \"The 50 Greatest Comedies Of All Time\". The Writers Guild of America ranked the film's screenplay (written by Billy Wilder &amp; I.A.L. Diamond.) the 15th greatest ever. In 2015, \"The Apartment\" ranked 24th on BBC's \"100 Greatest American Films\" list, voted on by film critics from around the world. The film was selected as the 27th best comedy of all time in a poll of 253 film critics from 52 countries conducted by the BBC in 2017.\nAmerican Film Institute lists:\nStage adaptation.\nIn 1968, Burt Bacharach, Hal David and Neil Simon created a musical adaptation titled \"Promises, Promises\" which opened on Broadway at the Shubert Theatre in New York City. Starring Jerry Orbach, Jill O'Hara and Edward Winter in the roles of Chuck, Fran and Sheldrake, the production closed in 1972. An all-star revival began in 2010 with Sean Hayes, Kristin Chenoweth and Tony Goldwyn as the three leads; this version added the Bacharach-David compositions \"I Say a Little Prayer\" and \"A House Is Not a Home\" to the roster.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43850", "revid": "49371786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43850", "title": "More", "text": "More may refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43851", "revid": "51035872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43851", "title": "Social norm", "text": "Informal understanding of acceptable conduct\nA social norm or norm is a shared standard of acceptable behavior by a group. Social norms can both be informal understandings that govern the behavior of members of a society, as well as be codified into rules and laws. Social normative influences or social norms, are deemed to be powerful drivers of human behavioural changes and well organized and incorporated by major theories which explain human behaviour. Institutions are composed of multiple norms. Norms are shared social beliefs about behavior; thus, they are distinct from \"ideas\", \"attitudes\", and \"values\", which can be held privately, and which do not necessarily concern behavior. Norms are contingent on context, social group, and historical circumstances.\nScholars distinguish between regulative norms (which constrain behavior), constitutive norms (which shape interests), and prescriptive norms (which prescribe what actors \"ought\" to do). The effects of norms can be determined by a logic of appropriateness and logic of consequences; the former entails that actors follow norms because it is socially appropriate, and the latter entails that actors follow norms because of cost-benefit calculations. Others see social norms emerging as part of an evolutionarily stable strategy, where they stabilize through third-party punishment.\nThree stages have been identified in the life cycle of a norm: (1) Norm emergence \u2013\u00a0norm entrepreneurs seek to persuade others of the desirability and appropriateness of certain behaviors; (2) Norm cascade \u2013\u00a0when a norm obtains broad acceptance; and (3) Norm internalization \u2013\u00a0when a norm acquires a \"taken-for-granted\" quality. Norms are robust to various degrees: some norms are often violated whereas other norms are so deeply internalized that norm violations are infrequent. Evidence for the existence of norms can be detected in the patterns of behavior within and across groups, as well as the articulation of norms in group discourse.\nDefinition.\nThere are varied definitions of social norms, but there is agreement among scholars that norms are:\nIn 1965, Jack P. Gibbs identified three basic normative dimensions that all concepts of norms could be subsumed under:\nAccording to Ronald Jepperson, Peter Katzenstein and Alexander Wendt, \"norms are collective expectations about proper behavior for a given identity.\" Wayne Sandholtz argues against this definition, as he writes that shared expectations are an \"effect\" of norms, not an intrinsic quality of norms. Sandholtz, Martha Finnemore and Kathryn Sikkink define norms instead as \"standards of appropriate behavior for actors with a given identity.\" In this definition, norms have an \"oughtness\" quality to them.\nMichael Hechter and Karl-Dieter Opp define norms as \"cultural phenomena that prescribe and proscribe behavior in specific circumstances.\" Sociologists Christine Horne and Stefanie Mollborn define norms as \"group-level evaluations of behavior.\" This entails that norms are widespread expectations of social approval or disapproval of behavior. Scholars debate whether social norms are individual constructs or collective constructs.\nEconomist and game theorist Peyton Young defines norms as \"patterns of behavior that are self-enforcing within a group.\" He emphasizes that norms are driven by shared expectations: \"Everyone conforms, everyone is expected to conform, and everyone wants to conform when they expect everyone else to conform.\" He characterizes norms as devices that \"coordinate people's expectations in interactions that possess multiple equilibria.\"\nConcepts such as \"conventions\", \"customs\", \"morals\", \"mores\", \"rules\", and \"laws\" have been characterized as equivalent to norms. Institutions can be considered collections or clusters of multiple norms. Rules and norms are not necessarily distinct phenomena: both are standards of conduct that can have varying levels of specificity and formality. Laws are a highly formal version of norms. Laws, rules and norms may be at odds; for example, a law may prohibit something but norms still allow it. Norms are not the equivalent of an aggregation of individual attitudes. Ideas, attitudes and values are not necessarily norms, as these concepts do not necessarily concern behavior and may be held privately. \"Prevalent behaviors\" and behavioral regularities are not necessarily norms. Instinctual or biological reactions, personal tastes, and personal habits are not necessarily norms.\nEmergence and transmission.\nGroups may adopt norms in a variety of ways.\nSome stable and self-reinforcing norms may emerge spontaneously without conscious human design. Peyton Young goes as far as to say that \"norms typically evolve without top-down direction... through interactions of individuals rather than by design.\" Norms may develop informally, emerging gradually as a result of repeated use of discretionary stimuli to control behavior. Not necessarily laws set in writing, informal norms represent generally accepted and widely sanctioned routines that people follow in everyday life. These informal norms, if broken, may not invite formal legal punishments or sanctions, but instead encourage reprimands, warnings, or othering; incest, for example, is generally thought of as wrong in society, but many jurisdictions do not legally prohibit it.\nNorms may also be created and advanced through conscious human design by norm entrepreneurs. Norms can arise formally, where groups explicitly outline and implement behavioral expectations. Legal norms typically arise from design. A large number of these norms we follow 'naturally' such as driving on the right side of the road in the US and on the left side in the UK, or not speeding in order to avoid a ticket.\nMartha Finnemore and Kathryn Sikkink identify three stages in the life cycle of a norm:\nThey argue that several factors may raise the influence of certain norms:\nChristina Horne and Stefanie Mollborn have identified two broad categories of arguments for the emergence of norms:\nPer consequentialism, norms contribute to the collective good. However, per relationalism, norms do not necessarily contribute to the collective good; norms may even be harmful to the collective.\nSome scholars have characterized norms as essentially unstable, thus creating possibilities for norm change. According to Wayne Sandholtz, actors are more likely to persuade others to modify existing norms if they possess power, can reference existing foundational meta-norms, and can reference precedents. Social closeness between actors has been characterized as a key component in sustaining social norms.\nTransfer of norms between groups.\nIndividuals may also import norms from a previous organization to their new group, which can get adopted over time. Without a clear indication of how to act, people typically rely on their history to determine the best course forward; what was successful before may serve them well again. In a group, individuals may all import different histories or scripts about appropriate behaviors; common experience over time will lead the group to define as a whole its take on the right action, usually with the integration of several members' schemas. Under the importation paradigm, norm formation occurs subtly and swiftly whereas with formal or informal development of norms may take longer.\nGroups internalize norms by accepting them as reasonable and proper standards for behavior within the group. Once firmly established, a norm becomes a part of the group's operational structure and hence more difficult to change. While possible for newcomers to a group to change its norms, it is much more likely that the new individual will adopt the group's norms, values, and perspectives, rather than the other way around.\nDeviance from social norms.\nDeviance is defined as \"nonconformity to a set of norms that are accepted by a significant number of people in a community or society\" More simply put, if group members do not follow a norm, they become tagged as a deviant. In the sociological literature, this can often lead to them being considered outcasts of society. Yet, deviant behavior amongst children is somewhat expected. Except the idea of this deviance manifesting as a criminal action, the social tolerance given in the example of the child is quickly withdrawn against the criminal. Crime is considered one of the most extreme forms of deviancy according to scholar Clifford R. Shaw.\nWhat is considered \"normal\" is relative to the location of the culture in which the social interaction is taking place. In psychology, an individual who routinely disobeys group norms runs the risk of turning into the \"institutionalized deviant.\" Similar to the sociological definition, institutionalized deviants may be judged by other group members for their failure to adhere to norms. At first, group members may increase pressure on a non-conformist, attempting to engage the individual in conversation or explicate why he or she should follow their behavioral expectations. The role in which one decides on whether or not to behave is largely determined on how their actions will affect others. Especially with new members who perhaps do not know any better, groups may use discretionary stimuli to bring an individual's behavior back into line. Over time, however, if members continue to disobey, the group will give-up on them as a lost cause; while the group may not necessarily revoke their membership, they may give them only superficial consideration. If a worker is late to a meeting, for example, violating the office norm of punctuality, a supervisor or other co-worker may wait for the individual to arrive and pull him aside later to ask what happened. If the behavior continues, eventually the group may begin meetings without him since the individual \"is always late.\" The group generalizes the individual's disobedience and promptly dismisses it, thereby reducing the member's influence and footing in future group disagreements.\nGroup tolerance for deviation varies across membership; not all group members receive the same treatment for norm violations. Individuals may build up a \"reserve\" of good behavior through conformity, which they can borrow against later. These \"idiosyncrasy credits\" provide a theoretical currency for understanding variations in group behavioral expectations. A teacher, for example, may more easily forgive a straight-A student for misbehaving\u2014who has past \"good credit\" saved up\u2014than a repeatedly disruptive student. While past performance can help build idiosyncrasy credits, some group members have a higher balance to start with. Individuals can import idiosyncrasy credits from another group; childhood movie stars, for example, who enroll in college, may experience more leeway in adopting school norms than other incoming freshmen. Finally, leaders or individuals in other high-status positions may begin with more credits and appear to be \"above the rules\" at times. Even their idiosyncrasy credits are not bottomless, however; while held to a more lenient standard than the average member, leaders may still face group rejection if their disobedience becomes too extreme.\nDeviance also causes multiple emotions one experiences when going against a norm. One of those emotions widely attributed to deviance is guilt. Guilt is connected to the ethics of duty which in turn becomes a primary object of moral obligation. Guilt is followed by an action that is questioned after its doing. It can be described as something negative to the self as well as a negative state of feeling. Used in both instances, it is both an unpleasant feeling as well as a form of self-punishment. Using the metaphor of \"dirty hands\", it is the staining or tainting of oneself and therefore having to self cleanse away the filth. It is a form of reparation that confronts oneself as well as submitting to the possibility of anger and punishment from others. Guilt is a point in both action and feeling that acts as a stimulus for further \"honorable\" actions.\nA 2023 study found that non-industrial societies varied in their punishments of norm violations. Punishment varied based on the types of norm violations and the socio-economic system of the society. The study \"found evidence that reputational punishment was associated with egalitarianism and the absence of food storage; material punishment was associated with the presence of food storage; physical punishment was moderately associated with greater dependence on hunting; and execution punishment was moderately associated with social stratification.\"\nBehavior.\nWhereas ideas in general do not necessarily have behavioral implications, Martha Finnemore notes that \"norms by definition concern behavior. One could say that they are collectively held ideas about behavior.\"\nNorms running counter to the behaviors of the overarching society or culture may be transmitted and maintained within small subgroups of society. For example, Crandall (1988) noted that certain groups (e.g., cheerleading squads, dance troupes, sports teams, sororities) have a rate of bulimia, a publicly recognized life-threatening disease, that is much higher than society as a whole. Social norms have a way of maintaining order and organizing groups.\nIn the field of social psychology, the roles of norms are emphasized\u2014which can guide behavior in a certain situation or environment as \"mental representations of appropriate behavior\".&lt;ref name=\"aarts &amp; dijksterhuis/\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It has been shown that normative messages can promote pro-social behavior, including decreasing alcohol use, increasing voter turnout, and reducing energy use. According to the psychological definition of social norms' behavioral component, norms have two dimensions: how much a behavior is exhibited, and how much the group approves of that behavior.\nSocial control.\nAlthough not considered to be formal laws within society, norms still work to promote a great deal of social control. They are statements that regulate conduct. The cultural phenomenon that is the norm is the prescriber of acceptable behavior in specific instances. Ranging in variations depending on culture, race, religion, and geographical location, it is the foundation of the terms some know as acceptable as not to injure others, the golden rule, and to keep promises that have been pledged. Without them, there would be a world without consensus, common ground, or restrictions. Even though the law and a state's legislation is not intended to control social norms, society and the law are inherently linked and one dictates the other. This is why it has been said that the language used in some legislation is controlling and dictating for what should or should not be accepted. For example, the criminalization of familial sexual relations is said to protect those that are vulnerable, however even consenting adults cannot have sexual relationships with their relatives. The language surrounding these laws conveys the message that such acts are supposedly immoral and should be condemned, even though there is no actual victim in these consenting relationships.\nSocial norms can be enforced formally (e.g., through sanctions) or informally (e.g., through body language and non-verbal communication cues). Because individuals often derive physical or psychological resources from group membership, groups are said to control \"discretionary stimuli\"; groups can withhold or give out more resources in response to members' adherence to group norms, effectively controlling member behavior through rewards and operant conditioning. Social psychology research has found the more an individual values group-controlled resources or the more an individual sees group membership as central to his definition of self, the more likely he is to conform. Social norms also allow an individual to assess what behaviors the group deems important to its existence or survival, since they represent a codification of belief; groups generally do not punish members or create norms over actions which they care little about. Norms in every culture create conformity that allows for people to become socialized to the culture in which they live.\nAs social beings, individuals learn when and where it is appropriate to say certain things, to use certain words, to discuss certain topics or wear certain clothes, and when it is not. Thus, knowledge about cultural norms is important for impressions, which is an individual's regulation of their nonverbal behavior. One also comes to know through experience what types of people he/she can and cannot discuss certain topics with or wear certain types of dress around. Typically, this knowledge is derived through experience (i.e. social norms are learned through social interaction). Wearing a suit to a job interview in order to give a great first impression represents a common example of a social norm in the white collar work force.\nIn his work \"Order without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes\", Robert Ellickson studies various interactions between members of neighbourhoods and communities to show how societal norms create order within a small group of people. He argues that, in a small community or neighborhood, many rules and disputes can be settled without a central governing body simply by the interactions within these communities.\nSociology.\nIn sociology, norms are seen as rules that bind an individual's actions to a specific sanction in one of two forms: a punishment or a reward. Through regulation of behavior, social norms create unique patterns that allow for distinguishing characteristics to be made between social systems. This creates a boundary that allows for a differentiation between those that belong in a specific social setting and those that do not.\nFor Talcott Parsons of the functionalist school, norms dictate the interactions of people in all social encounters. On the other hand, Karl Marx believed that norms are used to promote the creation of roles in society which allows for people of different levels of social class structure to be able to function properly. Marx claims that this power dynamic creates social order. James Coleman used both micro and macro conditions for his theory. For Coleman, norms start out as goal oriented actions by actors on the micro level. If the benefits do not outweigh the costs of the action for the actors, then a social norm would emerge. The norm's effectiveness is then determined by its ability to enforce its sanctions against those who would not contribute to the \"optimal social order.\"\nHeinrich Popitz is convinced that the establishment of social norms, that make the future actions of alter foreseeable for ego, solves the problem of contingency (Niklas Luhmann). In this way, ego can count on those actions as if they would already have been performed and does not have to wait for their actual execution; social interaction is thus accelerated. Important factors in the standardization of behavior are sanctions and social roles.\nOperant conditioning.\nThe probability of these behaviours occurring again is discussed in the theories of B. F. Skinner, who states that operant conditioning plays a role in the process of social norm development. Operant conditioning is the process by which behaviours are changed as a function of their consequences. The probability that a behaviour will occur can be increased or decreased depending on the consequences of said behaviour.\nIn the case of social deviance, an individual who has gone against a norm will contact the negative contingencies associated with deviance, this may take the form of formal or informal rebuke, social isolation or censure, or more concrete punishments such as fines or imprisonment. If one reduces the deviant behavior after receiving a negative consequence, then they have learned via punishment. If they have engaged in a behavior consistent with a social norm after having an aversive stimulus reduced, then they have learned via negative reinforcement. Reinforcement increases behavior, while punishment decreases behavior.\nAs an example of this, consider a child who has painted on the walls of her house, if she has never done this before she may immediately seek a reaction from her mother or father. The form of reaction taken by the mother or father will affect whether the behaviour is likely to occur again in the future. If her parent is positive and approving of the behaviour it will likely reoccur (reinforcement) however, if the parent offers an aversive consequence (physical punishment, time-out, anger etc...) then the child is less likely to repeat the behaviour in future (punishment).\nSkinner also states that humans are conditioned from a very young age on how to behave and how to act with those around us considering the outside influences of the society and location one is in. Built to blend into the ambiance and attitude around us, deviance is a frowned upon action.\nFocus theory of normative conduct.\nCialdini, Reno, and Kallgren developed the focus theory of normative conduct to describe how individuals implicitly juggle multiple behavioral expectations at once. Expanding on conflicting prior beliefs about whether cultural, situational or personal norms motivate action, the researchers suggested the focus of an individual's attention will dictate what behavioral expectation they follow.\nTypes.\nThere is no clear consensus on how the term norm should be used.\nMartha Finnemore and Kathryn Sikkink distinguish between three types of norms:\nFinnemore, Sikkink, Jeffrey W. Legro and others have argued that the robustness (or effectiveness) of norms can be measured by factors such as:\nChristine Horne argues that the robustness of a norm is shaped by the degree of support for the actors who sanction deviant behaviors; she refers to norms regulating how to enforce norms as \"metanorms.\" According to Beth G. Simmons and Hyeran Jo, diversity of support for a norm can be a strong indicator of robustness. They add that institutionalization of a norm raises its robustness. It has also been posited that norms that exist within broader clusters of distinct but mutually reinforcing norms may be more robust.\nJeffrey Checkel argues that there are two common types of explanations for the efficacy of norms:\nAccording to Peyton Young, mechanisms that support normative behavior include:\nDescriptive versus injunctive.\nDescriptive norms depict what happens, while injunctive norms describe what \"should\" happen. Cialdini, Reno, and Kallgren (1990) define a descriptive norm as people's perceptions of what is commonly done in specific situations; it signifies what most people do, without assigning judgment. The absence of trash on the ground in a parking lot, for example, transmits the descriptive norm that most people there do not litter. An Injunctive norm, on the other hand, transmits group approval about a particular behavior; it dictates how an individual \"should\" behave. Watching another person pick up trash off the ground and throw it out, a group member may pick up on the injunctive norm that he ought not to litter.\nPrescriptive and proscriptive norms.\nPrescriptive norms are unwritten rules that are understood and followed by society and indicate what we should do. Expressing gratitude or writing a Thank You card when someone gives you a gift represents a prescriptive norm in American culture. Proscriptive norms, in contrast, comprise the other end of the same spectrum; they are similarly society's unwritten rules about what one should not do. These norms can vary between cultures; while kissing someone you just met on the cheek is an acceptable greeting in some European countries, this is not acceptable, and thus represents a proscriptive norm in the United States.\nSubjective norms.\nSubjective norms are determined by beliefs about the extent to which important others want a person to perform a behavior.When combined with attitude toward behavior, subjective norms shape an individual's intentions. Social influences are conceptualized in terms of the pressure that people perceive from important others to perform, or not to perform, a behavior. Social Psychologist Icek Azjen theorized that subjective norms are determined by the strength of a given normative belief and further weighted by the significance of a social referent, as represented in the following equation: SN \u221d \u03a3\"nimi ,\" where (n) is a normative belief and (m) is the motivation to comply with said belief.\nMathematical representations.\nOver the last few decades, several theorists have attempted to explain social norms from a more theoretical point of view. By quantifying behavioral expectations graphically or attempting to plot the logic behind adherence, theorists hoped to be able to predict whether or not individuals would conform. The return potential model and game theory provide a slightly more economic conceptualization of norms, suggesting individuals can calculate the cost or benefit behind possible behavioral outcomes. Under these theoretical frameworks, choosing to obey or violate norms becomes a more deliberate, quantifiable decision.\nReturn potential model.\nDeveloped in the 1960s, the return potential model provides a method for plotting and visualizing group norms. In the regular coordinate plane, the amount of behavior exhibited is plotted on the X-axis (label \"a\" in https://) while the amount of group acceptance or approval gets plotted on the Y-axis (\"b\" in Figure 1). The graph represents the potential return or positive outcome to an individual for a given behavioral norm. Theoretically, one could plot a point for each increment of behavior how much the group likes or dislikes that action. For example, it may be the case that among first-year graduate students, strong social norms exist around how many daily cups of coffee a student drinks. If the return curve in Figure 1 correctly displays the example social norm, we can see that if someone drinks 0 cups of coffee a day, the group strongly disapproves. The group disapproves of the behavior of any member who drinks fewer than four cups of coffee a day; the group disapproves of drinking more than seven cups, shown by the approval curve dipping back below zero. As seen in this example, the return potential model displays how much group approval one can expect for each increment of behavior.\nGame theory.\nAnother general formal framework that can be used to represent the essential elements of the social situation surrounding a norm is the repeated game of game theory. Rational choice, a branch of game theory, deals with the relations and actions socially committed among rational agents. A norm gives a person a rule of thumb for how they should behave. However, a rational person acts according to the rule only if it is beneficial for them. The situation can be described as follows. A norm gives an expectation of how other people act in a given situation (macro). A person acts optimally given the expectation (micro). For a norm to be stable, people's actions must reconstitute the expectation without change (micro-macro feedback loop). A set of such correct stable expectations is known as a Nash equilibrium. Thus, a stable norm must constitute a Nash equilibrium. In the Nash equilibrium, no one actor has any positive incentive in individually deviating from a certain action. Social norms will be implemented if the actions of that specific norm come into agreement by the support of the Nash equilibrium in the majority of the game theoretical approaches.\nFrom a game-theoretical point of view, there are two explanations for the vast variety of norms that exist throughout the world. One is the difference in games. Different parts of the world may give different environmental contexts and different people may have different values, which may result in a difference in games. The other is equilibrium selection not explicable by the game itself. Equilibrium selection is closely related to coordination. For a simple example, driving is common throughout the world, but in some countries people drive on the right and in other countries people drive on the left (see coordination game). A framework called comparative institutional analysis is proposed to deal with the game theoretical structural understanding of the variety of social norms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43852", "revid": "58193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43852", "title": "Autonomous system", "text": "Autonomous system may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "43854", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43854", "title": "Reality", "text": "Sum or aggregate of all that is real or existent\nReality is the state of everything that exists, not how they might be imagined. Different cultures and academic disciplines conceptualize it in various ways.\nPhilosophical questions about the nature of reality, existence, or being are considered under the rubric of ontology, a major branch of metaphysics in the Western intellectual tradition. Ontological questions also feature in diverse branches of philosophy, including the philosophy of science, religion, mathematics, and logic. These include questions about whether only physical objects are real (e.g., physicalism), whether reality is fundamentally immaterial (e.g., idealism), whether hypothetical unobservable entities posited by scientific theories exist (e.g., scientific realism), whether God exists, whether numbers and other abstract objects exist, and whether possible worlds exist. Skeptics question whether any of those claims are true, and suggest more extreme postulates.\nMeaning and etymology.\nThe word \"reality\" means the state of things as they actually exist, not understood idealistically, as an unproven notional idea or ideas or via the imagination only. The word is a borrowing from the French \"realit\u00e9\" and the Latin \"realitas\". According to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", it first appeared in English at some time prior to 1513.\nWestern philosophy.\nPhilosophy addresses two different aspects of the topic of reality: the nature of reality itself, and the relationship between the mind (as well as language and culture) and reality.\nOn the one hand, ontology is the study of being, and the central topic of the field is couched, variously, in terms of being, existence, \"what is\", and reality. The task in ontology is to describe the most general categories of reality and how they are interrelated. If a philosopher wanted to proffer a positive definition of the concept \"reality\", it would be done under this heading. As explained above, some philosophers draw a distinction between reality and existence. In fact, many analytic philosophers today tend to avoid the term \"real\" and \"reality\" in discussing ontological issues. But for those who would treat \"is real\" the same way they treat \"exists\", one of the leading questions of analytic philosophy has been whether existence (or reality) is a property of objects. It has been widely held by analytic philosophers that it is \"not\" a property at all, though this view has lost some ground in recent decades.\nOn the other hand, particularly in discussions of objectivity that have grounding in both metaphysics and epistemology, philosophical discussions of reality often concern the ways in which reality is or is not in some way \"dependent upon\" (or, to use fashionable jargon, \"constructed\" out of) mental and cultural factors such as perceptions, beliefs, and other mental states, as well as cultural artifacts\u2014such as religions and political movements\u2014on up to the vague notion of a common cultural world view (or ).\nRealism.\nThe view that there is a reality independent of any beliefs, perceptions, etc., is called realism. More specifically, philosophers are given to speaking about \"realism \"about\"\" this and that, such as realism about universals or realism about the external world. Generally, where one can identify any class of object, the existence or essential characteristics of which is said not to depend on perceptions, beliefs, language, or any other human artifact, one can speak of \"realism \"about\"\" that object.\nA correspondence theory of knowledge about what exists claims that \"true\" knowledge of reality represents accurate correspondence of statements about and images of reality with the actual reality that the statements or images are attempting to represent. For example, the scientific method can verify that a statement is true based on the observable evidence that a thing exists. Many humans can point to the Rocky Mountains and say that this mountain range exists, and continues to exist even if no one is observing it or making statements about it.\nAnti-realism.\nOne can also speak of \"anti\"-realism about the same objects. \"Anti-realism\" is the latest in a long series of terms for views opposed to realism. Perhaps the first was idealism, so called because reality was said to be in the mind, or a product of our \"ideas\". Berkeleyan idealism is the view, propounded by the Irish empiricist George Berkeley, that the objects of perception are actually ideas in the mind. In this view, one might be tempted to say that reality is a \"mental construct\"; this is not quite accurate, however, since, in Berkeley's view, perceptual ideas are created and coordinated by God. By the 20th century, views similar to Berkeley's were called phenomenalism. Phenomenalism differs from Berkeleyan idealism primarily in that Berkeley believed that minds, or souls, are not merely ideas nor made up of ideas, whereas varieties of phenomenalism, such as that advocated by Russell, tended to go farther to say that the mind itself is merely a collection of perceptions, memories, etc., and that there is no mind or soul over and above such mental events. Finally, anti-realism became a fashionable term for \"any\" view which held that the existence of some object depends upon the mind or cultural artifacts. The view that the so-called external world is really merely a social, or cultural, artifact, called social constructionism, is one variety of anti-realism. Cultural relativism is the view that social issues such as morality are not absolute, but at least partially cultural artifact. Potentially the most extreme form of anti-realism is solipsism \u2014 the belief that oneself is the only thing in existence.\nBeing.\nThe nature of being is a perennial topic in metaphysics. For instance, Parmenides taught that reality was a single unchanging Being, whereas Heraclitus wrote that all things flow. The 20th-century philosopher Heidegger thought previous philosophers have lost sight of the question of Being (qua Being) in favour of the questions of beings (existing things), so he believed that a return to the Parmenidean approach was needed. An ontological catalogue is an attempt to list the fundamental constituents of reality. The question of whether existence is a predicate has been discussed since the Early Modern period, not least in relation to the ontological argument for the existence of God. Existence, \"that\" something is, has been contrasted with \"essence\", the question of \"what\" something is.\nSince existence without essence seems blank, it associated with nothingness by philosophers such as Hegel. Existential nihilism represents an extremely negative view of being, the absolute a positive one.\nPerception.\nThe question of direct or \"na\u00efve\" realism, as opposed to indirect or \"representational\" realism, arises in the philosophy of perception and of mind out of the debate over the nature of conscious experience; the epistemological question of whether the world we see around us is the real world itself or merely an internal perceptual copy of that world generated by neural processes in our brain. Na\u00efve realism is known as \"direct\" realism when developed to counter \"indirect\" or representative realism, also known as epistemological dualism, the philosophical position that our conscious experience is not of the real world itself but of an internal representation, a miniature virtual-reality replica of the world.\nTimothy Leary coined the influential term Reality Tunnel, by which he means a kind of representative realism. The theory states that, with a subconscious set of mental filters formed from their beliefs and experiences, every individual interprets the same world differently, hence \"Truth is in the eye of the beholder\". His ideas influenced the work of his friend Robert Anton Wilson.\nAbstract objects and mathematics.\nThe status of abstract entities, particularly numbers, is a topic of discussion in mathematics.\nIn the philosophy of mathematics, the best known form of realism about numbers is Platonic realism, which grants them abstract, immaterial existence. Other forms of realism identify mathematics with the concrete physical universe.\nAnti-realist stances include formalism and fictionalism.\nSome approaches are selectively realistic about some mathematical objects but not others. Finitism rejects infinite quantities. Ultra-finitism accepts finite quantities up to a certain amount. Constructivism and intuitionism are realistic about objects that can be explicitly constructed, but reject the use of the principle of the excluded middle to prove existence by reductio ad absurdum.\nThe traditional debate has focused on whether an abstract (immaterial, intelligible) realm of numbers has existed \"in addition to\" the physical (sensible, concrete) world. A recent development is the mathematical universe hypothesis, the theory that \"only\" a mathematical world exists, with the finite, physical world being an illusion within it.\nAn extreme form of realism about mathematics is the mathematical multiverse hypothesis advanced by Max Tegmark. Tegmark's sole postulate is: \"All structures that exist mathematically also exist physically\". That is, in the sense that \"in those [worlds] complex enough to contain self-aware substructures [they] will subjectively perceive themselves as existing in a physically 'real' world\". The hypothesis suggests that worlds corresponding to different sets of initial conditions, physical constants, or altogether different equations should be considered real. The theory can be considered a form of Platonism in that it posits the existence of mathematical entities, but can also be considered a mathematical monism in that it denies that anything exists except mathematical objects.\nProperties.\nThe problem of universals is an ancient problem in metaphysics about whether universals exist. Universals are general or abstract qualities, characteristics, properties, kinds or relations, such as being male/female, solid/liquid/gas or a certain colour, that can be predicated of individuals or particulars or that individuals or particulars can be regarded as sharing or participating in. For example, Scott, Pat, and Chris have in common the universal quality of \"being human\" or \"humanity\".\nThe realist school claims that universals are real\u00a0\u2013 they exist and are distinct from the particulars that instantiate them. There are various forms of realism. Two major forms are Platonic realism and Aristotelian realism. \"Platonic realism\" is the view that universals are real entities and they exist independent of particulars. \"Aristotelian realism\", on the other hand, is the view that universals are real entities, but their existence is dependent on the particulars that exemplify them.\nNominalism and conceptualism are the main forms of anti-realism about universals.\nTime and space.\nA traditional realist position in ontology is that time and space have existence apart from the human mind. Idealists deny or doubt the existence of objects independent of the mind. Some anti-realists whose ontological position is that objects outside the mind do exist, nevertheless doubt the independent existence of time and space.\nKant, in the \"Critique of Pure Reason\", described time as an \"a priori\" notion that, together with other \"a priori\" notions such as space, allows us to comprehend sense experience. Kant denies that either space or time are substance, entities in themselves, or learned by experience; he holds rather that both are elements of a systematic framework we use to structure our experience. Spatial measurements are used to quantify how far apart objects are, and temporal measurements are used to quantitatively compare the interval between (or duration of) events. Although space and time are held to be \"transcendentally ideal\" in this sense, they are also \"empirically real\", i.e. not mere illusions.\nIdealist writers such as J. M. E. McTaggart in \"The Unreality of Time\" have argued that time is an illusion.\nAs well as differing about the reality of time as a whole, metaphysical theories of time can differ in their ascriptions of reality to the past, present and future separately.\nTime, and the related concepts of process and evolution are central to the system-building metaphysics of A. N. Whitehead and Charles Hartshorne.\nPossible worlds.\nThe term \"possible world\" goes back to Leibniz's theory of possible worlds, used to analyse necessity, possibility, and similar modal notions. Modal realism is the view, notably propounded by David Kellogg Lewis, that all possible worlds are as real as the actual world. In short: the actual world is regarded as merely one among an infinite set of logically possible worlds, some \"nearer\" to the actual world and some more remote. Other theorists may use the Possible World framework to express and explore problems without committing to it ontologically. Possible world theory is related to alethic modal logic: a proposition is \"necessary\" if it is true in all possible worlds, and \"possible\" if it is true in at least one. The many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics is a similar idea in science.\nTheories of everything (TOE) and philosophy.\nThe philosophical implications of a physical TOE are frequently debated. For example, if philosophical physicalism is true, a physical TOE will coincide with a philosophical theory of everything.\nThe \"system building\" style of metaphysics attempts to answer \"all\" the important questions in a coherent way, providing a complete picture of the world. Plato and Aristotle could be said to be early examples of comprehensive systems. In the early modern period (17th and 18th centuries), the system-building \"scope\" of philosophy is often linked to the rationalist \"method\" of philosophy, that is the technique of deducing the nature of the world by pure \"a priori\" reason. Examples from the early modern period include the Leibniz's Monadology, Descartes's Dualism, Spinoza's Monism. Hegel's Absolute idealism and Whitehead's Process philosophy were later systems.\nOther philosophers do not believe its techniques can aim so high. Some scientists think a more mathematical approach than philosophy is needed for a TOE, for instance Stephen Hawking wrote in \"A Brief History of Time\" that even if we had a TOE, it would necessarily be a set of equations. He wrote, \"What is it that breathes fire into the equations and makes a universe for them to describe?\" \nPhenomenology.\nOn a much broader and more subjective level, private experiences, curiosity, inquiry, and the selectivity involved in personal interpretation of events shapes reality as seen by one and only one person and hence is called phenomenological. While this form of reality might be common to others as well, it could at times also be so unique to oneself as to never be experienced or agreed upon by anyone else. Much of the kind of experience deemed spiritual occurs on this level of reality.\nPhenomenology is a philosophical method developed in the early years of the twentieth century by Edmund Husserl (1859\u20131938) and a circle of followers at the universities of G\u00f6ttingen and Munich in Germany. Subsequently, phenomenological themes were taken up by philosophers in France, the United States, and elsewhere, often in contexts far removed from Husserl's work.\nThe word \"phenomenology\" comes from the Greek \"phain\u00f3menon\", meaning \"that which appears\", and \"l\u00f3gos\", meaning \"study\". In Husserl's conception, phenomenology is primarily concerned with making the structures of consciousness, and the phenomena which appear in acts of consciousness, objects of systematic reflection and analysis. Such reflection was to take place from a highly modified \"first person\" viewpoint, studying phenomena not as they appear to \"my\" consciousness, but to any consciousness whatsoever. Husserl believed that phenomenology could thus provide a firm basis for all human knowledge, including scientific knowledge, and could establish philosophy as a \"rigorous science\".\nHusserl's conception of phenomenology has been criticised and developed by his student and assistant Martin Heidegger (1889\u20131976), by existentialists like Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908\u20131961) and Jean-Paul Sartre (1905\u20131980), and by other philosophers, such as Paul Ricoeur (1913\u20132005), Emmanuel Levinas (1906\u20131995), and Dietrich von Hildebrand (1889\u20131977).\nSkeptical hypotheses.\nSkeptical hypotheses in philosophy suggest that reality could be very different from what we think it is; or at least that we cannot prove it is not. Examples include:\nNon-western philosophy.\nHindu philosophy.\nHindu philosophy, particularly the Vedic tradition, includes a number of subtly different and nuanced perspectives about the nature of reality and unified consciousness\nThey are as follows (order irrelevant):\nJain philosophy.\nJain philosophy postulates that seven tattva (truths or fundamental principles) constitute reality. These seven \"tattva\" are:\nPhysical sciences.\nScientific method.\nScience is used to comprehend reality. The scientific method concerns three concepts: reality, observation, and understanding. To apply the method requires that reality be observable in some way, that the observations can be summarized in a comprehendible way, and that the resulting understanding can be compared to reality or falsified.\nScientific realism.\nScientific realism is the view that reality exists externally to the mind, that this external world is what science describes, and that scientific theories constitute an understand of reality. By contrast, the scientific philosophy called instrumentalism rejects the reality of unobservable aspects of scientific theories. For example, in instrumentalism the electron is not an element of reality but the effect it creates in a cloud chamber is real.\nRealism and locality in physics.\n\"Realism\" in the sense used by physicists does not equate to realism in metaphysics. The latter is the claim that the world is mind-independent: that even if the results of a measurement do not pre-exist the act of measurement, that does not require that they are the creation of the observer. Furthermore, a mind-independent property does not have to be the value of some physical variable such as position or momentum. A property can be \"dispositional\" (or potential), i.e. it can be a tendency: in the way that glass objects tend to break, or are disposed to break, even if they do not \"actually\" break. Likewise, the mind-independent properties of quantum systems could consist of a tendency to respond to particular measurements with particular values with ascertainable probability. Such an ontology would be metaphysically realistic, without being realistic in the physicist's sense of \"local realism\" (which would require that a single value be produced with certainty).\nA closely related term is counterfactual definiteness (CFD), used to refer to the claim that one can meaningfully speak of the definiteness of results of measurements that have not been performed (i.e. the ability to assume the existence of objects, and properties of objects, even when they have not been measured).\nLocal realism is a significant feature of classical mechanics, of general relativity, and of classical electrodynamics; but not quantum mechanics. In a work now called the EPR paradox, Einstein relied on local realism to suggest that hidden variables were missing in quantum mechanics. However, John S. Bell subsequently showed that the predictions of quantum mechanics are inconsistent with hidden variables, a result known as Bell's theorem. The predictions of quantum mechanics have been verified: Bell's inequalities are violated. This means either particles have no definite positions independent of observation (no realism) \"or\" distant measurements can affect each other (no locality) or both. Different interpretations of quantum mechanics violate different parts of local realism.\nThe transition from \"possible\" to \"actual\" is a major topic of quantum physics, with related theories including quantum darwinism.\nRole of \"observation\" in quantum mechanics.\nThe quantum mind\u2013body problem refers to the philosophical discussions of the mind\u2013body problem in the context of quantum mechanics. Since quantum mechanics involves quantum superpositions, which are not perceived by observers, some interpretations of quantum mechanics place conscious observers in a special position.\nThe founders of quantum mechanics debated the role of the observer, and of them, Wolfgang Pauli and Werner Heisenberg believed that quantum mechanics expressed the observers knowledge and when an experiment was completed the additional knowledge should be incorporated in the wave function, an effect that came to be called state reduction or collapse. This point of view, which was never fully endorsed by Niels Bohr, was denounced as mystical and anti-scientific by Albert Einstein. Pauli accepted the term, and described quantum mechanics as \"lucid mysticism\".\nHeisenberg and Bohr always described quantum mechanics in logical positivist terms. Bohr also took an active interest in the philosophical implications of quantum theories such as his complementarity, for example. He believed quantum theory offers a complete description of nature, albeit one that is simply ill-suited for everyday experiences\u00a0\u2013 which are better described by classical mechanics and probability. Bohr famously avoided any characterization of \"reality\".\nEugene Wigner reformulated the \"Schr\u00f6dinger's cat\" thought experiment as \"Wigner's friend\" and proposed that the consciousness of an observer is the demarcation line which precipitates collapse of the wave function, independent of any realist interpretation. Commonly known as \"consciousness causes collapse\", this controversial interpretation of quantum mechanics states that observation by a conscious observer is what makes the wave function collapse. However, this is a minority view among quantum philosophers, considering it a misunderstanding. There are other possible solutions to the \"Wigner's friend\" thought experiment, which do not require consciousness to be different from other physical processes. Moreover, Wigner shifted to those interpretations in his later years.\nMultiverse.\nThe multiverse is the hypothetical set of multiple possible universes (including the historical universe we consistently experience) that together comprise everything that exists: the entirety of space, time, matter, and energy as well as the physical laws and constants that describe them. The term was coined in 1895 by the American philosopher and psychologist William James. In the many-worlds interpretation (MWI), one of the mainstream interpretations of quantum mechanics, there are an infinite number of universes and every possible quantum outcome occurs in at least one universe, albeit there is a debate as to how real the (other) worlds are.\nThe structure of the multiverse, the nature of each universe within it and the relationship between the various constituent universes, depend on the specific multiverse hypothesis considered. Multiverses have been hypothesized in cosmology, physics, astronomy, religion, philosophy, transpersonal psychology and fiction, particularly in science fiction and fantasy. In these contexts, parallel universes are also called \"alternative universes\", \"quantum universes\", \"interpenetrating dimensions\", \"parallel dimensions\", \"parallel worlds\", \"alternative realities\", \"alternative timelines\", and \"dimensional planes\", among others.\nCyclic theories.\nSome cyclic theories postulate continuous expansion of the universe across cycles to ensure entropy growth, but they have been shown not be truly cyclic in time. In any case these types of scientific hypotheses do not fundamentally alter concepts of the ultimate origin of reality such as the cosmological argument. A theist can argue for perpetual divine creation or for an unmoved mover responsible for the first universe in the sequence.\nPersonal and collective reality.\nEach individual has a different view of reality, with different memories and personal history, knowledge, personality traits and experience. This system, mostly referring to the human brain, affects cognition and behavior and into this complex new knowledge, memories, information, thoughts and experiences are continuously integrated. The connectome \u2013 neural networks/wirings in brains \u2013 is thought to be a key factor in human variability in terms of cognition or the way we perceive the world (as a context) and related features or processes. Sensemaking is the process by which people give meaning to their experiences and make sense of the world they live in. Personal identity is relating to questions like how a unique individual is persisting through time.\nSensemaking and determination of reality also occurs collectively, which is investigated in social epistemology and related approaches. From the collective intelligence perspective, the intelligence of the individual human (and potentially AI entities) is substantially limited and advanced intelligence emerges when multiple entities collaborate over time. Collective memory is an important component of the social construction of reality and communication and communication-related systems, such as media systems, may also be major components &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nPhilosophy of perception raises questions based on the evolutionary history of humans' perceptual apparatuses, particularly or especially individuals' physiological senses, described as \"[w]e don't see reality\u2014we only see what was useful to see in the past\", partly suggesting that \"[o]ur species has been so successful not in spite of our inability to see reality but because of it\".\nScientific theories of everything.\nA theory of everything (TOE) is a putative theory of theoretical physics that fully explains and links together all known physical phenomena, and predicts the outcome of \"any\" experiment that could be carried out \"in principle\". The theory of everything is also called the final theory. Many candidate theories of everything have been proposed by theoretical physicists during the twentieth century, but none have been confirmed experimentally. The primary problem in producing a TOE is that general relativity and quantum mechanics are hard to unify. This is one of the unsolved problems in physics.\nInitially, the term \"theory of everything\" was used with an ironic connotation to refer to various overgeneralized theories. For example, a great-grandfather of Ijon Tichy, a character from a cycle of Stanis\u0142aw Lem's science fiction stories of the 1960s, was known to work on the \"General Theory of Everything\". Physicist John Ellis claims to have introduced the term into the technical literature in an article in \"Nature\" in 1986. Over time, the term stuck in popularizations of quantum physics to describe a theory that would unify or explain through a single model the theories of all fundamental interactions and of all particles of nature: general relativity for gravitation, and the standard model of elementary particle physics\u00a0\u2013 which includes quantum mechanics\u00a0\u2013 for electromagnetism, the two nuclear interactions, and the known elementary particles.\nCurrent candidates for a theory of everything include string theory, M theory, and loop quantum gravity.\nTechnology.\nMedia.\nMedia \u2013 such as news media, social media, websites including Wikipedia, and fiction \u2013 shape individuals' and society's perception of reality (including as part of belief and attitude formation) and are partly used intentionally as means to learn about reality. Various technologies have changed society's relationship with reality such as the advent of radio and TV technologies.\nResearch investigates interrelations and effects, for example aspects in the social construction of reality. A major component of this shaping and representation of perceived reality is agenda, selection and prioritization \u2013 not only (or primarily) the quality, tone and types of content \u2013 which influences, for instance, the public agenda. Disproportional news attention for low-probability incidents \u2013 such as high-consequence accidents \u2013 can distort audiences' risk perceptions with harmful consequences. Various biases such as false balance, public attention dependence reactions like sensationalism and domination by \"current events\", as well as various interest-driven uses of media such as marketing can also have major impacts on the perception of reality. Time-use studies found that e.g. in 2018 the average U.S. American \"spent around eleven hours every day looking at screens\".\nVirtual reality and cyberspace.\nVirtual reality (VR) is a computer-simulated environment that can simulate physical presence in places in the real world, as well as in imaginary worlds.\nThe virtuality continuum is a continuous scale ranging between the completely virtual, a virtuality, and the completely real: reality. The reality\u2013virtuality continuum therefore encompasses all possible variations and compositions of real and virtual objects. It has been described as a concept in new media and computer science, but in fact it could be considered a matter of anthropology. The concept was first introduced by Paul Milgram.\nThe area between the two extremes, where both the real and the virtual are mixed, is the so-called mixed reality. This in turn is said to consist of both augmented reality, where the virtual augments the real, and augmented virtuality, where the real augments the virtual.\nCyberspace, the world's computer systems considered as an interconnected whole, can be thought of as a virtual reality; for instance, it is portrayed as such in the cyberpunk fiction of William Gibson and others. \"Second Life\" and MMORPGs such as \"World of Warcraft\" are examples of artificial environments or virtual worlds (falling some way short of full virtual reality) in cyberspace.\n\"RL\" in internet culture.\nOn the Internet, \"real life\" refers to life in the real world. It generally references life or consensus reality, in contrast to an environment seen as fiction or fantasy, such as virtual reality, lifelike experience, dreams, novels, or movies. Online, the acronym \"IRL\" stands for \"in real life\", with the meaning \"not on the Internet\". Sociologists engaged in the study of the Internet have determined that someday, a distinction between online and real-life worlds may seem \"quaint\", noting that certain types of online activity, such as sexual intrigues, have already made a full transition to complete legitimacy and \"reality\". The abbreviation \"RL\" stands for \"real life\". For example, one can speak of \"meeting in RL\" someone whom one has met in a chat or on an Internet forum. It may also be used to express an inability to use the Internet for a time due to \"RL problems\". A related abbreviation is \"AFK\", which stands for \"away from keyboard\", signifying that one is (at least temporarily) choosing to disengage themselves from the virtual world so as to focus preferentially on the real one. \nWorld views.\nA common colloquial usage would have \"reality\" mean \"perceptions, beliefs, and attitudes toward reality\", as in \"My reality is not your reality.\" This is often used just as a colloquialism indicating that the parties to a conversation agree, or should agree, not to quibble over deeply different conceptions of what is real. For example, in a religious discussion between friends, one might say (attempting humor), \"You might disagree, but in my reality, everyone goes to heaven.\"\nReality can be defined in a way that links it to worldviews or parts of them (conceptual frameworks): Reality is the totality of all things, structures (actual and conceptual), events (past and present) and phenomena, whether observable or not. It is what a world view (whether it be based on individual or shared human experience) ultimately attempts to describe or map.\nCertain ideas from physics, philosophy, sociology, literary criticism, and other fields shape various theories of reality. One such theory is that there simply and literally \"is\" no reality beyond the perceptions or beliefs we each have about reality. Such attitudes are summarized in popular statements, such as \"Perception is reality\" or \"Life is how you perceive reality\" or \"reality is what you can get away with\" (Robert Anton Wilson), and they indicate anti-realism\u00a0\u2013 that is, the view that there is no objective reality, whether acknowledged explicitly or not.\nMany of the concepts of science and philosophy are often defined culturally and socially. This idea was elaborated by Thomas Kuhn in his book \"The Structure of Scientific Revolutions\" (1962). \"The Social Construction of Reality\", a book about the sociology of knowledge written by Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann, was published in 1966. It explained how knowledge is acquired and used for the comprehension of reality. Out of all the realities, the reality of everyday life is the most important one since our consciousness requires us to be completely aware and attentive to the experience of everyday life.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43855", "revid": "50786722", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43855", "title": "Peter Bogdanovich", "text": "American film director (1939\u20132022)\nPeter Bogdanovich (July 30, 1939 \u2013 January 6, 2022) was an American director, writer, actor, producer, critic, and film historian. He started out his career as a young actor studying under Stella Adler before working as a film critic for \"Film Culture\" and \"Esquire\" and finally becoming a prominent filmmaker of the New Hollywood movement. He received accolades including a BAFTA Award and Grammy Award, as well as nominations for two Academy Awards and two Golden Globe Awards.\nBogdanovich worked as a film journalist until he was hired to work on Roger Corman's \"The Wild Angels\" (1966). His credited feature film debut came with \"Targets\" (1968), before his career breakthrough with the drama \"The Last Picture Show\" (1971) which earned him Academy Award nominations for Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay, and the acclaimed films \"What's Up, Doc?\" (1972) and \"Paper Moon\" (1973). Other films include \"Saint Jack\" (1979), \"They All Laughed\" (1981), \"Mask\" (1985), \"Noises Off\" (1992), \"The Cat's Meow\" (2001), and \"She's Funny That Way\" (2014).\nAs an actor, Bogdanovich was known for his roles in the HBO series \"The Sopranos\" and Orson Welles's last film, \"The Other Side of the Wind\" (2018), which he also helped finish.\nBogdanovich directed documentaries such as \"Directed by John Ford\" (1971) and \"\" (2018). He received a Grammy Award for Best Music Film for directing \"Runnin' Down a Dream\" (2007), a documentary about Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers. He also published numerous books, some of which include in-depth interviews with friends Howard Hawks, Alfred Hitchcock, and Orson Welles. Bogdanovich's works have been cited as important influences by many major filmmakers.\nEarly life.\nPeter Bogdanovich () was born in Kingston, New York, the son of Herma (n\u00e9e Robinson) and Borislav Bogdanovich, a pianist and painter. His father was of Serbian descent and his mother was of Austrian Jewish descent. Bogdanovich was fluent in Serbian, having learned it before English. He had an older brother who died in an accident in 1938, at eighteen months of age, after a pot of boiling soup fell on him, though Bogdanovich did not learn about his brother until he was seven and did not know the circumstances of his death until he was an adult. His parents both arrived in the U.S. in May 1939 on visitors' visas, along with his mother's immediate family, three months before the onset of World War II. In 1952, when he was twelve, Bogdanovich began keeping a record of every film he saw on index cards, complete with reviews; he continued to do so until 1970. He saw up to four hundred films a year. He graduated from New York City's Collegiate School in 1957 and studied acting at the Stella Adler Conservatory.\nCareer.\n1960s.\nIn the early 1960s, Bogdanovich was known as a film programmer at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, where he programmed influential retrospectives and wrote monographs for the films of Orson Welles, John Ford, Howard Hawks, and Alfred Hitchcock. Bogdanovich also brought attention to Allan Dwan, a pioneer of American film who had fallen into obscurity by then, in a 1971 retrospective Dwan attended. He also programmed for New Yorker Theater.\nBefore becoming a director, he wrote for \"Esquire\", \"The Saturday Evening Post\", and \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" as a film critic. These articles were collected in \"Pieces of Time\" (1973).\nIn 1966, following the example of \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" critics Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, Jean-Luc Godard, Claude Chabrol, and \u00c9ric Rohmer, who had created the Nouvelle Vague (\"New Wave\") by making their own films, Bogdanovich decided to become a director. Encouraged by director Frank Tashlin, whom he would interview in his book \"Who the Devil Made It\", Bogdanovich headed for Los Angeles with his wife Polly Platt and in so doing, left his rent unpaid.\nIntent on breaking into the industry, Bogdanovich would ask publicists for movie premiere and industry party invitations. At one screening, Bogdanovich was viewing a film and director Roger Corman was sitting behind him. The two struck up a conversation when Corman mentioned he liked a cinema piece Bogdanovich wrote for \"Esquire\". Corman offered him a directing job, which Bogdanovich accepted immediately. He worked with Corman on \"Targets\", which starred Boris Karloff, and \"Voyage to the Planet of Prehistoric Women\", under the pseudonym Derek Thomas. Bogdanovich later said of the Corman school of filmmaking, \"I went from getting the laundry to directing the picture in three weeks. Altogether, I worked 22 weeks \u2013 preproduction, shooting, second unit, cutting, dubbing \u2013 I haven't learned as much since.\"\n1970s.\nReturning to journalism, Bogdanovich struck up a lifelong friendship with Orson Welles while interviewing him on the set of Mike Nichols's \"Catch-22\". Bogdanovich played a major role in reviving Welles and his career with his writings on the actor-director, particularly through his rebuttal, in the pages of Esquire, of Pauline Kael's book The Citizen Kane Book: Raising Kane, a 1971 attack on the centrality of Welles' contribution to the film. (Bogdanovich's book-length interview with Welles, \"This is Orson Welles,\" was not released until 1992.) In the early 1970s, when Welles was having financial problems, Bogdanovich let him stay at his Bel Air mansion for a couple of years.\nIn 1970, Bogdanovich was commissioned by the American Film Institute to direct a documentary about John Ford for their tribute, \"Directed by John Ford\". The resulting film included candid interviews with John Wayne, James Stewart, and Henry Fonda, and was narrated by Orson Welles. Out of circulation for years due to licensing issues, Bogdanovich and TCM released it in 2006, re-edited it to make it \"faster and more incisive\", with additional interviews with Clint Eastwood, Walter Hill, Harry Carey Jr., Martin Scorsese, Steven Spielberg, and others.\nMuch of the inspiration that led Bogdanovich to his cinematic creations came from early viewings of the film \"Citizen Kane\". In an interview with Robert K. Elder, author of \"The Film That Changed My Life\", Bogdanovich explains his appreciation of Orson Welles's work:It's just not like any other movie you know. It's the first modern film: fragmented, not told straight ahead, jumping around. It anticipates everything that's being done now, and which is thought to be so modern. It's all become really decadent now, but it was certainly fresh then.\nThe 32-year-old Bogdanovich was hailed by critics as a \"Wellesian\" wunderkind when his best-received film, \"The Last Picture Show\", was released in 1971. The film earned eight Academy Award nominations, including Best Director, and won two statues, for Cloris Leachman and Ben Johnson in the supporting acting categories. Bogdanovich co-wrote the screenplay with Larry McMurtry, and it won the 1971 BAFTA award for Best Screenplay. Bogdanovich cast the 21-year-old model Cybill Shepherd in a major role in the film and fell in love with her, an affair leading to his divorce from Polly Platt, his longtime artistic collaborator and the mother of his two daughters.\nBogdanovich followed up \"The Last Picture Show\" with the screwball comedy \"What's Up, Doc?\", starring Barbra Streisand and Ryan O'Neal. Bogdanovich then formed The Directors Company with Francis Ford Coppola and William Friedkin and co-owned by Paramount Pictures. Paramount allowed the directors to make a minimum of twelve films with a budget of $3 million each. It was through this entity that Bogdanovich's \"Paper Moon\" was produced.\n\"Paper Moon\", a Depression-era comedy starring Ryan O'Neal that won his 10-year-old daughter Tatum O'Neal an Oscar as Best Supporting Actress, proved the high-water mark of Bogdanovich's career. Forced to share the profits with his fellow directors, Bogdanovich became dissatisfied with the arrangement. The Directors Company subsequently produced only two more pictures, Coppola's \"The Conversation\" (1974, which was nominated for Best Picture in 1974 alongside \"The Godfather Part II\"), and Bogdanovich's Cybill Shepherd vehicle, \"Daisy Miller\", which had a lackluster critical reception and was a disappointment at the box office. The partners of The Directors Company all went their separate ways after the production of \"Daisy Miller\".\nBogdanovich's next effort, \"At Long Last Love\", was a musical starring Shepherd and Burt Reynolds. Both that and his next film, \"Nickelodeon\", were critical and box-office disasters, severely damaging his standing in the film community. Reflecting upon his recent career, Bogdanovich said in 1976, \"I was dumb. I made a lot of mistakes.\"\nIn 1975, he sued Universal for breaching a contract to produce and direct \"Bugsy\". He then took a few years off, then returned to directing with a lower-budgeted film, \"Saint Jack\", which was filmed in Singapore and starred Ben Gazzara in the title role. The film earned critical praise, although was not a box-office hit. The making of this film marked the end of his romantic relationship with Cybill Shepherd.\n1980s.\nBogdanovich's next film was the romantic comedy \"They All Laughed\" which featured Dorothy Stratten, a former model and \"Playboy\" Playmate of the Month for August 1979 and Playmate of the Year in 1980, who began a romantic relationship with Bogdanovich. He took over distribution of \"They All Laughed\" himself. Bogdanovich later blamed this for his filing for bankruptcy in 1985. He declared he had a monthly income of $75,000 and monthly expenses of $200,000.\nShortly after the film finished shooting, Stratten was murdered by her estranged husband Paul Snider, who then killed himself. To cope with the tragedy, Bogdanovich began writing \"The Killing of the Unicorn\", a memoir detailing the relationship between Stratten and himself, the making of \"They All Laughed\" and her murder. \"I wanted to understand what happened to her,\" said Bogdanovich, \"I felt I couldn't move forward with my life, creative or otherwise until I did.\" Bogdanovich said the book was meant to be delivered to William Morrow and Company in August 1982, \"but new facts kept coming to light and so it was delayed. I did more and more rewriting. In all, I suppose, I wrote the book five times.\" The book was eventually published in 1984.\nStratten's murder was highly publicized, with Teresa Carpenter's \"Death of a Playmate\" article even claiming that she was as much a victim of Bogdanovich and \"Playboy\" mogul Hugh Hefner as she was Snider. Carpenter's article then served as the basis for Bob Fosse's film \"Star 80\". Bogdanovich opposed the production and refused to allow the film to use his name. He was portrayed as the fictional \"Aram Nicholas\", and he threatened litigation if he found the character objectionable. Shortly after, Hefner accused Bogdanovich of seducing Stratten's younger sister Louise when she was 13. On December 30, 1988, the 49-year-old Bogdanovich married 20-year-old Louise, sparking a tabloid frenzy.\nAfter Stratten's murder, Bogdanovich said he \"didn't go out much\", but one day got a call from his friend John Cassavetes who asked him to direct Diahnne Abbott in a scene from his film \"Love Streams\" to help get him out of the house. Despite Bogdanovich's contribution to the film, which even he himself admitted was minor, Cassavetes tried to get the Directors Guild to give him a shared credit.\nBogdanovich had wanted to make \"I'll Remember April\" with Cassavetes and \"The Lady in the Moon\" written with Larry McMurtry, but returned to directing officially with \"Mask\", which was released in 1985 to critical acclaim and strong box office returns. The film was released with a song score by Bob Seger against Bogdanovich's wishes (he favored Bruce Springsteen). A director's cut of the film, slightly longer and with Springsteen's songs, was belatedly released on DVD in 2004.\nBogdanovich directed the comedy \"Illegally Yours\" in 1988, starring Rob Lowe. Bogdanovich later disowned the film, saying he had \"high hopes for it\", but that it had been completely re-cut by Dino De Laurentiis, the film's distributor.\n1990s.\nIn 1990, Bogdanovich adapted Larry McMurtry's novel \"Texasville\", a sequel to \"The Last Picture Show\", into a film. It is set 32 years after the events of \"The Last Picture Show\", and Jeff Bridges and Cybill Shepherd both reprised their roles as Duane and Jacy. It was a critical and box office disappointment relative to the first film. Bogdanovich often complained that the version of \"Texasville\" that was released was not the film he had intended. His cut of \"Texasville\" was later released on LaserDisc, and the theatrical cut was released on DVD by MGM in 2005. After the release of \"Texasville\", Bogdanovich revisited \"The Last Picture Show\" and produced a modified director's cut for The Criterion Collection which includes seven minutes of previously unseen footage and re-edited scenes.\nIn 1991, Bogdanovich developed an alternative calendar, titled \"A Year and a Day: Goddess Engagement Calendar\". The calendar consisted of 13 months of 28 days and a bonus day to equal 365 days. Each month was named after a different species of tree. Bogdanovich attributed his inspiration for the calendar to the works of Robert Graves.\nBogdanovich directed two more theatrical films in 1992 and 1993, but neither film recaptured the success of his early career. One, \"Noises Off\", was based on a stage play by Michael Frayn, while another, \"The Thing Called Love\", is better known as one of River Phoenix's last roles before his death. In the mid-90s, Bogdanovich began to work in television, directing films such as \"To Sir, with Love II\". In 1997, he declared bankruptcy again. Drawing from his encyclopedic knowledge of film history, he wrote several critically lauded books, including \"Who the Devil Made It\", featuring archival interviews that Bogdanovich had held with famous Hollywood directors, and \"Peter Bogdanovich's Movie of the Week\", which offered the lifelong cinephile's commentary on 52 of his favorite films.\n2000s.\nIn 2001, Bogdanovich resurfaced with \"The Cat's Meow\", his return once again to a reworking of the past, this time the alleged killing of director Thomas Ince by William Randolph Hearst. The film was a modest critical success but made little money at the box-office. Bogdanovich said that he was told the story of the alleged Ince murder by Welles, who in turn said he heard it from writer Charles Lederer.\nIn addition to directing some television work, Bogdanovich returned to acting with a recurring guest role on the cable television series \"The Sopranos\", playing Dr. Melfi's psychotherapist, also later directing a fifth-season episode. He had a voice role, as Bart Simpson's therapist's analyst in an episode of \"The Simpsons\", and appeared as himself in the \"Robots Versus Wrestlers\" episode of \"How I Met Your Mother\". Quentin Tarantino cast Bogdanovich as a disc jockey in ' and '. \"Quentin knows, because he's such a movie buff, that when you hear a disc jockey's voice in my pictures, it's always me, sometimes doing different voices\", said Bogdanovich. \"So he called me and he said, 'I stole your voice from \"The Last Picture Show\" for the rough cut, but I need you to come down and do that voice again for my picture\u00a0... '\" He hosted \"The Essentials\" on Turner Classic Movies, but was replaced in May 2006 by TCM host Robert Osborne and film critic Molly Haskell. Bogdanovich hosted introductions to movies on Criterion Collection DVDs, and had a supporting role in the critically praised mini-series \"Out of Order\".\nIn 2006, Bogdanovich joined forces with ClickStar, where he hosted a classic film channel, Peter Bogdanovich's Golden Age of Movies. Bogdanovich also wrote a blog for the site. In 2003, he appeared in the BBC documentary \"Easy Riders, Raging Bulls\", and in 2006 he appeared in the documentary \"Wanderlust\". The following year, Bogdanovich was presented with an award for outstanding contribution to film preservation by the International Federation of Film Archives (FIAF) at the Toronto International Film Festival.\n2010s.\nIn 2010, Bogdanovich joined the directing faculty at the School of Filmmaking at the University of North Carolina School of the Arts. On April 17, 2010, he was awarded the Master of Cinema Award at the 12th Annual RiverRun International Film Festival. In 2011, he was given the Auteur Award by the International Press Academy, which is awarded to filmmakers whose singular vision and unique artistic control over the elements of production give a personal and signature style to their films.\nIn 2012, Bogdanovich made news with an essay in \"The Hollywood Reporter\", published in the aftermath of the Aurora, Colorado theater shooting, in which he argued against excessive violence in the movies:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Today, there's a general numbing of the audience. There's too much murder and killing. You make people insensitive by showing it all the time. The body count in pictures is huge. It numbs the audience into thinking it's not so terrible. Back in the '70s, I asked Orson Welles what he thought was happening to pictures, and he said, 'We're brutalizing the audience. We're going to end up like the Roman circus, live at the Coliseum.' The respect for human life seems to be eroding.\nIn 2014, Bogdanovich's last narrative film, \"She's Funny That Way\", was released in theaters and on-demand, followed by the documentary, \"\" in 2018. In 2018, Orson Welles' long-delayed film \"The Other Side of the Wind\", which was filmed in the 1970s and featured a prominent supporting role by Bogdanovich, who had long hoped to complete it, was released by Netflix to critical acclaim.\nOne of his final hopes was to direct a personal passion project he had worked on since the 1980s titled \"Wait for Me\" which Bogdanovich had described as a \"ghost picture\", the likes of \"The Ghost Goes West\", that was directly inspired by his relationship with Dorothy Stratten. In a July 2015 interview for \"Entertainment Weekly\", Bogdanovich revealed that Brett Ratner was going to produce the film, and that they were currently in the process of attaching actors. The plot, as described by Bogdanovich, would have followed a washed-up Hollywood director/star (someone like Orson Welles or Charlie Chaplin), who is visited by the ghost of his last wife, who was killed six years earlier in a plane crash.\n2020s.\nBogdanovich collaborated with Turner Classic Movies, and host Ben Mankiewicz, to create a documentary podcast about his life, which premiered in 2020. That same year, a copy of his original cut of \"She's Funny That Way\", originally titled \"Squirrels to the Nuts\", was found on eBay. In the wake of the director's death, the cut was shown at New York's Museum of Modern Art beginning on March 28, 2022.\nWeeks before his death, Bogdanovich collaborated with Kim Basinger to create \"LIT Project 2: Flux\", a first of its kind short film made available on the Ethereum blockchain as a non-fungible token. The project was scheduled to be released on January 25, 2022. He also wrote an as-yet unreleased book called \"Five American Icons\" featuring long interviews with Arthur Miller, Lauren Bacall, Kirk Douglas, Jack Nicholson and Clint Eastwood, and was working on developing a new screenplay, with the help of author Sam Kashner, titled \"Our Love Is Here to Stay\" about composers George and Ira Gershwin. According to Louise Stratten, after they had finished the script, Guillermo del Toro was involved to produce the film at Netflix. Stratten also noted that, prior to his death, Bogdanovich had completed his memoirs, which he wanted to call \"All I Wanna Do is Direct\".\nDeath and legacy.\nBogdanovich died from complications of Parkinson's disease at his home in Toluca Lake, on January 6, 2022, at the age of 82. Since his death, many directors, actors, and other public figures have paid tribute to him, including Martin Scorsese, Francis Ford Coppola, Jennifer Aniston, Barbra Streisand, Cher, William Friedkin, Guillermo del Toro, James Gunn, Ellen Burstyn, Laura Dern, Joe Dante, Bryan Adams, Ben Stiller, Jeff Bridges, Michael Imperioli, Paul Feig and Viola Davis. Peter Bradshaw of \"The Guardian\" described him as \"a loving cineaste and fearless genius of cinema.\" \"The New York Times\" described Bogdanovich as \"[a genius] of the Hollywood system who, with great success and frustration, worked to transform it in the same era.\"\nHis work has been cited as an influence by such filmmakers as Quentin Tarantino, David Fincher, Sofia Coppola, Wes Anderson, Noah Baumbach, Richard Linklater, Edgar Wright, Brett Ratner, M. Night Shyamalan, David O. Russell, James Mangold, Jon Watts, Rian Johnson, and the Safdie brothers.\nOn September 29, 2022, Louise Stratten announced that she was seeking a publisher for Bogdanovich's memoirs, as well as working on putting out episodes of a podcast series Bogdanovich had started called \"One Handshake Away\", where contemporary filmmakers were invited to discuss and listen to archival recordings of classic Hollywood directors whom Bogdanovich had interviewed. Guests include Guillermo del Toro (ep. \"Alfred Hitchcock\"), Rian Johnson (ep. \"Orson Welles\"), Quentin Tarantino (ep. \"Don Siegel\"), and Ken Burns (ep. \"John Ford\"). The episodes eventually aired in February 2024, two years after Bogdanovich's death, through Audacy. Del Toro contributed three additional interviews with Greta Gerwig (ep. \"Howard Hawks\"), Julie Delpy (ep. \"Fritz Lang\") and Allison Anders (ep. \"Raoul Walsh\").\nFrequent collaborators.\nCrew.\nCinematographer L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Kov\u00e1cs worked with Bogdanovich on several of his films, those of which are \"Targets\", the documentary \"Directed by John Ford\", \"What's Up, Doc?\", \"Paper Moon\", \"At Long Last Love\", \"Nickelodeon\" and \"Mask\". Robby M\u00fcller however, shot only two films for Bogdanovich, \"Saint Jack\" and \"They All Laughed\" back-to-back. Editors who have collaborated with Bogdanovich include Verna Fields (\"What's Up, Doc?\", \"Paper Moon\" and \"Daisy Miller\"), William C. Carruth (\"Nickelodeon\", \"Saint Jack\" and \"They All Laughed\") and Richard Fields (\"Illegally Yours\" and \"Texasville\"). Polly Platt, Bogdanovich's former wife, served as production designer on \"The Last Picture Show\", \"What's Up, Doc?\" and \"Paper Moon\".\nAudio commentaries.\nBogdanovich appeared in dozens of film documentaries and featurettes, and recorded many home video audio commentaries for his own films and others.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43857", "revid": "40697375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43857", "title": "C64 (disambiguation)", "text": "The Commodore 64, commonly known as just C64, is a home computer introduced by Commodore International.\nC64 or C-64 may also refer to :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "43859", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43859", "title": "Ecumenical Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "43860", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43860", "title": "Odense University", "text": "University in Odense, Denmark\nOdense University was a university in Odense, Denmark. It was established in 1966. In 1998, the university was merged with two other institutions to form the University of Southern Denmark. Its campus is now known as University of Southern Denmark Odense (\"Syddansk Universitet Odense\", abbr. SDU Odense) and is the university's biggest campus.\nHistory.\nThe university was established in 1966. It had four faculties: Humanities, Social Sciences, Health Science and Natural Sciences.\nIn 1998, Odense University was merged with the Southern Denmark School of Business and Engineering and the South Jutland University Centre to form the University of Southern Denmark. The campus is now known as SDU Odense, and is considered the main campus of the University of Southern Denmark, both because of its relative size and because the central administration of the university is situated there.\nCampus.\nBeing an epitome of Danish functionalist architecture, the campus has been nicknamed \"Rustenborg\" (which roughly translates as \"The Rusty Castle\") by students and staff, because it is built from gray concrete slabs clad with weathering steel, in an early architectural use of that material. Its architecture has also given rise to other nicknames and slang expressions among students and staff. For instance, the administrative block goes by the name of \"F\u00f8rerbunkeren\" (\"F\u00fchrerbunker\"), referring to the architectural similarities between the university building and a stereotypical military building. The University of Southern Denmark's students' magazine is simply called \"Rust\".\nMotto and logo.\nWhen abbreviated, the university motto becomes \"FIONIA\", the Latin name for Funen. The motto was created by the university's first rector, Mogens Br\u00f8ndsted in 1966. Br\u00f8ndsted also designed the university logo, featuring an apple tree.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43861", "revid": "50269957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43861", "title": "University of Southern Denmark", "text": "University in Denmark\nThe University of Southern Denmark (, abbr. SDU) has campuses located in Southern Denmark and on Zealand. It offers a number of joint programmes in co-operation with the University of Flensburg and the University of Kiel. Contacts with regional industries and the international scientific community are strong.\nWith its 29,674 enrolled students (as of 2016), the university is both the third-largest and, given its roots in Odense University, the third-oldest Danish university (fourth if one includes the Technical University of Denmark). Since the introduction of the ranking systems in 2012, the University of Southern Denmark has been ranked between 36th (2012 ), 38th (2013 ), 37th (2014), and 44th (2015 ) in the world by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings in the Top 100 Universities Under 50 List. It is also one of the Top 50 Universities Under 50 according to QS World University Rankings from 2012-2015.\nHistory.\nThe University of Southern Denmark was established in 1998 when Odense University, the Southern Denmark School of Business and Engineering and the South Jutland University Centre were merged. The University Library of Southern Denmark was also merged with the university in 1998.\nIn 2006, the Odense University College of Engineering was merged into the university and renamed as the Faculty of Engineering. In June 2009, SDU banned smoking during written examinations and in August that year tightened its alcohol policy; both measures were opposed by Freja Brandh\u00f8j, head of Syddanske Studerende. On 28 November that year, several hundred students participated in a boycott of the university canteen, calling for lower prices.\nIn 2007, the Business School Centre in Slagelse (\"Handelsh\u00f8jskolecentret Slagelse\") and the National Institute of Public Health (\"Statens Institut for Folkesundhed\") were also merged into the University of Southern Denmark. Princess Marie became a patron of the university in 2009, and participated in the annual party during several years.\nAfter being located in different parts of Odense for several years, a brand new Faculty of Engineering building physically connected to the main Odense Campus was established and opened in 2015. The University Library of Southern Denmark was also merged with the university in 1998. As the original Odense University was established in 1966, the University of Southern Denmark celebrated their 50-year anniversary on September 15, 2016. The queen of Denmark visited SDU in October of that year.\nAfter being located in different parts of Odense for several years, a brand new Faculty of Engineering building physically connected to the main Odense Campus was established and opened in 2015. As the original Odense University was established in 1966, the University of Southern Denmark celebrated their 50-year anniversary on September 15, 2016.\nAdministration and organization.\nThe university is governed by a board consisting of 9 members: 5 members recruited outside the university form the majority of the board, 1 member is appointed by the scientific staff, 1 member is appointed by the administrative staff, and 2 members are appointed by the students. The rector is appointed by the university board. The rector in turn appoints deans, and deans appoint heads of departments. There is no faculty senate and faculty is not involved in the appointment of rector, deans, or department heads. Hence, the university has no faculty governance.\nThe current rector is Jens Ringsmose, and the current Pro-vice-chancellor () is Helle Waagepetersen.\nCampuses.\nThe University of Southern Denmark has six campuses, mainly located in the southern part of Denmark: campus Odense on the island of Funen, campus Slagelse and campus Copenhagen on the island of Zealand, as well as campus Kolding, campus Esbjerg and campus Alsion in S\u00f8nderborg, all on the Jutland peninsula.\nThe campus in Slagelse is officially being discontinued as of 2027, with the university citing issues finding another institution interested in taking over. \nThe physical buildings of SDU cover an area of 272,554 m2 (2007), a figure that has increased from 181,450 m2 in 1999 when the university merger was implemented.\nThe university of Southern Denmark is an active member of the University of the Arctic. UArctic is an international cooperative network based in the Circumpolar Arctic region, consisting of more than 200 universities, colleges, and other organizations with an interest in promoting education and research in the Arctic region.\nThe university participates in UArctic's mobility program, north2north. The aim of that program is to enable students of member institutions to study in different parts of the North.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43864", "revid": "1317913417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43864", "title": "Lake-effect snow", "text": "Weather phenomenon\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLake-effect snow is produced during cooler atmospheric conditions when a cold air mass moves across long expanses of warmer lake water. The lower layer of air, heated by the lake water, picks up water vapor from the lake and rises through colder air. The vapor then freezes and is deposited on the leeward (downwind) shores.\nThe same effect also occurs over bodies of saline water, when it is termed ocean-effect or bay-effect snow. The effect is enhanced when the moving air mass is uplifted by the orographic influence of higher elevations on the downwind shores. This uplifting can produce narrow but very intense bands of precipitation, which deposit at a rate of many inches of snow each hour, often resulting in a large amount of total snowfall.\nThe areas affected by lake-effect and parallel \"ocean-effect\" phenomena are called snowbelts. These include areas east of the Great Lakes in North America, the west coasts of northern Japan, Lake Baikal in Russia, and areas near the Great Salt Lake, Black Sea, Caspian Sea, Baltic Sea, Adriatic Sea, the North Sea and more. \nLake-effect blizzards are the blizzard-like conditions resulting from lake-effect snow. Under certain conditions, strong winds can accompany lake-effect snows creating blizzard-like conditions; however, the duration of the event is often slightly less than that required for a blizzard warning in both the U.S. and Canada.\nIf the air temperature is low enough to keep the precipitation frozen, it falls as lake-effect snow. If not, then it falls as lake-effect rain. For lake-effect rain or snow to form, the air moving across the lake must be significantly cooler than the surface air (which is likely to be near the temperature of the water surface). Specifically, the air temperature at an altitude where the air pressure is (roughly vertically) should be lower than the temperature of the air at the surface. Lake-effect occurring when the air at is much colder than the water surface can produce thundersnow, snow showers accompanied by lightning and thunder (caused by larger amounts of energy available from the increased instability), and, on very rare occasions, tornados. \nFormation.\nSome key elements are required to form lake-effect precipitation and which determine its characteristics: instability, fetch, wind shear, upstream moisture, upwind lakes, synoptic (large)-scale forcing, orography/topography, and snow or ice cover.\nInstability.\nA temperature difference of approximately between the lake temperature and the height in the atmosphere (about at which barometric pressure measures ) provides for absolute instability and allows vigorous heat and moisture transportation vertically. Atmospheric lapse rate and convective depth are directly affected by both the mesoscale lake environment and the synoptic environment; a deeper convective depth with increasingly steep lapse rates and a suitable moisture level allow for thicker, taller lake-effect precipitation clouds and naturally a much greater precipitation rate.\nFetch.\nThe distance that an air mass travels over a body of water is called fetch. Because most lakes are irregular in shape, different angular degrees of travel yield different distances; typically, a fetch of at least is required to produce lake-effect precipitation. Generally, the larger the fetch, the more precipitation produced. Larger fetches provide the boundary layer with more time to become saturated with water vapor and for heat energy to move from the water to the air. As the air mass reaches the other side of the lake, the engine of rising and cooling water vapor pans itself out in the form of condensation and falls as snow, usually within of the lake, but sometimes up to about .\nWind shear.\nDirectional shear is one of the most important factors governing the development of squalls; environments with weak directional shear typically produce more intense squalls than those with higher shear levels. If directional shear between the surface and the height in the atmosphere at which the barometric pressure measures is greater than 60\u00b0, nothing more than flurries can be expected. If the directional shear between the body of water and the vertical height at which the pressure measures is between 30\u00b0 and 60\u00b0, weak lake-effect bands are possible. In environments where the shear is less than 30\u00b0, strong, well organized bands can be expected.\nSpeed shear is less critical but should be relatively uniform. The wind-speed difference between the surface and vertical height at which the pressure reads should be no greater than so as to prevent the upper portions of the band from shearing off. However, assuming the surface to winds are uniform, a faster overall velocity works to transport moisture more quickly from the water, and the band then travels much farther inland.\nUpstream moisture.\nA lower upstream relative humidity lake effect makes condensation, clouds, and precipitation more difficult to form. The opposite is true if the upstream moisture has a high relative humidity, allowing lake-effect condensation, cloud, and precipitation to form more readily and in a greater quantity.\nUpwind lakes.\nAny large body of water upwind impacts lake-effect precipitation to the lee of a downwind lake by adding moisture or pre-existing lake-effect bands, which can reintensify over the downwind lake. Upwind lakes do not always lead to an increase of precipitation downwind.\nSynoptic forcing.\nVorticity advection aloft and large upscale ascent help increase mixing and the convective depth, while cold air advection lowers the temperature and increases instability.\nOrography and topography.\nTypically, lake-effect precipitation increases with elevation to the lee of the lake as topographic forcing squeezes out precipitation and dries out the squall much faster.\nSnow and ice cover.\nAs a lake gradually freezes over, its ability to produce lake-effect precipitation decreases for two reasons. Firstly, the open ice-free liquid surface area of the lake shrinks. This reduces fetch distances. Secondly, the water temperature nears freezing, reducing overall latent heat energy available to produce squalls. To end the production of lake-effect precipitation, a complete freeze is often not necessary.\nEven when precipitation is not produced, cold air passing over warmer water may produce cloud cover. Fast-moving mid-latitude cyclones, known as Alberta clippers, often cross the Great Lakes. After the passage of a cold front, winds tend to switch to the northwest, and a frequent pattern is for a long-lasting low-pressure area to form over the Canadian Maritimes, which may pull cold northwestern air across the Great Lakes for a week or more, commonly identified with the negative phase of the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). Since the prevailing winter winds tend to be colder than the water for much of the winter, the southeastern shores of the lakes are almost constantly overcast, leading to the use of the term \"the Great Gray Funk\" as a synonym for winter. These areas allegedly contain populations that suffer from high rates of seasonal affective disorder, a type of psychological depression thought to be caused by lack of light.\nExamples.\nNorth America.\nThe Great Lakes region.\nCold winds in the winter typically prevail from the northwest in the Great Lakes region, producing the most dramatic lake-effect snowfalls on the southern and eastern shores of the Great Lakes. This lake effect results in much greater snowfall amounts on the southern and eastern shores compared to the northern and western shores of the Great Lakes.\nThe most affected areas include the Upper Peninsula of Michigan; Northern New York and Central New York; particularly the Tug Hill Region, Western New York; Northwestern Pennsylvania; Northeastern Ohio; southwestern Ontario and central Ontario; Northeastern Illinois (along the shoreline of Lake Michigan); northwestern and north central Indiana (mostly between Gary and Elkhart); northern Wisconsin (near Lake Superior); and West Michigan.\nLake-effect snows on the Tug Hill plateau (east of Lake Ontario) can frequently set daily records for snowfall in the United States. Tug Hill receives, typically, over of snow each winter. The snowiest portions of the Tug Hill, near the junction of the towns of Montague, Osceola, Redfield, and Worth, average over of snow annually.\nFrom February 3\u201312, 2007, a lake-effect snow event left of snow in 10 days at North Redfield on the Tug Hill Plateau. Other examples major prolonged lake effect snowstorms on the Tug Hill include December 27, 2001, - January 1, 2002, when of snow fell in six days in Montague, January 10\u201314, 1997, when of snow fell in five days in North Redfield, and January 15\u201322, 1940, when over eight feet of snow fell in eight days at Barnes Corners.\nSyracuse, New York, directly south of the Tug Hill Plateau, receives significant lake-effect snow from Lake Ontario, and averages of snow per year, which is enough snowfall to be considered one of the \"snowiest\" large cities in America.\nLake Erie produces a similar effect for a zone stretching from the eastern suburbs of Cleveland through Erie to Buffalo. Remnants of lake-effect snows from Lake Erie have been observed to reach as far south as Garrett County, Maryland, and as far east as Geneva, New York. Because it is not as deep as the other lakes, Erie warms rapidly in the spring and summer, and is frequently the only Great Lake to freeze over in winter. Once frozen, the resulting ice cover alleviates lake-effect snow downwind of the lake. Based on stable isotope evidence from lake sediment coupled with historical records of increasing lake-effect snow, global warming has been predicted to result in a further increase in lake-effect snow.\nA very large snowbelt in the United States exists on the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, near the cities of Houghton, Marquette, and Munising. These areas typically receive of snow each season. For comparison, on the western shore, Duluth, Minnesota receives per season.\nWestern Michigan, western Northern Lower Michigan, and Northern Indiana can get heavy lake-effect snows as winds pass over Lake Michigan and deposit snows over Muskegon, Traverse City, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, New Carlisle, South Bend, and Elkhart, but these snows abate significantly before Lansing or Fort Wayne. When winds become northerly or aligned between 330\u00b0 and 030\u00b0, a single band of lake-effect snow may form, which extends down the length of Lake Michigan. This long fetch often produces a very intense, yet localized, area of heavy snowfall, affecting cities such as La Porte and Gary.\nBecause Southwestern Ontario is surrounded by water on three sides, many parts of Southwestern and Central Ontario get a large part of their winter snow from lake-effect snow. This region is notorious for the whiteouts that can suddenly reduce highway visibility on North America's busiest highway (Ontario Highway 401) from clear to zero. The region most commonly affected spans from Port Stanley in the west, the Bruce Peninsula in the north, Niagara-on-the-Lake to the east, and Fort Erie to the south. The heaviest accumulations usually happen in the Bruce Peninsula, which is between Lake Huron and Georgian Bay. So long as the Great Lakes are not frozen over, the only time the Bruce Peninsula does not get lake-effect snow is when the wind is directly from the south.\nElsewhere in the United States.\nThe southern and southeastern sides of the Great Salt Lake receive significant lake-effect snow. Since the Great Salt Lake never freezes, the lake effect can influence the weather along the Wasatch Front year-round. The lake effect largely contributes to the annual snowfall amounts recorded south and east of the lake, and in average snowfall reaching in the Wasatch Range. The snow, which is often very light and dry because of the semiarid climate, is referred to as the \"Greatest Snow on Earth\" in the mountains. Lake-effect snow contributes to roughly six to eight snowfalls per year in Salt Lake City, with about 10% of the city's precipitation being contributed by the phenomenon.\nOn one occasion in December 2016, lake-effect snow fell in central Mississippi from a lake band off Ross Barnett Reservoir.\nThe West Coast occasionally experiences ocean-effect showers, usually in the form of rain at lower elevations south of about the mouth of the Columbia River. These occur whenever an Arctic air mass from western Canada is drawn westward out over the Pacific Ocean, typically by way of the Fraser Valley, returning shoreward around a center of low pressure. Cold air flowing southwest from the Fraser Valley can also pick up moisture over the Strait of Georgia and Strait of Juan de Fuca, then rise over the northeastern slopes of the Olympic Mountains, producing heavy, localized snow between Port Angeles and Sequim, as well as areas in Kitsap County and the Puget Sound region.\nWhile snow of any type is very rare in Florida, the phenomenon of gulf-effect snow has been observed along the northern coast of the Gulf of Mexico a few times in history. More recently, \"ocean-effect\" snow occurred on January 24, 2003, when wind off the Atlantic, combined with air temperatures in the 30\u00a0\u00b0F range, brought snow flurries briefly to the Atlantic Coast of northern Florida seen in the air as far south as Cape Canaveral.\nEurasia.\nIstanbul and northern Turkey.\nBecause the southern Black Sea is relatively warm (around 13\u00a0\u00b0C or 55\u00a0\u00b0F at the beginning of winter, typically 10 to 6\u00a0\u00b0C or 50 to 43\u00a0\u00b0F by the end), sufficiently cold air aloft can create significant snowfalls in a relatively short period of time. Furthermore, cold air, when it arrives to the region, tends to move slowly, creating days and sometimes weeks of occasional lake-effect snowfall. \nThe most populous city in the region, Istanbul, is very prone to lake-effect snow and this weather phenomenon occurs almost every winter, despite winter averages of , comparable to Paris. On multiple occasions, lake-effect snowfall events have lasted for more than a week, and official single-storm snow depth totals have exceeded downtown and around the city. Earlier, unofficial measurements are often higher, due to the relative dearth of sufficiently old weather stations in the region; some sources claim up to of snowfall during the blizzard of March 1987. \nMeanwhile, snowfall in mountainous provinces in this region is amplified by orographic effect, often resulting in snowfall of several meters, especially at higher elevations.\nAround the Baltic Sea.\nIn Northern Europe, cold, dry air masses from Russia can blow over the Baltic Sea and cause heavy snow squalls on areas of the southern and eastern coasts of Sweden, as well as on the Danish island of Bornholm, the east coast of Jutland and the northern coast of Poland. For the northern parts of the Baltic Sea, this happens mainly in the early winter, since it freezes later. Southeast Norway can also experience heavy sea snow events with east-north-easterly winds. Especially, coastal areas from Krager\u00f8 to Kristiansand have had incredible snow depths in the past with intense persistent snowbands from Skagerak (the coastal city of Arendal recorded in a single week in late February 2007). Although Fennoscandia is lined with an abundance of lakes, this type of snowfall is rare in these, due to the shallow freshwater freezing early in the cold interiors. One notable exception happened in the middle of May 2008, as Leksand on the since-long unfrozen lake of Siljan got on the ground.\nEast Asia.\nThe Sea of Japan creates snowfall in the mountainous western Japanese prefectures of Niigata and Nagano, parts of which are known collectively as snow country (\"Yukiguni\"). In addition to Japan, much of maritime Korea and the Shandong Peninsula experience these conditions.\nSiberia.\nStrong winds and a very large, deep lake enhance snowfall around Lake Baikal in the fall; however, nearly the entire surface of the lake freezes from January until Spring, precluding lake-effect snow.\nIran.\nMoving of polar or Siberian high-pressure centers along Caspian Sea regarding to relatively warmer water of this sea can make heavy snowfalls in the northern coast of Iran. Several blizzards have been reported in this region during the last decades. In February 2014, heavy snowfall reached on the coastline in Gilan and Mazandaran provinces of Iran. The heaviest snowfall was reported in Abkenar village near Anzali Lagoon.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, easterly winds bringing cold continental air across the North Sea can lead to a similar phenomenon. Locally, it is also known as \"lake-effect snow\" despite the snow coming in from the sea rather than a lake. Similarly during a north-westerly wind, snow showers can form coming in from the Liverpool Bay, coming down the Cheshire gap, causing snowfall in the West Midlands\u2014this formation resulted in the white Christmas of 2004 in the area, and most recently the heavy snowfall of 8 December 2017 and 30 January 2019.\nThe best-known example occurred in January 1987, when record-breaking cold air (associated with an upper low) moved across the North Sea towards the UK. The result was over 2\u00a0ft of snow for coastal areas, leading to communities being cut off for over a week. The latest of these events to affect Britain's east coast occurred on November 30, 2017; February 28, 2018; and March 17, 2018; in connection with the 2018 Great Britain and Ireland cold wave. The second event of winter 2017/18 was particularly severe, with up to falling in total over the 27th\u201328th.\nSimilarly, northerly winds blowing across the relatively warm waters of the English Channel during cold spells can bring significant snowfall to the French region of Normandy, where snow drifts exceeding 10\u00a0ft (3\u00a0m) were measured in March 2013.\nSee also.\nWarnings about lake-effect snow:\nUnited States:\n* Lake effect snow advisory\n* Lake effect snow watch\n* Lake effect snow warning\n* Severe weather terminology (United States)\nCanada:\n* Snowsquall warning\n* Severe weather terminology (Canada)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43865", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43865", "title": "Netscape Communications Corporation", "text": ""}
{"id": "43866", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43866", "title": "Choir", "text": "Ensemble of singers\nA choir ( ), also known as a chorale or chorus (from Latin , meaning 'a dance in a circle'), is a musical ensemble of singers. Choral music, in turn, is the music written specifically for such an ensemble to perform or in other words is the music performed by the ensemble. Choirs may perform music from the classical music repertoire, which spans from the medieval era to the present, or popular music repertoire. Most choirs are led by a conductor, who leads the performances with arm, hand, and facial gestures.\nThe term \"choir\" is very often applied to groups affiliated with a church (whether or not they actually occupy the quire), whereas a \"chorus\" performs in theatres or concert halls, but this distinction is not rigid. Choirs may sing without instruments, or accompanied by a piano, accordion, pipe organ, a small ensemble, or an orchestra.\nA choir can be a subset of an ensemble; thus one speaks of the \"woodwind choir\" of an orchestra, or different \"choirs\" of voices or instruments in a polychoral composition. In typical 18th century to 21st century oratorios and masses, 'chorus' or 'choir' implies that there is more than one singer per part, in contrast to the quartet of soloists also featured in these works.\nStructure.\nChoirs are often led by a conductor, choirmaster or choir director. Most often, choirs consist of four sections intended to sing in four-part harmony, but there is no limit to the number of possible parts as long as there is a singer available to sing the part. For instance, Thomas Tallis wrote a 40-part motet entitled \"Spem in alium\", for eight choirs of five parts each; while Krzysztof Penderecki's \"Stabat Mater\" is for three choirs of 16 voices each, a total of 48 parts. Other than four, the most common number of parts are three, five, six, and eight.\nChoirs can sing with or without instrumental accompaniment. Singing without accompaniment is usually called a cappella singing (although the American Choral Directors Association discourages this usage in favor of \"unaccompanied\", since a cappella denotes singing \"as in the chapel\" and much unaccompanied music today is secular). Accompanying instruments vary widely, from only one instrument (a piano or pipe organ) to a full orchestra of 70 to 100 musicians; for rehearsals a piano or organ accompaniment is often used, even if a different instrumentation is planned for performance, or if the choir is rehearsing unaccompanied music. With the new prevalence of electronic devices, small groups can use these together with learning tracks for both group rehearsals and private practice. \nMany choirs perform in various locations, such as churches, opera houses, schools, or village halls. In some cases, choirs come together to form a single \"massed choir\" for a special concert. In these instances, they present a series of songs or musical works to celebrate and entertain others.\nRole of conductor.\nConducting is the art of directing a musical performance, such as a choral concert, by way of visible gestures with the hands, arms, face and head. The primary duties of the conductor or choirmaster are to unify performers, set the tempo, execute clear preparations and beats (meter), and to listen critically and shape the sound of the ensemble.\nIn most choirs, the same individual acts as the musical director (responsible for deciding the repertoire and engaging soloists and accompanists), chorusmaster (or r\u00e9p\u00e9titeur) (responsible for training and rehearsing the singers), and conductor (responsible for directing the performance). However, these roles may be divided, especially when the choir is combined with other forces, for example in opera.\nThe conductor or choral director typically stands on a raised platform, and may or may not use a baton; using a baton gives the conductor's gestures greater visibility, but many choral conductors prefer conducting with their hands for greater expressiveness, particularly when working with a smaller ensemble. In the 2010s, most conductors do not play an instrument when conducting, although in earlier periods of classical music history, leading an ensemble while playing an instrument was common. In Baroque music from the 1600s to the 1750s, conductors performing in the 2010s may lead an ensemble while playing a harpsichord or the violin (see Concertmaster). Conducting while playing a piano may also be done with musical theatre pit orchestras. Communication is typically non-verbal during a performance (this is strictly the case in art music, but in jazz big bands or large pop ensembles, there may be occasional spoken instructions). However, in rehearsals, the conductor will often give verbal instructions to the ensemble, since the conductor generally also serves as an artistic director who crafts the ensemble's interpretation of the music.\nConductors act as guides to the choirs they conduct. They choose the works to be performed and study their scores, to which they may make certain adjustments (e.g., regarding tempo, repetitions of sections, assignment of vocal solos, etc.), work out their interpretation, and relay their vision to the singers. Choral conductors may also have to conduct instrumental ensembles such as orchestras if the choir is singing a piece for choir and orchestra. They may also attend to organizational matters, such as scheduling rehearsals, planning a concert season, hearing auditions, and promoting their ensemble in the media.\nIn worship services.\nHistorically, the sung repertoire divides into sacred or religious music and secular music. While much religious music has been written with concert performance in mind, its origin lies in its role within the context of liturgy.\nAccompaniment.\nLike post-Diaspora Jews during the first centuries, it was widely agreed by Christians that musical instruments should be excluded from worship. The consensus among early writers was that divine worship should privilege the unaccompanied human voice. \nMost Eastern Orthodox Christian churches, some American Protestant groups, and traditional Jewish synagogues do not accompany their songs with musical instruments. In churches of the Western Rite the accompanying instrument is usually the organ, although in colonial America, the Moravian Church used groups of strings and winds. Many churches that use a contemporary worship format use a small amplified band to accompany the singing, and Roman Catholic Churches may use, at their discretion, additional orchestral accompaniment.\nLiturgical function.\nIn addition to leading the singing in which the congregation participates, such as hymns and service music, some church choirs sing full liturgies, including propers (introit, gradual, communion antiphons appropriate for the different times of the liturgical year). In Christianity, chief among these are the Evangelical Lutheran, Anglican and Roman Catholic churches; far more common, however, is the performance of anthems or motets at designated times in the service. In the Catholic Church, the Second Vatican Council's \"Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy\" confirmed that choirs featured among those who \"exercise a genuine liturgical function\" within services such as the Mass. Singing in a congregation contributes to the effaciousness of the ritual. In Christianity, singing has played a significant role in the early Church, not only in authorising certain hymns but also providing the faithful with true Christian spirit.\nTypes.\nOne of the main classifications of choirs is by gender and age since these factors have traditionally been thought to affect how a choir sounds and what music it performs. The types are listed here in approximate descending order of prevalence at the professional and advanced amateur or semi-professional levels.\nThe all-female and mixed children's choirs tend to be professionally less prevalent than the high voiced boys' choirs, the lower voiced men's choruses, or the full SATB choirs. This is due to some extent to lack of scholarships and other types of funding, and a lack of professional opportunities for women such as that of being lay clerks or musical directors.\nChoirs are also categorized by the institutions in which they operate:\nSome choirs are categorized by the type of music they perform, such as\nIn schools.\nIn the United States, middle schools and high schools often offer choir as a class or activity. Some choirs participate in competitions. One kind of choir popular in high schools is show choir. During middle school and high school students' voices are changing. Although girls experience voice change, it is much more significant in boys. A lot of literature in music education has been focused on how male voice change works and how to help adolescent male singers. Research done by John Cooksey categorizes male voice change into five stages, and most middle school boys are in the early stages of change. The vocal range of male and female students may be limited while their voice is changing, and choir teachers must be able to adapt, which can be a challenge to teaching this age range.\nNationally, male students are enrolled in choir at much lower numbers than their female students. The music education field has had a longtime interest in the \"missing males\" in music programs. Speculation as to why there are not as many boys in choir, and possible solutions vary widely. One researcher found that boys who enjoy choir in middle school may not always go on to high school choir because it simply does not fit into their schedules. Some research speculates that one reason that boys' participation in choir is so low is because the U.S. does not encourage male singers. Often, schools will have a women's choir, which helps the balance issues mixed choirs face by taking on extra female singers. However, without a men's choir also, this can make the problem worse by not giving boys as many opportunities to sing as girls. Other researchers have noted that having an ensemble, or a workshop dedicated to male singers, can help with their confidence and singing abilities. British cathedral choirs are usually made from pupils enrolled in schools.\nArrangements on stage.\nThere are various schools of thought regarding how the various sections should be arranged on stage. It is the conductor's decision on where the different voice types are placed. In symphonic choirs it is common (though by no means universal) to order the choir behind the orchestra from highest to lowest voices from left to right, corresponding to the typical string layout. In \"a cappella\" or piano-accompanied situations it is not unusual for the men to be in the back and the women in front; some conductors prefer to place the basses behind the sopranos, arguing that the outer voices need to tune to each other.\nMore experienced choirs may sing with the voices all mixed. Sometimes singers of the same voice are grouped in pairs or threes. Proponents of this method argue that it makes it easier for each individual singer to hear and tune to the other parts, but it requires more independence from each singer. Opponents argue that this method loses the spatial separation of individual voice lines, an otherwise valuable feature for the audience, and that it eliminates sectional resonance, which lessens the effective volume of the chorus. For music with double (or multiple) choirs, usually the members of each choir are together, sometimes significantly separated, especially in performances of 16th-century music (such as works in the Venetian polychoral style). Some composers actually specify that choirs should be separated, such as in Benjamin Britten's \"War Requiem\". Some composers use separated choirs to create \"antiphonal\" effects, in which one choir seems to \"answer\" the other choir in a musical dialogue.\nConsideration is also given to the spacing of the singers. Studies have found that not only the actual formation, but the amount of space (both laterally and circumambiently) affects the perception of sound by choristers and auditors.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nThe origins of choral music are found in traditional music, as singing in big groups is extremely widely spread in traditional cultures (both singing in one part, or in unison, like in Ancient Greece, as well as singing in parts, or in harmony, like in contemporary European choral music).\nThe oldest unambiguously choral repertory that survives is that of ancient Greece, of which the 2nd century BC Delphic hymns and the 2nd century AD. hymns of Mesomedes are the most complete. The original Greek chorus sang its part in Greek drama, and fragments of works by Euripides (\"Orestes\") and Sophocles (\"Ajax\") are known from papyri. The Seikilos epitaph (2c BC) is a complete song (although possibly for solo voice). One of the latest examples, \"Oxyrhynchus hymn\" (3c) is also of interest as the earliest Christian music.\nOf the Roman drama's music a single line of Terence surfaced in the 18th century. However, musicologist Thomas J. Mathiesen comments that it is no longer believed to be authentic.\nMedieval music.\nThe earliest notated music of western Europe is Gregorian chant, along with a few other types of chant which were later subsumed (or sometimes suppressed) by the Catholic Church. This tradition of unison choir singing lasted from sometime between the times of St. Ambrose (4th century) and Gregory the Great (6th century) up to the present. During the later Middle Ages, a new type of singing involving multiple melodic parts, called organum, became predominant for certain functions, but initially this polyphony was only sung by soloists. Further developments of this technique included clausulae, conductus and the motet (most notably the isorhythmic motet), which, unlike the Renaissance motet, describes a composition with different texts sung simultaneously in different voices. The first evidence of polyphony with more than one singer per part comes in the Old Hall Manuscript (1420, though containing music from the late 14th century), in which there are apparent \"divisi\", one part dividing into two simultaneously sounding notes.\nRenaissance music.\nDuring the Renaissance, sacred choral music was the principal type of formally notated music in Western Europe. Throughout the era, hundreds of masses and motets (as well as various other forms) were composed for a cappella choir, though there is some dispute over the role of instruments during certain periods and in certain areas. Some of the better-known composers of this time include Guillaume Dufay, Josquin des Prez, Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, John Dunstable, and William Byrd; the glories of Renaissance polyphony were choral, sung by choirs of great skill and distinction all over Europe. Choral music from this period continues to be popular with many choirs throughout the world today.\nThe madrigal, a partsong conceived for amateurs to sing in a chamber setting, originated at this period. Although madrigals were initially dramatic settings of unrequited-love poetry or mythological stories in Italy, they were imported into England and merged with the more dancelike balletto, celebrating carefree songs of the seasons, or eating and drinking. To most English speakers, the word \"madrigal\" now refers to the latter, rather than to madrigals proper, which refers to a poetic form of lines consisting of seven and eleven syllables each.\nThe interaction of sung voices in Renaissance polyphony influenced Western music for centuries. Composers are routinely trained in the \"Palestrina style\" to this day, especially as codified by the 18th century music theorist Johann Joseph Fux. Composers of the early 20th century also wrote in Renaissance-inspired styles. Herbert Howells wrote a \"Mass in the Dorian mode\" entirely in strict Renaissance style, and Ralph Vaughan Williams's Mass in G minor is an extension of this style. Anton Webern wrote his dissertation on the \"Choralis Constantinus\" of Heinrich Isaac and the contrapuntal techniques of his serial music may be informed by this study.\nBaroque music.\nThe Baroque period in music is associated with the development around 1600 of the \"figured bass\" and the basso continuo system. The figured bass part was performed by the basso continuo group, which at minimum included a chord-playing instrument (e.g., pipe organ, harpsichord, lute) and a bass instrument (e.g., violone). Baroque vocal music explored dramatic implications in the realm of solo vocal music such as the monodies of the Florentine Camerata and the development of early opera. This innovation was in fact an extension of established practice of accompanying choral music at the organ, either from a skeletal reduced score (from which otherwise lost pieces can sometimes be reconstructed) or from a \"basso seguente\", a part on a single staff containing the lowest sounding part (the bass part).\nA new genre was the vocal \"stile concertato\", combining voices and instruments; its origins may be sought in the polychoral music of the Venetian school.\nClaudio Monteverdi (1567\u20131643) brought it to perfection with his Vespers and his Eighth Book of Madrigals, which call for great virtuosity on the part of singers and instruments alike. (His Fifth Book includes a \"basso continuo\" \"for harpsichord or lute\".) His pupil Heinrich Sch\u00fctz (1585\u20131672) (who had earlier studied with Giovanni Gabrieli) introduced the new style to Germany. Alongside the new music of the \"seconda pratica\", contrapuntal motets in the \"stile antico\" or old style continued to be written well into the 19th century. Choirs at this time were usually quite small and that singers could be classified as suited to church or to chamber singing. Monteverdi, himself a singer, is documented as taking part in performances of his Magnificat with one voice per part.\nIndependent instrumental accompaniment opened up new possibilities for choral music. Verse anthems alternated accompanied solos with choral sections; the best-known composers of this genre were Orlando Gibbons and Henry Purcell. Grands motets (such as those of Lully and Delalande) separated these sections into separate movements. Oratorios (of which Giacomo Carissimi was a pioneer) extended this concept into concert-length works, usually based on Biblical or moral stories.\nA pinnacle of baroque choral music, (particularly oratorio), may be found in George Frideric Handel's works, notably \"Messiah\" and \"Israel in Egypt\". While the modern chorus of hundreds had to await the growth of Choral Societies and his centennial commemoration concert, we find Handel already using a variety of performing forces, from the soloists of the \"Chandos Anthems\" to larger groups (whose proportions are still quite different from modern orchestra choruses):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Yesterday [Oct. 6] there was a Rehearsal of the Coronation Anthem in Westminster-Abby, set to musick by the famous Mr Hendall: there being 40 voices, and about 160 violins, Trumpets, Hautboys, Kettle-Drums and Bass' proportionable..!\u2014\u200a\nLutheran composers wrote instrumentally accompanied cantatas, often based on chorale tunes. Substantial late 17th-century sacred choral works in the emerging German tradition exist (the cantatas of Dietrich Buxtehude being a prime example), though the Lutheran church cantata did not assume its more codified, recognizable form until the early 18th century. Georg Philipp Telemann (based in Frankfurt) wrote over 1000 cantatas, many of which were engraved and published (e.g. his \"Harmonische Gottesdienst\") and Christoph Graupner (based in Darmstadt) over 1400. The cantatas of Johann Sebastian Bach (1685\u20131750) are perhaps the most recognizable (and often-performed) contribution to this repertoire: his obituary mentions five complete cycles of his cantatas, of which three, comprising some 200 works, are known today, in addition to motets. Bach himself rarely used the term cantata. Motet refers to his church music without orchestra accompaniment, but instruments playing colla parte with the voices. His works with accompaniment consists of his Passions, Masses, the Magnificat and the cantatas.\nA point of hot controversy today is the so-called \"Rifkin hypothesis,\" which re-examines the famous \"Entwurff\" Bach's 1730 memo to the Leipzig City Council (\"A Short but Most Necessary Draft for a Well Appointed Church Music\") calling for at least 12 singers. In light of Bach's responsibility to provide music to four churches and be able to perform double choir compositions with a substitute for each voice, Joshua Rifkin concludes that Bach's music was normally written with one voice per part in mind. A few sets of original performing parts include \"ripieni\" who reinforce rather than slavishly double the vocal quartet.\nClassical and Romantic music.\nComposers of the late 18th century became fascinated with the new possibilities of the symphony and other instrumental music, and generally neglected choral music. Mozart's mostly sacred choral works stand out as some of his greatest (such as the \"Great\" Mass in C minor and Requiem in D minor, the latter of which is highly regarded). Haydn became more interested in choral music near the end of his life following his visits to England in the 1790s, when he heard various Handel oratorios performed by large forces; he wrote a series of masses beginning in 1797 and his two great oratorios \"The Creation\" and \"The Seasons\". Beethoven wrote only two masses, both intended for liturgical use, although his \"Missa solemnis\" is probably suitable only for the grandest ceremonies due to its length, difficulty and large-scale scoring. He also pioneered the use of chorus as part of symphonic texture with his Ninth Symphony and Choral Fantasia.\nIn the 19th century, sacred music escaped from the church and leaped onto the concert stage, with large sacred works unsuitable for church use, such as Berlioz's \"Te Deum\" and Requiem, and Brahms's \"Ein deutsches Requiem\". Rossini's \"Stabat mater\", Schubert's masses, and Verdi's Requiem also exploited the grandeur offered by instrumental accompaniment. Oratorios also continued to be written, clearly influenced by Handel's models. Berlioz's \"L'enfance du Christ\" and Mendelssohn's \"Elijah\" and \"St Paul\" are in the category. Schubert, Mendelssohn, and Brahms also wrote secular cantatas, the best known of which are Brahms's \"Schicksalslied\" and \"N\u00e4nie\".\nA few composers developed a cappella music, especially Bruckner, whose masses and motets startlingly juxtapose Renaissance counterpoint with chromatic harmony. Mendelssohn and Brahms also wrote significant a cappella motets. The amateur chorus (beginning chiefly as a social outlet) began to receive serious consideration as a compositional venue for the part-songs of Schubert, Schumann, Mendelssohn, Brahms, and others. These 'singing clubs' were often for women or men separately, and the music was typically in four-part (hence the name \"part-song\") and either a cappella or with simple instrumentation. At the same time, the Cecilian movement attempted a restoration of the pure Renaissance style in Catholic churches.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nIn the United States, development of mixed choirs was pioneered by groups such as The St. Olaf Choir and Westminster Choir College. These groups were characterized by arrangements of hymns and other sacred works of christian nature which helped define the choral sound of the United States for most of the 20th century. Secular choral music in the United States was popularized by groups such as the Dale Warland Singers throughout the late 20th century.\nThe Big Choral Census online survey was established to find out how many choirs there were in the UK, of what type, with how many members, singing what type of music and with what sort of funding. Results estimated that there were some 40,000 choral groups operating in the UK and over 2 million people singing regularly in a choir. Over 30 percent of the groups listed described themselves a community choirs, half of the choirs listed sing contemporary music although singing classical music is still popular. Most choirs are self funding. It is thought that the increase in popularity of singing together in groups has been fed to some extent in the UK by TV programmes such as Gareth Malone's 'The Choir'. In 2017, the Purwa Caraka Music Studio Choir of Indonesia began the trend when they covered children's songs in a choral arrangement for the film \"Surat Kecil untuk Tuhan\".\nApart from their roles in liturgy and entertainment, choirs and choruses may also have social-service functions, including for mental health treatment or as therapy for homeless and disadvantaged people, like the Choir of Hard Knocks or for special groups such as Military Wives.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nDatabases\nProfessional organizations\nResources\nMedia\nReading"}
{"id": "43870", "revid": "38469862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43870", "title": "Johanna Schopenhauer", "text": "German writer (1766 - 1838)\nJohanna Schopenhauer (n\u00e9e Trosiener; 9 July 1766 \u2013 17 April 1838) was a German writer and \"salonni\u00e8re\". She was the mother of the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer and author Adele Schopenhauer.\nBiography.\nJohanna Schopenhauer was born in Danzig (\"Gda\u0144sk\"), in the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland, to a family of middle-class merchants. Her parents were Christian Heinrich Trosiener (1730\u20131797) and Elisabeth Trosiener, nee Lehmann (1745\u20131818). Her father was also a councillor in the city. She was the eldest child in the family, and had three younger sisters, Charlotte Elizabeth (1768\u20131828), who married Felix Ratzky, Anna (1769\u20131814) and Juliane Dorothea (1773\u20131849). She was a precocious girl, sensitive to art and with great talent for learning foreign languages. Before turning 10, she already knew Polish, French, and English apart from her native German. As a youth, she aspired to become a painter, a desire her parents however nipped right in the bud, considering it improper that a girl of her class exercised \"a trade.\"\nOn May 16, 1785, at age 18, she married Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer (1747\u20131805), a much wealthier merchant twenty years her senior. He was to become the father of her two children, Arthur and Adele, who were born in 1788 and 1797, respectively. In her autobiography, in which Johanna promised to tell the facts of her life \"without poetry\", Johanna made clear that she \"no more pretended ardent love to him than he demanded it\". She denied, however, that she came under pressure from her parents to marry Heinrich Floris. On the contrary, she subtly admitted that what attracted her to a union with him was his social rank and the possibilities that his wealth could open to her. The marriage was stable, but from the beginning Johanna felt that her happiness and that of her husband depended on her resignation to his will.\nIn 1793, the family moved to Hamburg when Danzig became part of Prussia as part of the Second Partition of Poland. In 1805, a year after her husband's death, Johanna and her daughter moved to Weimar, a town where Johanna had neither relatives nor close friends and which was, moreover, about to be the stage of war between Prussia and the invading troops of Napoleon. Though Johanna did not know of the imminent risk of war, she refused to leave the city when the situation became clear, as transportation was only available to her and her daughter, and her servants would have to be left to their own fate.\nDuring the war, Johanna was active in providing services to those in need, nursing German soldiers and giving asylum to less fortunate citizens, whose houses had been taken over by French soldiers. With that, she quickly became a popular figure in Weimar.\nAfter the war, she gained a high reputation as a \"salonni\u00e8re\" (as she had planned before she left Hamburg), and for years to come her semiweekly parties were attended by several literary celebrities: Christoph Martin Wieland, the Schlegel brothers August and Friedrich, Ludwig Tieck, and, above all, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, whose awareness was probably what attracted Johanna to Weimar in the first place. Goethe's endorsement was a big factor behind Johanna's social success, and what greatly contributed to their friendship was that Johanna was the first upper-class woman in Weimar to open the doors of her house to Christiane Vulpius, Goethe's mistress, who had hitherto been excluded from the shining social scene of the city owing not only to her lowly background, but also to the fact that Goethe and Vulpius were no more than lovers, despite living together.\nAt first, Arthur Schopenhauer chose to stay in Hamburg. At that moment he had every intention to fulfil a promise made to his father, that of concluding his merchant apprenticeship, however much that pained him and however much he would have preferred to study philosophy. Johanna encouraged her son to leave these studies behind and follow his desire to become a scholar.\nMother and son, however, did not get along. In letters written to Schopenhauer, Johanna makes it very clear how distressed she was at her son's pessimism, his arrogance, and his imperious ways. In one letter, she wrote: \"You are unbearable and burdensome, and very hard to live with; all your good qualities are overshadowed by your conceit, and made useless to the world simply because you cannot restrain your propensity to pick holes in other people.\" (She destroyed his letters to her.) When, in 1809, Schopenhauer finally moved to Weimar, he established himself, not in his mother's house, but in that of his young instructor, Franz Passow, as it was the mother's impression that living under the same roof as her son was a bad idea. In 1813, she finally allowed him to move into her house, renting him a room, but the arrangement was soon broken after frequent arguments, motivated by Johanna's friendship with another lodger, a younger man called Georg von Gerstenbergk.\nAfter 1814, mother and son never met again. All the communication between the two was from then on through letters, but even this was interrupted after Johanna read a correspondence from Schopenhauer to his sister Adele, where he blamed their mother for the death of their father, understood to have been by suicide, accusing her of going to amuse herself at parties while Heinrich Floris was bedridden, sick and abandoned to the care of a loyal employee. In 1819, however, Schopenhauer made an attempt to approach his family. That year, the Schopenhauer ladies lost most of their fortune in a banking crisis. Schopenhauer volunteered to share with them the inheritance he received from his father, but Johanna refused the offer.\nIt was only in 1831 that the correspondence between mother and son resumed. It was Arthur who took the first step, motivated, apparently, by his many difficulties: from the failure to sell his books to his bodily ailments. The correspondence continued sporadically until Johanna's death in 1838. Despite the cordial tone of the last communications between Johanna and Arthur, the latter continued to speak ill of her even after her death, making little of Johanna's mother skills and painting her as a thoroughly self-centered woman. For her part, in her will Johanna made Adele her sole heir. But this was probably intended not so much to slight her son as in recognition that her daughter would be in greater difficulties in future years, since Arthur not only managed to conserve his part of the fatherly inheritance but even doubled it, whereas Adele would have few resources at her disposal.\nIn Weimar, Johanna Schopenhauer made a name as an author. She was the first German woman to publish books without a pseudonym, and from the late 1810s to the early 1830s, her works turned her into the most famous woman author in Germany. In 1831, her books received a second edition, and the collection filled no less than 24 volumes. Despite all this production, her critical acclaim and commercial success, Johanna was never able to make up for the financial losses of the 1810s. Unable to maintain their lifestyle in Weimar, and also for health reasons, Johanna and Adele moved to Bonn. In the mid-1830s, Johanna's fame declined and their financial situation worsened. Almost without resources, Johanna wrote to the Duke of Weimar detailing her plight. In 1837, the Duke, in recognition of Johanna's fame and contribution to the city's culture, offered her a small pension and invited her to move to Jena. Johanna died there the following year. She left incomplete the manuscript of her last work, her autobiography, which narrates her early life until shortly after Arthur's birth.\nWork.\nNot long after her arrival in Weimar, Schopenhauer began to publish her writings, consisting of articles on paintings with special attention on Jan van Eyck's work. These were later published in two volumes in 1822. \nIn 1810, she published her first book: a biography of her friend Karl Ludwig Fernow, who had died two years before. She wrote the book with the generous intention to pay Fernow's heirs' debts with his editor. The work met with critical success, which encouraged Johanna to pursue a career as an author, on which her livelihood and that of Adele would depend after the aforementioned financial crisis. \nFirst came the publication of her travelogues. Prior to Heinrich Floris' death, the family made trips through Western Europe, mostly in order to help Arthur, then a teenager, develop the skills of a merchant. But the trips were also of great use to Johanna, serving as raw material for her travelogues, which were very successful at the time they were published, decades later. In 1990, her travelogue to England and Scotland was translated into English by Chapman &amp; Hall \u2014 Johanna's only book to be introduced to the Anglophone world since the turn of the 20th century. Then came her fiction work, which, for a little more than a decade, turned her into the most famous woman author in Germany. The following are her best known novels: \"Gabriele\" (1819), \"Die Tante\" (1823) and \"Sidonia\" (1827).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43871", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43871", "title": "Fatal insomnia", "text": "Prion disease of the human brain\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nFatal insomnia is a neurodegenerative prion disease that results in trouble sleeping as its hallmark symptom. The majority of cases are familial (fatal familial insomnia [FFI]), stemming from a mutation in the \"PRNP\" gene, with the remainder of cases occurring sporadically (sporadic fatal insomnia [sFI]). The problems with sleeping typically start out gradually and worsen over time. Eventually, the patient will succumb to total insomnia (\"agrypnia excitata\"), most often leading to other symptoms such as speech problems, coordination problems, and dementia. It results in death within a few months to a few years, and there is no known disease-modifying treatment.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe disease has four stages:\nClinically, Fatal Insomnia manifests with a disordered sleep-wake cycle, dysautonomia, motor disturbances, and neuropsychiatric disorders.\nOther symptoms include profuse sweating, miosis (pinpoint pupils), sudden entrance into menopause or impotence, neck stiffness, and elevation of blood pressure and heart rate. The sporadic form of the disease often presents with double vision. Prolonged constipation is common as well. As the disease progresses, the person becomes stuck in a state of pre-sleep limbo, or hypnagogia, which is the state just before sleep in healthy individuals. During these stages, people commonly and repeatedly move their limbs as if they were dreaming.\nThe age of onset is variable, ranging from 13 to 60 years, with an average of 50. The disease can be detected prior to onset by genetic testing. Death usually occurs between 6\u201336 months from onset. The presentation of the disease varies considerably from person to person, even among people within the same family; in the sporadic form, for example, sleep problems are not commonly reported, and early symptoms are ataxia, cognitive impairment, and double vision.\nCause.\nFatal familial insomnia is a rare hereditary prion disease that is associated with a mutation in \"PRNP\". The gene, which provides instructions for making the prion protein PrPC, is located on the short arm of chromosome 20 at position p13. Individuals with FFI or familial Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease (fCJD) both carry a mutation at codon 178 of the prion protein gene. FFI is also invariably linked to the presence of the methionine codon at position 129 of the mutant allele, whereas fCJD is linked to the presence of the valine codon at that position. The disease occurs when there is a change of amino acid at position 178 in which asparagine is found instead of the normal aspartic acid. This has to be accompanied with a methionine at position 129.\nFFI is an autosomal dominant disease caused by a missense GAC-to-AAC mutation at codon 178 of the \"PRNP\" prion protein gene located on chromosome 20, along with the presence of the methionine polymorphism at position 129 of the mutant allele. Pathologically, FFI is characterized predominantly by thalamic degeneration\u2014especially in the medio-dorsal and anteroventral nuclei. Phenotypic variability is a perplexing feature of FFI.\nPrion diseases are caused by the accumulation of misfolded prion proteins in the brain. Generally, prion disorders are characterized by long incubation periods and short clinical duration, which means the abnormal prions may accumulate for many years without causing symptoms (long incubation period), but once symptoms begin the disorder rapidly worsens.\nPathophysiology.\nGiven its striking clinical and neuropathologic similarities with fatal familial insomnia (FFI), a genetic prion disease linked to a point mutation at codon 178 (D178N) in the PRNP coupled with methionine at codon 129, the MM2T subtype is also known as sporadic FI (sFI). Transmission studies using susceptible transgenic mice have consistently demonstrated that the same prion strain is associated with both sFI and FFI. In contrast to what has been the rule for the most common neurodegenerative disorders, sFI is rarer than its genetic counterpart. Whereas the recognized patients with FFI are numerous and belong to &gt;50 families worldwide, only about 30 cases of CJD MM2T and a few cases with mixed MM2T and MM2C features (MM2T+C) have been recorded to date.\nIn itself the presence of prions causes reduced glucose to be used by the thalamus and a mild hypo-metabolism of the cingulate cortex. The extent of this symptom varies between two variations of the disease: those presenting methionine homozygotes at codon 129 and methionine/valine heterozygotes, with some evidence that hypo-metabolism is more severe in the latter. Given the relationship between the involvement of the thalamus in regulating sleep and alertness, a causal relationship can be drawn and is often mentioned as the cause of insomnia.\nDiagnosis.\nDiagnosis is based on symptoms and can be supported by a sleep study, a PET scan and genetic testing if the patient's family has a history of the disease. As with other prion diseases, the diagnosis can be confirmed only by a brain autopsy. \nThe real-time quaking-induced conversion (RT-QuIC), a highly sensitive assay that detects minute amounts of PrPSc in the cerebrospinal fluid, has been reported to have a sensitivity of 50% in FFI and sFI. However, this low sensitivity may change since the examination was based on a low number of cases, and the RT-QuIC technology is continuously evolving.\nA test that measures the cerebral metabolic rate of glucose by positron emission tomography (PET), referred to as [18F]-FDG-PET, has demonstrated severe hypometabolism of the thalamus bilaterally in FFI and sFI, also in the earliest stages of the disease. This hypometabolism then spreads, eventually impacting most cortical regions. The complexity and cost of this test currently impedes its use in routine diagnosis.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nOther diseases involving the mammalian prion protein are known. Some are transmissible (TSEs, including FFI) such as kuru, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, also known as mad cow disease) in cattle and chronic wasting disease in American deer and American elk in some areas of the United States and Canada, as well as Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease (CJD). Until recently, prion diseases were thought to be transmissible only by direct contact with infected tissue, such as from eating infected tissue, transfusion or transplantation; research suggests that prions can be transmitted by aerosols but that the general public is not at risk of airborne infection.\nTreatments.\nTreatment involves palliative care. There is conflicting evidence over the use of sleeping pills, including barbiturates, as a treatment for the disease. Symptoms of fatal familial insomnia may be treated with medications.\nClonazepam may be prescribed to treat muscle spasms, and eszopiclone or zolpidem may be prescribed to help treat insomnia. However, these drugs do not work in the long term.\nPrognosis.\nLike all prion diseases, FFI is invariably fatal. Life expectancy ranges from seven months to six years, with an average of 18 months.\nEpidemiology and history.\nFatal insomnia was first described by Elio Lugaresi et al. in 1986.\nIn 1998, 40 families were known to carry the gene for FFI globally: eight German, five Italian, four American, two French, two Australian, two British, one Japanese and one Austrian. In the Basque Country of Spain, 16 family cases of the 178N mutation were seen between 1993 and 2005 related to two families with a common ancestor in the 18th century. In 2011, another family was added to the list when researchers found the first man in the Netherlands to be diagnosed with FFI. Whilst he had lived in the Netherlands for 19 years, he was of Egyptian descent. Other prion diseases are similar to FFI and may be related but are missing the \"D178N\" gene mutation.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], 37 cases of sporadic fatal insomnia have been diagnosed. Unlike in FFI, those with sFI do not have the \"D178N\" mutation in the \"PRNP\" gene; they all have a different mutation in the same gene causing methionine homozygosity at codon 129.\nNonetheless, the methionine presence in lieu of the valine (Val129) is what causes the sporadic form of disease. The targeting of this mutation has been suggested as a strategy for treatment, or possibly as a cure for the disease.\nSilvano, 1983, Bologna, Italy.\nIn late 1983, Italian neurologist/sleep expert Dr. Ignazio Roiter received a patient at the University of Bologna hospital's sleep institute. The man, known only as Silvano, decided in a rare moment of consciousness to be recorded for future studies and to donate his brain for research in hopes of finding a cure for future victims.\nIn 1986, Lugaresi and colleagues first named and described in detail the clinical and histopathological features of fatal familial insomnia. This report was primarily based on the aforementioned Silvano. Dr. Roiter referred the case to Prof. Elio Lugaresi, a well-known sleep expert, who, along with his colleagues, carried out advanced sleep analyses. As Silvano's condition quickly deteriorated, Lugaresi arranged for a postmortem neuropathological examination of the brain to be carried out by Dr. Gambetti, Lugaresi's former trainee. The collaboration of these two groups led to the 1986 publication. At the time, a prion disease was not suspected due to a lack of prion-related histopathology and frozen brain tissue for advanced analysis. However, due to the devotion of Dr. Roiter and Silvano's family, more cases were obtained, resulting in the classification of FFI as a familial prion disease tied to the 178Asn genetic mutation.\nUnnamed American patient, 2001.\nIn an article published in 2006, Schenkein and Montagna wrote of a 52-year-old American man who was able to exceed the average survival time by nearly one year with various strategies that included vitamin therapy and meditation, different stimulants and hypnotics and even complete sensory deprivation in an attempt to induce sleep at night and increase alertness during the day. He managed to write a book and drive hundreds of miles in this time, but nonetheless, over the course of his trials, the man succumbed to the classic four-stage progression of the illness.\nEgyptian man, 2011, Netherlands.\nIn 2011, the first reported case in the Netherlands was of a 57-year-old man of Egyptian descent. The man came in with symptoms of double vision and progressive memory loss, and his family also noted he had recently become disoriented, paranoid and confused. Whilst he tended to fall asleep at random during daily activities, he experienced vivid dreams and random muscular jerks during normal slow-wave sleep. After four months of these symptoms, he began to have convulsions in his hands, trunk and lower limbs while awake. The person died at age 58, seven months after the onset of symptoms. An autopsy revealed mild atrophy of the frontal cortex and moderate atrophy of the thalamus. The latter is one of the most common signs of FFI.\nResearch.\nStill with unclear benefit in humans, a number of treatments have had tentative success in slowing disease progression in animal models, including pentosan polysulfate, mepacrine, and amphotericin B. As of 2016[ [update]], a study investigating doxycycline is being carried out.\nIn 2009, a mouse model was made for FFI. These mice expressed a humanized version of the PrP protein that also contains the\" D178N\" FFI mutation. These mice appear to have progressively fewer and shorter periods of uninterrupted sleep, damage in the thalamus, and early deaths, similar to humans with FFI.\nThe Prion Alliance was established by husband and wife duo Eric Minikel and Sonia Vallabh after Vallabh's mother was diagnosed with the fatal disease. They conduct research at the Broad Institute to develop therapeutics for human prion diseases. Their hypothesis is that lowering PrP-levels may prevent the onset of FFI. Other research interests involve identifying biomarkers to track the progression of prion disease in living people.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43872", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43872", "title": "Johann Wilhelm von Archenholz", "text": "Johann Wilhelm Archenholz was born in Langfuhr (Wrzeszcz) near Danzig (Gda\u0144sk) on 3 September 1741. He was a Prussian officer, Professor of History and a publicist. His book about the history of the Seven Years' War (1756\u201363) was the basis for many reprints, as well as for school books.\nLife.\nArchenholz passed from the Berlin Cadet school into the Prussian army at the age of sixteen, and took part in the last campaigns of the Seven Years' War. Retiring from military service, on account of his wounds, with the rank of captain in 1763, he travelled for sixteen years and visited nearly all the countries of Europe, and resided in England for ten years from 1769 to 1779.\nReturning to Germany in 1780, he obtained a lay canonry at Magdeburg Cathedral, and immediately entered upon a literary career by publishing the periodical \"Litteratur- und V\u00f6lkerkunde\" (Leipzig, 1782\u20131791). This was followed in 1785 by \"England und Italien\" (Leipzig, 1787), in which he gives an appreciation of English political and social institutions. Between 1789 and 1798 he published his \"Annalen der britischen Geschichte\" (20 volumes). But the work by which he is best known to fame is his history of the Seven Years' War, \"Geschichte des siebenj\u00e4hrigen Krieges\" (first published in the \"Berliner historisches Taschenbuch\" of 1787, and later in 2 volumes.\nIn 1791 Archenholz lived in France with his family, publishing German language reports about the French Revolution in his journal \"Minerva\". While at first he agreed with the ideas of the revolution, his view was changed by the ongoing violence. In 1792 he had to flee the country as he was threatened to be beheaded following some of his political papers.\nIn 1792 he moved to Hamburg, and there, from 1792 to 1812, edited the \"Minerva\", which had a reputation for its literary, historical and political information.\nArchenholz commissioned a Berlin artist, Johann Friedrich Bolt, to produce a copper etching for Archenholz's History of Gustav Vasa of the famous Swedish Nobility. He died in \u00d6jendorf (part of Hamburg today) on 28 February 1812, where the street Archenholzstra\u00dfe (\"Archenholz street\") and a school called \"Grundschule Archenholzstra\u00dfe\" is named after him today.\nAssessment.\nArchenholz' understanding of his role as a publicist was very modern for his times. He strove not to deliver opinions to his readers but instead unbiased facts. His main interest was current politics in Europe as well as their historical development.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43876", "revid": "35111337", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43876", "title": "Franco Zeffirelli", "text": "Italian filmmaker (1923\u20132019)\nGian Franco Corsi Zeffirelli (; 12 February 1923 \u2013 15 June 2019) was an Italian stage and film director, producer, production designer and politician. He was one of the most significant opera and theatre directors of the post\u2013World War II era, gaining both acclaim and notoriety for his lavish stagings of classical works, as well as his film adaptations of the same.\nFilms he directed included the Shakespearean adaptations \"The Taming of the Shrew\" (1967), starring Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton; \"Romeo and Juliet\" (1968), for which he received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Director; and \"Hamlet\" (1990), starring Mel Gibson and Glenn Close. His Biblical television miniseries \"Jesus of Nazareth\" (1977) won both national and international acclaim and is still frequently shown at Christmas and Easter in many countries.\nA member of the party, he served as the Senator for Catania between 1994 and 2001.\nA Grand Officer of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic since 1977, Zeffirelli also received an honorary British knighthood in 2004. Zeffirelli was awarded the Premio Colosseo in 2009 by the city of Rome.\nEarly life.\nZeffirelli was born Gian Franco Corsi Zeffirelli in the outskirts of Florence, Tuscany, Italy, after an affair between Florentine Alaide Garosi, a fashion designer, and Ottorino Corsi, a wool and silk dealer from Vinci. Since both were married, Alaide was unable to use her surname or Corsi's for her child. She came up with \"Zeffiretti\", which are the \"little breezes\" mentioned in Mozart's opera \"Idomeneo\", of which she was quite fond. However, it was misspelt in the register and became Zeffirelli. When he was six years old, his mother died and he subsequently grew up under the auspices of the English expatriate community and was particularly involved with the so-called Scorpioni, who inspired his semi-autobiographical film \"Tea with Mussolini\" (1999).\nItalian researchers found that Zeffirelli was one of a handful of living people traceably consanguineous with Leonardo da Vinci. He was a descendant of one of da Vinci's siblings.\nZeffirelli graduated from the Accademia di Belle Arti Firenze in 1941 and, following his father's advice, entered the University of Florence to study art and architecture. After World War II broke out, he fought as a partisan with the Italian Resistance, before he met up with British soldiers of the 1st Battalion Scots Guards and became their interpreter. After the war, he re-entered the University of Florence to continue his studies, but when he saw Laurence Olivier's \"Henry V\" in 1945, he directed his attention toward theatre instead.\nWhile working for a scene painter in Florence, he was introduced to Luchino Visconti, who hired him as an assistant director for the film \"La Terra trema\", which was released in 1948. Visconti's methods had a deep impact on Zeffirelli's later work. He also worked with directors such as Vittorio De Sica and Roberto Rossellini. In the 1960s, he made his name designing and directing his own plays in London and New York City and soon transferred his ideas to the cinema.\nCareer.\nFilm.\nZeffirelli's first film as director was a version of \"The Taming of the Shrew\" (1967), originally intended for Sophia Loren and Marcello Mastroianni but featuring the Hollywood stars Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton in their stead. Taylor and Burton helped fund production and took a percentage of the profits rather than their normal salaries.\nWhile editing \"The Taming of the Shrew\", Zeffirelli's native Florence was devastated by floods. A month later, he released a short documentary, entitled \"\", to raise funds for the disaster appeal.\nZeffirelli's major breakthrough came the year after, when he presented two teenagers as \"Romeo and Juliet\" (1968). It made Zeffirelli a household name \u2013 no other subsequent work by him had the immediate impact of \"Romeo and Juliet\". The film earned $14.5 million in domestic rentals at the North American box office in 1969. It was re-released in 1973 and earned $1.7 million in rentals.\nFilm critic Roger Ebert, for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", wrote: \"I believe Franco Zeffirelli's \"Romeo and Juliet\" is the most exciting film of Shakespeare ever made\".\nAfter two successful film adaptations of Shakespeare, Zeffirelli went on to religious themes, first with a film about the life of St. Francis of Assisi titled \"Brother Sun, Sister Moon\" (1972), then his extended mini-series \"Jesus of Nazareth\" (1977) with an all-star cast. The latter was a major success in the ratings.\nHe moved on to contemporary themes with a remake of the boxing picture \"The Champ\" (1979) and the critically panned \"Endless Love\" (1981). In the 1980s, he made a series of successful films adapting opera to the screen, with such stars as Pl\u00e1cido Domingo, Teresa Stratas, Juan Pons and Katia Ricciarelli. He returned to Shakespeare with \"Hamlet\" (1990), casting Mel Gibson in the lead role. His adaptation of the Charlotte Bront\u00eb novel \"Jane Eyre\" (1996) was a critical success.\nZeffirelli frequently cast unknown actors in major roles: Leonard Whiting (Romeo in \"Romeo and Juliet\"), Graham Faulkner (St. Francis in \"Brother Sun, Sister Moon\") and Martin Hewitt (David Axelrod in \"Endless Love\").\nOpera.\nZeffirelli was a major director of opera productions from the 1950s in Italy and elsewhere in Europe as well as the United States. He began his career in the theatre as assistant to Luchino Visconti. Then he tried his hand at scenography. His first work as a director was buffo operas by Gioachino Rossini. He became a friend of Maria Callas and they worked together on a \"La traviata\" in Dallas, Texas, in 1958. Of particular note is his 1964 Royal Opera House production of \"Tosca\" with Maria Callas and Tito Gobbi. In the same year, he created Callas' last \"Norma\" at the Paris Opera. He also staged at the Vienna State Opera: \"Don Giovanni\" (1972), \"La Boh\u00e8me\" (1963), and \"Carmen\" with Elena Obraztsova and Pl\u00e1cido Domingo in 1978. Zeffirelli also collaborated with Joan Sutherland, designing and directing her performances of Gaetano Donizetti's \"Lucia di Lammermoor\" in 1959. Over the years he created several productions for the Metropolitan Opera in New York, including \"La boh\u00e8me\", \"Tosca\", \"Turandot\" and \"Don Giovanni\". When the new Metropolitan Opera opened at Lincoln Center, he directed its first production, Samuel Barber's \"Antony and Cleopatra\", starring Leontyne Price.\nHonours.\nIn 1996, he was awarded an honorary degree for services to the arts by the University of Kent at a graduation ceremony held in Canterbury Cathedral. In 1999, he received the Crystal Globe award for outstanding artistic contribution to world cinema at the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival. In November 2004, he was awarded an honorary knighthood by the United Kingdom.\nCriticism.\nZeffirelli received criticism from religious groups for what they call the blasphemous representation of biblical figures in his films. He also roused accusations of antisemitism for describing Martin Scorsese's \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" as a product of \"that Jewish cultural scum of Los Angeles which is always spoiling for a chance to attack the Christian world.\"\nZeffirelli was a highly conservative Catholic, and served two terms in the Italian senate as a member of Silvio Berlusconi's centre-right party. He was criticized by members of the gay community for upholding the Catholic Church's position on homosexuality and by others for support of the Church's position on abortion. At one point he even called for capital punishment for women who had terminated a pregnancy.\nHe roused controversy again when he told a newspaper in 2006 that he had not suffered any harm when sexually abused by a priest as a child.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1996, Zeffirelli came out as gay, but thereafter preferred to be discreet about his personal life. Zeffirelli said that he considered himself \"homosexual\" rather than gay, as he felt the term \"gay\" was less elegant. Zeffirelli adopted two adult sons, men with whom he had lived and who worked for him for years, managing his affairs.\nAllegations of sexual assault.\nWriter and film director Bruce Robinson claimed to have been the target of unwanted amorous attention from Zeffirelli during the filming of \"Romeo and Juliet\", in which Robinson played Benvolio. Robinson says that he based the lecherous character of Uncle Monty in the film \"Withnail and I\" on Zeffirelli.\nIn 2018, the American actor Johnathon Schaech alleged that Zeffirelli sexually assaulted him during the filming of \"Sparrow\" (\"Storia di una capinera\", 1993). Zeffirelli's son Giuseppe \"Pippo\", adopted by the filmmaker as an adult, issued a statement at the time denying the allegation.\nDeath.\nZeffirelli died at his home in Rome on 15 June 2019, aged 96.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43877", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43877", "title": "1 E-20 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43878", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43878", "title": "1 E-28 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43879", "revid": "113689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43879", "title": "1 E-25 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43880", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43880", "title": "1 E-3 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43881", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43881", "title": "1 E-4 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43882", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43882", "title": "1 E-5 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43883", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43883", "title": "1 E-6 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43884", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43884", "title": "1 E-7 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43885", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43885", "title": "1 E-8 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43886", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43886", "title": "1 E-9 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43887", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43887", "title": "1 E-10 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43888", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43888", "title": "1 E-11 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43889", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43889", "title": "1 E-12 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43890", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43890", "title": "1 E-13 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43891", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43891", "title": "1 E-14 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43892", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43892", "title": "1 E-15 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43893", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43893", "title": "1 E-16 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43894", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43894", "title": "1 E-17 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43895", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43895", "title": "1 E-18 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43896", "revid": "10702891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43896", "title": "Merced, California", "text": "City in California, United States\nMerced ( ; from , ) is a city in and the county seat of Merced County, California, United States, in the San Joaquin Valley. As of the 2020 census, the city had a population of 86,333, up from 78,958 in 2010. Incorporated on April 1, 1889, Merced is a charter city that operates under a council\u2013manager government. It is named after the Merced River, which flows nearby.\nMerced, known as the \"Gateway to Yosemite\", is less than two hours by automobile from Yosemite National Park to the east and Monterey Bay, the Pacific Ocean, and multiple beaches to the west. The community is served by the passenger rail service Amtrak, a minor, heavily subsidized airline through Merced Regional Airport, and three bus lines. It is approximately from Sacramento, from San Francisco, from Fresno, and from Los Angeles.\nIn 2005, the city became home to the 10th University of California campus, University of California, Merced (UC Merced), the first research university built in the U.S. in the 21st century.\nHistory.\nThe first Merced post office opened in 1870. Merced incorporated in 1889 and now operates under the council-manager form of government.\nDuring World War II, the Merced County fairgrounds were the site of a temporary \"assembly center\" where Japanese Americans were detained after being removed from their West Coast homes under Executive Order 9066. 4,669 men, women and children from central California (with most coming from Merced County) were confined in the Merced Assembly Center from May 6 to September 15, 1942, when they were transferred to the more permanent Granada internment camp in Colorado.\nSince 2005, Merced has been home to the University of California, Merced. Historic cultural attractions in the city include The Mainzer Theater which is known for its historic and architectural value, the County Courthouse Museum c.\u20091889, the Merced Multicultural Arts Center and the .\nAlso within a short distance from the city limits are the Castle Air Museum, Lake Yosemite, and Merced Falls. The city of Merced along with its surrounding cities are serviced by the \"Merced Sun-Star\" and the \"Merced County Times\". The \"Merced Sun-Star\" daily newspaper has a circulation of 14,219 daily and 18,569 Saturday in the Merced area. The paper was sold to U.S. Media in 1985 and was acquired by The McClatchy Company in January 2004.\nHomes at the median level in Merced had lost 62% of their value from the second quarter of 2006, when they peaked at $336,743, the biggest drop anywhere in the country. Home prices have since rebounded, with the median sale price in April 2018 at $247,000. The current average being $358,000. Investors from outside of the Valley were helping to drive up home prices.\nThe metro area went to a 14.2% unemployment rate in December 2013. Having since recovered to a rate of 8.7% in April 2018. Some efforts have been directed towards diversifying its economy and are showing a lowering trend in the overall unemployment rate, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.\nDuring the Great Recession Merced suffered one of the greatest property price collapses in the country and house prices at the end of 2009 had fallen to 1998 levels, according to Zillow, making housing affordable compared to many other California locations.\nThe economy has traditionally relied upon agribusiness and upon the presence of Castle Air Force Base. Over the past twenty years, more diversified industry has entered the area, including printing, fiberglass boat building, warehousing and distribution, and packaging industries.\nIn September 1995, Castle Air Force Base closed after phasing down over the previous three years. This affected residential real estate and some sectors of the retail and service economies, but overall retail continued to increase. Industrial development is increasing in the area. It is now known as the Castle Airport Aviation and Development Center. The Castle Air Museum remains at the site.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of .\nMerced is approximately southeast of San Francisco and northwest of Los Angeles.\nA major groundwater plume containing the contaminant PCE was discovered in Merced in 1987. Subsequently, drilling of new water wells was severely restricted.\nClimate.\nMerced has a cold semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: BSk), with its annual precipitation falling just short of a mediterranean climate. The city features very hot, dry summers and mild, wet winters. There are an average of 99.7 days with highs of or higher and an average of 27.8 days with lows of or lower. The record highest temperature of was recorded on September 6, 2022. The record lowest temperature of was recorded on December 24, 1990.\nThe wettest year was 1998 with and the driest year was 2013 with . The most rainfall in one month was in January 1909. The most rainfall in 24 hours was , which occurred on January 30, 1911, and March 9, 1911.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEconomy.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the city's Official Website the top employers in the city are:\nIn the summer of 2014, the Castle Commerce Center's call center closed, subtracting 400 jobs from AT&amp;T's share of employment.\nAgriculture.\nMerced is ranked as the sixth-top producing county in California. In 2019, Merced County generated $3.271 billion in total value of production. The top five commodities from 2019 in Merced are:\nEducation.\nMerced is home to a community college, Merced College\u00a0and the University of California Merced.\nUC Merced now enrolls 8,321 undergraduate and 772 graduate students for a total of 9,093 students, as reported in the university's fall 2021 census.\u00a0Of the 2021-2022 undergraduate degrees awarded, the top degrees were: 19% Biological Sciences, 16% Psychology, 11% Management, and 10% Computer Science Engineering. The University of California, Merced campus opened in late 2005 northeast of the city limits. UC Merced spans a campus area of 1,026 acres. UC Merced enrolled about 7,967 students during the 2017\u20132018 academic year.\nMerced is served by the Merced City School District, which has five main middle schools, Cruickshank Middle School, Herbert Hoover Middle School, Rivera Middle School, Weaver Middle School and Tenaya Middle School. There are also 14 elementary schools in this district.\nMerced Union High School District has three major public high school campuses in Merced, Merced High School, Golden Valley High School, and El Capitan High School as well as a few smaller campuses offering alternative education.\nMerced's community college, Merced College, has an enrollment of 8,996 students as of January 2021. The main campus of Merced College covers an area of 267 acres.https://\nHealth.\n Mercy Medical Center Merced. A 2016 Community Health Assessment https:// prepared by the Merced County Department of Public Health (MCDPH), determined that top health topics that affect Merced and Merced county are heart disease and stroke; diabetes; access to health care; and drug and alcohol abuse. In 2017 the MCDPH published the Merced County Community Health Improvement Plan https:// in an effort to \"address health disparities and to promote health equity with the goal of health and wellness for all county residents.\"\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020.\nThe 2020 United States census reported that Merced had a population of 86,333. The population density was . The racial makeup of Merced was 35.8% White, 5.4% African American, 2.5% Native American, 11.1% Asian, 0.3% Pacific Islander, 27.1% from other races, and 17.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 56.3% of the population.\nThe census reported that 98.9% of the population lived in households, 0.4% lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 0.6% were institutionalized.\nThere were 27,462 households, out of which 42.1% included children under the age of 18, 40.7% were married-couple households, 8.9% were cohabiting couple households, 31.0% had a female householder with no partner present, and 19.5% had a male householder with no partner present. 21.1% of households were one person, and 8.6% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 3.11. There were 19,546 families (71.2% of all households).\nThe age distribution was 28.9% under the age of 18, 12.3% aged 18 to 24, 27.6% aged 25 to 44, 19.7% aged 45 to 64, and 11.6% who were 65years of age or older. The median age was 30.5years. For every 100 females, there were 96.2 males.\nThere were 29,083 housing units at an average density of , of which 27,462 (94.4%) were occupied. Of these, 43.3% were owner-occupied, and 56.7% were occupied by renters.\nIn 2023, the US Census Bureau estimated that the median household income was $59,938, and the per capita income was $26,140. About 18.6% of families and 23.0% of the population were below the poverty line.\n2010.\nThe 2010 United States census reported that Merced had a population of 78,959. The population density was 3,386.4 people per square mile. (1,307.5/km2). The racial makeup of Merced was 41,177 (52.2%) White, 4,958 (6.3%) African American, 1,153 (1.5%) Native American, 9,342 (11.8%) Asian, 174 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 17,804 (22.5%) from other races, and 4,350 (5.5%) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 39,140 persons (49.6%).\nThe Census reported that 77,878 people (98.6% of the population) lived in households, 492 (0.6%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 588 (0.7%) were institutionalized.\nThere were 24,899 households, out of which 11,484 (46.1%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 10,958 (44.0%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 4,921 (19.8%) had a female householder with no husband present, 1,941 (7.8%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 2,156 (8.7%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 167 (0.7%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 5,356 households (21.5%) were made up of individuals, and 1,823 (7.3%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.13. There were 17,820 families (71.6% of all households); the average family size was 3.65.\nThe population was spread out, with 25,091 people (31.8%) under the age of 18, 10,475 people (13.3%) aged 18 to 24, 20,986 people (26.6%) aged 25 to 44, 15,484 people (19.6%) aged 45 to 64, and 6,922 people (8.8%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 28.1 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.6 males.\nThere were 27,446 housing units at an average density of , of which 10,637 (42.7%) were owner-occupied, and 14,262 (57.3%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 3.5%; the rental vacancy rate was 8.5%. 31,690 people (40.1% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 46,188 people (58.5%) lived in rental housing units.\nHmong community.\nEscaping persecution from Communist forces after the Laotian Civil War, Hmong refugees from Laos moved to the United States in the 1970s and '80s, first settling in Merced and other areas in the Central Valley of California. The Hmong could not initially take part in farming like they had expected, as the land was owned by other people. They could not get high end agricultural jobs because they did not speak sufficient English and Mexican migrants already held low end agricultural jobs. As such, a great many of Merced's Hmong collected social services and Hmong gangs arose, prompting other residents to perceive them as being the cause of economic troubles. As the Hmong settlement matured and the Hmong children gained English language skills, the town's overall attitude began to be more accepting of the Hmong community.\nThis acceptance is reflected in various services provided to the Hmong community. This includes the Merced Lao Family Community Inc., a nonprofit organization that provides social services to Hmong people, the Merced Department of Public Health's MATCH (Multidisciplinary Approach to Cross-Cultural Health) program, intending to draw Hmong patients into the health care system, a body of Hmong-speaking faculty and paraprofessionals (including college classes on Hmong culture and language), and media outlets for the Hmong community\u2014cable television channel Channel 11 broadcasts programming to the Hmong community twice per week and radio station KBIF 900 AM airs programming oriented towards Hmong people.\nWhile Merced has historically had a proportionally large portion of Hmong (in 1997, 12,000 of Merced's 61,000 residents were Hmong), demographic shifts have reduced this. The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act of 1996 prompted a move of some Hmong to Minnesota, North Carolina, and Wisconsin. More recently, many Hmong have gone to Alaska to work in crabbing and fishing industries that require little proficiency in English.\nBlack community.\nThrough the years, Merced County has recognized many historic milestones. Some of those essential moments include the rise of Merced's first Black mayor, Sam Pipes in 1983 and the visit by first lady Michelle Obama to UC Merced for the university's 2009 commencement.\nThere's also the story of the late Charles Ogletree, a Merced native who rose from poverty to become a respected Harvard Law professor. Ogletree taught both Barack and Michelle Obama at Harvard; he remained close to Barack Obama throughout his apolitical career.[13]\nOgletree wrote opinion pieces on the state of race in the United States for major publications.[14] Ogletree also served as the moderator for a panel discussion on civil rights in baseball on March 28, 2008, that accompanied the second annual Major League Baseball civil rights exhibition game the following day between the New York Mets and the Chicago White Sox.[15]\nRacial demographics.\nIn 2010, Latinos became a majority population in Merced and Merced County as the agricultural industry brought in migrant farm laborers. The area's affordable housing prices attracted both Latino and Asian immigrants. Merced has large Asian-American (e.g. Hmong, followed by Chinese, Vietnamese, Laotian, Cambodian, Filipino, Thai, Korean and Asian Indian) populations relative to the city and county's population size.\nIn Merced County, Black history goes back to before the Civil War. According to historian Sarah Lim, during the mid-1800s Blacks came to this region and California as enslaved persons, while others arrived as free settlers. The 2011 census reported that 9,837 Black or African Americans lived in Merced County\nCrime.\nIn 2021, Merced had approximately 4,000 violent crimes occur within the city. This means that with a population of just 89,303 people, in 2021, individuals had approximately a 4.5% chance of falling victim to a crime while living-in or visiting Merced. Of the crimes that occurred, roughly 1,200 were physical (such as assault, rape or homicide) and 2,500 were property-related (e.g. burglary and theft). However, these crimes occurring in 2021 resulted in 13 fatalities. With its high crime rate, Merced is considered one of the \"50 most dangerous\" Californian cities to live in.\nGovernment.\nIn the California State Legislature, Merced is in the senatorial district, represented by Democrat Anna Caballero, and in the Assembly district, represented by Democrat Esmeralda Soria.\nIn the United States House of Representatives, Merced is in California's congressional district, represented by Democrat Adam Gray.\nSports.\nUC Merced is a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) and competes in the California Pacific (Cal Pac) Conference. It offers men's and women's basketball, volleyball, soccer, water polo, cross country and track. In July 2024, it was announced that in 2026-2027, UC Merced will begin NCAA Division II competition in the 2025-26 academic year and will be fully eligible for postseason in 2026-27.\nMerced High School and Golden Valley High School sponsor athletics as well.\nMerced has a history of minor league baseball including the California League Merced Bears (1940s) and Atwater Angels (1970s) in nearby Atwater, California. There were the defunct Merced Black Bears of the Horizon Air Summer Series and the current Atwater Aviators of the Golden State Collegiate Baseball League.\nTransportation.\nRail.\n\"Gold Runner\" provides passenger service.\nThe Yosemite Valley Railroad ran from Merced between 1907 and 1945.\nHigh-speed rail.\nThe California High-Speed Rail Authority February 2016 draft business plan, outlined the Merced station as not beginning service at the same time as the initial San Jose to Bakersfield route in 2025, but would likely open in 2029 instead. This would make the leg between the Central Valley and Pacheco Pass the first to be constructed. The Merced City Council vigorously opposed the delay in their city's station opening, noting Merced's volume of commuters seeking high-speed rail to access jobs in Silicon Valley. In response, the April 2016 revisions to the business plan indeed included Merced in the initial construction segment, initially as a single-track spur connecting only to the westbound track to the Bay Area, with build out of the full Wye happening later. The system will run from San Francisco to the Los Angeles basin in under three hours at speeds capable of over 200 miles per hour. In August 2022, the CAHSRA announced that it had received a $25,000,000 RAISE Grant to advance design work from Madera to Merced.\nSample trips in the California High Speed rail would include:\nAltamont Corridor Express Extension\nThe ACE regional rail system is pursuing an extension to Merced as a part of its broader Altamont Corridor Vision plan. The Final Environmental Impact Report for the Ceres-Merced extension was approved on December 3, 2021.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences and notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43898", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43898", "title": "1 E-30 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43899", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43899", "title": "1 E-29 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43900", "revid": "40982560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43900", "title": "Tony Richardson", "text": "English theatre and film director (1928\u20131991)\nCecil Antonio Richardson (5 June 1928 \u2013 14 November 1991) was an English theatre and film director, producer and screenwriter, whose career spanned five decades. He was identified with the \"angry young men\" group of British directors and playwrights during the 1950s, and was later a key figure in the British New Wave filmmaking movement.\nHis films \"Look Back in Anger\" (1959), \"The Entertainer\" (1960), \"A Taste of Honey\" (1961), and \"The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner\" (1962) are considered classics of kitchen sink realism. He won the 1964 Academy Awards for Best Director and Best Picture for the film \"Tom Jones\". He was also a two-time BAFTA Award winner, and was twice nominated for the Palme d'Or.\nWith his wife Vanessa Redgrave, Richardson was the father to actresses Natasha Richardson and Joely Richardson.\nLife and career.\nEarly years and education.\nRichardson was born in Shipley, West Riding of Yorkshire in 1928 to Clarence Albert Richardson, a chemist, and his wife, Elsie Evans (n\u00e9e Campion). He lived on the edge of Saltaire as a young child and kept grass snakes with his childhood friend Joan Naylor. He was Head Boy at Ashville College, Harrogate and attended Wadham College, University of Oxford. His Oxford contemporaries included Rupert Murdoch, Margaret Thatcher, Kenneth Tynan, Lindsay Anderson and Gavin Lambert. He had the unprecedented distinction of being president of both the Oxford University Dramatic Society and the Experimental Theatre Club (the ETC), in addition to being the theatre critic for the university magazine \"Isis\". Those he cast in his student productions included Shirley Williams (as Cordelia), John Schlesinger, Nigel Davenport and Robert Robinson.\nCareer.\nIn 1955, in his directing debut, Richardson produced Jean Giraudoux's \"The Apollo of Bellac\" for television with Denholm Elliott and Natasha Parry in the main roles. Around the same time he began to be active in Britain's Free Cinema movement, co-directing the non-fiction short \"Momma Don't Allow\" (also 1955) with Karel Reisz.\nPart of the British \"New Wave\" of directors, he was involved in the formation of the English Stage Company, along with his close friend George Goetschius and George Devine. He directed John Osborne's play \"Look Back in Anger\" at the Royal Court Theatre, and in the same period he directed Shakespeare in Stratford-upon-Avon. Then in 1957 he directed Laurence Olivier as Archie Rice in Osborne's next play \"The Entertainer\", again for the Royal Court.\nIn 1959, Richardson co-founded Woodfall Film Productions with John Osborne and producer Harry Saltzman, and, as Woodfall's debut, directed the film version of \"Look Back in Anger\" (1959), his first feature film. \"The Entertainer\" (1960), \"A Taste of Honey\" (1961), and \"The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner\" (1962), based on the novel by Alan Sillitoe, also were produced by Woodfall.\nMany of Richardson's films, such as \"A Taste of Honey\" and \"The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner\", were part of the acclaimed kitchen sink realism movement popular in Britain at the time, and several of his films continue to be held as cornerstones of the movement.\nIn 1964, Richardson received two Academy Awards (Best Director and Best Picture) for \"Tom Jones\" (1963) based on the novel by Henry Fielding. In the same year he also joined the \"Who Killed Kennedy?\" committee set up by Bertrand Russell.\nHis next film was \"The Loved One\" (1965), in which he worked with established stars, including John Gielgud, Rod Steiger and Robert Morse, and worked in Hollywood both on location and on the sound stage. In his autobiography, he confesses that he did not share the general admiration of Haskell Wexler, who worked on \"The Loved One\" as both director of photography and a producer.\nAmong stars that Richardson directed were Jeanne Moreau, Orson Welles, Rob Lowe, Milton Berle, Trevor Howard, David Hemmings, Nicol Williamson, Tom Courtenay, Lynn Redgrave, Marianne Faithfull, Richard Burton, Jodie Foster, Anthony Hopkins, Mick Jagger, Katharine Hepburn, Seth Green, Tommy Lee Jones and Judi Dench. His musical composers included Antoine Duhamel, John Addison and Shel Silverstein. His screenwriters were Jean Genet, Christopher Isherwood, Terry Southern, Marguerite Duras, Edward Bond (adapting Vladimir Nabokov) and Edward Albee. Richardson and Osborne eventually fell out during production of the film \"Charge of the Light Brigade\" (1968). The basic issue was Osborne's unwillingness to go through the rewrite process, more arduous in film than it is in the theatre. Richardson had a different version. In his autobiography (p.\u00a0195), he writes that Osborne was angry at being replaced in a small role by Laurence Harvey to whom the producers had obligations. Osborne took literary revenge by creating a fictionalised and pseudonymous Richardson \u2013 a domineering and arrogant character whom everyone hated \u2013 in his play \"The Hotel in Amsterdam\".\nRichardson's work was stylistically varied. \"Mademoiselle\" (1966) was shot noir-style on location in rural France with a static camera, monochrome film stock and no music. \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\" (1968) was part epic and part animated feature. \"Ned Kelly\" (1970) was what might be called an Aussie-western. \"Laughter in the Dark\" (1969) and \"A Delicate Balance\" (1973) were psycho-dramas. \"Joseph Andrews\" (1977), based on another novel by Henry Fielding, was a return to the mood of \"Tom Jones\".\nIn 1970, Richardson was set to direct a film about Vaslav Nijinsky with a script by Edward Albee. It was to have starred Rudolf Nureyev as Nijinsky, Claude Jade as Romola and Paul Scofield as Diaghilev, but producer Harry Saltzman cancelled the project during pre-production.\nIn 1974, he travelled to Los Angeles to work on a script (never produced) with Sam Shepard, and took up residence there. Later that year, he began work on \"Mahogany\" (1975), starring Diana Ross, but was fired by Motown head Berry Gordy shortly after production began, owing to creative differences.\nHe wrote and directed the comedy-drama \"The Hotel New Hampshire\" (1984), based on John Irving's novel of the same name and starring Jodie Foster, Beau Bridges and Rob Lowe. Although it was a box-office failure, the film received a positive critical reception.\nRichardson made four more major films before his death. His last, \"Blue Sky\" (1994), was not released for nearly three years after he died. Jessica Lange won a Best Actress Oscar for her performance in the film.\nIn 1966, Richardson is alleged to have financed the escape from Wormwood Scrubs prison of the spy and double agent George Blake.\nPersonal life and death.\nRichardson was married to English actress Vanessa Redgrave from 1962 to 1967. The couple had two daughters, Natasha (1963\u20132009) and Joely (born 1965), then he left Redgrave for French actress and singer Jeanne Moreau. In 1972, he had a relationship with Grizelda Grimond, who was a secretary for Richardson's former business partner Oscar Lewenstein, and the daughter of British politician Jo Grimond. Grizelda Grimond gave birth to his daughter, Katherine Grimond, on 8 January 1973.\nRichardson was bisexual. He died of complications from AIDS on 14 November 1991 at the age of 63.\nWorks.\nFilm.\nShort film\nFeature film\nAccolades for Richardson's directed features.\nDirected Academy Award Performances \nUnder Richardson's direction, these actors have received Oscar nominations (and 1 win) for their performances in these respective roles.\nTelevision.\nTV movies\nTV series\nTheatre.\n\"sources: Adler; Little &amp; McLaughlin; Richardson\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43901", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43901", "title": "1 E20 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43902", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43902", "title": "1 E19 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43903", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43903", "title": "1 E18 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43904", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43904", "title": "1 E16 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43905", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43905", "title": "1 E15 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43906", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43906", "title": "1 E14 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43907", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43907", "title": "1 E13 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43908", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43908", "title": "1 E12 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43909", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43909", "title": "1 E11 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43910", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43910", "title": "Albert Finney", "text": "English actor (1936\u20132019)\nAlbert Finney (9 May 1936\u00a0\u2013 7 February 2019) was an English actor. He attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and worked in the theatre before attaining fame for movie acting during the early 1960s, debuting with \"The Entertainer\" (1960), directed by Tony Richardson, who had previously directed him in theatre. He maintained a successful career in theatre, film and television.\nHe is known for his roles in \"Saturday Night and Sunday Morning\" (1960), \"Tom Jones\" (1963), \"Two for the Road\" (1967), \"Scrooge\" (1970), \"Annie\" (1982), \"The Dresser\" (1983), \"Miller's Crossing\" (1990), \"A Man of No Importance\" (1994), \"Erin Brockovich\" (2000), \"Big Fish\" (2003), \"A Good Year\" (2006), \"The Bourne Ultimatum\" (2007), \"Before the Devil Knows You're Dead\" (2007), and the James Bond film \"Skyfall\" (2012), and for his performances on stage and television.\nA recipient of BAFTA, Golden Globe, Emmy, Screen Actors Guild, Silver Bear and Volpi Cup awards, Finney was nominated for an Academy Award five times, as Best Actor four times, for \"Tom Jones\" (1963), \"Murder on the Orient Express\" (1974), \"The Dresser\" (1983), and \"Under the Volcano\" (1984), and as Best Supporting Actor for \"Erin Brockovich\" (2000). He received several awards for his performance as Winston Churchill in the 2002 BBC\u2013HBO television biographical movie \"The Gathering Storm\".\nEarly life.\nFinney was born on 9 May 1936 in Salford, Lancashire, the youngest of three children and only son of Albert Finney, a bookmaker, and Alice (n\u00e9e Hobson). He was educated at Tootal Drive Primary School, Salford Grammar School, and the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA), from which he graduated in 1956.\nCareer.\n1956\u20131962: Early career.\nWhile at RADA, Finney made an early television appearance playing Mr Hardcastle in Oliver Goldsmith's \"She Stoops to Conquer.\" The BBC filmed and broadcast the RADA students' performances at the Vanbrugh Theatre in London on Friday 6 January 1956. Other members of the cast included Roy Kinnear and Richard Briers. Finney graduated from RADA and became a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company. He was offered a contract by the Rank Organisation, but refused it to perform for the Birmingham Rep. He was in a production of \"The Miser\" for Birmingham Rep, which was filmed for the BBC in 1956. Also for the BBC he appeared in \"The Claverdon Road Job\" (1957) and \"View Friendship and Marriage\" (1958).\nAt Birmingham he played the title role of \"Henry V\", and in 1958, made his London stage debut in Jane Arden's \"The Party\", directed by Charles Laughton, who featured in the production along with his wife, Elsa Lanchester. In 1959, Finney appeared at Stratford in the title role of \"Coriolanus\", replacing an ill Laurence Olivier. Finney guest featured for several episodes of \"Emergency-Ward 10\" and was Lysander in a TV version of \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" (1959) directed by Peter Hall.\nFinney's first film appearance was in Tony Richardson's \"The Entertainer\" (1960), with Laurence Olivier. Finney and Alan Bates played Olivier's sons. He made his film breakthrough in the same year with his portrayal of a disillusioned factory worker in Karel Reisz's film version of Alan Sillitoe's \"Saturday Night and Sunday Morning\" (1960), produced by Richardson. The film was a success, being the third most popular movie in Britain that year. It earned more than half a million pounds. Finney then did \"Billy Liar\" (1960) on stage and for British television. Finney had been chosen to play T. E. Lawrence in David Lean's production of \"Lawrence of Arabia\" after a successful and elaborate screen-test that took four days to shoot. However, Finney baulked at signing a multi-year contract for producer Sam Spiegel and chose to decline the role.\nFinney created the title role in \"Luther\", the 1961 play by John Osborne depicting the life of Martin Luther. He performed the role with the English Stage Company in London, Nottingham, Paris and New York. The original West End run at the Phoenix ended in March 1962, after 239 performances there, when Finney had to quit the cast to fulfil a contractual obligation with a film company.\n1963\u20131977.\nFinney starred in the Academy Award-winning 1963 film \"Tom Jones\", directed by Richardson and written by Osborne. Due to the success of \"Tom Jones\", British exhibitors voted Finney the ninth most popular film actor in 1963. Finney received 10% of the film's earnings, which made him over $1 million.\nFinney followed this with a small part in ensemble war film \"The Victors\" (1963), which was a box-office failure. He then made his Broadway debut in \"Luther\" in 1963. When that run ended he decided to take a year off and sail around the world. \"People told me to cash in on my success while I was hot,\" he later said. \"I'd been acting for about eight years and had only had one vacation\u00a0... Captain Cook had been a hero of mine when I was a kid, and I thought it would be exciting to go to some of the places in the Pacific where he'd been.\" The success of \"Tom Jones\" enabled Finney to produce his next film, \"Night Must Fall\", in 1964, which he also featured in and which was directed by Reisz. A remake of the classic 1937 film of the same title, the film was a failure and Finney's performance received poor reviews.\nFinney undertook a season of plays at the Royal National Theatre, including \"Miss Julie\" by August Strindberg in 1965. He continued acting on films with \"Two for the Road\" (1967) co-featuring Audrey Hepburn. He and Michael Medwin formed a production company, Memorial Productions, which made \"Privilege\" (1967), directed by Peter Watkins; \"The Burning\" (1968), a short directed by Stephen Frears; and \"If...\" (1968), directed by Lindsay Anderson. Memorial also did stage productions, such as \"A Day in the Death of Joe Egg\", which Finney performed in London and then Broadway. Memorial also produced some in which Finney did not appear, such as \"Spring and Port Wine\" and \"The Burgular\". Memorial then made \"Charlie Bubbles\" (1968), which Finney featured in and also directed. Liza Minnelli made her feature debut in the movie. Finney later called it \"the most intense sense of creation I've ever had.\" Finney featured in \"The Picasso Summer\" in 1969, and played the title role in the musical \"Scrooge\" in 1970.\nFinney then made \"Gumshoe\" (1971), the first feature film directed by Stephen Frears, for Memorial. Memorial continued to produce films in which Finney did not appear: \"Spring and Port Wine\" (1970), with James Mason; \"Loving Memory\" (1971), an early directorial effort from Tony Scott; \"Bleak Moments\" (1971), the first feature from Mike Leigh; \"O Lucky Man!\" (1973) for Anderson; and \"Law and Disorder\" (1974); filmed in Hollywood. In 1972, Finney returned to stage after a six-year absence with \"Alpha Beta\", which he later filmed on television with Rachel Roberts. Memorial Productions stopped producing and Finney emphasized acting. \"It was OK at first,\" he later said, \"but in the end it was sitting in an office, pitching ideas to Hollywood and waiting for the phone to ring.\"\nFinney played Agatha Christie's Belgian master detective Hercule Poirot in the film \"Murder on the Orient Express\" (1974). Finney became so well known for the role that he complained that it typecast him for a number of years, \"People really do think I am 300 pounds with a French accent\", he said. He received nominations for the Academy Award for Best Actor and the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role.\nHe announced he intended to direct the film, \"The Girl in Melanie Klein\", for Memorial, but it was not made.\nFinney decided to take time off from features and focus on stage acting, doing classics at the National Theatre in London. \"I felt that it needed commitment,\" he later said. \"When you're making movies all the time, you stop breathing. You literally don't breathe in the same way that you do when you're playing the classics. When you have to deliver those long, complex speeches on stage, you can't heave your shoulders after every sentence. The set of muscles required for that kind of acting need to be trained. I really wanted to try and do justice to my own potential in the parts. I didn't want to be a movie actor just dropping in, doing Hamlet and taking off again. I wanted to feel part of the company.\"\nFinney was at the National for over three years during which he played in Hamlet, Macbeth, Tamburlaine, and plays by Anton Chekhov. Finney made a TV film \"Forget-Me-Not-Lane\" in 1975, which was written by Peter Nichols, and he also performed a brief role in \"The Duellists\" (1977), the first feature directed by Ridley Scott. He also released an album through Motown.\n1981\u20131999.\nFinney had not played a major role in a feature film in six years, and started to think about resuming work with cinema. The last two successful films he had made were \"Scrooge\" and \"Orient Express\" in which he was heavily disguised. \"Most Americans probably think I weigh 300 pounds, have black hair and talk with a French accent like Hercule Poirot,\" said Finney. \"So I thought they should have a look at me while I was still almost a juvenile and kind of cute.\" Finney decided to make six movies in succession \"so that I could relax and get back into it again. In order to feel really assured and comfortable in front of a camera, you've got to do it for a while.\" The first three were thrillers: \"Loophole\" (1981), with Susannah York; \"Wolfen\" (1981), directed by Michael Wadleigh; and \"Looker\" (1981), written and directed by Michael Crichton. He received excellent reviews for his performance in the drama \"Shoot the Moon\" (1982). Finney said the role \"required personal acting; I had to dig into myself. When you have to expose yourself and use your own vulnerability, you can get a little near the edge.\"\nLess well received was his performance as Daddy Warbucks in the Hollywood film version of \"Annie\" (1982), which was directed by John Huston. Finney said doing this movie after \"Shoot The Moon\" was \"marvelous. I use a completely different side of myself as Warbucks. \"Annie\" is show biz; it's open, simple and direct. It needs bold, primary colors. I don't have to reveal the inner workings of the character, and that's a relief.\"\nFinney featured in Peter Yates-directed movie \"The Dresser\" (1983) as Sir, a deteriorating veteran actor struggling through a difficult performance of \"King Lear\". He earned nominations for the Academy Award for Best Actor, the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Drama. He then played the title role for the TV film \"Pope John Paul II\" (1984), his American television debut. Huston cast Finney in the lead role of \"Under the Volcano\" (1984), which earned both men great acclaim, including another Best Actor Oscar nomination for Finney. Finney played the lead role of Sydney Kentridge in \"The Biko Inquest\", a 1984 dramatization of the inquest into the death of Steve Biko which was filmed for television after a London run.\nFinney performed on stage in \"Orphans\" in 1986, and the film version, directed by Alan J. Pakula. He had the lead in a television miniseries, \"The Endless Game\" (1989), written and directed by Bryan Forbes. Finney began the 1990s with the lead role in a film for HBO, \"The Image\" (1990). He received great acclaim playing the gangster boss in \"Miller's Crossing\" (1990), replacing Trey Wilson shortly before filming. Finney made an appearance at Roger Waters' \"The Wall \u2013 Live in Berlin\" (1990), where he played \"The Judge\" during the performance of \"The Trial\".\nFinney featured in the BBC \"TV serial The Green Man\", based on the Kingsley Amis novel. He followed it with \"The Playboys\" (1992) for Gillies MacKinnon; \"Rich in Love\" (1993) for Bruce Beresford; \"The Browning Version\" (1994) for Mike Figgis; \"A Man of No Importance\" (1994), for Suri Krishnamma; and \"The Run of the Country\" (1995) for Peter Yates. In 1994, Finney played a gay bus conductor in early 1960s Dublin in \"A Man of No Importance\". He had the main role in Dennis Potter's final two plays, \"Karaoke\" and \"Cold Lazarus\" (both 1996). In the latter he played a frozen, disembodied head. Finney did \"Nostromo\" (1997) for television, and \"Washington Square\" (1997) for Agnieszka Holland then made \"A Rather English Marriage\" (1998) with Tom Courtenay. He had supporting roles in \"Breakfast of Champions\" (1999) and \"Simpatico\" (1999).\n2000\u20132019.\nFinney had his biggest success in several years with \"Erin Brockovich\" (2000), alongside Julia Roberts for Steven Soderbergh. His portrayal of real-life California lawyer Edward L. Masry earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, his fifth and final Oscar nomination. Finney had a cameo in Soderbergh's \"Traffic\" (2000) and played Ernest Hemingway in \"Hemingway, the Hunter of Death\" (2001) for TV. He had the main role in \"Delivering Milo\" (2001) and in 2002 his critically acclaimed portrayal of Winston Churchill in \"The Gathering Storm\" won him British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA), Emmy and Golden Globe awards as Best Actor.\nHe also played the title role of the television series \"My Uncle Silas\", based on the short stories by H. E. Bates, about a roguish but lovable poacher-cum-farm labourer looking after his great-nephew. The show played for two series broadcast in 2001 and 2003. Finney had a major role in \"Big Fish\" (2003) directed by Tim Burton, and did another cameo for Soderbergh in \"Ocean's Twelve\" (2004). He sang in Tim Burton's \"Corpse Bride\" (2005) and the film of \"Aspects of Love\" (2005).\nFinney was reunited with Ridley Scott in \"A Good Year\" (2006). He had support roles in \"Amazing Grace\" (2006), \"The Bourne Ultimatum\" (2007), and \"Before the Devil Knows You're Dead\" (2007), which reunited him with \"Murder on the Orient Express\" director Sidney Lumet. His final film role was in \"Skyfall\" (2012). A lifelong supporter of Manchester United Football Club, Finney narrated the documentary \"Munich\", about the air crash that killed most of the Busby Babes in 1958, which was shown on United's TV channel MUTV in February 2008.\nTheatre.\nHe received Tony Award nominations for \"Luther\" (1964) and \"A Day in the Death of Joe Egg\" (1968), and also starred on stage in \"Love for Love\", Strindberg's \"Miss Julie\", \"Black Comedy\", \"The Country Wife\", \"Alpha Beta\", Beckett's \"Krapp's Last Tape\", \"Tamburlaine the Great\", \"Another Time\" and, his last stage appearance, in 1997, \"Art\" by Yasmina Reza, which preceded the 1998 Tony Award-winning Broadway run.\nHe won an Olivier Award for \"Orphans\" in 1986 and won three \"Evening Standard\" Theatre Awards for Best Actor.\nFinney never abandoned stage work and continued his association with the National Theatre Company in London, where he had performed during the mid-1960s in Shakespeare's \"Much Ado About Nothing\" at the Old Vic and Chekhov's \"The Cherry Orchard\" during the 1970s at the National Theatre.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1957, Finney married actress Jane Wenham; they had a son, Simon Finney, who works in the movie industry as a camera operator. They divorced in 1961. In 1970, Finney married French actress Anouk Aim\u00e9e, a union that lasted eight years. In 2006, he married Penelope Delmage, a travel agent. They remained together until Finney's death.\nIn May 2011, Finney disclosed that he had been receiving treatment for kidney cancer. According to a 2012 interview, he had been diagnosed with the disease five years earlier and had surgery, followed by six rounds of chemotherapy. \nDeath.\nFinney died of a chest infection at the Royal Marsden Hospital on 7 February 2019; he was 82.\nAwards and nominations.\nFinney declined the offer of a CBE in 1980, as well as a knighthood in 2000. He criticised such honours as \"perpetuating snobbery\".\nOther awards.\nOther awards include: a Golden Laurel for his work on \"Scrooge\" (1970) and for his work on \"Tom Jones\", for which he was the 3rd Place Winner for the \"Top Male Comedy Performance\" for 1964. He was honoured by the Los Angeles Film Critics Association as Best Actor for \"Under the Volcano\" (which he tied with F. Murray Abraham for \"Amadeus\"), the National Board of Review Best Actor award for \"Saturday Night and Sunday Morning\", and the New York Film Critics Circle Best Actor award for \"Tom Jones\".\nFinney won two Screen Actors Guild Awards, for Best Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role, for \"Erin Brockovich\", and as a member of the acting ensemble in the film \"Traffic\". He was also nominated for \"The Gathering Storm\", for Best Performance by a Male Actor in a Television Movie or Miniseries, but did not win.\nHe won the Silver Berlin Bear award for Best Actor, for \"The Dresser\", at the 34th Berlin International Film Festival in 1984.\nHe won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor, for \"Tom Jones\", at the Venice Film Festival.\nIn 2001, Finney was awarded the BAFTA Fellowship for his achievements in film.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43913", "revid": "50953534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43913", "title": "Anthony Quinn", "text": "American actor (1915\u20132001)\nManuel Antonio Rodolfo Quinn Oaxaca (April 21, 1915 \u2013 June 3, 2001), known as Anthony Quinn, was an American actor. He was known for his portrayal of earthy, passionate characters \"marked by a brutal and elemental virility\" in over 100 film, television and stage roles between 1936 and 2002. He was a two-time Academy Award winner, and was also nominated for five Golden Globe Awards, two BAFTA Awards and a Tony Award.\nQuinn was born in Chihuahua City, Mexico, and was raised in El Paso, Texas and East Los Angeles. After stints as a boxer and an architect, he made his film debut in the Cecil B. DeMille Western \"The Plainsman\" in 1936. Initially typecast as a \"heavy\" and playing other minor parts as well, he was gradually cast in more substantial parts, including co-starring roles in \"Blood and Sand\" (1941) and \"The Ox-Bow Incident\" (1943). He won his first Oscar, for Best Supporting Actor, for his portrayal of Eufemio Zapata in \"Viva Zapata!\" (1952), becoming the first Mexican-born performer to win an Academy Award. He received his second Oscar in 1957 for \"Lust for Life\".\nHe would be nominated for Best Actor twice more, for his roles in \"Wild is the Wind\" (1958) and \"Zorba the Greek\" (1964). His other notable films included \"La Strada\" (1954), \"The Guns of Navarone\" (1961), \"Requiem for a Heavyweight\" (1962), \"Lawrence of Arabia\" (1962), \"Guns for San Sebastian\" (1968), \"The Shoes of the Fisherman\" (1968), \"Across 110th Street\" (1972), \"The Message\" (1976), \"Lion of the Desert\" (1980), \"Jungle Fever\" (1991) and \"Seven Servants\" (1996). He also starred in the Broadway plays \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" (replacing Marlon Brando), \"Becket\" (earning a Tony nomination for Best Actor in a Play), and \"Zorba\" (reprising his film role).\nAside from his acting career, Quinn was also a civil rights activist, an avid painter, and the author of several autobiographical books. In 1987, he was presented with the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Lifetime Achievement Award. Through both his artistic endeavors and activism, he is considered a seminal figure of Latin-American representation in the media of the United States.\nEarly life and education.\n1915\u20131936: Childhood, studies and early acting.\nManuel Antonio Rodolfo Quinn Oaxaca was born April 21, 1915, in Chihuahua, Mexico, during the Mexican Revolution to Manuela \"Nellie\" (n\u00e9e Oaxaca) and Francisco \"Frank\" Quinn. Frank Quinn was born to an Irish immigrant father from County Cork and a Mexican mother. Frank reportedly rode with Mexican revolutionary Pancho Villa, then later moved to the East Los Angeles neighborhood of City Terrace and became an assistant cameraman at a movie studio. In Quinn's autobiography, \"The Original Sin: A Self-portrait by Anthony Quinn\", he denied being the son of an \"Irish adventurer\" and attributed that tale to Hollywood publicists. Quinn later said he was not accepted in Mexico because of his surname.\nWhen he was six years old, Quinn attended a Catholic church and even contemplated becoming a priest, but at the age of 11, he joined the Pentecostals at the International Church of the Foursquare Gospel, which was founded and led by the evangelical preacher Aimee Semple McPherson. For a time, Quinn played in the church's band and was an apprentice preacher with the evangelist. \"I have known most of the great actresses of my time, and not one of them could touch her,\" Quinn once said of the spellbinding McPherson, whom he credited with inspiring Zorba's gesture of the dramatically outstretched hand.\nQuinn grew up first in El Paso, Texas, and later in East Los Angeles and in the Echo Park area of Los Angeles, California. He attended Hammel Street Elementary School, Belvedere Junior High School, Polytechnic High School, and Belmont High School in Los Angeles, with future baseball player and \"General Hospital\" star John Beradino, but left before graduating. In June 1987, Tucson High School in Arizona awarded him an honorary high-school diploma.\nAs a young man, Quinn boxed professionally to earn money, then studied art and architecture under Frank Lloyd Wright at the designer's Arizona residence and his Wisconsin studio, Taliesin. The two men became friends. When Quinn mentioned that he wanted to be an actor, Wright encouraged him. Quinn said he had been offered $800 per week by a film studio and did not know what to do. Wright replied, \"Take it, you'll never make that much with me.\" During a 1999 interview on \"Private Screenings with Robert Osborne\", Quinn said the contract was for only $300 per week.\nCareer.\n1936\u20131952: Beginnings in cinema.\nAfter a short time performing on the stage, Quinn launched his film career performing character roles in the 1936 films \"The Plainsman\" (as a Cheyenne Indian after Custer's defeat with Gary Cooper), \"Parole\" (in which he made his debut), and \"The Milky Way\", his first motion picture, although he was not credited. He played \"ethnic\" villains in Paramount films such as \"Dangerous to Know\" (1938) with Anna May Wong and \"Road to Morocco\" with Bing Crosby and Bob Hope, and played a more sympathetic Crazy Horse in \"They Died with Their Boots On\" with Errol Flynn.\nA breakthrough in his career occurred in 1941, when he received an offer to play a matador in the bullfighting-themed \"Blood and Sand\" with Tyrone Power and Rita Hayworth. In 1942, Quinn co-starred alongside Power in another critical and financial success, the swashbuckling adventure \"The Black Swan\". In 1943, he had a role in the Oscar-nominated Western \"The Ox-Bow Incident\". He co-starred in \"Sinbad the Sailor\" (1947) with Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. and Maureen O'Hara.\nBy 1947, Quinn had appeared in more than 50 films and had played a variety of characters, including Indians, Mafia dons, Hawaiian chiefs, Filipino freedom fighters, Chinese guerrillas, and Arab sheiks. He returned to the theater, replacing Marlon Brando as Stanley Kowalski in \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" on Broadway. In 1947, he became a naturalized citizen of the United States.\nHe returned to Hollywood in the early 1950s, and was cast in a series of B-adventures such as \"Mask of the Avenger\" (1951). He solidified his position as one of Hollywood's premier actors in Elia Kazan's \"Viva Zapata!\" (1952), opposite Marlon Brando. Quinn's performance as Zapata's brother won him an Oscar for Best Supporting Actor while Brando lost the Oscar for Best Actor to Gary Cooper in \"High Noon\". Quinn holds the distinction of being the first Mexican-American to win an Academy Award.\n1953\u20131959: International films and career success.\nIn the late 1950s, Quinn traveled to Rome, where he collaborated with several renowned Italian filmmakers and established himself as a star of world cinema. He worked with Dino De Laurentiis and Carlo Ponti in the Kirk Douglas film \"Ulysses\", and starred as Attila the Hun, with Sophia Loren, in \"Attila\". In 1953, he turned in one of his best performances as a dim-witted, thuggish, and volatile strongman in Federico Fellini's Oscar-winning \"La Strada\" (1954), opposite Giulietta Masina.\nQuinn won his second Oscar for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of painter Paul Gauguin in Vincente Minnelli's \"Lust for Life\" (1956), alongside Kirk Douglas, who portrayed Vincent van Gogh. Quinn also starred as Quasimodo in the French-language film \"The Hunchback of Notre Dame\". Even after his return to the United States, Quinn continued to appear periodically in European films. His frequent portrayal of Italian characters and appearance in Italian films led to the popular misconception that he was, in fact, Italian.\n1959\u20131969: Return to Hollywood and Broadway.\nThe following year, he received an Oscar nomination for Best Actor for his part in George Cukor's \"Wild Is the Wind\". Quinn starred in the film \"The Savage Innocents\" (1959) as Inuk, an Eskimo who finds himself caught between two clashing cultures. He teamed with Kirk Douglas once again in the Western \"Last Train from Gun Hill\" (1959).\nHe appeared on Broadway to great acclaim in \"Becket\", as King Henry II to Laurence Olivier's Thomas Becket in 1960. Quinn's performance earned him a Tony Award nomination for best leading actor and \"Becket\" received the award for best play. An erroneous story arose in later years that during the run, Quinn and Olivier switched roles and Quinn played Becket to Olivier's King. In fact, Quinn left the production for a film, never having played Becket, and director Peter Glenville suggested a road tour with Olivier as Henry. Olivier happily agreed and Arthur Kennedy took on the role of Becket for the tour and brief return to Broadway.\nAs the decade ended, Quinn allowed his age to show and began his transformation into a major character actor. His physique filled out, his hair grayed, and his once smooth, swarthy face weathered and became more rugged. He played a Greek resistance fighter in \"The Guns of Navarone\" (1961), an aging boxer in \"Requiem for a Heavyweight\", and the Bedouin \"shaikh\" Auda abu Tayi in \"Lawrence of Arabia\" (both 1962). \"Lawrence of Arabia\" would go on to win the Oscar and Golden Globe for best picture, and Quinn received a Golden Globe nomination for best actor alongside co-star Peter O'Toole. He also played the title role in the 1961 film \"Barabbas\", based on a novel by P\u00e4r Lagerkvist. In 1962, he returned to Broadway, playing the role of Caesario Grimaldi in the Tony Award-nominated \"Tchin-Tchin\", and had the lead role in the film \"Requiem for a Heavyweight\".\nThe success of \"Zorba the Greek\" in 1964 resulted in another Oscar nomination for Best Actor. Other films included \"The 25th Hour\", \"The Magus\", \"Guns for San Sebastian\", and \"The Shoes of the Fisherman\". In 1969, he starred in \"The Secret of Santa Vittoria\" with Anna Magnani; each was nominated for a Golden Globe Award.\n1970\u20131979: Television and later films.\nIn 1970 Quinn starred as a liberal sociology professor in the campus unrest drama \"R. P. M.,\" opposite Ann-Margret, and as a Smoky Mountains backwoodsman in \"A Walk in the Spring Rain,\" Ingrid Bergman's first American film in 20 years. In 1971, after the success of a TV movie named \"The City\", where Quinn played Mayor Thomas Jefferson Alcala, he starred in the television series, \"The Man and the City\". Quinn's subsequent television appearances were sporadic, including \"Jesus of Nazareth\".\nIn 1972, he co-starred with Yaphet Kotto in the blaxploitation film \"Across 110th Street\". He played NYPD Captain Frank Martelli, who along with Kotto, was investigating a robbery-homicide of Italian and Black gangsters in Harlem, New York City. He played the old racist, violent captain, against Kotto's modern, educated, enlightened lieutenant.\nIn 1976, Quinn starred in the movie \"Mohammad, Messenger of God\" (also known as \"The Message\"), about the origin of Islam, as Hamza, a highly respected uncle of Mohammad, the prophet of Islam. In 1981, he starred in \"Lion of the Desert\". Quinn played real-life Bedouin leader Omar Mukhtar, who fought Benito Mussolini's Italian troops in the deserts of Libya.\nIn 1979, Quinn starred in the film \"The Passage\", as a Basque shepherd during WWII. He was tasked with leading a scientist and his family across the Pyrenees, while pursued by Nazis. It also starred James Mason and Malcolm McDowell.\n1980\u20131994: Final works.\nIn 1983, he reprised his role as Zorba for 362 performances in a successful musical version, called \"Zorba\", opposite fellow film co-star Lila Kedrova, reprising her role as Madame Hortense. Quinn performed in the musical both on Broadway and at the Kennedy Center in Washington, DC.\nIn 1990, he starred in \"The Old Man and the Sea\", a television movie based on the novel by Ernest Hemingway. Quinn's film career slowed during the 1990s, but he nonetheless continued to work steadily, appearing in \"Revenge\" (1990), \"Jungle Fever\" (1991), \"Only the Lonely\" (1991), Mobsters (1991) \"Last Action Hero\" (1993), \"A Walk in the Clouds\" (1995) and \"Seven Servants\" (1996).\nIn 1994, Quinn played the role of Zeus in five television movies focusing on the legendary journeys of Hercules. These were, in order, \"Hercules and the Amazon Women\", \"Hercules and the Lost Kingdom\", \"Hercules and the Circle of Fire\", \"Hercules in the Underworld\", and \"Hercules in the Maze of the Minotaur\".\nIn 1995, Quinn starred in his last movie in a lead role in the film \"Seven Servants\", by Daryush Shokof.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and children.\nQuinn's first wife was actress Katherine DeMille, the adopted daughter of Cecil B. DeMille; they wed in 1937. The couple had five children: Christopher (1938\u20131941), Christina (born December 1, 1941), Catalina (born November 21, 1942), Duncan (born August 4, 1945), and Valentina (born December 26, 1952). Their first child, Christopher, aged two, drowned in the lily pond of next-door neighbor W. C. Fields. During his marriage to DeMille, Quinn had an affair with the married actress Evelyn Keyes.\nIn 1965, Quinn and DeMille divorced because of his affair with Italian costume designer Jolanda Addolori (died 2016), whom he married in 1966. They had three children: Francesco Quinn (March 22, 1963 \u2013 August 5, 2011), Danny Quinn (born April 16, 1964), and Lorenzo Quinn (born May 7, 1966).\nIn the 1970s, during his marriage to Addolori, Quinn also had two children with Friedel Dunbar, an event producer in Los Angeles: Sean Quinn (born February 7, 1973) and Alexander Anthony Quinn (born December 30, 1976).\nIn the 1990s, Quinn had two children with his secretary Katherine Benvin; daughter Antonia Patricia Rose Quinn (born July 23, 1993) and son Ryan Nicholas Quinn (born July 5, 1996). His marriage to Addolori ended in divorce in August 1997. He then married Benvin in December 1997 and remained married to her until his death.\nCivil-rights activism.\nQuinn, who experienced discrimination growing up in Los Angeles, participated in various civil-rights and social causes. He provided funding for Latino advocacy group the Spanish-Speaking People's Congress. He assisted in fundraising efforts for the legal defense of Mexican-American youth in the racially charged Sleepy Lagoon murder trial in 1942. While in Paris, several other prominent Americans and he composed a petition endorsing the 1963 March on Washington; the petition, which was reprinted in several high-profile publications, was intended to rally support among Americans living abroad, according to Elliott Miller, writing in \"CounterPunch\". In 1969, Quinn visited with Native American student activists occupying Alcatraz Island in protest, promising to offer assistance. In 1970, Quinn was a panelist at the Mexican-American Conference. In 1971, he narrated a documentary film by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, discussing job discrimination faced by Hispanic Americans. He was a supporter of the United Farm Workers organization led by his friend and labor activist Cesar Chavez.\nPainting and writing.\nArt critic Donald Kuspit explains, \"Examining Quinn's many expressions of creativity together\u2014his art, collecting, and acting\u2014we can see that he was a creative genius.\"\nEarly in life, Quinn had an interest in painting and drawing. Throughout his teenaged years, he won various art competitions in California and focused his studies at Polytechnic High School in Los Angeles on drafting. Later, Quinn studied briefly under Frank Lloyd Wright through the Taliesin Fellowship \u2014 an opportunity created by winning first prize in an architectural design contest. Through Wright's recommendation, Quinn took acting lessons as a form of postoperative speech therapy, which led to an acting career that spanned over six decades.\nApart from art classes taken in Chicago during the 1950s, Quinn never attended art school; nonetheless, taking advantage of books, museums, and amassing a sizable collection, he managed to give himself an effective education in the language of modern art. By the early 1980s, his work had caught the eyes of various gallery owners and was exhibited internationally, in Mexico City, Los Angeles, New York City, and Paris. His work is now represented in both public and private collections throughout the world.\nHe wrote two memoirs, \"The Original Sin\" (1972) and \"One Man Tango\" (1997), a number of scripts, and a series of unpublished stories currently in the collection of his archive.\nDeath.\nQuinn spent his last years in Bristol, Rhode Island. He died of respiratory failure (due to complications from radiation treatment for lung cancer) on June 3, 2001, in Boston, at age 86. Quinn's funeral was held in the First Baptist Church in America in College Hill, Providence, Rhode Island. His wife asked for the permission of Bristol authorities to bury him in his favorite spot in the backyard of his house, near an old maple tree. They had bought the property in 1995; it had a view of the Narragansett Bay. Permission was granted and he was laid to rest there.\nTributes and legacy.\nOn January 5, 1982, the Belvedere County Public Library in East Los Angeles was renamed in honor of Anthony Quinn. The present library sits on the site of his family's former home.\nIn 1984, artist Eloy Torrez produced a 70-foot-high (21\u00a0m) portrait mural of Quinn titled both \"Anthony Quinn\" and \"The Pope of Broadway\" in Los Angeles. It depicts Quinn in his famous \"Zorba the Greek\" role, and it remains one of the largest portrait murals in California. Both the portrait mural and Anthony Quinn himself are the subject of a 2018 Google Arts &amp; Culture exhibit.\nHis birthplace of Chihuahua, Mexico, has a statue of Quinn doing his famous \"Zorba the Greek\" dance.\nAn Anthony Quinn Bay and Beach is in Rhodes, Greece, just south of the village of Faliraki. Quinn bought the land during the filming of \"The Guns of Navarone\" in Rhodes, but it was reclaimed by the Greek government in 1984 due to a change in property law.\nSince 2002, the National Council of La Raza has given the \"Anthony Quinn Award for Excellence in Motion Pictures\" as an ALMA Award. His widow, Katherine Benvin Quinn, established the Anthony Quinn Foundation, which advocates the importance of arts in education.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43914", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43914", "title": "1 E10 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43915", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43915", "title": "1 E9 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43916", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43916", "title": "1 E8 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43917", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43917", "title": "1 E7 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43918", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43918", "title": "1 E6 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43919", "revid": "91264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43919", "title": "1 E5 kg", "text": ""}
{"id": "43921", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43921", "title": "Ren\u00e9 Goscinny", "text": "French comic book writer (1926\u20131977)\nRen\u00e9 Goscinny (; ; 14 August 1926 \u2013 5 November 1977) was a French comic editor and writer, who created the \"Asterix\" comic book series with illustrator Albert Uderzo. Born in France to a Jewish family from Poland, he spent his childhood in Argentina where he attended French schools and later lived in the United States for a short period of time. There he met Belgian cartoonist Morris. After his return to France, they collaborated for more than 20 years on the comic series \"Lucky Luke\" (in what was considered the series' golden age).\nHe wrote \"Iznogoud\" with Jean Tabary. Goscinny also wrote a series of children's books known as \"Le Petit Nicolas\" (\"Little Nicolas\") illustrated by Jean-Jacques Semp\u00e9.\nEarly life.\nGoscinny was born in Paris in 1926, to Jewish immigrants from Poland. His parents were Stanis\u0142aw Simkha Go\u015bcinny, a chemical engineer from Warsaw, and Anna (Hanna) Bere\u015bniak-Go\u015bcinna from Chodork\u00f3w (modern-day Khodorkiv), a small village near Kyiv in Ukraine. Goscinny's maternal grandfather, Abraham Lazare Berezniak, founded a printing company. Claude, Goscinny's older brother, was six years older, born on 10 December 1920.\nStanis\u0142aw and Anna had met in Paris and married in 1919. When Ren\u00e9 was two, the Go\u015bcinnys moved to Buenos Aires, Argentina, because his father had been hired as a chemical engineer there. Ren\u00e9 had a happy childhood in Buenos Aires and studied in French-language schools there. He was often the \"class clown\", probably to compensate for a natural shyness. He started drawing very early on, inspired by the illustrated stories which he enjoyed reading.\nIn December 1943, the year after Goscinny graduated from lyc\u00e9e or high school, his father died of a cerebral hemorrhage (stroke). The youth had to go to work. The next year, he got his first job as an assistant accountant in a tyre recovery factory. After being laid off the following year, Goscinny became a junior illustrator in an advertising agency.\nGoscinny, along with his mother, emigrated from Argentina and immigrated to New York, United States in 1945 to join her brother, Boris. To avoid service in the United States Armed Forces he travelled to France to join the French Army in 1946. He served at Aubagne in the 141st Alpine Infantry Battalion. Promoted to senior corporal, he became the appointed artist of the regiment and drew illustrations and posters for the army.\nFirst works.\nThe following year, Goscinny worked on an illustrated version of the Balzac novella \"The Girl with the Golden Eyes\". In April of that year he returned to New York.\nThere he went through the most difficult period of his life. For a while, Goscinny was jobless, alone, and living in poverty. By 1948, though, he had begun working in a small studio, where he became friends with future \"MAD Magazine\" contributors Will Elder, Jack Davis, and Harvey Kurtzman. Goscinny became art director at Kunen Publishers, where he wrote four books for children.\nAround this time he met two Belgian comic artists, Joseph Gillain, better known as Jij\u00e9, and Maurice de Bevere, also known as Morris. Morris lived in the US for six years, having already started his cartoon series \"Lucky Luke.\" (He and Goscinny collaborated on this, with Goscinny writing it from 1955 until his death in 1977, a period described as its golden age).\nGeorges Troisfontaines, chief of the World Press agency, convinced Goscinny to return to France in 1951 in order to work for his agency as the head of the Paris office. There he met Albert Uderzo, with whom he started a longtime collaboration. They started out with some work for \"Bonnes Soir\u00e9es\", a women's magazine for which Goscinny wrote \"Sylvie\". Goscinny and Uderzo also launched the series \"Jehan Pistolet\" and \"Luc Junior,\" in the magazine \"La Libre Junior\".\nIn 1955, Goscinny, together with Uderzo, Jean-Michel Charlier, and Jean H\u00e9brad, founded the syndicate Edipress/Edifrance. The syndicate launched publications such as \"Clairon\" for the factory union and \"Pistolin\" for a chocolate company. Goscinny and Uderzo cooperated on the series \"Bill Blanchart\" in \"Jeannot\", \"Pistolet\" in \"Pistolin,\" and \"Benjamin et Benjamine\" in the magazine of the same name. Under the pseudonym Agostini, Goscinny wrote \"Le Petit Nicolas\" for Jean-Jacques Semp\u00e9 in \"Le Moustique.\" It was later published in \"Sud-Ouest\" and \"Pilote\" magazines.\nIn 1956, Goscinny began a collaboration with \"Tintin\" magazine. He wrote some short stories for Jo Angenot and Albert Weinberg, and worked on \"Signor Spaghetti\" with Dino Attanasio, \"Monsieur Tric\" with Bob de Moor, \"Prudence Petitpas\" with Maurice Mar\u00e9chal, \"Globul le Martien\" and \"Alphonse\" with Tibet, \"Strapontin\" with Berck and \"Modeste et Pompon\" with Andr\u00e9 Franquin. An early creation with Uderzo, \"Oumpah-pah\", was also adapted for serial publication in \"Tintin\" from 1958 to 1962. In addition, Goscinny appeared in the magazines \"Paris-Flirt\" (\"Lili Manequin\" with Will) and \"Vaillant\" (\"Boniface et Anatole\" with Jordom, \"Pipsi\" with Godard).\n\"Pilote\" and \"Ast\u00e9rix\" (1959).\nIn 1959, the \u00c9difrance/\u00c9dipresse syndicate started the Franco-Belgian comics magazine \"Pilote\". Goscinny became one of the most productive writers for the magazine. In the magazine's first issue, he launched \"Ast\u00e9rix\", with Uderzo. The series was an instant hit and remains popular worldwide. Goscinny also restarted the series \"Le Petit Nicolas\" and \"Jehan Pistolet\", now called \"Jehan Soupolet\". Goscinny also began \"Jacquot le Mousse\" and \"Tromblon et Bottaclou\" with Godard.\nThe magazine was bought by Georges Dargaud in 1960, and Goscinny became editor-in-chief. He also began new series like \"Les Divagations de Monsieur Sait-Tout\" (with Martial), \"La Potachologie Illustr\u00e9e\" (with Cabu), \"Les Dingodossiers\" (with Gotlib) and \"La For\u00eat de Ch\u00eanebeau\" (with Mic Delinx). With Tabary, he launched \"Calife Haroun El Poussah\" in \"Record\", a series that was later continued in \"Pilote\" as \"Iznogoud\". With Raymond Macherot he created \"Pantoufle\" for \"Spirou\".\nFamily.\nGoscinny married Gilberte Pollaro-Millo in 1967. In 1968, their daughter Anne Goscinny was born. She also became an author.\nAnne Goscinny, the daughter of Ren\u00e9 Goscinny, co-wrote the screenplay for \"\", 2022 animation film with Michel Fessler and Massoubre.\nDeath.\nGoscinny died at 51, in Paris of a heart attack on 5 November 1977, during a routine stress test at his doctor's office. He was buried in the Jewish Cemetery in Nice. In accordance with his will, most of his money was transferred to the chief rabbinate of France.\nGoscinny's death occurred part-way through the writing of \"Asterix in Belgium\" (published in 1979, two years after his death). As a homage to Goscinny, Uderzo drew darkened skies and rain into the comic. The last panel on page 32 and all but the last panel on page 33 were drawn with grey skies and rain to mark the point at which Goscinny died. Most of the remaining panels in the book were drawn with leaden grey skies, but none have rain. There is a further tribute at the end of the book: near the lower left corner of the final panel, Uderzo drew a rabbit sadly looking over its shoulders towards Goscinny's signature. Regrettably, as printed (at least in the German edition) the outlines are too thick, even at 10X magnification, to make clear what the rabbit is doing.\nAfter Goscinny's death, Uderzo began to write \"Asterix\" himself and continued the series, although at a much slower pace, until passing the series over in 2011 to writer Jean-Yves Ferri and illustrator Didier Conrad. Tabary similarly began to write \"Iznogoud\" himself, whereas Morris continued \"Lucky Luke\" with various other writers.\nAs a further tribute to Goscinny, Uderzo gave his late colleague's likeness to the Jewish character Saul ben Ephishul (a play on \"it's all beneficial\"; Sa\u00fcl P\u00e9hy\u00e9, a play on \"\u00e7a e\u00fbt pay\u00e9\" and therefore a sketch by Fernand Reynaud, in the original French, Saul Nizahle, a play on \"soll nicht zahlen\", in the German edition) in the 1981 album \"L'Odyss\u00e9e d'Ast\u00e9rix\" (\"Asterix and the Black Gold\"), which is dedicated to Goscinny's memory.\nAwards and honors.\nSince 1996, the Ren\u00e9 Goscinny Award is presented at the yearly Angoul\u00eame International Comics Festival in France as an encouragement for young comic writers.\nAccording to UNESCO's Index Translationum, Goscinny, as of August 2017, was the 20th most-translated author, with 2,200 translations of his work.\nOn 23 January 2020, a life-sized bronze statue of Goscinny was unveiled near his former home in Paris. It was the first public statue in Paris dedicated to a comic book author.\nStudios Id\u00e9fix.\nStudios Id\u00e9fix was an animation studio founded on 1 April 1974 by Goscinny, Uderzo and Morris.\nIts logo, designed by Uderzo, is a parody of MGM's logo, with Dogmatix (known in French as Id\u00e9fix) instead of Leo and a banner reading \"Delirant Isti Romani\", instead of \"Ars Gratia Artis\".\nHistory.\nIn the fall of 1973, Goscinny, Uderzo, Morris and their publisher Georges Dargaud joined forces to create their own animation studio, the Id\u00e9fix studios. At the time, launching the creation of a cartoon feature film in France was complex, considering that France no longer had a major animation studio ever since the closure in 1952 of Les G\u00e9meaux, ruined by the project of \"The Shepherdess and the Chimney Sweep\".\nPrior to Id\u00e9fix, the works of the founders were animated and adapted to films by Belvision Studios, based at Brussels in Belgium.\nAs the founders themselves said,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Goscinny and I were very unhappy watching the previous films, even if the public had followed them. The first two films were not a claim to fame for us. And we had to go through the premieres several times\u2026 By dint of seeing these flaws again and again, which we felt more and more because we knew them better, they had become enormous! For this one, we can avoid this kind of thing. Goscinny and I are doing the storyboarding and we hope to oversee everything. Because this time the cartoon will be produced in Paris, by a studio that we created ourselves. We will be both authors and directors, we will work really closely with the animators. If we're embarking on this adventure, it's because we've pulled out all the stops!\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It\u2019s an old childhood dream that we had with Albert Uderzo, who actually started out in cartoons. It\u2019s the culmination of ten years of work, because we started making cartoons in other studios. It took ten years before we could have our own studios and make the films the way we wanted them. We did it, I must say, thanks to Asterix, who is a miracle character and who is our star, and who allowed us in many ways to realize this dream.\u2014\u200a\nRen\u00e9 Goscinny called Henri Gruel to constitute the technical and artistic teams of the Id\u00e9fix studios. The latter directed several animated short films and was responsible for the sound effects of Asterix the Gaul and Asterix and Cleopatra, as well as the two productions by Pierre Tchernia scripted by Goscinny, Le Viager and Les Gaspards. Gruel gets Goscinny to share the artistic direction of the studios with Pierre Watrin, whom he considers to be an excellent designer, one of Paul Grimault's best former animators. Over several months, Gruel and Watrin contacted former artists and animators, as well as promising young artists. Most of Paul Grimault's former animators then worked in small cartoon structures, and would be interested in the idea of working again in a real studio. However, the search for Pierre Watrin and Henri Gruel ultimately proved difficult, most of the former employees of the Les G\u00e9meaux studios having converted to illustration and advertising. Talent was lacking and, at Goscinny's request, Henri Gruel sent his friend Serge Caillet, production director on live-action films, to the Paris Chamber of Commerce and Industry to demand the opening of an animated cinema section to supply the studios with young artists, who thus offer employment to students as soon as they leave school. Eventually, they managed to produce their first feature film, The Twelve Tasks of Asterix, with Halas and Batchelor and Dargaud.\nHowever, in 1977, during the production of their second (and final) production, Goscinny died of a sudden heart attack. So, after the release of their second feature, The Ballad of the Daltons, a Lucky Luke feature, the studio ceased operations and closed shop permanently.\nFilms produced.\nStudio Id\u00e9fix produced only two feature films, namely,\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43922", "revid": "48642160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43922", "title": "Clostridium botulinum", "text": "Species of endospore forming bacterium\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClostridium botulinum is a gram-positive, rod-shaped, anaerobic, spore-forming, motile bacterium that has the ability to produce botulinum toxin, which is a neurotoxin known to be the deadliest substance ever recorded in the chemical literature.\n\"C. botulinum\" is a diverse group of pathogenic bacteria. Initially, they were grouped together by their ability to produce botulinum toxin and are now known as four distinct groups, \"C. botulinum\" groups I\u2013IV. Along with some strains of \"Clostridium butyricum\" and \"Clostridium baratii\", these bacteria all produce the toxin.\nBotulinum toxin can cause botulism, a severe flaccid paralytic disease in humans and other animals. The botulinum toxin is the most potent toxin known in scientific literature, natural or synthetic, with a lethal dose of 1.3\u20132.1\u00a0ng/kg in humans.\n\"C. botulinum\" is commonly associated with bulging canned food; misshapen cans can be due to an internal increase in pressure caused by gas produced by bacteria. \"C. botulinum\" can also grow in traditionally aged meats (e.g. igunaq) and carrion (e.g. dead beached whale).\n\"C. botulinum\" is responsible for food-borne botulism (ingestion of preformed toxin), infant botulism (intestinal infection with toxin-forming \"C. botulinum\"), and wound botulism (infection of a wound with \"C. botulinum\"). \"C. botulinum\" produces heat-resistant endospores that are commonly found in soil and are able to survive under adverse conditions.\nMicrobiology.\n\"C. botulinum \"is an obligate anaerobe, requiring an environment that lacks oxygen. However, \"C. botulinum\" tolerates traces of oxygen due to the enzyme superoxide dismutase, which is an important antioxidant defense in nearly all cells exposed to oxygen. \"C. botulinum\" is able to produce the neurotoxin only during sporulation, which can happen only in an anaerobic environment.\n\"C. botulinum\" is divided into four distinct phenotypic groups (I-IV) and is also classified into seven serotypes (A\u2013G) based on the antigenicity of the botulinum toxin produced. On the level visible to DNA sequences, the phenotypic grouping matches the results of whole-genome and rRNA analyses, and setotype grouping approximates the result of analyses focused specifically on the toxin sequence. The two phylogenetic trees do not match because of the ability of the toxin gene cluster to be horizontally transferred.\nSerotypes.\nBotulinum neurotoxin (BoNT) production is the unifying feature of the species. Seven serotypes of toxins have been identified that are allocated a letter (A\u2013G), several of which can cause disease in humans. They are resistant to degradation by enzymes found in the gastrointestinal tract. This allows for ingested toxins to be absorbed from the intestines into the bloodstream. Toxins can be further differentiated into subtypes on the bases of smaller variations.\nHowever, all types of botulinum toxin are rapidly destroyed by heating to 100\u00a0\u00b0C for 15 minutes (900 seconds). 80\u00a0\u00b0C for 30 minutes also destroys BoNT.\nMost strains produce one type of BoNT, but strains producing multiple toxins have been described. \"C. botulinum\" producing B and F toxin types have been isolated from human botulism cases in New Mexico and California. The toxin type has been designated Bf as the type B toxin was found in excess to the type F. Similarly, strains producing Ab and Af toxins have been reported.\nEvidence indicates the neurotoxin genes have been the subject of horizontal gene transfer, possibly from a viral (bacteriophage) source. This theory is supported by the presence of integration sites flanking the toxin in some strains of \"C. botulinum\". However, these integrations sites are degraded (except for the C and D types), indicating that the \"C. botulinum\" acquired the toxin genes quite far in the evolutionary past. Nevertheless, further transfers still happen via the plasmids and other mobile elements the genes are located on.\nToxin types in disease.\nBotulinum toxin types A, B, E, F and H (FA) cause disease in humans. Types A, B, and E are associated with food-borne illness, while type E is specifically associated with fish products. Type C produces limber-neck in birds and type D causes botulism in other mammals. No disease is associated with type G. The \"gold standard\" for determining toxin type is a mouse bioassay, but the genes for types A, B, E, and F can now be readily differentiated using quantitative PCR. Type \"H\" is in fact a recombinant toxin from types A and F. It can be neutralized by type A antitoxin and no longer is considered a distinct type.\nA few strains from organisms genetically identified as other \"Clostridium\" species have caused human botulism: \"C. butyricum\" has produced type E toxin and \"C. baratii\" has produced type F toxin. The ability of \"C. botulinum\" to naturally transfer neurotoxin genes to other clostridia is concerning, especially in the food industry, where preservation systems are designed to destroy or inhibit only \"C. botulinum\" but not other \"Clostridium\" species.\nMetabolism.\nMany \"C. botulinum\" genes play a role in the breakdown of essential carbohydrates and the metabolism of sugars. Chitin is the preferred source of carbon and nitrogen for \"C. botulinum\". Hall A strain of \"C. botulinum\" has an active chitinolytic system to aid in the breakdown of chitin. Type A and B of \"C. botulinum\" production of BoNT is affected by nitrogen and carbon nutrition. There is evidence that these processes are also under catabolite repression.\nProteolytic \"Clostridium\" often rely on amino acids as carbon and energy sources. They carry out a unique metabolic process called Stickland Fermentation. In this process, two amino acids are used in complementary roles. One will serve as an electron donor, and the other amino acid serves as an electron acceptor. Not only does this reaction create precursors for other metabolic pathways, but it also regenerates NAD+, an important oxidizing agent in the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway. Utilizing amino acids as a carbon source and regenerating NAD+ allows \"C. botulinum\" to thrive in anaerobic environments.\nGroups.\nPhysiological differences and genome sequencing at 16S rRNA level support the subdivision of the \"C. botulinum\" species into groups I-IV. Some authors have briefly used groups V and VI, corresponding to toxin-producing \"C. baratii\" and \"C. butyricum\". What used to be group IV is now \"C. argentinense\".\nAlthough group II cannot degrade native protein such as casein, coagulated egg white, and cooked meat particles, it is able to degrade gelatin.\nHuman botulism is predominantly caused by group I or II \"C. botulinum\". Group III organisms mainly cause diseases in non-human animals.\nLaboratory isolation.\nIn the laboratory, \"C. botulinum\" is usually isolated in tryptose sulfite cycloserine (TSC) growth medium in an anaerobic environment with less than 2% oxygen. This can be achieved by several commercial kits that use a chemical reaction to replace O2 with CO2. \"C. botulinum\" (groups I through III) is a lipase-positive microorganism that grows between pH of 4.8 and 7.0 and cannot use lactose as a primary carbon source, characteristics important for biochemical identification.\nTransmission, sporulation, and germination.\nSporulation and germination in \"Clostridium botulinum\" is a major virulence factor, allowing the bacteria to be prevalent in a wide variety of environments, and botulism to exist in many forms. The exact mechanism behind sporulation and germination of \"C. botulinum\" is not known, but the study of \"Bacillus subtilus\" can be used to give a general prediction of the mechanism. \nDifferent strains of \"C. botulinum\" can be divided into three different groups, group I, II, and III, based on environmental conditions like heat resistance, temperature, and biome. Within each group, different strains will use different strategies to adapt to their environment to survive. Unlike other clostridial species, \"C. botulinum\" spores will sporulate as it enters the stationary phase. \"C. botulinum\" relies on quorum-sensing to initiate the sporulation process. \n\"C. botulinum\" begins sporulation once its sporulation protein becomes phosphorylated. The phosphorylation activates the stage I and II sporulation genes that halt cell division, and begin creation of an asymmetric septum and the spore. The cell forms spore layers until the spore is fully mature, after which, the cell is covered in exosporium. Group I cells have a thick yet loose exosporium layer that allows the spore to be heat-resistant, while group III have a thin yet tight exosporium layer that leaves the cell with a moderate amount of heat-resistance. \nGermination will begin if specific nutrients called germinants interact with receptors found within the spore. Once the germinants are bound to the cell, the cell begins to hydrolyze itself to rehydrate its core and create a vegetative cell. \"C. botulinum\" spores are not found in human feces unless the individual has contracted botulism, but \"C. botulinum\" cannot spread from person to person.\nMotility structures.\nThe most common motility structure for \"C. botulinum\" is a flagellum. Though this structure is not found in all strains of \"C. botulinum\", most produce peritrichous flagella. When comparing the different strains, there are also differences in the length of the flagella and how many are present on the cell.\nGenomic analyses of C. \"botulinum\" have shown many strains to harbor mutations in flagellar genes, including flaA, which encodes the flagellin protein, and flhA and flgN, which are involved in flagellar biosynthesis. These mutations can change motility to varying extents, and in some cases, may modify the structure of the flagellum without fully impairing its function. Flagella are important in colonization and movement in gut environments, but also have immunogenic properties that make the bacterium more visible to host defenses. As a result, strains may downregulating flagellar production or acquire mutations that change flagellar assembly, so they can be used for motility but also evade the immune system during colonization.\nGrowth conditions and prevention.\n\"C. botulinum\" is a soil bacterium. The spores can survive in most environments and are very hard to kill. They can survive the temperature of boiling water at sea level, thus many foods are canned with a pressurized boil that achieves even higher temperatures, sufficient to kill the spores. This bacteria is widely distributed in nature and can be assumed to be present on all food surfaces. Its optimum growth temperature is within the mesophilic range. In spore form, it is a heat resistant pathogen that can survive in low acid foods and grow to produce toxins. The toxin attacks the nervous system and will kill an adult at a dose of around 75\u00a0ng. Botulinum toxin can be destroyed by holding food at 100\u00a0\u00b0C for 10 minutes; however, because of its potency, this is not recommended by the USA's FDA as a means of control.\nBotulism poisoning can occur due to preserved or home-canned, low-acid food that was not processed using correct preservation times and/or pressure. Growth of the bacterium can be prevented by high acidity, high ratio of dissolved sugar, high levels of oxygen, very low levels of moisture, or storage at temperatures below 3\u00a0\u00b0C (38\u00a0\u00b0F) for type A. For example, in a low-acid, canned vegetable such as green beans that are not heated enough to kill the spores (i.e., a pressurized environment) may provide an oxygen-free medium for the spores to grow and produce the toxin. However, pickles are sufficiently acidic to prevent growth; even if the spores are present, they pose no danger to the consumer.\nHoney, corn syrup, and other sweeteners may contain spores, but the spores cannot grow in a highly concentrated sugar solution; however, when a sweetener is diluted in the low-oxygen, low-acid digestive system of an infant, the spores can grow and produce toxin. As soon as infants begin eating solid food, the digestive juices become too acidic for the bacterium to grow.\nThe control of food-borne botulism caused by \"C. botulinum\" is based almost entirely on thermal destruction (heating) of the spores or inhibiting spore germination into bacteria and allowing cells to grow and produce toxins in foods. Conditions conducive of growth are dependent on various environmental factors.\nGrowth of \"C. botulinum\" is a risk in low acid foods as defined by having a pH above 4.6 although growth is significantly retarded for pH below 4.9.\nMechanisms of tolerance.\n\"C. botulinum\" is very resilient against many mechanisms of food processing because of the endospores that it produces. These endospores allow the bacteria to survive extreme conditions such as heat, cold, and high or low acidity. These endospores have multiple thick protective layers which allow the bacteria to survive in a dormant state for very long periods of time. The endospores can remain dormant in the bacteria, and in this state they are harmless. As endospores germinate when they are subject to environments with low oxygen, they multiply producing the neurotoxin that causes botulism.\nTaxonomic history.\n\"C. botulinum\" was first recognized and isolated in 1895 by Emile van Ermengem from home-cured ham implicated in a botulism outbreak. The isolate was originally named \"Bacillus botulinus\", after the Latin word for sausage, \"botulus\". (\"Sausage poisoning\" was a common problem in 18th- and 19th-century Germany, and was most likely caused by botulism.) However, isolates from subsequent outbreaks were always found to be anaerobic spore formers, so Ida A. Bengtson proposed that both be placed into the genus \"Clostridium\", as the genus \"Bacillus\" was restricted to aerobic spore-forming rods.\nSince 1959, all species producing the botulinum neurotoxins (types A\u2013G) have been designated \"C. botulinum\". Substantial phenotypic and genotypic evidence exists to demonstrate heterogeneity within the species, with at least four clearly defined \"groups\" (see ) straddling other species, implying that they each deserve to be a genospecies.\nThe situation as of 2018 is as follows:\nSmith \"et al.\" (2018) argues that group I should be called \"C. parabotulinum\" and group III be called \"C. novyi\" \"sensu lato\", leaving only group II in \"C. botulinum\". This argument is not accepted by the LPSN and would cause an unjustified change of the type strain under the Prokaryotic Code. (The current type strain ATCC 25763 falls into group I.) Dobritsa \"et al.\" (2018) argues, without formal descriptions, that group II can potentially be made into two new species.\nThe complete genome of \"C. botulinum\" ATCC 3502 has been sequenced at Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute in 2007. This strain encodes a type \"A\" toxin.\nDiagnosis.\nPhysicians may consider the diagnosis of botulism based on a patient's clinical presentation, which classically includes an acute onset of bilateral cranial neuropathies and symmetric descending weakness. Other key features of botulism include an absence of fever, symmetric neurologic deficits, normal or slow heart rate and normal blood pressure, and no sensory deficits except for blurred vision. A careful history and physical examination is paramount to diagnose the type of botulism, as well as to rule out other conditions with similar findings, such as Guillain\u2013Barr\u00e9 syndrome, stroke, and myasthenia gravis. Depending on the type of botulism considered, different tests for diagnosis may be indicated.\nOther tests that may be helpful in ruling out other conditions are:\nPathology.\nFoodborne botulism.\nSigns and symptoms of foodborne botulism typically begin between 18 and 36 hours after the toxin gets into the body, but can range from a few hours to several days, depending on the amount of toxin ingested. Symptoms include:\nWound botulism.\nMost people who develop wound botulism inject drugs several times a day, so determining a timeline of when onset symptoms first occurred and when the toxin entered the body can be difficult. It is more common in people who inject black tar heroin. Wound botulism signs and symptoms include:\nInfant botulism.\nIf infant botulism is related to food, such as honey, problems generally begin within 18 to 36 hours after the toxin enters the baby's body. Signs and symptoms include:\nBeneficial effects of botulinum toxin.\nPurified botulinum toxin is diluted by a physician for treatment of:\nAdult intestinal toxemia.\nA very rare form of botulism that occurs by the same route as infant botulism but is among adults. Occurs rarely and sporadically. Signs and symptoms include:\nVeterinary pathology.\nMost cases of botulism in animals come from foodborne botulism, though wound botulism is also common. Foodborne botulism comes from ingestion of infected material, like raw or decaying vegetation, carcasses, or larvae that have consumed infected material. Ruminants have longer incubation times for foodborne botulism when compared to animals with less complex stomachs. Wound botulism occurs when a wound becomes infected with Clostridium botulinum that is allowed to germinate and produce toxins. \nToxicoinfection can also cause botulism cases as Clostridium botulinum cells infect the lower intestine and begin to produce toxins. The toxin is either expelled as feces from the animal, not causing any harm but spreading the toxin, or, if in close proximity to the beginning of the small intestine, causes symptoms to present in the host. \nBotulism symptoms in cattle and horses can begin with weakness or trembling in the hindquarters which progresses into full body paralysis and eventually death. Avian botulism is characterized by the inability of the animal to fly, walk, lift its neck, or close its inner eyelid, followed by death. Small carnivores, like foxes, mink, and ferrets, are prone to botulism and will present flaccid paralysis, then die. An infected fish will have each of its fins paralyzed over time until the tail fin is fully paralyzed, preventing swimming, killing the fish.\nTreatment.\nIn the case of a diagnosis or suspicion of botulism, patients should be hospitalized immediately, even if the diagnosis and/or tests are pending. Additionally, if botulism is suspected, patients should be treated immediately with antitoxin therapy in order to reduce mortality. Immediate intubation is also highly recommended, as respiratory failure is the primary cause of death from botulism.\nIn North America, an equine-derived heptavalent botulinum antitoxin is used to treat all serotypes of non-infant naturally occurring botulism. For infants less than one year of age, botulism immune globulin is used to treat type A or type B.\nOutcomes vary between one and three months, but with prompt interventions, mortality from botulism ranges from less than 5 percent to 8 percent.\nDespite these interventions, there is currently no approved pharmacological treatment that reverses botulinum neurotoxin once it has entered neurons. Due to this limitation, early antitoxin administration and supportive care is critical. Ongoing research investigates several therapeutic strategies; for example, recombinant vaccines based on the heavy-chain (HC) domains of BoNTs have provided protective immunity in animals and shown promise in early clinical trials. However, no human vaccine is currently licensed. Veterinary vaccines are available to prevent outbreaks in livestock.\nAntibody-based therapies are also under development. Traditional equine antitoxins, though effective, carry risks of serum sickness. Human polyclonal antibodies isolated from immunized volunteers and novel camelid single-domain antibodies are two alternatives, which may provide safer and longer-lasting protection. Additionally, small-molecule inhibitors targeting the metalloprotease activity of the toxin\u2019s light chain are being explored as potential post-exposure therapies.\nClinical outcomes also depend on the toxin serotype involved. Type A toxins typically cause the most prolonged paralysis, while type E toxins are associated with shorter disease courses. Although BoNTs induce paralysis, they do not destroy neurons; with adequate ventilation and intensive care, patients can fully recover as nerve terminals regenerate.\nDue to the extreme potency of botulinum neurotoxins, much of this therapeutic research is framed in context of biodefense preparedness against the potential use of BoNTs as biological weapons.\nVaccination.\nThere used to be a formalin-treated toxoid vaccine against botulism (serotypes A-E), but it was discontinued in 2011 due to declining potency in the toxoid stock. It was originally intended for people at risk of exposure. A few new vaccines are under development.\nUse and detection.\n\"C. botulinum\" is used to prepare the medicaments Botox, Dysport, Xeomin, and Neurobloc used to selectively paralyze muscles to temporarily relieve muscle function. It has other \"off-label\" medical purposes, such as treating severe facial pain, such as that caused by trigeminal neuralgia.\nBotulinum toxin produced by \"C. botulinum\" is often believed to be a potential bioweapon as it is so potent that it takes about 75 nanograms to kill a person (LD50 of 1\u00a0ng/kg, assuming an average person weighs ~75\u00a0kg); 1\u00a0kilogram of it would be enough to kill the entire human population.\nA \"mouse protection\" or \"mouse bioassay\" test determines the type of \"C. botulinum\" toxin present using monoclonal antibodies. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with digoxigenin-labeled antibodies can also be used to detect the toxin, and quantitative PCR can detect the toxin genes in the organism.\n\"C. botulinum\" in different geographical locations.\nA number of quantitative surveys for \"C. botulinum\" spores in the environment have suggested a prevalence of specific toxin types in given geographic areas, which remain unexplained.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43923", "revid": "50696742", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43923", "title": "Philip Larkin", "text": "English poet, novelist and librarian (1922\u20131985)\nPhilip Arthur Larkin (9 August 1922 \u2013 2 December 1985) was an English poet, novelist, and librarian. His first book of poetry, \"The North Ship\", was published in 1945, followed by two novels, \"Jill\" (1946) and \"A Girl in Winter\" (1947). He came to prominence in 1955 with the publication of his second collection of poems, \"The Less Deceived\", followed by \"The Whitsun Weddings\" (1964) and \"High Windows\" (1974). He contributed to \"The Daily Telegraph\" as its jazz critic from 1961 to 1971, with his articles gathered in \"All What Jazz: A Record Diary 1961\u201371\" (1985), and edited \"The Oxford Book of Twentieth Century English Verse\" (1973). His many honours include the Queen's Gold Medal for Poetry. He was offered, but declined, the position of Poet Laureate in 1984, following the death of Sir John Betjeman.\nAfter graduating from Oxford University in 1943 with a first in English Language and Literature, Larkin became a librarian. It was during the thirty years he worked with distinction as university librarian at the Brynmor Jones Library at the University of Hull that he produced the greater part of his published work. His poems are marked by what Andrew Motion calls \"a very English, glum accuracy\" about emotions, places, and relationships, and what Donald Davie described as \"lowered sights and diminished expectations\". Eric Homberger (echoing Randall Jarrell) called him \"the saddest heart in the post-war supermarket\"\u2014Larkin himself said that deprivation for him was \"what daffodils were for Wordsworth\". Influenced by W. H. Auden, W. B. Yeats, and Thomas Hardy, his poems are highly structured but flexible verse forms. They were described by Jean Hartley, the ex-wife of Larkin's publisher George Hartley (the Marvell Press), as a \"piquant mixture of lyricism and discontent\". Anthologist Keith Tuma writes that there is more to Larkin's work than its reputation for dour pessimism suggests.\nLarkin's public persona was that of the no-nonsense, solitary Englishman who disliked fame and had no patience for the trappings of the public literary life. The posthumous publication by Anthony Thwaite in 1992 of his letters triggered controversy about his personal life and political views, described by John Banville as hair-raising but also in places hilarious. Lisa Jardine called him a \"casual, habitual racist, and an easy misogynist\", but the academic John Osborne argued in 2008 that \"the worst that anyone has discovered about Larkin are some crass letters and a taste for porn softer than what passes for mainstream entertainment\". Despite the controversy, Larkin was chosen in a 2003 Poetry Book Society survey, almost two decades after his death, as Britain's best-loved poet of the previous 50 years, and in 2008 \"The Times\" named him Britain's greatest post-war writer.\nIn 1973 a \"Coventry Evening Telegraph\" reviewer referred to Larkin as \"the bard of Coventry\", but in 2010, 25 years after his death, it was Larkin's adopted home city, Kingston upon Hull, that commemorated him with the Larkin 25 Festival, which culminated in the unveiling of a statue of Larkin by Martin Jennings on 2 December 2010, the 25th anniversary of his death. On 2 December 2016, the 31st anniversary of his death, a floor stone memorial for Larkin was unveiled at Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey.\nLife.\nEarly life and education.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;'You look as if you wished the place in Hell,'\nMy friend said, 'judging from your face.' 'Oh well,\nI suppose it's not the place's fault,' I said.\n'Nothing, like something, happens anywhere.'&lt;/poem&gt;\n\"from\" \"I Remember, I Remember\" (1954),\"The Less Deceived\"\nPhilip Larkin was born on 9 August 1922 at 2 Poultney Road, Radford, Coventry, the only son and younger child of Sydney Larkin (1884\u20131948) and his wife Eva Emily (1886\u20131977), daughter of first-class excise officer William James Day. Sydney Larkin's family originated in Kent, but had lived since at least the eighteenth century at Lichfield, Staffordshire, where they worked first as tailors, then also as coach-builders and shoe-makers. The Day family were from Epping, Essex, but moved to Leigh, Lancashire in 1914 where William Day took a post administering pensions and other dependent allowances.\nLarkin's family lived in the district of Radford, Coventry, until Larkin was five years old, before moving to a large three-storey middle-class house complete with servants' quarters near Coventry railway station and King Henry VIII School, in Manor Road. Having survived the bombings of the Second World War, their former house in Manor Road was demolished in the 1960s to make way for a road modernisation programme, the construction of an inner ring road. His sister Catherine, known as Kitty, was 10 years older than he was. \nHis father, a self-made man who had risen to be Coventry City Treasurer, was a singular individual, 'nihilistically disillusioned in middle age', who combined a love of literature with an enthusiasm for Nazism, and had attended two Nuremberg rallies during the mid-1930s. He introduced his son to the works of Ezra Pound, T. S. Eliot, James Joyce and above all D. H. Lawrence. His mother was a nervous and passive woman, \"a kind of defective mechanism...Her ideal is 'to collapse' and to be taken care of\", dominated by her husband.\nLarkin's early childhood was in some respects unusual: he was educated at home until the age of eight by his mother and sister, neither friends nor relatives ever visited the family home, and he developed a stammer. When he joined Coventry's King Henry VIII Junior School he fitted in immediately and made close, long-standing friendships, such as those with James \"Jim\" Sutton, Colin Gunner and Noel \"Josh\" Hughes. Although home life was relatively cold, Larkin enjoyed support from his parents. For example, his deep passion for jazz was supported by the purchase of a drum kit and a saxophone, supplemented by a subscription to \"DownBeat\". From the junior school he progressed to King Henry VIII Senior School. He fared quite poorly when he sat his School Certificate exam at the age of 16. Despite his results, he was allowed to stay on at school. Two years later he earned distinctions in English and History, and passed the entrance exams for St John's College, Oxford, to read English.\nLarkin began at Oxford University in October 1940, a year after the outbreak of the Second World War. The old upper-class traditions of university life had, at least for the time being, faded, and most of the male students were studying for highly truncated degrees. Due to his poor eyesight, Larkin failed his military medical examination and was able to study for the usual three years. Through his tutorial partner, Norman Iles, he met Kingsley Amis, who encouraged his taste for ridicule and irreverence and who remained a close friend throughout Larkin's life. \nAmis, Larkin and other university friends formed a group they dubbed \"The Seven\", meeting to discuss each other's poetry, listen to jazz, and drink enthusiastically. During this time he had his first real social interaction with the opposite sex, but made no romantic headway. In 1943 he sat his finals, and, having dedicated much of his time to his own writing, was greatly surprised at being awarded a first-class honours degree.\nEarly career and relationships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;Why should I let the toad \"work\"\n Squat on my life?\nCan't I use my wit as a pitchfork\n And drive the brute off?&lt;/poem&gt;\n\"from\" \"Toads\" (1954), \"The Less Deceived\"\nIn 1943 Larkin was appointed librarian of the public library in Wellington, Shropshire. It was while working there that in early 1944 he met his first girlfriend, Ruth Bowman, an academically ambitious 16-year-old schoolgirl. In 1945, Ruth went to continue her studies at King's College London; during one of his visits their friendship developed into a sexual relationship. By June 1946, Larkin was halfway through qualifying for membership of the Library Association and was appointed assistant librarian at University College, Leicester. It was visiting Larkin in Leicester and witnessing the university's Senior Common Room that gave Kingsley Amis the inspiration to write \"Lucky Jim\" (1954), the novel that made Amis famous and to whose long gestation Larkin contributed considerably. Six weeks after his father's death from cancer in March 1948, Larkin proposed to Ruth, and that summer the couple spent their annual holiday touring Hardy country.\nIn June 1950 Larkin was appointed sub-librarian at The Queen's University of Belfast, a post he took up that September. Before his departure he and Ruth split up. At some stage between the appointment to the position at Queen's and the end of the engagement to Ruth, Larkin's friendship with Monica Jones, a lecturer in English at Leicester, also developed into a sexual relationship. He spent five years in Belfast, which appear to have been the most contented of his life. While his relationship with Jones developed, he also had \"the most satisfyingly erotic [experience] of his life\" with Patsy Strang, who at the time was in an open marriage with one of his colleagues. \nAt one stage she offered to leave her husband to marry Larkin. From 1951 onwards Larkin holidayed with Jones in various locations around the British Isles. While in Belfast he also had a significant though sexually undeveloped friendship with Winifred Arnott, the subject of \"Lines on a Young Lady's Photograph Album\", which came to an end when she married in 1954. This was the period in which he gave Kingsley Amis extensive advice on the writing of \"Lucky Jim\". Amis repaid the debt by dedicating the finished book to Larkin.\nIn 1955 Larkin became University Librarian at the University of Hull, a post he held until his death. Professor R. L. Brett, who was chairman of the library committee that appointed him and a friend, wrote, \"At first I was impressed with the time he spent in his office, arriving early and leaving late. It was only later that I realised that his office was also his study where he spent hours on his private writing as well as the work of the library. Then he would return home and on a good many evenings start writing again.\" For his first year he lodged in bedsits. In 1956, at the age of 34, he rented a self-contained flat on the top-floor of 32 Pearson Park, a three-storey red-brick house overlooking the park, previously the American Consulate. This, it seems, was the vantage point later commemorated in the poem \"High Windows.\" \nOf the city itself Larkin commented: \"I never thought about Hull until I was here. Having got here, it suits me in many ways. It is a little on the edge of things, I think even its natives would say that. I rather like being on the edge of things. One doesn't really go anywhere by design, you know, you put in for jobs and move about, you know, I've lived in other places.\" \nIn the post-war years, Hull University underwent significant expansion, as was typical of British universities during that period. When Larkin took up his appointment there, the plans for a new university library were already far advanced. He made a great effort in just a few months to familiarize himself with them before they were placed before the University Grants Committee; he suggested a number of emendations, some major and structural, all of which were adopted. It was built in two stages, and in 1967 it was named the Brynmor Jones Library after Sir Brynmor Jones, the university's vice-chancellor.\nOne of Larkin's colleagues at Hull said he became a great figure in post-war British librarianship. Ten years after the new library's completion, Larkin computerized records for the entire library stock, making it the first library in Europe to install a Geac computer system, an automated online circulation system. Richard Goodman wrote that Larkin excelled as an administrator, committee man and arbitrator. \"He treated his staff decently, and he motivated them\", Goodman said. \"He did this with a combination of efficiency, high standards, humour and compassion.\" He rejected the Net Book Agreement. From 1957 until his death, Larkin's secretary was Betty Mackereth. All access to him by his colleagues was through her, and she came to know as much about Larkin's compartmentalized life as anyone. During his 30 years there, the library's stock sextupled, and the budget expanded from \u00a34,500 to \u00a3448,500, in real terms a twelvefold increase.\nLater life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDockery, now:\nOnly nineteen, he must have taken stock\nOf what he wanted, and been capable\nOf . . . No, that's not the difference: rather how\nConvinced he was he should be added to!\nWhy did he think adding meant increase?\nTo me it was dilution.\n\"from\" \"Dockery and Son\" (1963),\"The Whitsun Weddings\"\nIn February 1961 Larkin's friendship with his colleague Maeve Brennan became romantic, despite her strong Roman Catholic beliefs. In early 1963 Brennan persuaded him to go with her to a dance for university staff, despite his preference for smaller gatherings. This seems to have been a pivotal moment in their relationship, and he memorialised it in his longest (and unfinished) poem \"The Dance\". Around this time, also at her prompting, Larkin learnt to drive and bought a car \u2013 his first, a Singer Gazelle. Meanwhile, Monica Jones, whose parents had died in 1959, bought a holiday cottage in Haydon Bridge, near Hexham, which she and Larkin visited regularly. His poem \"Show Saturday\" is a description of the 1973 Bellingham show in the North Tyne valley.\nIn 1964, following the publication of \"The Whitsun Weddings\", Larkin was the subject of an edition of the arts programme \"Monitor\", directed by Patrick Garland. The programme, which shows him being interviewed by fellow poet John Betjeman in a series of locations in and around Hull, allowed Larkin to play a significant part in the creation of his own public persona; one he would prefer his readers to imagine.\nIn 1968, Larkin was offered the OBE, which he declined. Later in life he accepted the offer of being made a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour. In 1976, the Hamburg-based Alfred Toepfer Foundation awarded Larkin its annual Shakespeare Prize in recognition of his life's work.\nLarkin's role in the creation of Hull University's new Brynmor Jones Library had been important and demanding. Soon after the completion of the second and larger phase of construction in 1969, he was able to redirect his energies. In October 1970, he started to work on compiling a new anthology, \"The Oxford Book of Twentieth Century English Verse\" (1973). He was awarded a Visiting Fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford, for two academic terms, allowing him to consult Oxford's Bodleian Library, a copyright library. While he was in Oxford he passed responsibility for the Library to his deputy, Brenda Moon. Larkin was a major contributor to the re-evaluation of the poetry of Thomas Hardy, which, in comparison to his novels, had been overlooked; in Larkin's \"idiosyncratic\" and \"controversial\" anthology, Hardy was the poet most generously represented. There were twenty-seven poems by Hardy, compared with only nine by T. S. Eliot (however, Eliot is most famous for long poems); the other poets most extensively represented were W. B. Yeats, W. H. Auden and Rudyard Kipling. Larkin included six of his own poems\u2014the same number as for Rupert Brooke. In the process of compiling the volume he had been disappointed not to find more and better poems as evidence that the clamour over the Modernists had stifled the voices of traditionalists. The most favourable responses to the anthology were those of Auden and John Betjeman, while the most hostile was that of Donald Davie, who accused Larkin of \"positive cynicism\" and of encouraging \"the perverse triumph of philistinism, the cult of the amateur ... [and] the weakest kind of Englishry\". After an initial period of anxiety about the anthology's reception, Larkin enjoyed the clamour.\nIn 1971, Larkin regained contact with his schoolfriend Colin Gunner, who had led a picaresque life. Their subsequent correspondence has gained notoriety as Larkin expressed right-wing views and used racist language. In the period from 1973 to 1974, Larkin became an Honorary Fellow of St John's College, Oxford, and was awarded honorary degrees by Warwick, St Andrews and Sussex universities. In January 1974, Hull University informed Larkin that they were going to dispose of the building on Pearson Park in which he lived. Shortly afterwards he bought a detached two-storey 1950s house in Newland Park which was described by his university colleague John Kenyon as \"an entirely middle-class backwater\". Larkin, who moved into the house in June, thought the four-bedroom property \"utterly undistinguished\" and reflected, \"I can't say it's the kind of dwelling that is eloquent of the nobility of the human spirit\".\nShortly after splitting up with Maeve Brennan in August 1973, Larkin attended W. H. Auden's memorial service at Christ Church, Oxford, with Monica Jones as his official partner. In March 1975, the relationship with Brennan restarted, and three weeks after this he initiated a secret affair with Betty Mackereth, who served as his secretary for 28 years, writing the long-undiscovered poem \"We met at the end of the party\" for her. Despite the logistical difficulties of having three relationships simultaneously, the situation continued until March 1978. From then on he and Jones were a monogamous couple.\nIn 1976, Larkin was the guest of Roy Plomley on BBC's \"Desert Island Discs\". His choice of music included \"Dallas Blues\" by Louis Armstrong, \"Spem in alium\" by Thomas Tallis and the Symphony No. 1 in A flat major by Edward Elgar. His favourite piece was \"I'm Down in the Dumps\" by Bessie Smith.\nIn December 2010, as part of the commemorations of the 25th anniversary of Larkin's death, the BBC broadcast a programme entitled \"Philip Larkin and the Third Woman\" focusing on his affair with Mackereth in which she spoke for the first time about their relationship. It included a reading of a newly discovered secret poem, \"Dear Jake\", and revealed that Mackereth was one of the inspirations for his writings.\nFinal years and death.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;Being brave\nLets no one off the grave.\nDeath is no different whined at than withstood.&lt;/poem&gt;\n\"from\" \"Aubade\" (1977), \"Collected Poems\"\nLarkin turned sixty in 1982. This was marked most significantly by a collection of essays entitled \"Larkin at Sixty\", edited by Anthony Thwaite and published by Faber and Faber. There were also two television programmes: an episode of \"The South Bank Show\" presented by Melvyn Bragg in which Larkin made off-camera contributions, and a half-hour special on the BBC that was devised and presented by the Labour Shadow Cabinet Minister Roy Hattersley.\nIn 1983, Jones was hospitalised with shingles, a skin rash. The severity of her symptoms, including its effects on her eyes, distressed Larkin. As her health declined, regular care became necessary: within a month she moved into his Newland Park home and remained there for the rest of her life.\nAt the memorial service for John Betjeman, who died in July 1984, Larkin was asked if he would accept the post of Poet Laureate. He declined, not least because he felt he had long since ceased to be a writer of poetry in a meaningful sense. The following year, Larkin began to suffer from oesophageal cancer. On 11 June 1985, he underwent surgery, but his cancer was found to have spread and was inoperable. On 28 November, he collapsed and was readmitted to hospital. He died four days later, on 2 December 1985, at the age of 63, and was buried at Cottingham municipal cemetery near Hull.\nLarkin had asked on his deathbed that his diaries be destroyed. The request was granted by Jones, the main beneficiary of his will, and Betty Mackereth; the latter shredded the unread diaries page by page, then had them burned. His will was found to be contradictory regarding his other private papers and unpublished work; legal advice left the issue to the discretion of his literary executors, who decided the material should not be destroyed. When she died on 15 February 2001, Jones, in turn, left \u00a31\u00a0million split between St Paul's Cathedral, Hexham Abbey and Durham Cathedral, and another \u00a31\u00a0million to the National Trust. Larkin is commemorated with a green plaque on The Avenues, Kingston upon Hull.\nCreative output.\nJuvenilia and early works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnd kneel upon the stone,For we have triedAll courages on these despairs,And are required lastly to give up pride,And the last difficult pride in being humble.\n\"from\" \"Come then to prayers\" (1946), \"Collected Poems\"\nFrom his mid-teens, Larkin \"wrote ceaselessly\", producing both poetry, initially modelled on Eliot and W. H. Auden, and fiction: he wrote five full-length novels, each of which he destroyed shortly after their completion. While he was at Oxford University, his first published poem, \"Ultimatum\", appeared in \"The Listener\".\nHe developed a pseudonymous alter ego in this period for his prose: Brunette Coleman. Under this name he wrote two novellas, \"Trouble at Willow Gables\" and \"Michaelmas Term at St Brides\" (2002), as well as a supposed autobiography and an equally fictitious creative manifesto called \"What we are writing for\". Richard Bradford has written that these curious works show \"three registers: cautious indifference, archly overwritten symbolism with a hint of Lawrence and prose that appears to disclose its writer's involuntary feelings of sexual excitement\".\nAfter these works, Larkin began to write his first published novel \"Jill\" (1946). This was published by Reginald A. Caton, a publisher of barely legal pornography, who also issued serious fiction as a cover for his core activities. Around the time that \"Jill\" was being prepared for publication, Caton inquired of Larkin if he also wrote poetry. This resulted in the publication, three months before \"Jill\", of \"The North Ship\" (1945), a collection of poems written between 1942 and 1944 which showed the increasing influence of Yeats. Immediately after completing \"Jill\", Larkin started work on the novel \"A Girl in Winter\" (1947), completing it in 1945. This was published by Faber and Faber and was well received, \"The Sunday Times\" calling it \"an exquisite performance and nearly faultless\". Subsequently, he made at least three concerted attempts at writing a third novel, but none developed beyond a solid start.\nMature works.\nIt was during Larkin's five years in Belfast that he reached maturity as a poet. The bulk of his next published collection of poems, \"The Less Deceived\" (1955), was written there, though eight of the twenty-nine poems included were from the late 1940s. This period also saw Larkin make his final attempts at writing prose fiction, and he gave extensive help to Kingsley Amis with \"Lucky Jim\", which was Amis's first published novel. In October 1954 an article in \"The Spectator\" made the first use of the title The Movement to describe the dominant trend in British post-war literature. Poems by Larkin were included in a 1953 PEN Anthology that also featured poems by Amis and Robert Conquest, and Larkin was seen to be a part of this grouping. In 1951, Larkin compiled a collection called \"XX Poems\" which he had privately printed in a run of just 100 copies. Many of the poems in it subsequently appeared in his next published volume. \nIn November 1955, \"The Less Deceived\", was published by the Marvell Press, an independent company in Hessle near Hull (dated October). At first the volume attracted little attention, but in December it was included in \"The Times\"' list of \"Books of the Year\". From this point, the book's reputation spread and sales blossomed throughout 1956 and 1957. During his first five years in Hull, the pressures of work slowed Larkin's output to an average of just two-and-a-half poems a year, but this period saw the writing of some of his best-known poems, such as \"An Arundel Tomb\", \"The Whitsun Weddings\" and \"Here\".\nIn 1963, Faber and Faber reissued \"Jill\", with the addition of a long introduction by Larkin that included much information about his time at Oxford University and his friendship with Kingsley Amis. This acted as a prelude to the publication the following year of \"The Whitsun Weddings\", the volume which cemented his reputation; a Fellowship of the Royal Society of Literature was granted to Larkin almost immediately. In the years that followed, Larkin wrote several of his most best-known poems, followed in the 1970s by a series of longer and more sober poems, including \"The Building\" and \"The Old Fools\". \nAll of these appeared in Larkin's final collection, \"High Windows\", which was published in June 1974. Its more direct use of language meant that it did not meet with uniform praise; nonetheless it sold over twenty thousand copies in its first year alone. For some critics it represents a falling-off from his previous two books, yet it contains a number of his much-loved pieces, including \"This Be The Verse\" and \"The Explosion\", as well as the title poem. \"Annus Mirabilis\" (Year of Wonder), also from that volume, contains the frequently quoted observation that sexual intercourse began in 1963, which the narrator claims was \"rather late for me\". Bradford, prompted by comments in Maeve Brennan's memoir, suggests that the poem commemorates Larkin's relationship with Brennan moving from the romantic to the sexual.\nLater in 1974 he started work on his final major published poem, \"Aubade\". It was completed in 1977 and published in 23 December issue of \"The Times Literary Supplement\". After \"Aubade\" Larkin wrote only one poem that has attracted close critical attention, the posthumously published and intensely personal \"Love Again\".\nPoetic style.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI work all day, and get half-drunk at night.Waking at four to soundless dark, I stare.In time the curtain-edges will grow light.Till then I see what's really always there:Unresting death, a whole day nearer now,Making all thought impossible but howAnd where and when I shall myself die.\n \"from\" \"Aubade\" (1977), \"Collected Poems\"\nLarkin's poetry has been characterized as combining \"an ordinary, colloquial style\", \"clarity\", a \"quiet, reflective tone\", \"ironic understatement\" and a \"direct\" engagement with \"commonplace experiences\", while Jean Hartley summed his style up as a \"piquant mixture of lyricism and discontent\".\nLarkin's earliest work showed the influence of Eliot, Auden and Yeats, and the development of his mature poetic identity in the early 1950s coincided with the growing influence on him of Thomas Hardy. The \"mature\" Larkin style, first evident in \"The Less Deceived\", is \"that of the detached, sometimes lugubrious, sometimes tender observer\", who, in Hartley's phrase, looks at \"ordinary people doing ordinary things\". He disparaged poems that relied on \"shared classical and literary allusions \u2013 what he called \"the myth-kitty\", and the poems are never cluttered with elaborate imagery.\" Larkin's mature poetic persona is notable for its \"plainness and scepticism\". Other recurrent features of his mature work are sudden openings and \"highly-structured but flexible verse forms\".\nTerence Hawkes has argued that while most of the poems in \"The North Ship\" are \"metaphoric in nature, heavily indebted to Yeats's symbolist lyrics\", the subsequent development of Larkin's mature style is \"not ... a movement from Yeats to Hardy, but rather a surrounding of the Yeatsian moment (the metaphor) within a Hardyesque frame\". In Hawkes's view, \"Larkin's poetry ... revolves around two losses\": the \"loss of modernism\", which manifests itself as \"the desire to find a moment of epiphany\", and \"the loss of England, or rather the loss of the British Empire, which requires England to define itself in its own terms when previously it could define 'Englishness' in opposition to something else.\"\nIn 1972, Larkin wrote the oft-quoted \"Going, Going\", a poem which expresses a romantic fatalism in its view of England that was typical of his later years. In it he prophesies a complete destruction of the countryside, and expresses an idealised sense of national togetherness and identity: \"And that will be England gone\u00a0... it will linger on in galleries; but all that remains for us will be concrete and tyres\". The poem ends with the blunt statement, \"I just think it will happen, soon.\"\nLarkin's style is bound up with his recurring themes and subjects, which include death and fatalism, as in his final major poem \"Aubade\". Poet Andrew Motion observes of Larkin's poems: \"their rage or contempt is always checked by the ... energy of their language and the satisfactions of their articulate formal control\". Motion contrasts two aspects of his poetic personality\u2014on the one hand, an enthusiasm for \"symbolist moments\" and \"freely imaginative narratives\", and on the other a \"remorseless factuality\" and \"crudity of language\". Motion defines this as a \"life-enhancing struggle between opposites\", and concludes that his poetry is typically \"ambivalent\": \"His three mature collections have developed attitudes and styles of ... imaginative daring: in their prolonged debates with despair, they testify to wide sympathies, contain passages of frequently transcendent beauty, and demonstrate a poetic inclusiveness which is of immense consequence for his literary heirs.\"\nProse non-fiction.\nLarkin was a critic of modernism in contemporary art and literature. His scepticism is at its most nuanced and illuminating in \"Required Writing\", a collection of his book reviews and essays, and at its most inflamed and polemical in his introduction to his collected jazz reviews, \"All What Jazz\", drawn from the 126 record-review columns he wrote for \"The Daily Telegraph\" between 1961 and 1971, which contains an attack on modern jazz that widens into a wholesale critique of modernism in the arts. Larkin (not unwillingly) acquired a reputation as an enemy of modernism, but recent critical assessments of Larkin's writings have identified them as possessing some modernist characteristics.\nLegacy.\nReception history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLife is an immobile, locked,Three-handed struggle betweenYour wants, the world's for you, and (worse)The unbeatable slow machineThat brings what you'll get.\n \"from\" \"The Life with a Hole in it\" (1974),\"Collected Poems\"\nWhen first published in 1945, \"The North Ship\" received just one review, in the \"Coventry Evening Telegraph\", which concluded \"Mr Larkin has an inner vision that must be sought for with care. His recondite imagery is couched in phrases that make up in a kind of wistful hinted beauty what they lack in lucidity. Mr Larkin's readers must at present be confined to a small circle. Perhaps his work will gain wider appeal as his genius becomes more mature?\" A few years later, though, the poet and critic Charles Madge came across the book and wrote to Larkin with his compliments. When the collection was reissued in 1966, it was presented as a work of juvenilia, and the reviews were gentle and respectful; the most forthright praise came from Elizabeth Jennings in \"The Spectator\": \"few will question the intrinsic value of \"The North Ship\" or the importance of its being reprinted now. It is good to know that Larkin could write so well when still so young.\"\n\"The Less Deceived\" was first noticed by \"The Times\", who included it in its \"List of Books of 1955\". In its wake many other reviews followed; \"most of them concentrated ... on the book's emotional impact and its sophisticated, witty language.\" \"The Spectator\" felt the collection was \"in the running for the best published in this country since the war\"; G. S. Fraser, referring to Larkin's perceived association with The Movement felt that Larkin exemplified \"everything that is good in this 'new movement' and none of its faults\". \"The Times Literary Supplement\" called him \"a poet of quite exceptional importance\". \nIn June 1956, the \"Times Educational Supplement\" was fulsome: \"As native as a Whitstable oyster, as sharp an expression of contemporary thought and experience as anything written in our time, as immediate in its appeal as the lyric poetry of an earlier day, it may well be regarded by posterity as a poetic monument that marks the triumph over the formless mystifications of the last twenty years. With Larkin poetry is on its way back to the middlebrow public.\" Reviewing the book in America, the poet Robert Lowell wrote: \"No post-war poetry has so caught the moment, and caught it without straining after its ephemera. It's a hesitant, groping mumble, resolutely experienced, resolutely perfect in its artistic methods.\"\nIn time, there was a counter-reaction: David Wright wrote in \"Encounter\" that \"The Less Deceived\" suffered from the \"palsy of playing safe\". In April 1957, Charles Tomlinson wrote a piece for the journal \"Essays in Criticism\", \"The Middlebrow Muse\", attacking The Movement's poets for their \"middle-cum-lowbrowism\", \"suburban mental ratio\" and \"parochialism\"\u2014Larkin had a \"tenderly nursed sense of defeat\". In 1962, A. Alvarez, the compiler of an anthology entitled \"The New Poetry\", accused Larkin of \"gentility, neo-Georgian pastoralism, and a failure to deal with the violent extremes of contemporary life\".\nWhen \"The Whitsun Weddings\" was released, Alvarez continued his attacks in a review in \"The Observer\", complaining of the \"drab circumspection\" of Larkin's \"commonplace\" subject-matter. Praise outweighed criticism; John Betjeman felt Larkin had \"closed the gap between poetry and the public which the experiments and obscurity of the last fifty years have done so much to widen.\" In \"The New York Review of Books\", Christopher Ricks wrote of the \"refinement of self-consciousness, usually flawless in its execution\" and Larkin's summoning up of \"the world of all of us, the place where, in the end, we find our happiness, or not at all.\" He felt Larkin to be \"the best poet England now has.\"\nIn his biography, Richard Bradford writes that the reviews for \"High Windows\" showed \"genuine admiration\" but notes that they typically encountered problems describing \"the individual genius at work\" in poems such as \"Annus Mirabilis\", \"The Explosion\" and \"The Building\" while also explaining why each were \"so radically different\" from one another. Robert Nye in \"The Times\" overcame this problem \"by treating the differences as ineffective masks for a consistently nasty presence\".\nIn \"Larkin at Sixty\", amongst the portraits by friends and colleagues such as Kingsley Amis, Noel Hughes and Charles Monteith and dedicatory poems by John Betjeman, Peter Porter and Gavin Ewart, the various strands of Larkin's output were analysed by critics and fellow poets: Andrew Motion, Christopher Ricks and Seamus Heaney looked at the poems, Alan Brownjohn wrote on the novels, and Donald Mitchell and Clive James looked at his jazz criticism.\nCritical opinion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIsolate rather this elementThat spreads through other lives like a treeAnd sways them on in a sort of senseAnd say why it never worked for me\n\"from\" \"Love Again\" (1974), \"posthumously published\"\nIn 1980, Neil Powell wrote: \"It is probably fair to say that Philip Larkin is less highly regarded in academic circles than either Thom Gunn or Donald Davie\". But since the turn of the century, Larkin's standing has increased. \"Philip Larkin is an excellent example of the plain style in modern times\", writes Tijana Stojkovic. Robert Sheppard asserts: \"It is by general consent that the work of Philip Larkin is taken to be exemplary\". \"Larkin is the most widely celebrated and arguably the finest poet of the Movement\", states Keith Tuma, and his poetry is \"more various than its reputation for dour pessimism and anecdotes of a disappointed middle class suggests\".\nStephen Cooper's \"Philip Larkin: Subversive Writer\" and John Osborne's \"Larkin, Ideology and Critical Violence\" suggest the changing temper of Larkin studies, the latter attacking eminent critics such as James Booth and Anthony Thwaite for their readiness to reduce the poems to works of biography, and stressing instead the genius of Larkin's universality and deconstructionism. Cooper argues that \"The interplay of signs and motifs in the early work orchestrates a subversion of conventional attitudes towards class, gender, authority and sexual relations\". Cooper identifies Larkin as a progressive writer, and perceives in the letters a \"plea for alternative constructs of masculinity, femininity and social and political organisation\". Cooper draws on the entire canon of Larkin's works, as well as on unpublished correspondence, to counter the image of Larkin as merely a racist, misogynist reactionary. Instead he identifies in Larkin what he calls a \"subversive imagination\". He highlights in particular \"Larkin's objections to the hypocrisies of conventional sexual politics that hamper the lives of both sexes in equal measure\".\nIn similar vein to Cooper, Stephen Regan notes in an essay entitled \"Philip Larkin: a late modern poet\" that Larkin frequently embraces devices associated with the experimental practices of Modernism, such as \"linguistic strangeness, self-conscious literariness, radical self-questioning, sudden shifts of voice and register, complex viewpoints and perspectives, and symbolist intensity\".\nA further indication of a new direction in the critical valuation of Larkin is Sisir Kumar Chatterjee's statement that \"Larkin is no longer just a name but an institution, a modern British national cultural monument\".\nChatterjee's view of Larkin is grounded in a detailed analysis of his poetic style. He observes a development from Larkin's early works to his later ones, which sees his style change from \"verbal opulence through a recognition of the self-ironising and self-negating potentiality of language to a linguistic domain where the conventionally held conceptual incompatibles \u2013 which are traditional binary oppositions between absolutes and relatives, between abstracts and concretes, between fallings and risings and between singleness and multiplicity \u2013 are found to be the last stumbling-block for an artist aspiring to rise above the impasse of worldliness\". This contrasts with an older view that Larkin's style barely changed over the course of his poetic career. Chatterjee identifies this view as being typified by Bernard Bergonzi's comment that \"Larkin's poetry did not ... develop between 1955 and 1974\". For Chatterjee, Larkin's poetry responds strongly to changing \"economic, socio-political, literary and cultural factors\".\nChatterjee argues: \"It is under the defeatist veneer of his poetry that the positive side of Larkin's vision of life is hidden\". This positivity, suggests Chatterjee, is most apparent in his later works. Over the course of Larkin's poetic career: \"The most notable attitudinal development lay in the zone of his view of life, which from being almost irredeemably bleak and pessimistic in \"The North Ship\", became more and more positive with the passage of time\".\nThe view that Larkin is not a nihilist or pessimist, but actually displays optimism in his works, is certainly not universally endorsed, but Chatterjee's study suggests the degree to which old stereotypes of Larkin are now being transcended. Representative of these stereotypes is Bryan Appleyard's judgement (quoted by Maeve Brennan) that of the writers who \"have adopted a personal pose of extreme pessimism and loathing of the world ... none has done so with quite such a grinding focus on littleness and triviality as Larkin the man\". Recent criticism of Larkin demonstrates a more complex set of values at work in his poetry and across the totality of his writings.\nThe debate about Larkin is summed up by Matthew Johnson, who observes that in most evaluations of Larkin \"one is not really discussing the man, but actually reading a coded and implicit discussion of the supposed values of 'Englishness' that he is held to represent\". Changing attitudes to Englishness are reflected in changing attitudes to Larkin, and the more sustained intellectual interest in the English national character, as embodied in the works of Peter Mandler for instance, pinpoint one key reason why there is an increased scholarly interest in Larkin.\nA summative view similar to those of Johnson and Regan is that of Robert Crawford, who argues that \"In various ways, Larkin's work depends on, and develops from, Modernism.\" Furthermore, he \"demonstrates just how slippery the word 'English' is\".\nDespite these recent developments, Larkin and his circle are nonetheless still firmly rejected by modernist critics and poets. For example, the poet Andrew Duncan, writing of The Movement on his pinko.org website, is of the opinion that \"there now seems to be a very wide consensus that it was a bad thing, and that Movement poems are tedious, shallow, smug, sententious, emotionally dead, etc. Their successors in the mainstream retain most of these characteristics. Wolfgang Gortschacher's book on Little Magazine Profiles ... shows ... that there was a terrific dearth of magazines during the 50s\u2014an impoverishment of openings which correlates with rigid and conservative poetry, and with the hegemony of a few people determined to exclude dissidents.\" \nPeter Riley, a participant in the British Poetry Revival, which was a reaction against The Movement's poets, has also criticised Larkin for his uncritical and ideologically narrow position: \"What after all were Larkin and The Movement but a denial of the effusive ethics of poetry from 1795 onwards, in favour of 'This is what life is really like' as if anyone thought for a second of representing observable 'life'. W.S. Graham and Dylan Thomas knew perfectly well that 'life' was like that, if you nominated it thus, which is why they went elsewhere.\"\nPosthumous reputation.\nLarkin's posthumous reputation was deeply affected by the publication in 1992 of Anthony Thwaite's edition of his letters and, the following year, his official biography, \"Philip Larkin: A Writer's Life\" by Andrew Motion. These revealed his obsession with pornography, his racism, his increasing shift to the political right wing, and his habitual expressions of venom and spleen. In 1990, even before the publication of these two books, Tom Paulin wrote that Larkin's \"obscenity is informed by prejudices that are not by any means as ordinary, commonplace, or acceptable as the poetic language in which they are so plainly spelled out.\" \nThe letters and Motion's biography fuelled further assessments of this kind, such as Lisa Jardine's comment in \"The Guardian\" that \"The Britishness of Larkin's poetry carries a baggage of attitudes which the \"Selected Letters\" now make explicit\". On the other hand, the revelations were dismissed by the novelist Martin Amis in \"The War Against Clich\u00e9\", arguing that the letters in particular show nothing more than a tendency for Larkin to tailor his words according to the recipient. A similar argument was made by Richard Bradford in his biography on Larkin from 2005. Commenting on \"Letters to Monica\"\n(2010) Graeme Richardson states that the collection went \"some way towards the restoration of Larkin's tarnished image...reveal(ing) Larkin as not quite the sinister, black-hearted near-rapist everyone thought it was OK to abuse in the 90s.\"\nTrying to resolve Larkin's contradictory opinions on race in his book \"Such Deliberate Disguises: The Art of Philip Larkin\", the writer Richard Palmer quotes a letter Larkin wrote to Betjeman, as if it exposes \"all the post-Motion and post-Letters furore about Larkin's 'racism' as the nonsense it is\":\nThe American Negro is trying to take a step forward that can be compared only to the ending of slavery in the nineteenth century. And despite the dogs, the hosepipes and the burnings, advances have already been made towards giving the Negro his civil rights that would have been inconceivable when Louis Armstrong was a young man. These advances will doubtless continue. They will end only when the Negro is as well-housed, educated and medically cared for as the white man.\nReviewing Palmer's book, John G. Rodwan, Jr. proposes that:\na less forgiving reader could counter by asking if this does not qualify as the thought of a \"true racist\": I find the state of the nation quite terrifying. In 10 years' time we shall all be cowering under our beds as hordes of blacks steal anything they can lay their hands on. Or this: We don't go to cricket Test matches now, too many fucking niggers about.\nDespite controversy about his personal life and opinions, Larkin remains one of Britain's most popular poets. In 2003, almost two decades after his death, Larkin was chosen as \"the nation's best-loved poet\" in a survey by the Poetry Book Society, and in 2008 \"The Times\" named Larkin as the greatest British post-war writer. Three of his poems, \"This Be The Verse\", \"The Whitsun Weddings\" and \"An Arundel Tomb\", featured in the \"Nation's Top 100 Poems\" as voted for by viewers of the BBC's \"Bookworm\" in 1995. \nMedia interest in Larkin has increased in the twenty-first century. Larkin's collection \"The Whitsun Weddings\" is one of the available poetry texts in the AQA English Literature A Level syllabus, while \"High Windows\" is offered by the OCR board. Buses in Hull displayed extracts from his poems in 2010.\nThe Centennial of Larkin's birth was celebrated in 2022.\nRecordings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn everyone there sleepsA sense of life lived according to love.To some it means the difference they could makeBy loving others, but across most it sweepsAs all they might have done had they been loved.\n \"from\" \"Faith Healing\" (1960), \"The Whitsun Weddings\"\nIn 1959, the Marvell Press published \"Listen presents Philip Larkin reading The Less Deceived\" (Listen LPV1), an LP record on which Larkin recites all the poems from \"The Less Deceived\" in the order they appear in the printed volume. This was followed, in 1965, by \"Philip Larkin reads and comments on The Whitsun Weddings\" (Listen LPV6), again on the Marvell Press's record label (though the printed volume was published by Faber and Faber). Once again the poems are read in the order in which they appear in the printed volume, but with Larkin including introductory remarks to many of the poems. A recording of Larkin reading the poems from his final collection, \"High Windows\", was published in 1975 as \"British poets of our time. Philip Larkin; High Windows: poems read by the author\" (edited by Peter Orr) on the Argo record label (Argo PLP 1202). As with the two previous recordings, the sequencing of the poems is the same as in the printed volume.\nLarkin also appears on several audio poetry anthologies: \"The Jupiter Anthology of 20th Century English Poetry \u2013 Part III\" (JUR 00A8), issued in 1963 and featuring \"An Arundel Tomb\" and \"Mr Bleaney\" (this same recording was issued in the United States in 1967 on the Folkways record label as \"Anthology of 20th Century English Poetry \u2013 Part III\" (FL9870)); \"The Poet Speaks\" record 8 (Argo PLP 1088), issued in 1967 and featuring \"Wants\", \"Coming\", \"Nothing to be Said\", \"Days\" and \"Dockery and Son\"; \"On Record\" (YA3), issued in 1974 by Yorkshire Arts Association and featuring \"Here\", \"Days\", \"Next, Please\", \"Wedding-Wind\", \"The Whitsun Weddings\", \"XXX\", \"XIII\" (these last two poems from \"The North Ship\"); and \"Douglas Dunn and Philip Larkin\", issued in 1984 by Faber and Faber (A Faber Poetry cassette), featuring Larkin reading 13 poems including, for the first time on a recording, \"Aubade\".\nDespite the fact that Larkin made audio recordings (in studio conditions) of each of his three mature collections, and separate recordings of groups of poems for a number of audio anthologies, he somehow gained a reputation as a poet who was reluctant to make recordings in which he read his own work. While Larkin did express a dislike of the sound of his own voice (\"I come from Coventry, between the sloppiness of Leicester and the whine of Birmingham, you know\u2014and sometimes it comes out\"), the evidence indicates that this influenced more his preference not to give public readings of his own work, than his willingness to make audio recordings of his poems.\nIn 1980, Larkin was invited by the Poets' Audio Center, Washington, to record a selection of poems from the full range of his poetic output for publication on a Watershed Foundation cassette tape. The recording was made in February 1980 (at Larkin's own expense) by John Weeks, a sound engineer colleague from the University of Hull. Although negotiations between Larkin, his publishers and the Watershed Foundation collapsed, the recording (of Larkin reading 26 poems selected from his four canonical volumes of poetry) was sold \u2013 by Larkin \u2013 to Harvard University's Poetry Room in 1981. \nIn 2004, a copy of this recording was uncovered in the Hornsea garage studio of the engineer who had made the recording for Larkin. (Subsequently, Larkin's own copy of the recording was found in the Larkin Archive at the University of Hull.) News of the \"newly discovered\" recording made the headlines in 2006, with extracts being broadcast in a Sky News report. A programme examining the discovery in more depth, \"The Larkin Tapes\", was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in March 2008. The recordings were issued on CD by Faber and Faber in January 2009 as \"The Sunday Sessions\".\nIn contrast to the number of audio recordings of Larkin reading his own work, there are very few appearances by Larkin on television. The only programme in which he agreed to be filmed taking part is \"Down Cemetery Road\" (1964), from the BBC \"Monitor\" series, in which Larkin was interviewed by John Betjeman. The filming took place in and around Hull (with some filming in North Lincolnshire), and showed Larkin in his natural surroundings: his flat in Pearson Park, the Brynmor Jones Library; and visiting churches and cemeteries. The film was broadcast on BBC Four. In 1981, Larkin was part of a group of poets who surprised John Betjeman on his seventy-fifth birthday by turning up on his doorstep with gifts and greetings. This scene was filmed by Jonathan Stedall and later featured in the third episode of his 1983 series for BBC2, \"Time With Betjeman\".\nIn 1982, as part of the celebrations for his sixtieth birthday, Larkin was the subject of \"The South Bank Show\". Although Larkin declined the invitation to appear in the programme, he recorded (on audio tape) \"a lot of poems\" specifically for it. Melvyn Bragg commented, in his introduction to the programme, that the poet had given his full cooperation. The programme, broadcast on 30 May, featured contributions from Kingsley Amis, Andrew Motion and Alan Bennett. Bennett was also filmed reading several Larkin poems a few years later, in an edition of \"Poetry in Motion\", broadcast by Channel 4 in 1990.\nFiction based on Larkin's life.\nIn 1999, Oliver Ford Davies starred in Ben Brown's play \"Larkin With Women\" at the Stephen Joseph Theatre, Scarborough, reprising his role at the Orange Tree Theatre, London, in 2006. The play was published by Larkin's usual publishers, Faber and Faber. Set in the three decades after Larkin's arrival in Hull, it explores his long relationships with Monica Jones, Maeve Brennan and Betty Mackereth. Another Larkin-inspired entertainment, devised by and starring Sir Tom Courtenay, was given a pre-production performance in June 2002 at Hull University's Middleton Hall. Courtenay performed his one-man play \"Pretending to Be Me\" as part of the Second Hull International Conference on the Work of Philip Larkin. \nIn November that year, Courtenay debuted the play at the West Yorkshire Playhouse, later transferring the production to the Comedy Theatre in London's West End. An audio recording of the play, which is based on Larkin's letters, interviews, diaries and verse, was released in 2005. In June 2010, Courtenay returned to the University of Hull to give a performance of a newly revised version of \"Pretending to Be Me\" called \"Larkin Revisited\" in aid of the Larkin statue appeal as part of the Larkin 25 festival.\nIn July 2003, BBC Two broadcast a film entitled \"Love Again\"\u2014its title also that of one of Larkin's most painfully personal poems\u2014dealing with the last thirty years of Larkin's life (though not shot anywhere near Hull). The lead role was played by Hugh Bonneville, and in the same year Channel 4 broadcast the documentary \"Philip Larkin, Love and Death in Hull\".\nIn April 2008, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a play by Chris Harrald entitled \"Mr Larkin's Awkward Day\", recounting the practical joke played on him in 1957 by his friend Robert Conquest, a fellow poet.\nPhilip Larkin Society.\nThe Philip Larkin Society is a charitable organization dedicated to preserving the memory and works of Philip Larkin. It was formed in 1995 on the tenth anniversary of Larkin's death, and achieved charity status in the United Kingdom in 2000. Anthony Thwaite, one of Larkin's literary executors, was the society's president until his death in 2021. Professor James Booth is an Honorary Vice-president and Honorary Life Member, as was Professor Eddie Dawes, the society's inaugural Chair. The current Society president is Rosie Millard OBE. The Society's Chair is Graham Chesters and deputy chair is Lyn Lockwood.\nThe society carries out various activities, such as lectures, walking tours and events for Larkin and his literary contemporaries. It hosted the Larkin 25 art festival from June to December 2010 to commemorate the 25th anniversary of Larkin's death, and in 2016 unveiled Larkin's memorial stone at Poet's Corner in Westminster Abbey, which includes lines from \"An Arundel Tomb\": \"Our almost-instinct almost true / What will survive of us is love\".\nMemorials.\nMemorials to Larkin in Kingston upon Hull, where he worked and wrote much of his poetry, are the Larkin Building at the University of Hull housing teaching facilities and lecture rooms and the Philip Larkin Centre for Poetry and Creative Writing which hosts a regular programme of literary events.\nIn May 2022 Larkin's childhood school, King Henry VIII School, dedicated a memorial room, called 'The Philip Larkin Room', next to the main school hall, otherwise known as Burgess Hall.\nIn 2010, the city marked the 25th anniversary of his death with the Larkin 25 Festival. A video was commissioned to illustrate Larkin's poem \"Here\", his hymn to Hull and the East Riding of Yorkshire. Forty decorated toad sculptures entitled \"Larkin with Toads\" were displayed in the city in tribute to Larkin's poem \"Toads\" on 17 July 2010.\nA larger-than-life-size bronze statue of Larkin by sculptor Martin Jennings was unveiled at Hull Paragon Interchange in December 2010, closing the Larkin 25 events. It is inscribed, \"That Whitsun I was late getting away\", from the poem, \"The Whitsun Weddings\". \nFunding for the \u00a3100,000 statue, designed by Martin Jennings, was raised at charity events and auctions with support from Hull City Council. The unveiling was accompanied by Nathaniel Seaman's \"Fanfare for Larkin\", composed for the occasion. Five plaques containing Larkin's poems were added to the floor near the statue in 2011. In December 2012, a memorial bench was installed around a pillar near the statue.\nIn June 2015, it was announced that Larkin would be honoured with a floor stone memorial at Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey. The memorial was unveiled on 2 December 2016, the 31st anniversary of his death. Actor Sir Tom Courtenay and artist Grayson Perry both read from Larkin's work during the unveiling ceremony and an address was given by poet and author Blake Morrison. The memorial includes two lines quoted from his poem \"An Arundel Tomb\":Our almost-instinct almost true:What will survive of us is love.\nFrom 5 July to 1 October 2017, as part of the Hull UK City of Culture 2017 celebrations, the Brynmor Jones Library at Hull University mounted the exhibition \"Larkin: New Eyes Each Year\". It featured objects from Larkin's life, as well as his personal collection of books from his last home at Newland Park, in the original shelf order in which he had arranged them. Also in 2017, in the Burgess district of Coventry, the pub known as The Tudor Rose was renamed The Philip Larkin.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43924", "revid": "352579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43924", "title": "Botulism toxin", "text": ""}
{"id": "43926", "revid": "1305745941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43926", "title": "Java API for XML Processing", "text": "Java application programming interface\nIn computing, the Java API for XML Processing (JAXP) ( ), one of the Java XML application programming interfaces (APIs), provides the capability of validating and parsing XML documents. It has three basic parsing interfaces:\nIn addition to the parsing interfaces, the API provides an XSLT interface to provide data and structural transformations on an XML document.\nJAXP was developed under the Java Community Process as JSR 5 (JAXP 1.0), JSR 63 (JAXP 1.1 and 1.2), and JSR 206 (JAXP 1.3).\nJAXP version 1.4.4 was released on September 3, 2010. JAXP 1.3 was declared https:// on February 12, 2008.\nDOM interface.\nThe DOM interface parses an entire XML document and constructs a complete in-memory representation of the document using the classes and modeling the concepts found in the Document Object Model Level 2 Core Specification.\nThe DOM parser is called a \n, as it builds an in-memory codice_1 representation. The codice_2 is created by the codice_2. The \n creates an instance - a tree structure containing nodes in the XML Document. Each tree node in the structure implements the interface. Among the many different types of tree nodes, each representing the type of data found in an XML document, the most important include:\nSAX interface.\nThe codice_2 creates the SAX parser, called the codice_2. Unlike the DOM parser, the SAX parser does not create an in-memory representation of the XML document and so runs faster and uses less memory. Instead, the SAX parser informs clients of the XML document structure by invoking callbacks, that is, by invoking methods on an codice_2 instance provided to the parser. This way of accessing document is called Streaming XML.\nThe codice_7 class implements the codice_2, the codice_2, the codice_2, and the codice_2 interfaces. Most clients will be interested in methods defined in the codice_12 interface that are called when the SAX parser encounters the corresponding elements in the XML document. The most important methods in this interface are:\nClients provide a subclass of the codice_7 that overrides these methods and processes the data. This may involve storing the data into a database or writing it out to a stream.\nDuring parsing, the parser may need to access external documents. It is possible to store a local cache for frequently used documents using an XML Catalog.\nThis was introduced with Java 1.3 in May 2000.\nStAX interface.\nStAX was designed as a median between the DOM and SAX interface. In its metaphor, the programmatic entry point is a cursor that represents a point within the document. The application moves the cursor forward - 'pulling' the information from the parser as it needs. This is different from an event based API - such as SAX - which 'pushes' data to the application - requiring the application to maintain state between events as necessary to keep track of location within the document.\nXSLT interface.\nThe XML Stylesheet Language for Transformations, or XSLT, allows for conversion of an XML document into other forms of data. JAXP provides interfaces in package codice_2 allowing applications to invoke an XSLT transformation. This interface was originally called TrAX (Transformation API for XML), and was developed by an informal collaboration between the developers of a number of Java XSLT processors.\nMain features of the interface are\n object to create a codice_2, representing the executable form of a stylesheet (codice_2) This cannot be shared across threads, though it is serially reusable. The \n provides methods to set stylesheet parameters and serialization options (for example, whether output should be indented), and a method to actually run the transformation. (codice_2).\nTwo abstract interfaces codice_2 and codice_2 are defined to represent the input and output of the transformation. This is a somewhat unconventional use of Java interfaces, since there is no expectation that a processor will accept any class that implements the interface - each processor can choose which kinds of \n or \n it is prepared to handle. In practice all JAXP processors supports several standard kinds of Source (codice_2, codice_2 codice_2) and several standard kinds of Result (codice_2, codice_2 codice_2) and possibly other implementations of their own.\nExample.\nThe most primitive but complete example of XSLT transformation launching may look like this:\n/* file src/examples/xslt/XsltDemo.java */\npackage examples.xslt;\nimport java.io.StringReader;\nimport java.io.StringWriter;\nimport javax.xml.transform.Transformer;\nimport javax.xml.transform.TransformerException;\nimport javax.xml.transform.TransformerFactory;\nimport javax.xml.transform.TransformerFactoryConfigurationError;\nimport javax.xml.transform.stream.StreamResult;\nimport javax.xml.transform.stream.StreamSource;\npublic class XsltDemo {\n public static void main(String[] args) throws TransformerFactoryConfigurationError, TransformerException {\n //language=xslt\n String xsltResource = \"\"\"\n &lt;?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?&gt;\n &lt;xsl:stylesheet version='2.0' xmlns:xsl='http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform'&gt;\n &lt;xsl:output method='xml' indent='no'/&gt;\n &lt;xsl:template match='/'&gt;\n &lt;reRoot&gt;&lt;reNode&gt;&lt;xsl:value-of select='/root/node/@val' /&gt; world&lt;/reNode&gt;&lt;/reRoot&gt;\n &lt;/xsl:template&gt;\n &lt;/xsl:stylesheet&gt;\n // language=XML\n String xmlSourceResource = \"\"\"\n &lt;?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?&gt;\n &lt;root&gt;&lt;node val='hello'/&gt;&lt;/root&gt;\n StringWriter xmlResultResource = new StringWriter();\n Transformer xmlTransformer = TransformerFactory.newInstance().newTransformer(\n new StreamSource(new StringReader(xsltResource))\n xmlTransformer.transform(\n new StreamSource(new StringReader(xmlSourceResource)), new StreamResult(xmlResultResource)\n System.out.println(xmlResultResource.getBuffer().toString());\nIt applies the following hardcoded XSLT transformation:\n&lt;?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?&gt;\n&lt;xsl:stylesheet version='2.0' xmlns:xsl='http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform'&gt;\n &lt;xsl:output method='xml' indent='no'/&gt;\n &lt;xsl:template match='/'&gt;\n &lt;reRoot&gt;&lt;reNode&gt;&lt;xsl:value-of select='/root/node/@val' /&gt; world&lt;/reNode&gt;&lt;/reRoot&gt;\n &lt;/xsl:template&gt;\n&lt;/xsl:stylesheet&gt;\nTo the following hardcoded XML document:\n&lt;?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?&gt;\n&lt;root&gt;&lt;node val='hello'/&gt;&lt;/root&gt;\nThe result of execution will be\n&lt;?xml version=\"1.0\" encoding=\"UTF-8\"?&gt;&lt;reRoot&gt;&lt;reNode&gt;hello world&lt;/reNode&gt;&lt;/reRoot&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43927", "revid": "44164165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43927", "title": "Billy Joel", "text": "American singer, songwriter, and pianist (born 1949)\nWilliam Martin Joel (; born May 9, 1949) is an American singer, songwriter, and pianist. Nicknamed the \"Piano Man\" after his signature 1973 song of the same name, Joel has had a successful career as a solo artist since the 1970s. From 1971 to 1993, he released 12 studio albums spanning the genres of pop and rock, and in 2001 released a one-off studio album of classical compositions. With over 160 million records sold worldwide, Joel is one of the world's best-selling music artists and is the fourth-best-selling solo artist in the United States. His 1985 compilation album, \"Greatest Hits \u2013 Volume I &amp; Volume II\", is one of the best-selling albums in the U.S.\nJoel was born in the Bronx in New York City and grew up in Hicksville on Long Island, where he began taking piano lessons at his mother's insistence. After dropping out of high school to pursue a music career, Joel took part in two short-lived bands, the Hassles and Attila, before signing a record deal with Family Productions and embarking on a solo career with his debut album, \"Cold Spring Harbor\" (1971). In 1972, Joel caught the attention of Columbia Records after a live radio performance of \"Captain Jack\" became popular in Philadelphia, prompting him to sign a new record deal with the company, through which he released his second album, \"Piano Man\" (1973). After \"Streetlife Serenade\" (1974) and \"Turnstiles\" (1976), Joel achieved his critical and commercial breakthrough with \"The Stranger\" (1977). It became Columbia's best-selling release, selling over 10 million copies and spawning the hit singles \"Just the Way You Are\", \"Movin' Out (Anthony's Song)\", \"Only the Good Die Young\", and \"She's Always a Woman\", as well as the concert staples \"Scenes from an Italian Restaurant\" and \"Vienna\".\nJoel's \"52nd Street\" (1978) was his first album to reach No. 1 on the \"Billboard\" 200. \"Glass Houses\" (1980) was an attempt to further establish himself as a rock artist; it featured \"It's Still Rock and Roll to Me\" (Joel's first single to top the \"Billboard\" Hot 100), \"You May Be Right\", \"Don't Ask Me Why\", and \"Sometimes a Fantasy\". \"The Nylon Curtain\" (1982) stemmed from a desire to create more lyrically and melodically ambitious music. \"An Innocent Man\" (1983) served as an homage to genres of music that Joel had grown up with in the 1950s, such as rhythm and blues and doo-wop; it featured \"Tell Her About It\", \"Uptown Girl\", and \"The Longest Time\", three of his best-known songs. After \"River of Dreams\" (1993), Joel largely retired from producing studio material, although he went on to release \"Fantasies &amp; Delusions\" (2001), featuring classical compositions composed by him and performed by British-Korean pianist Richard Hyung-ki Joo. Joel provided voiceover work in 1988 for the Disney animated film \"Oliver &amp; Company\", performing the song \"Why Should I Worry?\", and contributed to the soundtracks to several films, including \"Easy Money\" (1983), \"Ruthless People\" (1986), \"A League of Their Own\", and \"Honeymoon in Vegas\" (both 1992). Joel returned to composing new music with the 2024 single \"Turn the Lights Back On\".\nJoel has had a successful touring career, holding live performances across the globe. In 1987, he became one of the first artists to hold a rock tour in the Soviet Union. Joel has had 33 Top 40 hits in the U.S., three of which (\"It's Still Rock and Roll to Me\", \"Tell Her About It\", and \"We Didn't Start the Fire\") topped the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. He has been nominated for 23 Grammy Awards, winning six, including Album of the Year for \"52nd Street\". Joel was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1992, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1999 and the Long Island Music Hall of Fame in 2006. He received the 2001 Johnny Mercer Award from the Songwriters Hall of Fame and was recognized at the 2013 Kennedy Center Honors.\nEarly life, family and education.\nWilliam Martin Joel was born on May 9, 1949, in the Bronx, New York. At age one, he moved with his family to Hicksville in the town of Oyster Bay on Long Island. Joel and his cousin Judy, whom his parents adopted, were raised in a nondescript house similar to those in nearby Levittown.\nHis mother, Rosalind (1922\u20132014), was born in Brooklyn to Jewish parents, Philip and Rebecca Nyman, who emigrated from England. Billy's father, Howard (born Helmut) Joel (1923\u20132011), an accomplished amateur classical pianist and businessman, was born in Nuremberg, Germany to a Jewish family, the only child of merchant and manufacturer Karl Amson Joel, and educated in Switzerland. In 1928, Karl Joel set up a prosperous mail-order textile company, Joel Macht Fabrik, which within 10 years had become the second largest of its type in Germany. Escaping the Nazi regime, Karl, his wife and young son emigrated to Switzerland. Following the passing of laws which prevented Jews from owning property and businesses, in 1938 he was forced to sell his company to Josef Neckermann for a fraction of its true value. As direct entry to the United States was difficult for German Jews due to strict quotas imposed by the Immigration Act of 1924, the family reached the country via Cuba, where they arrived in early 1939 and stayed for nearly two years. In the United States, Howard became an engineer but always loved music.\nJoel's parents met in 1942, whilst taking part in a production of Gilbert and Sullivan's comic opera \"The Pirates of Penzance\" at the City College of New York. He has said that neither of his parents talked much about World War II. It was not until later that Joel learned more about his father's family. After Rosalind and Howard Joel divorced in 1957, Howard returned to Europe, as he had never liked the United States: he considered the people uneducated and materialistic. Howard settled in Vienna, Austria, and later remarried. Joel has a half-brother, Alexander Joel, born to his father in England, who became a classical conductor in Europe and was the chief musical director of the Staatstheater Braunschweig from 2001 to 2014.\nAt age four, Joel began taking piano lessons reluctantly at his mother's insistence, after he started banging on the piano in the family home. He continued with formal tuition until about the age of 16, his teachers including the noted American pianist Morton Estrin and musician Timothy Ford. When learning a new piece, he would sometimes improvise in the style of its composer to avoid reading the music. Joel has said that he is a better organist than a pianist. As a teenager, Joel took up boxing and competed on the amateur Golden Gloves circuit as a welterweight. He abandoned the sport after his nose was broken, having won 22 of his 26 fights.\nAlthough Joel's parents were Jewish, he did not grow up in the religion. Joel stated: \"I was not brought up Jewish in any religious way. My circumcision was as Jewish as they got.\" He attended a Roman Catholic church with friends. At age 11, Joel was baptized in a Church of Christ in Hicksville. He now identifies as a Jewish atheist.\nJoel attended Hicksville High School until 1967 but did not graduate with his class. He was playing at a piano bar to help support himself, his mother and sister, and missed a crucial English exam after playing a late-night gig the evening before. Although Joel was a comparatively strong student, at the end of his senior year, he did not have enough credits to graduate. Rather than attend summer school to earn his diploma, Joel decided to begin a music career: \"I told them, 'To hell with it. If I'm not going to Columbia University, I'm going to Columbia Records, and you don't need a high school diploma over there'.\" In 1992, he submitted essays to the school board in lieu of the missed exam. They were accepted, and he was awarded his diploma at Hicksville High's annual graduation ceremony 25 years after leaving.\nMusic career.\n1964\u20131970: Early career.\nAlthough Joel's compositions are infused with references to classical music, his music mostly encompasses pop and rock, fitting into the subgenres of pop rock and soft rock. Furthermore, Joel's tightly structured melodies and down-to-earth songwriting betray the influence of early rock &amp; roll and rhythm &amp; blues artists, including Elvis Presley and the Everly Brothers. However, it was only after seeing the Beatles on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" that he decided to pursue a career in music. As he later commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAt age 16, Joel joined the Echoes, a group which specialized in British Invasion covers. The Echoes began recording in 1965. Joel played piano on several records released through Kama Sutra Productions and on recordings produced by Shadow Morton. He played on a demo version of \"Leader of the Pack\", which in 1964 became a major hit for the Shangri-Las, and has said that he was also on the demo or master recording of their song \"Remember (Walking in the Sand)\". The released single included a co-producer credit for Artie Ripp, who later was the first to sign and produce Joel as a solo artist after Michael Lang, who had given Joel a monetary advance, passed Joel along to Ripp to focus his attentions elsewhere.\nIn late 1965, the Echoes changed their name briefly to the Emeralds, and then to the Lost Souls. Joel left the band in 1967 to join the Hassles, a Long Island group that had signed with United Artists Records. Over the next year and a half, they released four singles and two albums (\"The Hassles\" and \"Hour of the Wolf\"). However, all were commercial failures. Joel and drummer Jon Small left the Hassles in 1969 to form the duo Attila, releasing an eponymous debut album in July 1970. The duo disbanded the following October when Joel began an affair with Small's wife, Elizabeth. The pair later married.\n1970\u20131974: \"Cold Spring Harbor\" and \"Piano Man\".\nJoel signed a contract with the record company Family Productions, with which he recorded his first solo album, \"Cold Spring Harbor\", named for Cold Spring Harbor, a hamlet on his native Long Island. Artie Ripp, owner of Family Productions, states that he spent US$450,000 developing Joel; nevertheless, the album was mastered at too high a speed and was a technical and commercial disappointment.\nThe popular songs \"She's Got a Way\" and \"Everybody Loves You Now\" were first released on this album, but went largely unnoticed until live versions were included on \"Songs in the Attic \"(1981). Columbia released a remastered version of \"Cold Spring Harbor\" in 1983, with certain songs shortened or re-orchestrated.\nJoel began his \"Cold Spring Harbor\" tour in the fall of 1971, touring with his band, consisting of Rhys Clark on drums, Al Hertzberg on guitar, and Larry Russell on bass guitar, throughout the mainland United States and Puerto Rico, opening for such artists as the J. Geils Band, the Beach Boys, Badfinger and Taj Mahal. Joel's performance at the Puerto Rican Mar y Sol Pop Festival was especially well-received; and although recorded, Joel refused to have it published on the Mar Y Sol compilation album \"\". Nevertheless, interest in his music grew.\nOn April 15, 1972, WMMR-FM radio in Philadelphia featured a live broadcast of Joel performing 12 songs, and a recording of the set was played several times by station DJ Jonathan Takiff on his late-night weekend show. As a result, \"Captain Jack\" became the most requested track in the station's history, and after receiving regular airplay, was soon an underground hit on the East Coast. Herb Gordon, a Columbia Records executive, heard Joel's music and brought him to the attention of company president Clive Davis. Joel signed a recording contract with the label in 1972 and moved to Los Angeles, where he lived for the next three years. For six months, Joel worked at The Executive Room piano bar on Wilshire Boulevard as \"Bill Martin\". Whilst not playing his own material, it was during this period that he composed his signature song \"Piano Man\", about the bar's patrons.\nAlthough now signed to Columbia, Joel was still obliged to pay Archie Ripp and Michael Lang a share of his royalties from album sales. In 1981, when his contract was renegotiated, the company agreed to cover these payments itself. President of CBS/Columbia Records Walter Yetnikoff also bought the publishing rights to Joel's songs owned by Ripp, which he then gave to the artist as a birthday gift. Yetnikoff noted in the 2010 documentary \"The Last Play at Shea\" that he had to threaten Ripp to close the deal.\nJoel's first album with Columbia was \"Piano Man\" (1973). Despite modest sales, the album's title track became his signature song, ending nearly every concert. That same year, Joel's touring band changed. Guitarist Al Hertzberg was replaced by Don Evans, and bassist Larry Russell by Patrick McDonald, himself replaced in late 1974 by Doug Stegmeyer, who stayed with Joel until 1989. Rhys Clark returned as drummer and Tom Whitehorse as banjoist and pedal steel player; Johnny Almond joined as saxophonist and keyboardist. The band toured the U.S. and Canada extensively, appearing on popular music shows. Joel's songwriting began attracting more attention; in 1974, Helen Reddy recorded the \"Piano Man\" track \"You're My Home\".\n1974\u20131977: \"Streetlife Serenade\" and \"Turnstiles\".\nIn 1974, Joel recorded his second Columbia album in Los Angeles, \"Streetlife Serenade\". His manager at the time was Jon Troy, an old friend from New York's Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood; Troy was soon replaced by Joel's wife Elizabeth. \"Streetlife Serenade\" contains references to suburbia and the inner city. It is perhaps best known for \"The Entertainer\", a No. 34 hit in the U.S. Upset that \"Piano Man\" had been significantly cut for radio play, Joel wrote \"The Entertainer\" as a sarcastic response: \"If you're gonna have a hit, you gotta make it fit, so they cut it down to 3:05.\" Although \"Streetlife Serenade\" was viewed unfavorably by critics, it contains the notable songs \"Los Angelenos\" and \"Root Beer Rag\", an instrumental that was a staple of his live set in the 1970s.\nIn late 1975, Joel played piano and organ on several tracks on Bo Diddley's \"The 20th Anniversary of Rock 'n' Roll\" all-star album.\nNot long after the release of \"Streetlife Serenade\", Joel began working on his next album, \"Turnstiles\", at Caribou Ranch studio in Colorado. The difficult project began with Michael Stewart as producer, then James William Guercio took over before Stewart was brought in again. Using members of Elton John's backing band Dee Murray and Nigel Olsson, as well as session musicians, half the songs had been recorded when Joel decided the results were less than satisfactory. Also disenchanted with Los Angeles, where he encountered anti-New York sentiment, he returned to the East Coast metropolis in 1975, seeking inspiration in the city's troubles. Now with himself as producer, he rerecorded and completed the album, which when released in 1976, was the first to feature his regular touring band.\n\"Say Goodbye to Hollywood\" was a minor hit, covered by Ronnie Spector and Nigel Olsson. During a 2008 radio interview, Joel said that he no longer performs the song because singing it in its high original key \"shreds\" his vocal cords; however, Joel did finally play it live for the first time since 1982 when he sang it at the Hollywood Bowl in May 2014. Although never released as a single, \"New York State of Mind\" became one of Joel's best-known songs; Barbra Streisand recorded a cover and Tony Bennett performed it as a duet with Joel on \"\". Other notable songs from the album include \"Summer, Highland Falls\"; \"Miami 2017 (Seen the Lights Go Out on Broadway)\" and \"Prelude/Angry Young Man\", a concert mainstay.\n1977\u20131979: \"The Stranger\" and \"52nd Street\".\nDuring the \"Turnstiles\" tour, Joel's wife Elizabeth phoned George Martin in an attempt to recruit him as the producer for Joel's next album, but having seen the artist play live at Glassboro State College in New Jersey, Martin declined the invitation. Prior to the tour, Joel had expressed to his wife a desire to work with Phil Ramone at some point. She now contacted the legendary producer, who attended Joel's concert at New York's Carnegie Hall on June 2, 1977 (as did Don DeVito from Columbia Records, who brought with him a recording truck to tape the show). Impressed by what he saw, Ramone went on to produce all seven studio albums Joel recorded from 1977 to 1986.\nTheir first collaboration, \"The Stranger\" (1977), was an enormous commercial success and \"established Joel as a household name\".\n The album yielded four Top-25 hits on the \"Billboard\" charts: \"Just the Way You Are\" (No. 3), \"Movin' Out\" (No. 17), \"Only the Good Die Young\" (No. 24) and \"She's Always a Woman\" (No. 17). Joel's first Top Ten album, \"The Stranger \"reached number two on the charts and was certified multi-platinum, besting Simon &amp; Garfunkel's \"Bridge over Troubled Water\" as Columbia's previous bestselling album. \"Just the Way You Are\" \u2014 written for Joel's first wife, Elizabeth Weber \u2014 was inspired by a dream and won Grammy awards for Record of the Year and Song of the Year. On tour in Paris, Joel learned the news late one night in a hotel room. It also featured \"Scenes from an Italian Restaurant\", an album-oriented rock classic, which has become one of his best-known songs. It is one of Joel's favorite of his own songs, which has become a firm staple of his live shows, and \"Vienna\", also one of Joel's personal favorites, and one of his most streamed songs on the internet as of 2022. \"Rolling Stone\" later ranked \"The Stranger\" the 70th greatest album of all time.\nJoel released \"52nd Street\" in 1978, naming it after Manhattan's 52nd Street, which, at the time of its release, served as the world headquarters of CBS/ Columbia. The album sold over seven million copies, propelled to number one on the charts by the hits \"My Life\" (No. 3), \"Big Shot\" (No. 14) and \"Honesty\" (No. 24). A cover of \"My Life\" by Gary Bennett became the theme for the television sitcom \"Bosom Buddies\". \"52nd Street\" also won Grammy awards for Best Pop Vocal Performance, Male and Album of the Year.\nIn 1978, Joel gave his first of what would go on to be at least 150 shows at New York City's Madison Square Garden. In 2025, Joel described playing at the arena as being a \"dream come true\". He currently dominates the record for most concerts performed at Madison Square Garden.\nIn 1979, Joel traveled to Havana, Cuba, to participate in the historic Havana Jam festival from March 2\u20134, alongside Rita Coolidge, Kris Kristofferson, Stephen Stills, the CBS Jazz All-Stars, the Trio of Doom, Fania All-Stars, Billy Swan, Bonnie Bramlett, Mike Finnegan, Weather Report, and an array of Cuban artists including Irakere, Pacho Alonso, Tata G\u00fcines and Orquesta Arag\u00f3n. Although Joel's performance was for many the highlight of the weekend, CBS were unable to record or film it as planned because his wife objected to the fact that a specific deal had not been agreed with them in advance. He was interviewed about his experience of playing at the event for Ernesto Juan Castellanos's documentary \"Havana Jam '79\".\n\"52nd Street\" was the first commercially released album on the then-new compact disc format, in 1982.\n1979\u20131983: \"Glass Houses\" and \"The Nylon Curtain\".\nThe success of his piano-driven ballads like \"Just the Way You Are\", \"She's Always a Woman\" and \"Honesty\" led some critics to label Joel a \"balladeer\" and \"soft rocker\". He thought these labels were unfair and insulting, and with \"Glass Houses\", Joel tried to record an album that proved that he could rock harder than his critics gave him credit for, occasionally imitating and referring to the style of new wave rock music that was starting to become popular. Joel stated that the album cover, which pictured him wearing a leather jacket and about to throw a rock at a window of his Long Island home, was intended as a riposte to his image as a \"mellow balladeer\".\n\"Glass Houses\" spent six weeks at the top of the \"Billboard\" album chart, yielding the hits \"You May Be Right\" (No. 7, May 1980), \"It's Still Rock and Roll to Me\", (No. 1, July 1980), \"Don't Ask Me Why\" (No. 19, September 1980) and \"Sometimes a Fantasy\" (No. 36, November 1980). The latter song gave its name to a 15-minute promotional film featuring both music and dialog, which as Joel's first venture of this kind, he wrote and directed himself. \"It's Still Rock and Roll to Me\" was his first number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, where it spent 11 weeks in the top 10 and became the ninth biggest-selling single of the year. His five sold-out shows at Madison Square Garden in 1980 earned him the venue's Gold Ticket Award for selling more than 100,000 tickets.\n\"Glass Houses\" won the 1981 Grammy Award for Best Rock Vocal Performance, Male. It also won the American Music Award for Favorite Album, Pop/Rock category. The album's closing song, \"Through the Long Night\" (B-side of the \"It's Still Rock &amp; Roll to Me\" single), was a lullaby that featured Joel harmonizing with himself in a song he says was inspired by the Beatles' \"Yes It Is\". In a recorded master class at the University of Pennsylvania, Joel recalled that he had written to the Beatles asking them how to get started in the music industry. In response, he received a pamphlet about Beatles merchandise. This later led to the idea of Joel conducting Q&amp;A sessions around the world answering questions that people had about the music industry.\nJoel's next release, \"Songs in the Attic\", was composed of live performances of lesser-known songs from the beginning of his career. It was recorded at larger US arenas and in intimate nightclub shows in June and July 1980. This release introduced many fans, who discovered Joel when \"The Stranger\" became a smash in 1977, to many of his earlier compositions. The album reached No. 8 on the \"Billboard\" chart and produced two hit singles: \"Say Goodbye to Hollywood\" (No. 17), and \"She's Got a Way\" (No. 23). It sold over three million copies. Although not as successful as some of his previous albums, it was still considered a success by Joel.\nThe next wave of Joel's career commenced with the recording of \"The Nylon Curtain\". With it, Joel became more ambitious with his songwriting, which included highly topical songs like \"Allentown\" and \"Goodnight Saigon\". Joel has stated that he wanted the album to communicate his feelings about the American Dream and how changes in American politics during the Reagan administration meant that \"all of a sudden you weren't going to be able to inherit [the kind of life] your old man had.\" He also tried to be more ambitious in his use of the recording studio. Joel said that he wanted to \"create a sonic masterpiece\" on \"The Nylon Curtain\". So he spent more time in the studio, crafting the sound of the album, than he had on any previous album. Production of \"The Nylon Curtain\" began in the fall of 1981, but was delayed for several months after Joel was involved in a serious motorcycle accident on April 15, 1982. The bone in his left thumb was crushed and his other wrist dislocated in the incident, when he hit and was flipped over a car which had run a red light at an intersection on Long Island.\nIn October 1982, Joel embarked on a brief tour to support the album, and recorded his first video special, \"Live from Long Island\", at the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale, New York on December 29. This was first broadcast on HBO on July 24, 1983, before being released on VHS. At the following year's Grammy Awards,it was nominated for the Best Video Album.\n\"The Nylon Curtain\" went to No. 7 on the charts, partially due to heavy airplay on MTV for the videos to the singles \"Allentown\" and \"Pressure\", both directed by Russell Mulcahy.\n1983\u20131988: \"An Innocent Man\" and \"The Bridge\".\nJoel's next album moved away from the serious themes of \"The Nylon Curtain\" and struck a much lighter tone. \"An Innocent Man\" was Joel's tribute to R&amp;B and doo wop music of the 1950s and 1960s and resulted in Joel's second \"Billboard\" number-one hit, \"Tell Her About It\", which was the first single off the album in the summer of 1983. The album itself reached No. 4 on the charts and No. 2 in UK. It also boasted six top-30 singles, the most of any album in Joel's catalog. The album was well received by critics, with Stephen Thomas Erlewine, senior editor for AllMusic, describing Joel as being \"in top form as a craftsman throughout the record, effortlessly spinning out infectious, memorable melodies in a variety of styles.\"\nAt the time that the album was released, WCBS-FM began playing \"Uptown Girl\" both in regular rotation and on the \"Doo Wop Live\". The song became a worldwide hit when released as a single. Originally entitled \"Uptown Girls\", it was inspired by a chance encounter with Christie Brinkley, Whitney Houston, and Elle Macpherson, who were on a modelling assignment in the Caribbean when they approached Joel whilst he was playing the piano in the bar of their hotel (where he was a holiday guest). The accompanying music video featured Brinkley as a high-society girl who pulls her Rolls-Royce into the gas station where Joel's character is working. At the end of the video, Joel's \"grease monkey\" character drives off with his \"uptown girl\" on the back of a motorcycle. When Brinkley went to visit Joel after being asked to star in the video, the first thing Joel said to her upon opening his door was \"I don't dance\". Brinkley had to walk him through the basic steps he does in the video. Their work together on this video shoot sparked a relationship between the two which led to their marriage in 1985.\nIn December, the title song was released as a single and it peaked at No. 10 in the U.S. and No. 8 in the UK, early in 1984. That March, \"The Longest Time\" was released as a single, peaking at No. 14 on the Hot 100 and No. 1 on the Adult Contemporary chart. That summer, \"Leave a Tender Moment Alone\" was released and it hit No. 27 while \"Keeping the Faith\" peaked at No. 18 in January 1985. In the video for \"Keeping the Faith\", Brinkley appears as a passenger in a convertible Chevrolet. \"An Innocent Man\" was also nominated for the Album of the Year Grammy, but lost to Michael Jackson's \"Thriller\".\nJoel participated in the USA for Africa \"We Are the World\" project in 1985. Following \"An Innocent Man\", Joel was asked about releasing an album of his most successful singles. This was not the first time this topic had come up, but Joel had initially considered greatest hits albums as marking the end of one's career. This time he agreed, and \"Greatest Hits Vol. 1 and 2\" was released as a four-sided album and two-CD set, with the songs in the order in which they were released. The new songs \"You're Only Human (Second Wind)\" and \"The Night Is Still Young\" were recorded and released as singles to support the album; both reached the top 40, peaking at No. 9 and No. 34, respectively. \"Greatest Hits\" was highly successful and it has since been certified double diamond by the RIAA, with over 11.5 million copies (23 million units) sold. It is one of the best-selling albums in American music history, according to the RIAA.\nCoinciding with the \"Greatest Hits\" album release, Joel released a two-volume \"Video Album\" that was a compilation of the promotional videos he had recorded from 1977 to that time. Along with videos for the new singles off the \"Greatest Hits\" album, Joel also recorded a video for his first hit, \"Piano Man\", for this project.\nJoel's next album, \"The Bridge\" (1986), did not achieve the level of success of his previous albums, but it yielded the hits \"A\u00a0Matter of Trust\" and \"Modern Woman\" (both No. 10) from the film \"Ruthless People\", a dark comedy from the directors of \"Airplane!\". The ballad \"This is the Time\" also charted, peaking at No. 18. On November 18, 1986, an extended version of \"Big Man on Mulberry Street\" was used on a Season\u00a03 episode of \"Moonlighting\".\"The Bridge\" was Joel's last album to carry the Family Productions logo, after which he severed his ties with Artie Ripp. Joel was unsatisfied with most of the songs on \"The Bridge\", but his record company denied a request for time to produce better material. In a 2008 interview, he described it as \"not a good album'.\nIn October 1986, Joel and his team started planning a trip to the Soviet Union. This was realized the following July, when he arrived in the country with his wife, daughter Alexa, and full touring band. Following an improvised performance in Tbilisi, Joel gave six concerts at indoor arenas in Moscow and Leningrad, to a combined audience possibly in excess of 100,000 people. The entourage was filmed for television and video to offset the cost of the trip, and the concerts were simulcast on radio around the world. Joel's Russian tour was the first live rock radio broadcast in Soviet history. The tour was later cited frequently as one of the first fully staged pop rock shows to come to the Soviet Union, although in reality other artists had previously toured in the country, including Elton John, James Taylor, and Bonnie Raitt.\nMost of that audience took a long while to warm up to Joel's energetic show, something that had never happened in other countries he had performed in. According to Joel, each time the fans were hit with the bright lights, anybody who seemed to be enjoying themselves froze. In addition, people who were \"overreacting\" were removed by security. During this concert, Joel, enraged by the bright lights, flipped his electric piano and snapped a microphone stand while continuing to sing. Joel later apologized for the incident.\nThe concerts in Russia came after an intensive series of European shows and after doing interviews during the day, Joel found himself playing at venues where the PA\u00a0system was \"second rate at best\". Released against his wishes in October 1987, \"Kohuept\" (Russian for \"Concert\"), a live double album recorded during the tour, included cover versions of Bob Dylan's \"The Times They Are a-Changin\" and \"Back in the U.S.S.R.\" by the Beatles. The latter was released as a single but failed to make the Billboard Hot 100 in the US, and the album was Joel's first since \"Cold Spring Harbor\" not to achieve gold disc status. Singer Pete Hewlett was brought in to hit the high notes on his most vocally challenging songs, like \"An Innocent Man\". It has been estimated that Joel lost more than US$1\u00a0million of his own money on the trip and concerts, but he has said the goodwill he was shown there was well worth it.\n1988\u20131993: \"Storm Front\" and \"River of Dreams\".\nThe animated film \"Oliver &amp; Company\" (1988) features Joel in a rare voice acting role as Dodger, a sarcastic Jack Russell based on Dickens's Artful Dodger. The character's design is based on Joel's image at the time, including his trademark Wayfarer sunglasses. Joel also sang his character's song \"Why Should I Worry?\".\nThe recording of \"Storm Front\", which commenced in 1988, coincided with major changes in Joel's career and inaugurated a period of serious upheaval in his business affairs. In August 1989, just before the album was released, Joel dismissed his manager (and former brother-in-law) Frank Weber after an audit revealed major discrepancies in Weber's accounting. Joel subsequently sued Weber for US$90 million, claiming fraud and breach of fiduciary duty, and in January 1990, Joel was awarded US$2 million in a partial judgment against Weber; in April, the court dismissed a US$30 million countersuit filed by Weber.\nThe first single for the album, \"We Didn't Start the Fire\", was released in September 1989 and it became Joel's third\u2014and most recent\u2014US number-one hit, spending two weeks at the top. \"Storm Front\" was released in October, and it eventually became Joel's first number-one album since \"Glass Houses\", nine years earlier. \"Storm Front\" was Joel's first album since \"Turnstiles\" to be recorded without Phil Ramone as producer. For this album, he wanted a new sound, and worked with Mick Jones of Foreigner. Joel is also credited as one of the keyboard players on Jones's 1988 self-titled solo album, and is featured in the official video for Jones's single \"Just Wanna Hold\"; Joel can be seen playing the piano while his then-wife Christie Brinkley joins him and kisses him. Joel also revamped his backing band, dismissing everyone but drummer Liberty DeVitto, guitarist David Brown, and saxophone player Mark Rivera, and bringing in new faces, including multi-instrumentalist Crystal Taliefero.\n\"Storm Front\"'s second single, \"I Go to Extremes\" reached No. 6 in early 1990. The album was also notable for its song \"Leningrad\", written after Joel met a clown in the Soviet city of that name during his tour in 1987, and \"The Downeaster Alexa\", written to underscore the plight of fishermen on Long Island who are barely able to make ends meet. Another well-known single from the album is the ballad \"And So It Goes\" (No. 37 in late 1990). The song was originally written in 1983, around the time Joel was writing songs for \"An Innocent Man\"; but \"And So It Goes\" did not fit that album's retro theme, so it was held back until \"Storm Front\". Joel said in a 1996 master class session in Pittsburgh that \"Storm Front\" was a turbulent album and that \"And So It Goes\", as the last song on the album, portrayed the calm and tranquility that often follows a violent thunderstorm.\nIn September 1992, Joel filed a US$90 million lawsuit against his former lawyer Allen Grubman, alleging a wide range of offenses including fraud, breach of fiduciary responsibility, malpractice and breach of contract. The case was settled out of court in the fall of 1993 for US$3 million paid to Joel by third party Sony America, to protect its subsidiary Sony Music's interests, as it had several other artists also using Grubman's law firm.\nIn 1992, Joel inducted the R&amp;B duo Sam &amp; Dave into the Rock &amp; Roll Hall of Fame. That year, Joel also started work on \"River of Dreams\", finishing the album in early 1993. Its cover art was a colorful painting by Christie Brinkley that was a series of scenes from each of the songs on the album. The eponymous first single was the last top 10 hit Joel has penned to date, reaching No. 3 on \"Billboard\"'s Hot 100 and ranking at No. 21 on the 1993 year-end chart. In addition to the title track, the album includes the hits \"All About Soul\" (with Color Me Badd on backing vocals) and \"Lullabye (Goodnight, My Angel)\", written for his daughter, Alexa. A radio remix version of \"All About Soul\" can be found on \"The Essential Billy Joel\" (2001), and a demo version appears on \"My Lives\" (2005).\nThe song \"The Great Wall of China\" was written about his ex-manager Frank Weber and was a regular in the setlist for Joel's 2006 tour. \"2000 Years\" was prominent in the millennium concert at Madison Square Garden, December 31, 1999, and \"Famous Last Words\" closed the book on Joel's pop songwriting for more than a decade.\n1994\u20132013: Touring and new singles.\nBeginning in 1994, Joel toured extensively with Elton John on a series of \"Face to Face\" tours, making them the longest running and most successful concert tandem in pop music history. During these shows, the two played their own songs, sang each other's songs, and performed duets. They grossed over US$46 million in just 24 dates in their sold out 2003 tour. Joel and John resumed their Face to Face tour in March 2009 and it continued until March 2010, where it ended in Albany, New York, at the Times Union Center. In February 2010, Joel denied rumors in the trade press that he canceled a summer 2010 leg of the tour, claiming there were never any dates booked and that he intended to take the year off. Joel told \"Rolling Stone\": \"We'll probably pick it up again. It's always fun playing with him.\"\nJoel and Christie Brinkley announced on April 13, 1994, that they had separated, and their divorce was finalized in August 1994. The two remained friends.\nJoel's \"Greatest Hits Volume III\" yielded \"To Make You Feel My Love\" (a Bob Dylan cover) and \"Hey Girl\". During his Central Park concert in 1997, Joel performed with Garth Brooks, who had reached No. 1 on \"Billboard\"'s country charts in 1991 with a recording of the song \"Shameless\" from Joel's 1989 album. On March 15, 1999, Joel was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Ray Charles. In his speech, Charles mentioned \"Baby Grand\", the duet Joel had written for the them which appeared on his 1986 album \"The Bridge\".\nOn October 4, 1997, two classical piano pieces composed by Joel, \"The Soliloquy\" and \"Reverie\", were first heard in public. Both played by Yuliya Gorenman at the Seiji Ozawa Hall in Lenox, Massachusetts, a recording of her performance of \"Reverie\" was broadcast nine days later on WNYC-FM and WSHU-FM.\nOn December 31, 1999, Joel performed at New York's Madison Square Garden. At the time, Joel said that it would be his last tour and possibly his last concert. Two of his performances from that night, \"We Didn't Start the Fire\" and \"Scenes from an Italian Restaurant\" were filmed and featured that night as part of ABC's special New Year's Y2K coverage. The concert (dubbed The Night of the 2000 Years) ran for close to four hours and was later released as \"\".\nIn 2001, Joel released \"Fantasies &amp; Delusions\", a collection of classical piano pieces composed by Joel and performed by Hyung-ki Joo. Joel often uses bits of these pieces as interludes in live performances, and some of them are part of the score for the hit show \"Movin' Out\". The album topped the classical charts at No. 1. Joel performed \"New York State of Mind\" live on September 21, 2001, as part of the benefit concert, and on October 20, 2001, along with \"Miami 2017 (Seen the Lights Go Out on Broadway)\", at the Concert for New York City in Madison Square Garden. That night, he also performed \"Your Song\" with Elton John.\nIn 2003, Joel inducted The Righteous Brothers into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, noting that his song \"Until the Night\" from the album \"52nd Street\" was a tribute to the duo.\nIn 2005, Columbia released a box set, \"My Lives\", which is largely a compilation of demos, b-sides, live/alternative versions, and even a few Top 40 hits. The compilation also includes the software that permits people to remix \"Zanzibar\" and a live version of \"I Go to Extremes\" with their PC. A DVD of a show from the \"River of Dreams\" tour is included.\nOn January 7, 2006, Joel began a tour across the U.S. Having not released any new songs in 13 years, he featured a sampling of songs from throughout his career, including major hits as well as deep cuts like \"Zanzibar\" and \"All for Leyna\". Between January 23 and April 24, his 12 performances at Madison Square Garden broke the venue's record for the most consecutive sold-out concerts by an artist during the same tour (the previous best was 10 shows, set by Bruce Springsteen in 2000). This achievement earned Joel the first retired number (12) in the arena's history to be given to a non-athlete. The same honor has been bestowed on Joel at Xfinity Mobile Arena (formerly the Wells Fargo Center) in Philadelphia, where a banner in the colors of the Philadelphia Flyers is hung honoring Joel's 48 sold-out Philadelphia shows. On June 13, 2006, Columbia released \"12 Gardens Live\", a double album containing 32 live recordings from a collection of the 12 different shows at Madison Square Garden during Joel's 2006 tour.\nJoel visited the United Kingdom and Ireland for the first time in many years as part of the European leg of his 2006 tour. On July 31, 2006, Joel performed a free concert in Rome, with the Colosseum as the backdrop.\nJoel toured South Africa, Australia, Japan and Hawaii in late 2006, and subsequently toured the Southeastern U.S. in February and March 2007 before hitting the Midwest in the spring of 2007. A new song, titled \"All My Life\", was Joel's newest single (with second track \"You're My Home\", live from Madison Square Garden 2006 tour) and was released in stores on February 27, 2007. On February 4, Joel sang the national anthem for Super Bowl XLI, becoming the second to sing the national anthem twice at a Super Bowl, after Aaron Neville.\nOn December 1, 2007, Joel premiered his new song \"Christmas in Fallujah\". The song was performed by Cass Dillon, a new Long Island based musician, as Joel felt it should be sung by someone in a soldier's age range (though he himself has played the song occasionally in concert.) The track was dedicated to servicemen based in Iraq. Joel wrote it in September 2007 after reading numerous letters sent to him from American soldiers in Iraq. \"Christmas in Fallujah\" is only the second pop/rock song released by Joel since 1993's \"River of Dreams\". Proceeds from the song benefited the Homes For Our Troops foundation.\nOn January 26, 2008, Joel performed with the Philadelphia Orchestra at the city's Academy of Music 151st anniversary concert. The event premiered an orchestral version of his classical piano piece \"Waltz No. 2 (Steinway Hall)\" from \"Fantasies &amp; Delusions\", arranged by Brad Ellis and the composer. Accompied throughout by the orchestra, Joel's 44-minute set included some of his lesser-known songs, such as \"Scandinavian Skies\" and \"Where's the Orchestra?\" from \"The Nylon Curtain\", as well as \"Uptown Girl\", which he had largely dropped from his live repertoire. The concert and associated ball were part of the academy's fund-raising efforts to establish a \"Billy Joel Fund for Music Education\", to which the singer donated his fee for the evening.\nOn March 10, 2008, Joel inducted his friend John Mellencamp into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.\nJoel sold out 10 concerts at the Mohegan Sun Casino in Uncasville, Connecticut from May to July 2008. The casino honored him with a banner displaying his name and the number 10 to hang in the arena. On June 19, 2008, Joel played a concert at the grand re-opening of Caesars Windsor (formerly Casino Windsor) in Windsor, Ontario, Canada, to an invite-only crowd for Casino VIPs. His mood was light and joke-filled, even introducing himself as \"Billy Joel's dad\" and stating \"you guys overpaid to see a fat bald guy\". He also admitted that Canadian folk-pop musician Gordon Lightfoot was the musical inspiration for \"She's Always A Woman\".\nOn July 16 and 18, 2008, Joel played the final concerts at Shea Stadium before its demolition. His guests included Tony Bennett, Don Henley, John Mayer, John Mellencamp, Steven Tyler, Roger Daltrey, Garth Brooks and Paul McCartney. The concerts were featured in the 2010 documentary film \"Last Play at Shea\". The film was released on DVD on February 8, 2011. The CD and DVD of the show, \"\", were released a month later on March 8.\nOn December 11, 2008, Joel recorded his own rendition of \"Christmas in Fallujah\" during a concert at Acer Arena in Sydney and released it as a live single in Australia only. It is the only official release of Joel performing \"Christmas in Fallujah\", as Cass Dillon sang on the 2007 studio recording and the handful of times the song was played live in 2007.,Joel sang the song throughout his December 2008 tour of Australia.\nOn May 19, 2009, Joel's former drummer, Liberty DeVitto, filed a lawsuit in New York City claiming he was owed over 10 years of royalty payments by Joel and Sony Music. DeVitto had never been given songwriting or arranging credit on any of Joel's songs, but he claimed that he helped arrange some of them, including \"Only the Good Die Young\". In April 2010, it was announced that Joel and DeVitto amicably resolved the lawsuit.\nTo mark the 40th anniversary of the release of Joel's debut album, \"Cold Spring Harbor\", it was announced on his official website that Columbia/Legacy Recordings planned \"to celebrate the occasion with a definitive reissue project of newly restored and expanded Legacy editions of Joel's complete catalog, newly curated collections of rarities from the vaults, previously unavailable studio tracks and live performances, home video releases and more\", although this project was never fully realized. \"Piano Man\" was re-released in a two-disc Legacy edition in November 2011, with Joel's 1972 live radio concert at WMMR-FM in Philadelphia comprising the second disc.\nIn 2012, Joel signed an exclusive worldwide publishing agreement with Universal Music Publishing Group (UMPG) and its subsidiary Rondor Music International, who together replaced EMI Music Publishing in managing his catalog outside the US. Additionally, the agreement marked the first time since Joel regained control of his publishing rights in the 1980s that he began to use an administrator to handle his catalog within the U.S. The agreement's focus is on increasing the use of Joel's music in movies, television programs and commercials.\nOn December 12, 2012, Joel performed as part of at Madison Square Garden, a concert held for all the victims of Hurricane Sandy. He changed the lyrics to \"Miami 2017 (Seen the Lights Go Out on Broadway)\" to make it relate to all the damage caused by Sandy.\nIn May 2013, it was announced that Joel would hold his first ever indoor Irish concert at the O2 in Dublin on November 1. He subsequently announced his return to the UK for the first time in seven years to perform in October and November. Joel played in Manchester and Birmingham as well as London's Hammersmith Apollo. In October, Joel held a surprise concert on Long Island at The Paramount (Huntington, New York) to benefit Long Island Cares. The venue holds a capacity of 1,555 and sold out in five minutes. Joel headlined a solo arena concert in New York City for the first time since 2006 when he performed at Barclays Center in Brooklyn on December 31, 2013.\nIn December 2013, Joel would be named as Madison Square Garden's first ever music \"franchise.\" With this honor, Joel would also join the New York Knicks, New York Rangers and New York Liberty in being recognized as an original Madison Square Garden franchise.\n2014\u20132025: Madison Square Garden residency, \"Turn the Lights Back On\", and recent health updates.\nJoel announced a concert residency at Madison Square Garden, playing one concert a month indefinitely, starting January 27, 2014. The first MSG show also launched the Billy Joel in Concert tour, which continued at the Amway Center (in Orlando, Florida) where Joel performed several cover songs such as Elton John's \"Your Song\", Billy Preston's \"You Are So Beautiful\" (in tribute to Joe Cocker), the Beatles' \"With a Little Help from My Friends\", \"Can't Buy Me Love\" and \"When I'm 64\", Robert Burns' \"Auld Lang Syne\" and AC/DC's \"You Shook Me All Night Long\" (with Brian Johnson). Joel also performed an unusual set, including the song \"Souvenir\" (from 1974's \"Streetlife Serenade\") and excluding \"We Didn't Start the Fire\".\nIn January 2015, Joel broke the previous record he set in 2006 for most consecutive shows at Madison Square Garden after performing his 13th consecutive show, which also resulted in a new banner being raised to the Madison Square Garden rafters. Throughout 2015, Joel performed 21 concerts in addition to his monthly Madison Square Garden residency. His August 4, 2015, engagement at Nassau Coliseum was the final concert prior to the arena undergoing a US$261 million renovation. Joel returned to Nassau Coliseum on April 5, 2017, to play the first concert at the newly renovated venue. Later that month, he played the first concert at Atlanta's new SunTrust Park, the suburban home of the Atlanta Braves. On June 24, Joel returned to Hicksville High School 50 years after his would-be graduating class received their diplomas, to deliver the honorary commencement address. It was also the 25th anniversary of receiving his own diploma from the same high school.\nOn October 7\u20138, 2016, Colorado College in Colorado Springs hosted the first academic conference on Joel. Entitled \"'It\u2019s Still Rock and Roll to Me': The Music and Lyrics of Billy Joel\", the event was open to the public, and the singer participated by giving an hour-long phone interview for the benefit of the 300 attendees.\nIn 2019, Joel announced a concert at Camden Yards, home of the Baltimore Orioles, marking the first-ever concert at the baseball stadium. Joel was forced to postpone his concerts between March 2020 and August 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nJoel and Stevie Nicks jointly announced plans to perform a series of concerts across the United States in 2023, tentatively beginning with SoFi Stadium outside Los Angeles on March 10.\nOn June 1, 2023, Joel announced that his residency at Madison Square Garden would end in July 2024 with his 104th performance in the series, marking his 150th lifetime performance at the venue. On January 22, 2024, Joel announced his first new pop single in years (and only his second pop song in more than two decades), \"Turn the Lights Back On\", which was released on February 1.\nOn May 23, 2025, Joel canceled every concert on his itinerary following a diagnosis of normal pressure hydrocephalus. By July 2025, Joel told \"People\", as well as Bill Maher, that he felt better.\nOn June 4, 2025, the first installment of \"\", a two-part HBO documentary about Joel, premiered at the opening night of the 24th Tribeca Film Festival, New York. It aired on HBO and HBO Max on July 18, with the second part being shown a week later. Shortly afterwards, a 155-track playlist, comprising 115 songs plus audio clips from the documentary, was released on streaming services. This included previously unreleased live and demo recordings, such as Joel's first live performance of \"Scenes from an Italian Restaurant\".\nOther ventures.\nIn 1996, Joel merged his long-held love of boating with his desire for a second career. He and Long Island boating businessman Peter Needham formed the Long Island Boat Company.\nIn November 2010, Joel opened 20th Century Cycles, a vintage motorcycle customization business and museum in Oyster Bay, Long Island.\nIn 2011, Joel announced that he was releasing an autobiography that he had written with Fred Schruers, titled \"The Book of Joel: A Memoir\". The book was originally going to be released in June 2011, but, in March 2011, Joel decided against publishing the book and officially canceled his deal with HarperCollins. \"Rolling Stone\" noted, \"HarperCollins acquired the book project for US$3 million in 2008. Joel is expected to return his advance on that sum to the publisher.\" According to \"Billboard\", \"the HarperCollins book was billed as an 'emotional ride' that would detail the music legend's failed marriage to Christie Brinkley, as well as his battles with substance abuse.\" In explaining his decision to cancel the book's release, Joel said, \"It took working on writing a book to make me realize that I'm not all that interested in talking about the past, and that the best expression of my life and its ups and downs has been and remains my music.\" In 2014, Schruers published a biography, simply titled \"Billy Joel\", based on his extensive personal interviews with Joel.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and family.\nJoel's first wife was Elizabeth Weber Small. When their relationship began, she was married to Jon Small, his music partner in the short-lived duo Attila, with whom she had a son. When the affair was revealed, Weber severed her relationships with both men. Weber and Joel later reconciled and married in 1973, and she then became his manager. They divorced on July 20, 1982.\nJoel married a second time, to model Christie Brinkley, in March 1985. Their daughter, Alexa Ray Joel, was born December 29, 1985. Alexa was given the middle name of Ray after Ray Charles, one of Joel's musical idols. Joel and Brinkley divorced on August 26, 1994. They remain friends, and Joel is the godfather of Brinkley's two youngest children, Jack and Sailor Brinkley Cook.\nOn October 2, 2004, Joel married chef Katie Lee, his third wife. At the time of the wedding, Lee was 23 and Joel was 55. Joel's daughter, Alexa Ray, then 18, served as the maid of honor. Joel's second wife, Christie Brinkley, attended the union and gave the couple her blessing. On June 17, 2009, they announced their separation.\nOn July 4, 2015, Joel married a fourth time, to Alexis Roderick, an equestrian and former Morgan Stanley executive, at his Oyster Bay estate on Long Island. He was 66 and she was 33. Governor of New York Andrew Cuomo conducted the ceremony. The couple has been together since 2009. On August 12, 2015, the couple had a daughter, Della Rose Joel. Their second daughter, Remy Anne Joel, was born on October 22, 2017. His two younger daughters attend school in Florida, where the family now lives.\nHomes.\nFollowing the birth of their daughter Alexa, in 1986 Joel and his wife Christine Brinkley moved to a house in Amagansett, New York, for which it was reported that he paid US$2.9 million. In 2002, he sold the property to comedian Jerry Seinfeld for US$32.5 million (then the most expensive house purchase in the history of New York State).\nIn 2002, Joel bought an estate in Centre Island, New York in the town of Oyster Bay for US$22 million. He also owns a house in Sag Harbor. In 2023, Joel put his Oyster Bay estate on the market for $49 million. The listing was pulled as the main house was undergoing renovations. The mansion, with its guest houses, pool, beach, and helipad on 26 acres, was again offered for sale in September 2024, asking $49.9 million.\nIn 2015, Joel purchased a home in Manalapan, Florida. The waterfront residence went on the market in November 2015 for $19.5 million but it was taken off the market and re-listed in 2017 with an asking price of $18.5 million. The property was further reduced to $16.9 million in 2018. In January 2020, the 13,200-square-foot property sold for US$10.3 million.\nHaving worked on an oyster dredger as a teenager, Joel has a longstanding interest in nautical matters. In 2009, it was reported that he owned a small flotilla of vessels, overseen by a full-time captain. Several of the craft were based on rough designs by Joel, including a boat with a top speed of which he had built to commute from Oyster Bay to Manhattan.\nHealth issues.\nIn 1970, a career decline and personal tragedies led Joel to a deep depressive period. It was revealed in the 2025 documentary \"\" that he tried to commit suicide twice. After Joel's affair with Elizabeth Weber Small resulted in the breakup of Attila, and his estrangement from his best friend Jon Small, Joel was evicted from Small's house. \"I had no place to live. I was sleeping in laundromats and I was depressed, I think to the point of almost being psychotic,\" said Joel. Joel's sister, Judy Molinari, who was a medical assistant at the time, had previously given him sleeping pills to help him sleep. Joel's first suicide attempt occurred when he planned to take an overdose of all the pills. This resulted in Joel falling into a coma for several days. When he awoke, Joel was disappointed that his attempt failed, and swore he would \"do it right\" the second time around. Joel then left a suicide note and attempted to kill himself a second time by drinking furniture polish. Joel later said, \"I drank furniture polish. It looked tastier than bleach.\" Jon Small rushed him to the hospital. Joel checked into Meadowbrook Hospital, where he was put on suicide watch and received treatment for depression. Joel would later pen the song \"Tomorrow Is Today\", which he describes as a suicide note.\nIn 1985, Joel recorded \"You're Only Human (Second Wind)\" as a message to help prevent teen suicide.\nIn 2002, Joel entered Silver Hill Hospital, a substance abuse and psychiatric center in New Canaan, Connecticut, where he underwent treatment for 10 days. In March 2005, Joel checked into the Betty Ford Center, where he spent 30 days for the treatment of alcohol abuse.\nIn 2025, Joel was diagnosed with normal pressure hydrocephalus, leading to problems with his hearing, vision, and balance. The diagnosis led to Joel cancelling all his upcoming planned concerts. In July 2025, he stated in interviews \"People\" and on Bill Maher's podcast that he was improving, with his condition being treatable.\nJoel has admitted to having a history of alcoholism, though he eventually became sober and has stated that some details regarding his alcohol addiction, such as the claim that Joel reached the point where he received DUI arrests, were exaggerated.\nPolitical views and contributions.\nAlthough Joel has donated money to Democratic candidates, he has never publicly affiliated himself with the Democratic Party. Joel rarely publicly endorses political candidates; however, he did play a benefit with his friend Bruce Springsteen to raise money for Barack Obama's presidential campaign in 2008. Joel has performed at benefit concerts that have helped raise funds for political causes. However, about celebrities endorsing political candidates, Joel has said, \"People who pay for your tickets, I don't think they want to hear who you're going to vote for and how you think they should vote.\"\nIn 2016, after his sarcastic dedication of \"The Entertainer\" to then-Republican candidate Donald Trump was taken as a serious endorsement, Joel told the \"New York Daily News\" in an email that he would be voting for Hillary Clinton.\nJoel endorsed Andrew Cuomo\u2019s candidacy for the 2025 New York City mayoral election.\nSupport for fishermen.\nIn January 1992, Joel announced that he would donate some of the proceeds from \"The Downeaster Alexa\" to defend 11 East Hampton fishermen accused of selling striped bass illegally. On July 28, he then joined a related protest by fishermen who claimed regulations were threatening their way of life, saying that he had taken the decision to risk arrest reluctantly but would \"hate to see these people disappear.\"\nAlong with 29 other fishermen and local officials, he was charged by the state Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) with fishing out of season and using the banned method of haul seining. Although the arguments put forward by the defense were rejected by the judge hearing the case, in March 1993 he found that DEC had cited the wrong law when filing it and therefore dismissed the charges against all defendants.\nTours.\nTours\nResidency\nAwards and achievements.\nJoel graduated well after his high school peers because of a missed English exam. His high school diploma was finally awarded by the school board 25 years later. Joel has been presented with multiple honorary doctorates:\nIn 1986, Joel was on the site selection committee for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame board. Seven members of the committee voted for the Hall to be located in San Francisco, and seven voted for Cleveland, Ohio; this tie was broken when Joel voted for Cleveland. Joel was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland in 1999 by one of his chief musical influences, Ray Charles, with whom Joel also collaborated on his song \"Baby Grand\" (1986).\nJoel was also named MusiCares Person of the Year for 2002, an award given each year at the same time as the Grammy Awards. At the dinner honoring him, various artists performed versions of Joel's songs, including Nelly Furtado, Stevie Wonder, Jon Bon Jovi, Diana Krall, Rob Thomas and Natalie Cole.\nJoel has won six Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year for \"52nd Street\" and Song of the Year and Record of the Year for \"Just the Way You Are\".\nIn 1993, Joel was the second entertainer out of 30 persons to be inducted into the Madison Square Garden Walk of Fame. On September 20, 2004, he received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, for his work in the music industry, located at 6233 Hollywood Boulevard. Joel was inducted into the Long Island Music Hall of Fame on October 15, 2006.\nJoel is the only performing artist to have played both Yankee and Shea Stadiums, as well as Giants Stadium, Madison Square Garden, and Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum. Joel has banners in the rafters of the MVP Arena, Nassau Coliseum, Madison Square Garden, Mohegan Sun Arena in Uncasville, Connecticut, Xfinity Mobile Arena in Philadelphia, Hartford Civic Center in Hartford, and the JMA Wireless Dome in Syracuse.\nIn 2003, \"Rolling Stone\"'s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list included \"The Stranger\" at number 67, and \"52nd Street\" at number 352. On their 500 Greatest Songs of All Time list, \"Rolling Stone\" included \"Piano Man\" at number 421.\nJoel has also sponsored the Billy Joel Visiting Composer Series at Syracuse University.\nOn December 12, 2011, Joel became the first non-classical musician honored with a portrait in Steinway Hall.\nOn December 29, 2013, in Washington, D.C., Joel received Kennedy Center Honors, the nation's highest honor for influencing American culture through the arts.\nOn July 22, 2014, the Library of Congress announced that Joel would be the sixth recipient of the Gershwin Prize for Popular Song. He received the prize at a performance ceremony in November 2014 from James H. Billington, the Librarian of Congress, and Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor.\nOn July 18, 2018, Governor Andrew Cuomo proclaimed the date to be Billy Joel Day in New York state to mark his 100th performance at Madison Square Garden.\nOn October 19, 2023, a section of Audrey Avenue near Joel's motorcycle museum in his hometown of Oyster Bay was given the ceremonial name \"Billy Joel Way\" in honor of the musician.\nOn April 14, 2024, Joel was featured on CBS in commemoration of his 100th performance at Madison Square Garden. The network broadcast an encore presentation of the concert special five nights later, on April 19.\nIn 2024, Joel was honored in \"Group C Premiere: Billy Joel Night,\" on \"The Masked Singer\" Season 11. The contestants that night sang songs by Joel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43931", "revid": "50649442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43931", "title": "Transitive verb", "text": "Verb that entails a transitive object\nA transitive verb is a verb that entails one or more transitive objects, for example, 'enjoys' in \"Amadeus enjoys music\". This contrasts with intransitive verbs, which do not entail transitive objects, for example, 'arose' in \"Beatrice arose\". \nTransitivity is traditionally thought of as a global property of a clause, by which activity is transferred from an agent to a patient.\nTransitive verbs can be classified by the number of objects they require. Verbs that entail only two arguments, a subject and a single direct object, are monotransitive. Verbs that entail two objects, a direct object and an indirect object, are called \"ditransitive\", or less commonly \"bitransitive\". \"To give\" is an example of a ditransitive verb in English: it may feature a subject, an indirect object, and a direct object: \"John gave Mary the book\".\nVerbs that take three objects are \"tritransitive\". In English a tritransitive verb features an indirect object, a direct object, and a prepositional phrase \u2013 as in \"I'll trade you this bicycle for your binoculars\" \u2013 or else a clause that behaves like an argument \u2013 as in \"I bet you a pound that he has forgotten\". Not all descriptive grammars recognize tritransitive verbs.\nA clause with a prepositional phrase that expresses a meaning similar to that usually expressed by an object may be called \"pseudo-transitive\". For example, the Indonesian sentences \"Dia masuk sekolah\" (\"He attended school\") and \"Dia masuk ke sekolah\" (\"He went into the school\") have the same verb (\"masuk\" \"enter\"), but the first sentence has a direct object while the second has a prepositional phrase in its place. A clause with a direct object plus a prepositional phrase may be called \"pseudo-ditransitive\", as in the Lakhota sentence \"Ha\u014bp\u00edk\u010deka ki\u014b len\u00e1 w\u00e9-\u010dage\" (\"I made those moccasins for him\"). Such constructions are sometimes called \"complex transitive\". The category of complex transitives includes not only prepositional phrases but also dependent clauses, appositives, and other structures. There is some controversy regarding complex transitives and tritransitives; linguists disagree on the nature of the structures.\nIn contrast to transitive verbs, some verbs take zero objects. Verbs that do not require an object are called intransitive verbs. An example in modern English is the verb \"to arrive\".\nVerbs that can be used in an intransitive or transitive way are called \"ambitransitive verbs\". In English, an example is the verb \"to eat\"; the sentences \"You eat\" (with an intransitive form) and \"You eat apples\" (a transitive form that has \"apples\" as the object) are both grammatical.\nThe concept of valency is related to transitivity. The valency of a verb considers all the arguments the verb takes, including both the subject and all of the objects. In contrast to valency, the transitivity of a verb only considers the objects. Subcategorization is roughly synonymous with valency, though they come from different theoretical traditions.\nHistory.\nTransitive phrases, i.e. phrases containing transitive verbs, were first recognized by the stoics and from the Peripatetic school, but they probably referred to the whole phrase containing the transitive verb, not just to the verb. The advancements of the stoics were later developed by the philologists of the Alexandrian school.\nLexical vis-\u00e0-vis grammatical information.\nTraditionally, transitivity patterns are thought of as lexical information of the verb, but recent research in construction grammar and related theories has argued that transitivity is a grammatical rather than a lexical property, since the same verb very often appears with different transitivity in different contexts. Consider:\nIn grammatical construction theories, transitivity is considered as an element of grammatical construction, rather than an inherent part of verbs.\nIn English.\nThe following sentences exemplify transitive verbs in English.\nOther languages.\nIn some languages, morphological features separate verbs based on their transitivity, which suggests this is a salient linguistic feature. For example, in Japanese:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, the definition of transitive verbs as those with one object is not universal, and is not used in grammars of many languages. \nIn Hungarian.\nHungarian is sometimes misunderstood to have transitive and intransitive conjugation for all verbs, but there is really only one general conjugation.\nIn present and future, there is a lesser used variant \u2013 a definite, or say emphatic conjugation form. It is used only when referring to a previous sentence, or topic, where the object was already mentioned. Logically the definite article as reference is used here\u2014and due to verb emphasis (definite), word order changes to VO.\n \u2014 I see (a) house \u2013 (general)\n \u2014 I see the house \u2013 (The house we were looking for)\n \u2014 I eat (an) apple \u2013 (general)\n \u2014 I eat the apple \u2013 (The one mom told me to)\n \u2014 I drink wine \u2013 (general)\n \u2014 I drink the wine \u2013 (That you offered me before)\nIn English, one would say 'I do see the house', etc., stressing the verb \u2013 in Hungarian, the object is emphasized \u2013 but both mean exactly the same thing.\nIn Pingelapese.\nIn the Pingelapese language, transitive verbs are used in one of four of the most common sentence structures. Transitive verbs according to this language have two main characteristics. These characteristics are action verbs and the sentence must contain a direct object. To elaborate, an action verb is a verb that has a physical action associated to its meaning. The sentence must contain a direct object meaning there must be a recipient of said verb. Two entities must be involved when using a transitive sentence. There is also a fixed word order associated with transitive sentences: subject-transitive verb-object. For example: \nLinda (Subject) \"e\" aesae (transitive verb) Adino (object) This sentence translates to, Linda knows Adino.\nIn Polish.\nIt is generally accepted in Polish grammar that transitive verbs are those that:\nFor example, the verb (to see) is transitive because it satisfies both conditions:\n (Mary sees John; is the accusative form of )&lt;br&gt;\n (John is seen by Mary)&lt;br&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43932", "revid": "39457116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43932", "title": "Obligate aerobe", "text": "Organism that requires oxygen to grow\nAn obligate aerobe is an organism that requires oxygen to grow. Through cellular respiration, these organisms use oxygen to metabolise substances, like sugars or fats, to obtain energy. In this type of respiration, oxygen serves as the terminal electron acceptor for the electron transport chain. Aerobic respiration has the advantage of yielding more energy (adenosine triphosphate or ATP) than fermentation or anaerobic respiration, but obligate aerobes are subject to high levels of oxidative stress.\nExamples.\nAmong organisms, almost all animals, most fungi, and several bacteria are obligate aerobes. Examples of obligately aerobic bacteria include \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" (acid-fast), \"Bacillus\" (Gram-positive), and \"Nocardia asteroides\" (Gram-positive). With the exception of the yeasts, most fungi are obligate aerobes. Also, almost all algae are obligate aerobes.\nA unique obligate aerobe is \"Streptomyces coelicolor\" which is gram-positive, soil-dwelling, and belongs to the phylum Actinomycetota. It is unique because the genome of this obligate aerobe encodes numerous enzymes with functions that are usually attributed to anaerobic metabolism in facultatively and strictly anaerobic bacteria.\nSurvival strategies.\nWhen obligate aerobes are in a temporarily oxygen-deprived environment, they need survival strategies to avoid death. Under these conditions, \"Mycobacterium smegmatis\" can quickly switch between fermentative hydrogen production and hydrogen oxidation with either oxygen or fumarate reduction depending on the availability of electron acceptor. This example is the first time that hydrogen production has been seen in an obligate aerobe. It also confirms the fermentation in a mycobacterium and is evidence that hydrogen plays a role in survival as well as growth.\nProblems can also arise in oxygen-rich environments, most commonly attributed to oxidative stress. This occurrence is when there is an imbalance of free radicals and antioxidants in the cells of the organism, largely due to pollution and radiation in the environment. Obligate aerobes survive this phenomenon by using the organism's immune system to correct the imbalance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43933", "revid": "50044019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43933", "title": "Intransitive verb", "text": "Verb that does not entail a direct object\nIn grammar, an intransitive verb is a verb, aside from an auxiliary verb, whose context does not entail a transitive object. That lack of an object distinguishes intransitive verbs from transitive verbs, which entail one or more objects. Additionally, intransitive verbs are typically considered within a class apart from modal verbs and defective verbs.\nExamples.\nIn the following sentences, verbs are used without a direct object:\nThe following sentences contain transitive verbs (they entail one or more objects):\nSome verbs, called ambitransitive verbs, may entail objects but do not always require one. Such a verb may be used as intransitive in one sentence, and as transitive in another.\nIn general, intransitive verbs often involve weather terms, involuntary processes, states, bodily functions, motion, action processes, cognition, sensation, and emotion.\nValency-changing operations.\nThe valency of a verb is related to transitivity. Where the transitivity of a verb only considers the objects, the valency of a verb considers all the arguments that correspond to a verb, including both the subject of the verb and all of the objects.\nIt is possible to change the contextually indicated sense of a verb from transitive to intransitive, and in so doing to change the valency.\nIn languages that have a passive voice, a transitive verb in the active voice becomes intransitive in the passive voice. For example, consider the following sentence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"David hugged Mary.\"\nIn this sentence, \"hugged\" is a transitive verb with \"Mary\" as its object. The sentence can be made passive with the direct object \"Mary\" as the grammatical subject as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Mary was hugged.\"\nThis shift is called \"promotion\" of the object.\nThe passive-voice construction does not indicate an object. The passivized sentence could be continued with the agent:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Mary was hugged by David.\"\nIt cannot be continued with a direct object to be taken by \"was hugged\". For example, it would be ungrammatical to write \"Mary was hugged her daughter\" to show that Mary and her daughter shared a hug.\nIntransitive verbs can be rephrased as passive constructs in some languages. In English, intransitive verbs can be used in the passive voice when a prepositional phrase is included, as in, \"The houses were lived in by millions of people.\"\nSome languages, such as Dutch, have an impersonal passive voice that lets an intransitive verb without a prepositional phrase be passive. In German, a sentence such as \"The children sleep\" can be made passive to remove the subject and becomes, \"It is slept.\" However, no addition like \"...\u00a0by the children\" is possible in such cases.\nIn languages with ergative\u2013absolutive alignment, the passive voice (where the object of a transitive verb becomes the subject of an intransitive verb) does not make sense, because the noun associated with the intransitive verb is marked as the object, not as the subject. Instead, these often have an antipassive voice. In this context, the \"subject\" of a transitive verb is promoted to the \"object\" of the corresponding intransitive verb. In the context of a nominative\u2013accusative language like English, this promotion is nonsensical because intransitive verbs do not entail objects, they entail subjects. So, the subject of a transitive verb (\"I\" in \"I hug him\") is \"also\" the subject of the intransitive passive construction (\"I was hugged by him\"). But in an ergative\u2013absolutive language like Dyirbal, \"I\" in the transitive \"I hug him\" would involve the ergative case, but the \"I\" in \"I was hugged\" would involve the absolutive, and so by analogy the antipassive construction more closely resembles \"*was hugged me\". Thus in this example, the ergative is promoted to the absolutive, and the agent (i.e., \"him\"), which was formerly marked by the absolutive, is deleted to form the antipassive voice (or is marked in a different way, in the same way that in the English passive voice can still be specified as the agent of the action using \"by him\" in \"I was hugged by him\"\u2014for example, Dyirbal puts the agent in the dative case, and Basque retains the agent in the absolutive).\nAmbitransitivity.\nIn many languages, there are \"ambitransitive\" verbs, which can occur either in a transitive or intransitive sense. For example, English \"play\" is ambitransitive, since it is grammatical to say \"His son plays\", and it is also grammatical to say \"His son plays guitar\". English is rather flexible as regards verb valency, and so it has a high number of ambitransitive verbs; other languages are more rigid and require explicit valency changing operations (voice, causative morphology, etc.) to transform a verb from intransitive to transitive or vice versa.\nIn some ambitransitive verbs are \"ergative verbs\" for which the alignment of the syntactic arguments to the semantic roles is exchanged. An example of this is the verb \"break\" in English.\n(1) \"He broke the cup.\"\n(2) \"The cup broke.\"\nIn (1), the verb is transitive, and the subject is the \"agent\" of the action, i.e. the performer of the action of breaking the cup. In (2), the verb is intransitive and the subject is the \"patient\" of the action, i.e. it is the thing affected by the action, not the one that performs it. In fact, the patient is the same in both sentences, and sentence (2) is an example of implicit middle voice. This has also been termed an \"anticausative\" or \"inchoative\", indicating a change of state without an external cause.\nOther alternating intransitive verbs in English are \"change\" and \"sink\".\nIn the Romance languages, these verbs are often called \"pseudo-reflexive\", because they are signaled in the same way as reflexive verbs, using the clitic particle \"se\". Compare the following (in Spanish):\n(3a) (\"The cup broke.\")\n(3b) (\"The boat sank.\")\n(4a) (\"She looked at herself in the mirror.\")\n(4b) (\"The cat washes itself.\")\nSentences (3a) and (3b) show Romance pseudo-reflexive phrases, corresponding to English alternating intransitives. As in \"The cup broke\", they are inherently without an agent; their deep structure does not and can not contain one. The action is not reflexive (as in (4a) and (4b)) because it is not performed by the subject; it just happens to it. Therefore, this is not the same as passive voice, where an intransitive verb phrase appears, but there is an implicit agent (which can be made explicit using a complement phrase):\n(5) (\"The cup was broken (by the child).\")\n(6) (\"The boat was sunk (by pirates).\")\nOther ambitransitive verbs (like \"eat\") are not of the alternating type; the subject is always the agent of the action, and the object is simply optional. A few verbs are of both types at once, like \"read\": compare \"I read\", \"I read a magazine\", and \"this magazine reads easily\".\nSome languages like Japanese have different forms of certain verbs to show transitivity. For example, there are two forms of the verb \"to start\":\n (7) \n (8) \nIn Japanese, the form of the verb indicates the number of arguments the sentence needs to have.\nUnaccusative and unergative verbs.\nEspecially in some languages, it makes sense to classify intransitive verbs as:\nThis distinction may in some cases be reflected in the grammar, where for instance different auxiliary verbs may be used for the two categories.\nCognate objects.\nIn many languages, including English, some or all intransitive verbs can entail \"cognate objects\"\u2014objects formed from the same roots as the verbs themselves; for example, the verb \"sleep\" is ordinarily intransitive, but one can say, \"He slept a troubled sleep\", meaning roughly \"He slept, and his sleep was troubled.\"\nOther languages.\nIn Pingelapese, a Micronesian language, intransitive verb sentence structure is often used, with no object attached. There must be a stative or active verb to have an intransitive sentence. A stative verb has a person or an object that is directly influenced by a verb. An active verb has the direct action performed by the subject. The word order that is most commonly associated with intransitive sentences is subject-verb. However, verb-subject is used if the verb is unaccusative or by discourse pragmatics.\nIn Tokelauan, the noun phrases used with verbs are required when verbs are placed in groups. Verbs are divided into two major groups. Every verbal sentence must have that structure, which contains a singular noun phrase, without a preposition, called an unmarked noun phrase. Only if a \"ko\"-phrase precedes the predicate, that rule may be ignored. The agent is what speakers of the language call the person who is performing the action of the verb. If a noun phrase that starts with the preposition \"e\" is able to express the agent, and the receiving person or thing that the agent is performing the action of the verb to is expressed by a singular noun phrase that lack a preposition, or unmarked noun phrase, the verb is then considered transitive. All other verbs are considered intransitive.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43934", "revid": "2", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43934", "title": "Obligate aerobic", "text": ""}
{"id": "43935", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43935", "title": "Micrometer (device)", "text": "Tool for the precise measurement of a component's length, width, and/or depth\nA micrometer ( ), sometimes known as a micrometer screw gauge (MSG), is a device incorporating a calibrated screw for accurate measurement of the size of components. It is widely used in mechanical engineering, machining, metrology and most mechanical trades, along with other dimensional instruments such as dial, vernier, and digital calipers. Micrometers are usually, but not always, in the form of calipers (opposing ends joined by a frame). The spindle is a very accurately machined screw and the object to be measured is placed between the spindle and the anvil. The spindle is moved by turning the ratchet knob or thimble until the object to be measured is lightly touched by both the spindle and the anvil.\nHistory.\nThe word \"micrometer\" is a neoclassical coinage from and . According to the \"Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary\", the word was loaned to English from French, with its first known appearance in English writing being in 1670. Neither the metre nor the micrometre (\u03bcm) nor the micrometer (device) as we know them today existed at that time. However, the people of that time did have much need for, and interest in, the ability to measure small things and small differences. The word was no doubt coined in reference to this endeavor, even if it did not refer specifically to its present-day senses.\nThe London Science Museum contains an exhibit \"James Watt's end measuring instrument with micrometer screw, 1776\" which the science museum claims is probably the first screw micrometer made. This instrument is intended to measure items very accurately by placing them between the two anvils and then advancing one using a fine micrometer screw until both are in contact with the object, the distance between them being precisely recorded on the two dials. However, as the science museum notes, there is a possibility that this instrument was not made c.1776 by Watt, but 1876 when it was placed in that year's Special Loan Exhibition of scientific instruments in South Kensington.\nHenry Maudslay built a bench micrometer in the early 19th century that was jocularly nicknamed \"the Lord Chancellor\" among his staff because it was the final judge on measurement accuracy and precision in the firm's work. In 1844, details of Whitworth's workshop micrometer were published. This was described as having a strong frame of cast iron, the opposite ends of which were two highly finished steel cylinders, which traversed longitudinally by action of screws. The ends of the cylinders where they met was of hemispherical shape. One screw was fitted with a wheel graduated to measure to the ten thousandth of an inch. His object was \"to furnish ordinary mechanics with an instrument which, while it afforded very accurate indications, was yet not very liable to be deranged by the rough handling of the workshop\".\nThe first documented development of handheld micrometer-screw calipers was by Jean Laurent Palmer of Paris in 1848; the device is therefore often called \"palmer\" in French, \"tornillo de Palmer\" (\"Palmer screw\") in Spanish, and \"calibro Palmer\" (\"Palmer caliper\") in Italian. (Those languages also use the \"micrometer\" cognates: \"microm\u00e8tre, micr\u00f3metro, micrometro\".) The micrometer caliper was introduced to the mass market in anglophone countries by Brown &amp; Sharpe in 1867, allowing the penetration of the instrument's use into the average machine shop. Brown &amp; Sharpe were inspired by several earlier devices, one of them being Palmer's design. In 1888, Edward W. Morley added to the precision of micrometric measurements and proved their accuracy in a complex series of experiments.\nThe culture of toolroom accuracy and precision, which started with interchangeability pioneers including Gribeauval, Tousard, North, Hall, Whitney, and Colt, and continued through leaders such as Maudslay, Palmer, Whitworth, Brown, Sharpe, Pratt, Whitney, Leland, Johansson, and others, grew during the Machine Age to become an important part of combining applied science with technology. Beginning in the early 20th century, one could no longer truly master tool and die making, machine tool building, or engineering without some knowledge of the science of metrology, as well as the sciences of chemistry and physics (for metallurgy, kinematics/dynamics, and quality).\nTypes.\nSpecialized types.\nEach type of micrometer caliper can be fitted with specialized anvils and spindle tips for particular measuring tasks. For example, the anvil may be shaped in the form of a segment of screw thread, in the form of a v-block, or in the form of a large disc.\nOperating principles.\nMicrometers use the screw to transform small distances (that are too small to measure directly) into large rotations of the screw that are big enough to read from a scale. The accuracy of a micrometer derives from the accuracy of the thread-forms that are central to the core of its design. In some cases it is a differential screw. The basic operating principles of a micrometer are as follows:\nFor example, if the lead of a screw is 1\u00a0mm, but the major diameter (here, outer diameter) is 10\u00a0mm, then the circumference of the screw is 10\u03c0, or about 31.4\u00a0mm. Therefore, an axial movement of 1\u00a0mm is amplified (magnified) to a circumferential movement of 31.4\u00a0mm. This amplification allows a small difference in the sizes of two similar measured objects to correlate to a larger difference in the position of a micrometer's thimble. In some micrometers, even greater accuracy is obtained by using a differential screw adjuster to move the thimble in much smaller increments than a single thread would allow.\nIn classic-style analog micrometers, the position of the thimble is read directly from scale markings on the thimble and sleeve (for names of parts see next section). A vernier scale is often included, which allows the position to be read to a fraction of the smallest scale mark. In digital micrometers, an electronic readout displays the length digitally on an LCD on the instrument. There also exist mechanical-digit versions, like the style of car odometers where .\nParts.\nA micrometer is composed of:\nReading.\nMicrometers are high precision instruments. Proper use of them requires not only understanding their operation itself but also the nature of the object and the dynamic between the instrument and the object as it is being measured. For simplicity's sake, in the figures and text below issues related to deformation or definition of the length being measured are assumed to be negligible unless otherwise stated.\nCustomary/Imperial system.\nThe spindle of a micrometer graduated for the Imperial and US customary measurement systems has 40 threads per inch, so that one turn moves the spindle axially 0.025\u00a0inch (1 \u00f7 40 = 0.025), equal to the distance between adjacent graduations on the sleeve. The 25 graduations on the thimble allow the 0.025\u00a0inch to be further divided, so that turning the thimble through one division moves the spindle axially 0.001\u00a0inch (0.025 \u00f7 25 = 0.001). Thus, the reading is given by the number of whole divisions that are visible on the scale of the sleeve, multiplied by 25 (the number of thousandths of an inch that each division represents), plus the number of that division on the thimble which coincides with the axial zero line on the sleeve. The result will be the diameter expressed in thousandths of an inch. As the numbers 1, 2, 3, etc., appear below every fourth sub-division on the sleeve, indicating hundreds of thousandths, the reading can easily be taken.\nSuppose the thimble were screwed out so that graduation 2, and three additional sub-divisions, were visible on the sleeve (as shown in the image), and that graduation 1 on the thimble coincided with the axial line on the sleeve. The reading would then be 0.2000 + 0.075 + 0.001, or 0.276\u00a0inch.\nMetric system.\nThe spindle of an ordinary metric micrometer has 2 threads per millimetre, and thus one complete revolution moves the spindle through a distance of 0.5 millimetres. The longitudinal line on the sleeve is graduated with 1 millimetre divisions and 0.5 millimetre subdivisions. The thimble has 50 graduations, each being 0.01 millimetre (one-hundredth of a millimetre). Thus, the reading is given by the number of millimetre divisions visible on the scale of the sleeve plus the division on the thimble which coincides with the axial line on the sleeve.\nAs shown in the image, suppose that the thimble were screwed out so that graduation 5, and one additional 0.5 subdivision were visible on the sleeve. The reading from the axial line on the sleeve almost reaches graduation 28 on the thimble. The best estimate is 27.9 graduations. The reading then would be 5.00 (exact) + 0.5 (exact) + 0.279 (estimate) = 5.779\u00a0mm (estimate). As the last digit is an \"estimated tenth\", both 5.780\u00a0mm and 5.778\u00a0mm are also reasonably acceptable readings but the former cannot be written as 5.78\u00a0mm or, by the rules for significant figures, it is then taken to express ten times less precision than the instrument actually has! But note that the nature of the object being measured often requires one should round the result to fewer significant figures than which the instrument is capable.\nVernier micrometers.\nSome micrometers are provided with a vernier scale on the sleeve in addition to the regular graduations. These permit measurements within 0.001\u00a0millimetre to be made on metric micrometers, or 0.0001\u00a0inches on inch-system micrometers.\nThe additional digit of these micrometers is obtained by finding the line on the sleeve vernier scale which exactly coincides with one on the thimble. The number of this coinciding vernier line represents the additional digit.\nThus, the reading for metric micrometers of this type is the number of whole millimeters (if any) and the number of hundredths of a millimeter, as with an ordinary micrometer, and the number of thousandths of a millimeter given by the coinciding vernier line on the sleeve vernier scale.\nFor example, a measurement of 5.783\u00a0millimetres would be obtained by reading 5.5\u00a0millimetres on the sleeve, and then adding 0.28\u00a0millimetre as determined by the thimble. The vernier would then be used to read the 0.003 (as shown in the image).\nInch micrometers are read in a similar fashion.\nNote: 0.01 millimeter = 0.000393\u00a0inch, and 0.002\u00a0millimeter = 0.000078\u00a0inch (78 millionths) or alternatively, 0.0001\u00a0inch = 0.00254\u00a0millimeters. Therefore, metric micrometers provide smaller measuring increments than comparable inch unit micrometers\u2014the smallest graduation of an ordinary inch reading micrometer is 0.001\u00a0inch; the vernier type has graduations down to 0.0001\u00a0inch (0.00254\u00a0mm). When using either a metric or inch micrometer, without a vernier, smaller readings than those graduated may of course be obtained by visual interpolation between graduations.\nCalibration: testing and adjusting.\nZeroing.\nOn most micrometers, a small pin spanner is used to turn the sleeve relative to the barrel, so that its zero line is repositioned relative to the markings on the thimble. There is usually a small hole in the sleeve to accept the spanner's pin. This calibration procedure will cancel a zero error: the problem that the micrometer reads nonzero when its jaws are closed.\nTesting.\nA standard one-inch micrometer has readout divisions of 0.001\u00a0inch and a rated accuracy of \u00b10.0001\u00a0inch (\"one tenth\", in machinist parlance). \nBoth the measuring instrument and the object being measured should be at room temperature for an accurate measurement; dirt, operator skill issue, and misuse (or abuse) of the instrument are the main sources of error.\nThe accuracy of micrometers is checked by using them to measure gauge blocks, rods, or similar standards whose lengths are precisely and accurately known. If the gauge block is known to be 0.75000\u00a0\u00b1\u00a00.00005\u00a0inch (\"seven-fifty plus or minus fifty millionths\", that is, \"seven hundred fifty thou plus or minus half a tenth\"), then the micrometer should measure it as 0.7500\u00a0inch. If the micrometer measures 0.7503\u00a0inch, then it is out of calibration. Cleanliness and low but consistent torque are especially important when calibrating\u2014each tenth (that is, ten-thousandth of an inch), or hundredth of a millimetre, \"counts\"; each is important. A mere speck of dirt, or a mere bit too much squeeze, obscures the truth of whether the instrument can read correctly. The solution is simply conscientiousness\u2014cleaning, patience, due care and attention, and repeated measurements (good repeatability assures the calibrator that their technique is working correctly).\nCalibration typically checks the error at 3 to 5 points along the range. Only one can be adjusted to zero. If the micrometer is in good condition, then they are all \"so near to zero\" that the instrument seems to read essentially \"-on\" all along its range; no noticeable error is seen at any locale. In contrast, on a worn-out micrometer (or one that was poorly made to begin with), one can \"chase the error up and down the range\", that is, \"move\" it up or down to any of various locales along the range, by adjusting the sleeve, but one cannot \"eliminate\" it from all locales at once.\nCalibration can also include the condition of the tips (flat and parallel), ratchet, and linearity of the scale. Flatness and parallelism are typically measured with a gauge called an optical flat, a disc of glass or plastic ground with extreme accuracy to have flat, parallel faces, which allows light bands to be counted when the micrometer's anvil and spindle are against it, revealing their amount of geometric inaccuracy.\nCommercial machine shops, especially those that do certain categories of work (military or commercial aerospace, nuclear power industry, medical, and others), are required by various standards organizations (such as ISO, ANSI, ASME, ASTM, SAE, AIA, the U.S. military, and others) to calibrate micrometers and other gauges on a schedule (often annually), to affix a label to each gauge that gives it an ID number and a calibration expiration date, to keep a record of all the gauges by ID number, and to specify in inspection reports which gauge was used for a particular measurement.\nNot all calibration is an affair for metrology labs. A micrometer can be calibrated on-site anytime, at least in the most basic and important way (if not comprehensively), by measuring a high-grade gauge block and adjusting to match. Even gauges that are calibrated annually and within their expiration timeframe should be checked this way every month or two if they are used daily. They usually will check out OK as needing no adjustment.\nThe accuracy of the gauge blocks themselves is traceable through a chain of comparisons back to a master standard such as the international prototype of the meter. This bar of metal, like the , is maintained under controlled conditions at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures headquarters in France, which is one of the principal measurement standards laboratories of the world. These master standards have extreme-accuracy regional copies (kept in the national laboratories of various countries, such as NIST), and metrological equipment makes the chain of comparisons. Because the definition of the meter is now based on a light wavelength, the international prototype of the meter is not quite as indispensable as it once was. But such master gauges are still important for calibrating and certifying metrological equipment. Equipment described as \"NIST traceable\" means that its comparison against master gauges, and their comparison against others, can be traced back through a chain of documentation to equipment in the NIST labs. Maintaining this degree of traceability requires some expense, which is why NIST-traceable equipment is more expensive than non-NIST-traceable. But applications needing the highest degree of quality control mandate the cost.\nAdjustment.\nA micrometer that has been zeroed and tested and found to be off might be restored to accuracy by further adjustment. If the error originates from the parts of the micrometer being worn out of shape and size, then restoration of accuracy by this means is not possible; rather, repair (grinding, lapping, or replacing of parts) is required. For standard kinds of instruments, in practice it is easier and faster, and often no more expensive, to buy a new one rather than pursue refurbishment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43936", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43936", "title": "Ditransitive verb", "text": "Verb which takes a subject and two objects\nIn grammar, a ditransitive (or bitransitive) verb is a transitive verb whose contextual use corresponds to a subject and two objects which refer to a theme and a recipient. According to certain linguistics considerations, these objects may be called \"direct\" and \"indirect\", or \"primary\" and \"secondary\". This is in contrast to monotransitive verbs, whose contextual use corresponds to only one object.\nIn languages which mark grammatical case, it is common to differentiate the objects of a ditransitive verb using, for example, the accusative case for the direct object, and the dative case for the indirect object (but this morphological alignment is not unique; see below). In languages without morphological case (such as English for the most part) the objects are distinguished by word order or context.\nIn English.\nEnglish has a number of generally ditransitive verbs, such as \"give\", \"grant\", and \"tell\" and many transitive verbs that can take an additional argument (commonly a beneficiary or target of the action), such as \"pass\", \"read\", \"bake\", etc.:\n\"He gave Mary ten dollars.\"\n\"He passed Paul the ball.\"\n\"Jean read him the books.\"\n\"She is baking him a cake.\"\n\"I am mailing Sam some lemons.\"\nAlternatively, English grammar allows for these sentences to be written with a preposition (\"to\" or \"for\"): (See also Dative shift)\n\"He gave ten dollars to Mary.\"\n\"He passed the ball to Paul.\"\n\"Jean read the books to/for him.\"\n\"She is baking a cake for him.\"\n\"I am mailing some lemons to Sam.\", etc.\nThe latter form is grammatically correct in every case, but in some dialects the former (without a preposition) is considered ungrammatical, or at least unnatural-sounding, when the direct object is a pronoun (as in \"He gave me it\" or \"He gave Fred it\").\nSometimes one of the forms is perceived as wrong for idiosyncratic reasons (idioms tend to be fixed in form) or the verb simply dictates one of the patterns and excludes the other:\n\"*Give a break to me\" (grammatical, but always phrased \"Give me a break\")\n\"*He introduced Susan his brother\" (usually phrased \"He introduced his brother to Susan\")\nIn certain dialects of English, many verbs not normally treated as ditransitive are allowed to take a second object that shows a beneficiary, generally of an action performed for oneself.\n\"Let's catch ourselves some fish\" (which might also be phrased \"Let's catch some fish for ourselves\")\nThis construction could also be an extension of a reflexive construction.\nIn addition, certain ditransitive verbs can also act as monotransitive verbs:\n\"David told a story to \"the children\"\" \u2013 Ditransitive\n\"David told \"a story\" \u2013 Monotransitive\nPassive voice.\nMany ditransitive verbs have a passive voice form which can take a direct object. Contrast the active and two forms of the passive:\nActive:\n\"Jean gave the books to him.\"\n\"Jean gave him the books.\"\nPassive:\n\"The books were given to him by Jean.\"\n\"He was given the books by Jean.\"\nNot all languages have a passive voice, and some that do have one (e.g. Polish) do not allow the indirect object of a ditransitive verb to be promoted to subject by passivization, as English does. In others like Dutch a passivization is possible but requires a different auxiliary: \"krijgen\" instead of \"worden\".\nE.g. \"schenken\" means \"to donate, to give\":\nActive: \"Jan schonk hem de boeken\" \u2013 John donated the books to him.\nPassive: \"De boeken werden door Jan aan hem geschonken\" \u2013 The books were donated to him by John.\nPseudo-passive: \"Hij kreeg de boeken door Jan geschonken\" \u2013 He got the books donated [to him] by John.\nAttributive ditransitive verbs.\nAnother category of ditransitive verb is the attributive ditransitive verb in which the two objects are semantically an entity and a quality, a source and a result, etc. These verbs attribute one object to the other. In English, \"make\", \"name\", \"appoint\", \"consider\", \"turn into\" and others are examples:\nThe first object is a direct object. The second object is an object complement.\nAttributive ditransitive verbs are also referred to as resultative verbs.\nMorphosyntactic alignment.\nThe morphosyntactic alignment between arguments of monotransitive and ditransitive verbs is explained below. If the three arguments of a typical ditransitive verb are labeled D (for Donor; the subject of a verb like \"to give\" in English), T (for Theme; normally the direct object of ditransitive verb in English) and R (for Recipient, normally the indirect object in English), these can be aligned with the Agent and Patient of monotransitive verbs and the Subject of intransitive verbs in several ways, which are not predicted by whether the language is nominative\u2013accusative, ergative\u2013absolutive, or active\u2013stative. Donor is always or nearly always in the same case as Agent, but different languages equate the other arguments in different ways:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43937", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43937", "title": "Parasitism", "text": "Relationship between species\nParasitism is a close relationship between species, where one organism, the parasite, lives (at least some of the time) on or inside another organism, the host, causing it some harm, and is adapted structurally to this way of life. The entomologist E. O. Wilson characterised parasites' way of feeding as \"predators that eat prey in units of less than one\". Parasites include single-celled protozoans such as the agents of malaria, sleeping sickness, and amoebic dysentery; animals such as hookworms, lice, mosquitoes, and vampire bats; fungi such as honey fungus and the agents of ringworm; and plants such as mistletoe, dodder, and the broomrapes.\nThere are six major parasitic strategies of exploitation of animal hosts, namely parasitic castration, directly transmitted parasitism (by contact), trophically-transmitted parasitism (by being eaten), vector-transmitted parasitism, parasitoidism, and micropredation. One major axis of classification concerns invasiveness: an endoparasite lives inside the host's body; an ectoparasite lives outside, on the host's surface.\nLike predation, parasitism is a type of consumer\u2013resource interaction, but unlike predators, parasites, with the exception of parasitoids, are much smaller than their hosts, do not kill them, and often live in or on their hosts for an extended period. Parasites of animals are highly specialised, each parasite species living on one given animal species, and reproduce at a faster rate than their hosts. Classic examples include interactions between vertebrate hosts and tapeworms, flukes, and those between the malaria-causing \"Plasmodium\" species, and fleas.\nParasites reduce host fitness by general or specialised pathology, that ranges from parasitic castration to modification of host behaviour. Parasites increase their own fitness by exploiting hosts for resources necessary for their survival, in particular by feeding on them and by using intermediate (secondary) hosts to assist in their transmission from one definitive (primary) host to another. Although parasitism is often unambiguous, it is part of a spectrum of interactions between species, grading via parasitoidism into predation, through evolution into mutualism, and in some fungi, shading into being saprophytic.\nHuman knowledge of parasites such as roundworms and tapeworms dates back to ancient Egypt, Greece, and Rome. In early modern times, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek observed \"Giardia lamblia\" with his microscope in 1681, while Francesco Redi described internal and external parasites including sheep liver fluke and ticks. Modern parasitology developed in the 19th century. In human culture, parasitism has negative connotations. These were exploited to satirical effect in Jonathan Swift's 1733 poem \"On Poetry: A Rhapsody\", comparing poets to hyperparasitical \"vermin\". In fiction, Bram Stoker's 1897 Gothic horror novel \"Dracula\" and its many later adaptations featured a blood-drinking parasite. Ridley Scott's 1979 film \"Alien\" was one of many works of science fiction to feature a parasitic alien species.\nEtymology.\nFirst used in English in 1539, the word \"parasite\" comes from the Medieval French , from the Latinised form , from grc \" \"\u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03ac\u03c3\u03b9\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2\" (parasitos)\"\u00a0'one who eats at the table of another' \" \"in turn from\" \"\u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03ac\" (para)\"\u00a0'beside, by' and \" \"\u03c3\u1fd6\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2\" (sitos)\"\u00a0'wheat, food'. The related term \"parasitism\" appears in English from 1611.\nEvolutionary strategies.\nBasic concepts.\nParasitism is a kind of symbiosis, a close and persistent long-term biological interaction between a parasite and its host. Unlike saprotrophs, parasites feed on living hosts, though some parasitic fungi, for instance, may continue to feed on hosts they have killed. Unlike commensalism and mutualism, the parasitic relationship harms the host, either feeding on it or, as in the case of intestinal parasites, consuming some of its food. Because parasites interact with other species, they can readily act as vectors of pathogens, causing disease. Predation is by definition not a symbiosis, as the interaction is brief, but the entomologist E. O. Wilson has characterised parasites as \"predators that eat prey in units of less than one\".\nWithin that scope are many possible strategies. Taxonomists classify parasites in a variety of overlapping schemes, based on their interactions with their hosts and on their life cycles, which can be complex. An obligate parasite depends completely on the host to complete its life cycle, while a facultative parasite does not. Parasite life cycles involving only one host are called \"direct\"; those with a definitive host (where the parasite reproduces sexually) and at least one intermediate host are called \"indirect\". An endoparasite lives inside the host's body; an ectoparasite lives outside, on the host's surface. Mesoparasites\u2014like some copepods, for example\u2014enter an opening in the host's body and remain partly embedded there. Some parasites can be generalists, feeding on a wide range of hosts, but many parasites, and the majority of protozoans and helminths that parasitise animals, are specialists and extremely host-specific. An early basic, functional division of parasites distinguished microparasites and macroparasites. These each had a mathematical model assigned in order to analyse the population movements of the host\u2013parasite groupings. The microorganisms and viruses that can reproduce and complete their life cycle within the host are known as microparasites. Macroparasites are the multicellular organisms that reproduce and complete their life cycle outside of the host or on the host's body.\nMuch of the thinking on types of parasitism has focused on terrestrial animal parasites of animals, such as helminths. Those in other environments and with other hosts often have analogous strategies. For example, the snubnosed eel is probably a facultative endoparasite (i.e., it is semiparasitic) that opportunistically burrows into and eats sick and dying fish. Plant-eating insects such as scale insects, aphids, and caterpillars closely resemble ectoparasites, attacking much larger plants; they serve as vectors of bacteria, fungi and viruses which cause plant diseases. As female scale insects cannot move, they are obligate parasites, permanently attached to their hosts.\nThe sensory inputs that a parasite employs to identify and approach a potential host are known as \"host cues\". Such cues can include, for example, vibration, exhaled carbon dioxide, skin odours, visual and heat signatures, and moisture. Parasitic plants can use, for example, light, host physiochemistry, and volatiles to recognize potential hosts.\nMajor strategies.\nThere are six major parasitic strategies, namely parasitic castration; directly transmitted parasitism; trophically-transmitted parasitism; vector-transmitted parasitism; parasitoidism; and micropredation. These apply to parasites whose hosts are plants as well as animals. These strategies represent adaptive peaks; intermediate strategies are possible, but organisms in many different groups have consistently converged on these six, which are evolutionarily stable.\nA perspective on the evolutionary options can be gained by considering four key questions: the effect on the fitness of a parasite's hosts; the number of hosts they have per life stage; whether the host is prevented from reproducing; and whether the effect depends on intensity (number of parasites per host). From this analysis, the major evolutionary strategies of parasitism emerge, alongside predation.\nParasitic castrators.\nParasitic castrators partly or completely destroy their host's ability to reproduce, diverting the energy that would have gone into reproduction into host and parasite growth, sometimes causing gigantism in the host. The host's other systems remain intact, allowing it to survive and to sustain the parasite. Parasitic crustaceans such as those in the specialised barnacle genus \"Sacculina\" specifically cause damage to the gonads of their many species of host crabs. In the case of \"Sacculina\", the testes of over two-thirds of their crab hosts degenerate sufficiently for these male crabs to develop female secondary sex characteristics such as broader abdomens, smaller claws and egg-grasping appendages. Various species of helminth castrate their hosts (such as insects and snails). This may happen directly, whether mechanically by feeding on their gonads, or by secreting a chemical that destroys reproductive cells; or indirectly, whether by secreting a hormone or by diverting nutrients. For example, the trematode \"Zoogonus lasius\", whose sporocysts lack mouths, castrates the intertidal marine snail \"Tritia obsoleta\" chemically, developing in its gonad and killing its reproductive cells.\nDirectly transmitted.\nDirectly transmitted parasites, not requiring a vector to reach their hosts, include such parasites of terrestrial vertebrates as lice and mites; marine parasites such as copepods and cyamid amphipods; monogeneans; and many species of nematodes, fungi, protozoans, bacteria, and viruses. Whether endoparasites or ectoparasites, each has a single host-species. Within that species, most individuals are free or almost free of parasites, while a minority carry a large number of parasites; this is known as an aggregated distribution.\nTrophically transmitted.\nTrophically-transmitted parasites are transmitted by being eaten by a host. They include trematodes (all except schistosomes), cestodes, acanthocephalans, pentastomids, many roundworms, and many protozoa such as \"Toxoplasma\". They have complex life cycles involving hosts of two or more species. In their juvenile stages they infect and often encyst in the intermediate host. When the intermediate-host animal is eaten by a predator, the definitive host, the parasite survives the digestion process and matures into an adult; some live as intestinal parasites. Many trophically transmitted parasites modify the behaviour of their intermediate hosts, increasing their chances of being eaten by a predator. As with directly transmitted parasites, the distribution of trophically transmitted parasites among host individuals is aggregated. Coinfection by multiple parasites is common. Autoinfection, where (by exception) the whole of the parasite's life cycle takes place in a single primary host, can sometimes occur in helminths such as \"Strongyloides stercoralis\".\nVector-transmitted.\nVector-transmitted parasites rely on a third party, an intermediate host, where the parasite does not reproduce sexually, to carry them from one definitive host to another. These parasites are microorganisms, namely protozoa, bacteria, or viruses, often intracellular pathogens (disease-causers). Their vectors are mostly hematophagic arthropods such as fleas, lice, ticks, and mosquitoes. For example, the deer tick \"Ixodes scapularis\" acts as a vector for diseases including Lyme disease, babesiosis, and anaplasmosis. Protozoan endoparasites, such as the malarial parasites in the genus \"Plasmodium\" and sleeping-sickness parasites in the genus \"Trypanosoma\", have infective stages in the host's blood which are transported to new hosts by biting insects.\nParasitoids.\nParasitoids are insects which sooner or later kill their hosts, placing their relationship close to predation. Most parasitoids are parasitoid wasps or other hymenopterans; others include dipterans such as phorid flies. They can be divided into two groups, idiobionts and koinobionts, differing in their treatment of their hosts.\nIdiobiont parasitoids sting their often-large prey on capture, either killing them outright or paralysing them immediately. The immobilised prey is then carried to a nest, sometimes alongside other prey if it is not large enough to support a parasitoid throughout its development. An egg is laid on top of the prey and the nest is then sealed. The parasitoid develops rapidly through its larval and pupal stages, feeding on the provisions left for it.\nKoinobiont parasitoids, which include flies as well as wasps, lay their eggs inside young hosts, usually larvae. These are allowed to go on growing, so the host and parasitoid develop together for an extended period, ending when the parasitoids emerge as adults, leaving the prey dead, eaten from inside. Some koinobionts regulate their host's development, for example preventing it from pupating or making it moult whenever the parasitoid is ready to moult. They may do this by producing hormones that mimic the host's moulting hormones (ecdysteroids), or by regulating the host's endocrine system.\nMicropredators.\nA micropredator attacks more than one host, reducing each host's fitness by at least a small amount, and is only in contact with any one host intermittently. This behavior makes micropredators suitable as vectors, as they can pass smaller parasites from one host to another. Most micropredators are hematophagic, feeding on blood. They include annelids such as leeches, crustaceans such as branchiurans and gnathiid isopods, various dipterans such as mosquitoes and tsetse flies, other arthropods such as fleas and ticks, vertebrates such as lampreys, and mammals such as vampire bats.\nTransmission strategies.\nParasites use a variety of methods to infect animal hosts, including physical contact, the fecal\u2013oral route, free-living infectious stages, and vectors, suiting their differing hosts, life cycles, and ecological contexts. Examples to illustrate some of the many possible combinations are given in the table.\nVariations.\nAmong the many variations on parasitic strategies are hyperparasitism, social parasitism, brood parasitism, kleptoparasitism, sexual parasitism, and adelphoparasitism.\nHyperparasitism.\nHyperparasites feed on another parasite, as exemplified by protozoa living in helminth parasites, or facultative or obligate parasitoids whose hosts are either conventional parasites or parasitoids. Levels of parasitism beyond secondary also occur, especially among facultative parasitoids. In oak gall systems, there can be up to four levels of parasitism.\nHyperparasites can control their hosts' populations, and are used for this purpose in agriculture and to some extent in medicine. The controlling effects can be seen in the way that the CHV1 virus helps to control the damage that chestnut blight, \"Cryphonectria parasitica\", does to American chestnut trees, and in the way that bacteriophages can limit bacterial infections. It is likely, though little researched, that most pathogenic microparasites have hyperparasites which may prove widely useful in both agriculture and medicine.\nSocial parasitism.\nSocial parasites take advantage of interspecific interactions between members of eusocial animals such as ants, termites, and bumblebees. Examples include the large blue butterfly, \"Phengaris arion\", its larvae employing ant mimicry to parasitise certain ants, \"Bombus bohemicus\", a bumblebee which invades the hives of other bees and takes over reproduction while their young are raised by host workers, and \"Melipona scutellaris\", a eusocial bee whose virgin queens escape killer workers and invade another colony without a queen. An extreme example of interspecific social parasitism is found in the ant \"Tetramorium inquilinum\", an obligate parasite which lives exclusively on the backs of other \"Tetramorium\" ants. A mechanism for the evolution of social parasitism was first proposed by Carlo Emery in 1909. Now known as \"Emery's rule\", it states that social parasites tend to be closely related to their hosts, often being in the same genus.\nIntraspecific social parasitism occurs in parasitic nursing, where some individual young take milk from unrelated females. In wedge-capped capuchins, higher ranking females sometimes take milk from low ranking females without any reciprocation.\nBrood parasitism.\nIn brood parasitism, the hosts suffer increased parental investment and energy expenditure to feed parasitic young, which are commonly larger than host young. The growth rate of host nestlings is slowed, reducing the host's fitness. Brood parasites include birds in different families such as cowbirds, whydahs, cuckoos, and black-headed ducks. These do not build nests of their own, but leave their eggs in nests of other species. In the family \"Cuculidae\", over 40% of cuckoo species are obligate brood parasites, while others are either facultative brood parasites or provide parental care. The eggs of some brood parasites mimic those of their hosts, while some cowbird eggs have tough shells, making them hard for the hosts to kill by piercing, both mechanisms implying selection by the hosts against parasitic eggs. The adult female European cuckoo further mimics a predator, the European sparrowhawk, giving her time to lay her eggs in the host's nest unobserved. Host species often combat parasitic egg mimicry through egg polymorphism, having two or more egg phenotypes within a single population of a species. Multiple phenotypes in host eggs decrease the probability of a parasitic species accurately \"matching\" their eggs to host eggs.\nKleptoparasitism.\nIn kleptoparasitism (from Greek \u03ba\u03bb\u03ad\u03c0\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 (\"klept\u0113s\"), \"thief\"), parasites steal food gathered by the host. The parasitism is often on close relatives, whether within the same species or between species in the same genus or family. For instance, the many lineages of cuckoo bees lay their eggs in the nest cells of other bees in the same family. Kleptoparasitism is uncommon generally but conspicuous in birds; some such as skuas are specialised in pirating food from other seabirds, relentlessly chasing them down until they disgorge their catch.\nSexual parasitism.\nA unique approach is seen in some species of anglerfish, such as \"Ceratias holboelli\", where the males are reduced to tiny sexual parasites, wholly dependent on females of their own species for survival, permanently attached below the female's body, and unable to fend for themselves. The female nourishes the male and protects him from predators, while the male gives nothing back except the sperm that the female needs to produce the next generation.\nAdelphoparasitism.\nAdelphoparasitism, (from Greek \u1f00\u03b4\u03b5\u03bb\u03c6\u03cc\u03c2 (\"adelph\u00f3s\"), brother), also known as sibling-parasitism, occurs where the host species is closely related to the parasite, often in the same family or genus. In the citrus blackfly parasitoid, \"Encarsia perplexa\", unmated females may lay haploid eggs in the fully developed larvae of their own species, producing male offspring, while the marine worm \"Bonellia viridis\" has a similar reproductive strategy, although the larvae are planktonic.\nIllustrations.\nExamples of the major variant strategies are illustrated.\nTaxonomic range.\nParasitism has an extremely wide taxonomic range, including animals, plants, fungi, protozoans, bacteria, and viruses.\nAnimals.\nParasitism is widespread in the animal kingdom, and has evolved independently from free-living forms hundreds of times. Many types of helminth including flukes and cestodes have complete life cycles involving two or more hosts. By far the largest group is the parasitoid wasps in the Hymenoptera. The phyla and classes with the largest numbers of parasitic species are listed in the table. Numbers are conservative minimum estimates. The columns for Endo- and Ecto-parasitism refer to the definitive host, as documented in the Vertebrate and Invertebrate columns.\nPlants.\nA hemiparasite or \"partial parasite\" such as mistletoe derives some of its nutrients from another living plant, whereas a holoparasite such as \"Cuscuta\" derives all of its nutrients from another plant. Parasitic plants make up about one per cent of angiosperms and are in almost every biome in the world. All these plants have modified roots, haustoria, which penetrate the host plants, connecting them to the conductive system\u2014either the xylem, the phloem, or both. This provides them with the ability to extract water and nutrients from the host. A parasitic plant is classified depending on where it latches onto the host, either the stem or the root, and the amount of nutrients it requires. Since holoparasites have no chlorophyll and therefore cannot make food for themselves by photosynthesis, they are always obligate parasites, deriving all their food from their hosts. Some parasitic plants can locate their host plants by detecting chemicals in the air or soil given off by host shoots or roots, respectively. About 4,500 species of parasitic plant in approximately 20 families of flowering plants are known.\nSpecies within the \"Orobanchaceae\" (broomrapes) are among the most economically destructive of all plants. Species of \"Striga\" (witchweeds) are estimated to cost billions of dollars a year in crop yield loss, infesting over 50\u00a0million hectares of cultivated land within Sub-Saharan Africa alone. \"Striga\" infects both grasses and grains, including corn, rice, and sorghum, which are among the world's most important food crops. \"Orobanche\" also threatens a wide range of other important crops, including peas, chickpeas, tomatoes, carrots, and varieties of cabbage. Yield loss from \"Orobanche\" can be total; despite extensive research, no method of control has been entirely successful.\nMany plants and fungi exchange carbon and nutrients in mutualistic mycorrhizal relationships. Some 400 species of myco-heterotrophic plants, mostly in the tropics, however effectively cheat by taking carbon from a fungus rather than exchanging it for minerals. They have much reduced roots, as they do not need to absorb water from the soil; their stems are slender with few vascular bundles, and their leaves are reduced to small scales, as they do not photosynthesize. Their seeds are small and numerous, so they appear to rely on being infected by a suitable fungus soon after germinating.\nFungi.\nParasitic fungi derive some or all of their nutritional requirements from plants, other fungi, or animals.\nPlant pathogenic fungi are classified into three categories depending on their mode of nutrition: biotrophs, hemibiotrophs and necrotrophs. Biotrophic fungi derive nutrients from living plant cells, and during the course of infection they colonise their plant host in such a way as to keep it alive for a maximally long time. One well-known example of a biotrophic pathogen is \"Ustilago maydis\", causative agent of the corn smut disease. Necrotrophic pathogens on the other hand, kill host cells and feed saprophytically, an example being the root-colonising honey fungi in the genus \"Armillaria.\" Hemibiotrophic pathogens begin their colonising their hosts as biotrophs, and subsequently killing off host cells and feeding as necrotrophs, a phenomenon termed the biotrophy-necrotrophy switch.\nPathogenic fungi are well-known causative agents of diseases on animals as well as humans. Fungal infections (mycosis) are estimated to kill 1.6\u00a0million people each year. One example of a potent fungal animal pathogen are Microsporidia - obligate intracellular parasitic fungi that largely affect insects, but may also affect vertebrates including humans, causing the intestinal infection microsporidiosis.\nProtozoa.\nProtozoa such as \"Plasmodium\", \"Trypanosoma\", and \"Entamoeba\" are endoparasitic. They cause serious diseases in vertebrates including humans\u2014in these examples, malaria, sleeping sickness, and amoebic dysentery\u2014and have complex life cycles.\nBacteria.\nMany bacteria are parasitic, though they are more generally thought of as pathogens causing disease. Parasitic bacteria are extremely diverse, and infect their hosts by a variety of routes. To give a few examples, \"Bacillus anthracis\", the cause of anthrax, is spread by contact with infected domestic animals; its spores, which can survive for years outside the body, can enter a host through an abrasion or may be inhaled. \"Borrelia\", the cause of Lyme disease and relapsing fever, is transmitted by vectors, ticks of the genus \"Ixodes\", from the diseases' reservoirs in animals such as deer. \"Campylobacter jejuni\", a cause of gastroenteritis, is spread by the fecal\u2013oral route from animals, or by eating insufficiently cooked poultry, or by contaminated water. \"Haemophilus influenzae\", an agent of bacterial meningitis and respiratory tract infections such as influenza and bronchitis, is transmitted by droplet contact. \"Treponema pallidum\", the cause of syphilis, is spread by sexual activity.\nViruses.\nViruses are obligate intracellular parasites, characterised by extremely limited biological function, to the point where, while they are evidently able to infect all other organisms from bacteria and archaea to animals, plants and fungi, it is unclear whether they can themselves be described as living. They can be either RNA or DNA viruses consisting of a single or double strand of genetic material (RNA or DNA, respectively), covered in a protein coat and sometimes a lipid envelope. They thus lack all the usual machinery of the cell such as enzymes, relying entirely on the host cell's ability to replicate DNA and synthesise proteins. Most viruses are bacteriophages, infecting bacteria.\nEvolutionary ecology.\nParasitism is a major aspect of evolutionary ecology; for example, almost all free-living animals are host to at least one species of parasite. Vertebrates, the best-studied group, are hosts to between 75,000 and 300,000 species of helminths and an uncounted number of parasitic microorganisms. On average, a mammal species hosts four species of nematode, two of trematodes, and two of cestodes. Humans have 342 species of helminth parasites, and 70 species of protozoan parasites. Some three-quarters of the links in food webs include a parasite, important in regulating host numbers. Perhaps 40 per cent of described species are parasitic.\nFossil record.\nParasitism is hard to demonstrate from the fossil record, but holes in the mandibles of several specimens of \"Tyrannosaurus\" may have been caused by \"Trichomonas\"-like parasites. \"Saurophthirus\", the Early Cretaceous flea, parasitized pterosaurs. Eggs that belonged to nematode worms and probably protozoan cysts were found in the Late Triassic coprolite of phytosaur. This rare find in Thailand reveals more about the ecology of prehistoric parasites.\nCoevolution.\nAs hosts and parasites evolve together, their relationships often change. When a parasite is in a sole relationship with a host, selection drives the relationship to become more benign, even mutualistic, as the parasite can reproduce for longer if its host lives longer. But where parasites are competing, selection favours the parasite that reproduces fastest, leading to increased virulence. There are thus varied possibilities in host\u2013parasite coevolution.\nEvolutionary epidemiology analyses how parasites spread and evolve, whereas Darwinian medicine applies similar evolutionary thinking to non-parasitic diseases like cancer and autoimmune conditions.\nLong-term partnerships favouring mutualism.\nLong-term partnerships can lead to a relatively stable relationship tending to commensalism or mutualism, as, all else being equal, it is in the evolutionary interest of the parasite that its host thrives. A parasite may evolve to become less harmful for its host or a host may evolve to cope with the unavoidable presence of a parasite\u2014to the point that the parasite's absence causes the host harm. For example, although animals parasitised by worms are often clearly harmed, such infections may also reduce the prevalence and effects of autoimmune disorders in animal hosts, including humans. In a more extreme example, some nematode worms cannot reproduce, or even survive, without infection by \"Wolbachia\" bacteria.\nLynn Margulis and others have argued, following Peter Kropotkin's 1902 \"\", that natural selection drives relationships from parasitism to mutualism when resources are limited. This process may have been involved in the symbiogenesis which formed the eukaryotes from an intracellular relationship between archaea and bacteria, though the sequence of events remains largely undefined.\nCompetition favouring virulence.\nCompetition between parasites can be expected to favour faster reproducing and therefore more virulent parasites, by natural selection.\nAmong competing parasitic insect-killing bacteria of the genera \"Photorhabdus\" and \"Xenorhabdus\", virulence depended on the relative potency of the antimicrobial toxins (bacteriocins) produced by the two strains involved. When only one bacterium could kill the other, the other strain was excluded by the competition. But when caterpillars were infected with bacteria both of which had toxins able to kill the other strain, neither strain was excluded, and their virulence was less than when the insect was infected by a single strain.\nCospeciation.\nA parasite sometimes undergoes cospeciation with its host, resulting in the pattern described in Fahrenholz's rule, that the phylogenies of the host and parasite come to mirror each other.\nAn example is between the simian foamy virus (SFV) and its primate hosts. The phylogenies of SFV polymerase and the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit II from African and Asian primates were found to be closely congruent in branching order and divergence times, implying that the simian foamy viruses cospeciated with Old World primates for at least 30\u00a0million years.\nThe presumption of a shared evolutionary history between parasites and hosts can help elucidate how host taxa are related. For instance, there has been a dispute about whether flamingos are more closely related to storks or ducks. The fact that flamingos share parasites with ducks and geese was initially taken as evidence that these groups were more closely related to each other than either is to storks. However, evolutionary events such as the duplication, or the extinction of parasite species (without similar events on the host phylogeny) often erode similarities between host and parasite phylogenies. In the case of flamingos, they have similar lice to those of grebes. Flamingos and grebes do have a common ancestor, implying cospeciation of birds and lice in these groups. Flamingo lice then switched hosts to ducks, creating the situation which had confused biologists.\nParasites infect sympatric hosts (those within their same geographical area) more effectively, as has been shown with digenetic trematodes infecting lake snails. This is in line with the Red Queen hypothesis, which states that interactions between species lead to constant natural selection for coadaptation. Parasites track the locally common hosts' phenotypes, so the parasites are less infective to allopatric hosts, those from different geographical regions.\nModifying host behaviour.\nSome parasites modify host behaviour in order to increase their transmission between hosts, often in relation to predator and prey (parasite increased trophic transmission). For example, in the California coastal salt marsh, the fluke \"Euhaplorchis californiensis\" reduces the ability of its killifish host to avoid predators. This parasite matures in egrets, which are more likely to feed on infected killifish than on uninfected fish. Another example is the protozoan \"Toxoplasma gondii\", a parasite that matures in cats but can be carried by many other mammals. Uninfected rats avoid cat odors, but rats infected with \"T. gondii\" are drawn to this scent, which may increase transmission to feline hosts. The malaria parasite modifies the skin odour of its human hosts, increasing their attractiveness to mosquitoes and hence improving the chance for the parasite to be transmitted. The spider \"Cyclosa argenteoalba\" often have parasitoid wasp larvae attached to them which alter their web-building behavior. Instead of producing their normal sticky spiral shaped webs, they made simplified webs when the parasites were attached. This manipulated behavior lasted longer and was more prominent the longer the parasites were left on the spiders.\nTrait loss.\nParasites can exploit their hosts to carry out a number of functions that they would otherwise have to carry out for themselves. Parasites which lose those functions then have a selective advantage, as they can divert resources to reproduction. Many insect ectoparasites including bedbugs, batbugs, lice and fleas have lost their ability to fly, relying instead on their hosts for transport. Trait loss more generally is widespread among parasites. An extreme example is the myxosporean \"Henneguya zschokkei\", an ectoparasite of fish and the only animal known to have lost the ability to respire aerobically: its cells lack mitochondria.\nHost defences.\nHosts have evolved a variety of defensive measures against their parasites, including physical barriers like the skin of vertebrates, the immune system of mammals, insects actively removing parasites, and defensive chemicals in plants.\nThe evolutionary biologist W. D. Hamilton suggested that sexual reproduction could have evolved to help to defeat multiple parasites by enabling genetic recombination, the shuffling of genes to create varied combinations. Hamilton showed by mathematical modelling that sexual reproduction would be evolutionarily stable in different situations, and that the theory's predictions matched the actual ecology of sexual reproduction. However, there may be a trade-off between immunocompetence and breeding male vertebrate hosts' secondary sex characteristics, such as the plumage of peacocks and the manes of lions. This is because the male hormone testosterone encourages the growth of secondary sex characteristics, favouring such males in sexual selection, at the price of reducing their immune defences.\nVertebrates.\nThe physical barrier of the tough and often dry and waterproof skin of reptiles, birds and mammals keeps invading microorganisms from entering the body. Human skin also secretes sebum, which is toxic to most microorganisms. On the other hand, larger parasites such as trematodes detect chemicals produced by the skin to locate their hosts when they enter the water. Vertebrate saliva and tears contain lysozyme, an enzyme that breaks down the cell walls of invading bacteria. Should the organism pass the mouth, the stomach with its hydrochloric acid, toxic to most microorganisms, is the next line of defence. Some intestinal parasites have a thick, tough outer coating which is digested slowly or not at all, allowing the parasite to pass through the stomach alive, at which point they enter the intestine and begin the next stage of their life. Once inside the body, parasites must overcome the immune system's serum proteins and pattern recognition receptors, intracellular and cellular, that trigger the adaptive immune system's lymphocytes such as T cells and antibody-producing B cells. These have receptors that recognise parasites.\nInsects.\nInsects often adapt their nests to reduce parasitism. For example, one of the key reasons why the wasp \"Polistes canadensis\" nests across multiple combs, rather than building a single comb like much of the rest of its genus, is to avoid infestation by tineid moths. The tineid moth lays its eggs within the wasps' nests and then these eggs hatch into larvae that can burrow from cell to cell and prey on wasp pupae. Adult wasps attempt to remove and kill moth eggs and larvae by chewing down the edges of cells, coating the cells with an oral secretion that gives the nest a dark brownish appearance.\nPlants.\nPlants respond to parasite attack with a series of chemical defences, such as polyphenol oxidase, under the control of the jasmonic acid-insensitive (JA) and salicylic acid (SA) signalling pathways. The different biochemical pathways are activated by different attacks, and the two pathways can interact positively or negatively. In general, plants can either initiate a specific or a non-specific response. Specific responses involve recognition of a parasite by the plant's cellular receptors, leading to a strong but localised response: defensive chemicals are produced around the area where the parasite was detected, blocking its spread, and avoiding wasting defensive production where it is not needed. Non-specific defensive responses are systemic, meaning that the responses are not confined to an area of the plant, but spread throughout the plant, making them costly in energy. These are effective against a wide range of parasites. When damaged, such as by lepidopteran caterpillars, leaves of plants including maize and cotton release increased amounts of volatile chemicals such as terpenes that signal they are being attacked; one effect of this is to attract parasitoid wasps, which in turn attack the caterpillars.\nBiology and conservation.\nEcology and parasitology.\nParasitism and parasite evolution were until the twenty-first century studied by parasitologists, in a science dominated by medicine, rather than by ecologists or evolutionary biologists. Even though parasite-host interactions were plainly ecological and important in evolution, the history of parasitology caused what the evolutionary ecologist Robert Poulin called a \"takeover of parasitism by parasitologists\", leading ecologists to ignore the area. This was in his opinion \"unfortunate\", as parasites are \"omnipresent agents of natural selection\" and significant forces in evolution and ecology. In his view, the long-standing split between the sciences limited the exchange of ideas, with separate conferences and separate journals. The technical languages of ecology and parasitology sometimes involved different meanings for the same words. There were philosophical differences, too: Poulin notes that, influenced by medicine, \"many parasitologists accepted that evolution led to a decrease in parasite virulence, whereas modern evolutionary theory would have predicted a greater range of outcomes\".\nTheir complex relationships make parasites difficult to place in food webs: a trematode with multiple hosts for its various life cycle stages would occupy many positions in a food web simultaneously, and would set up loops of energy flow, confusing the analysis. Further, since nearly every animal has (multiple) parasites, parasites would occupy the top levels of every food web.\nParasites can play a role in the proliferation of non-native species. For example, invasive green crabs are minimally affected by native trematodes on the Eastern Atlantic coast. This helps them outcompete native crabs such as the Atlantic Rock and Jonah crabs.\nEcological parasitology can be important to attempts at control, like during the campaign for eradicating the Guinea worm. Even though the parasite was eradicated in all but four countries, the worm began using frogs as an intermediary host before infecting dogs, making control more difficult than it would have been if the relationships had been better understood.\nRationale for conservation.\nAlthough parasites are widely considered to be harmful, the eradication of all parasites would not be beneficial. Parasites account for at least half of life's diversity; they perform important ecological roles; and without parasites, organisms might tend to asexual reproduction, diminishing the diversity of traits brought about by sexual reproduction. Parasites provide an opportunity for the transfer of genetic material between species, facilitating evolutionary change. Many parasites require multiple hosts of different species to complete their life cycles and rely on predator-prey or other stable ecological interactions to get from one host to another. The presence of parasites thus indicates that an ecosystem is healthy.\nAn ectoparasite, the California condor louse, \"Colpocephalum californici\", became a well-known conservation issue. A large and costly captive breeding program was run in the United States to rescue the California condor. It was host to a louse, which lived only on it. Any lice found were \"deliberately killed\" during the program, to keep the condors in the best possible health. The result was that one species, the condor, was saved and returned to the wild, while another species, the parasite, became extinct.\nAlthough parasites are often omitted in depictions of food webs, they usually occupy the top position. Parasites can function like keystone species, reducing the dominance of superior competitors and allowing competing species to co-exist.\nQuantitative ecology.\nA single parasite species usually has an aggregated distribution across host animals, which means that most hosts carry few parasites, while a few hosts carry the vast majority of parasite individuals. This poses considerable problems for students of parasite ecology, as it renders parametric statistics as commonly used by biologists invalid. Log-transformation of data before the application of parametric test, or the use of non-parametric statistics is recommended by several authors, but this can give rise to further problems, so quantitative parasitology is based on more advanced biostatistical methods.\nHistory.\nAncient.\nHuman parasites including roundworms, the Guinea worm, threadworms and tapeworms are mentioned in Egyptian papyrus records from 3000 BC onwards; the Ebers Papyrus describes hookworm. In ancient Greece, parasites including the bladder worm are described in the Hippocratic Corpus, while the comic playwright Aristophanes called tapeworms \"hailstones\". The Roman physicians Celsus and Galen documented the roundworms \"Ascaris lumbricoides\" and \"Enterobius vermicularis\".\nMedieval.\nIn his \"Canon of Medicine\", completed in 1025, the Persian physician Avicenna recorded human and animal parasites including roundworms, threadworms, the Guinea worm and tapeworms.\nIn his 1397 book \"Trait\u00e9 de l'\u00e9tat, science et pratique de l'art de la Bergerie\" (Account of the state, science and practice of the art of shepherding), Jehan de Brie wrote the first description of a trematode endoparasite, the sheep liver fluke \"Fasciola hepatica\".\nEarly modern.\nIn the early modern period, Francesco Redi's 1668 book \"Esperienze Intorno alla Generazione degl'Insetti\" (\"Experiences of the Generation of Insects\"), explicitly described ecto- and endoparasites, illustrating ticks, the larvae of nasal flies of deer, and sheep liver fluke. Redi noted that parasites develop from eggs, contradicting the theory of spontaneous generation. In his 1684 book \"Osservazioni intorno agli animali viventi che si trovano negli animali viventi\" (\"Observations on Living Animals found in Living Animals\"), Redi described and illustrated over 100 parasites including the large roundworm in humans that causes ascariasis. Redi was the first to name the cysts of \"Echinococcus granulosus\" seen in dogs and sheep as parasitic; a century later, in 1760, Peter Simon Pallas correctly suggested that these were the larvae of tapeworms.\nIn 1681, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek observed and illustrated the protozoan parasite \"Giardia lamblia\", and linked it to \"his own loose stools\". This was the first protozoan parasite of humans to be seen under a microscope. A few years later, in 1687, the Italian biologists Giovanni Cosimo Bonomo and Diacinto Cestoni described scabies as caused by the parasitic mite \"Sarcoptes scabiei\", marking it as the first disease of humans with a known microscopic causative agent.\nParasitology.\nModern parasitology developed in the 19th century with accurate observations and experiments by many researchers and clinicians; the term was first used in 1870. In 1828, James Annersley described amoebiasis, protozoal infections of the intestines and the liver, though the pathogen, \"Entamoeba histolytica\", was not discovered until 1873 by Friedrich L\u00f6sch. James Paget discovered the intestinal nematode \"Trichinella spiralis\" in humans in 1835. James McConnell described the human liver fluke, \"Clonorchis sinensis\", in 1875. Algernon Thomas and Rudolf Leuckart independently made the first discovery of the life cycle of a trematode, the sheep liver fluke, by experiment in 1881\u20131883. In 1877 Patrick Manson discovered the life cycle of the filarial worms that cause elephantiasis transmitted by mosquitoes. Manson further predicted that the malaria parasite, \"Plasmodium\", had a mosquito vector, and persuaded Ronald Ross to investigate. Ross confirmed that the prediction was correct in 1897\u20131898. At the same time, Giovanni Battista Grassi and others described the malaria parasite's life cycle stages in \"Anopheles\" mosquitoes. Ross was controversially awarded the 1902 Nobel prize for his work, while Grassi was not. In 1903, David Bruce identified the protozoan parasite and the tsetse fly vector of African trypanosomiasis.\nVaccine.\nGiven the importance of malaria, with some 220\u00a0million people infected annually, many attempts have been made to interrupt its transmission. Various methods of malaria prophylaxis have been tried including the use of antimalarial drugs to kill off the parasites in the blood, the eradication of its mosquito vectors with organochlorine and other insecticides, and the development of a malaria vaccine. All of these have proven problematic, with drug resistance, insecticide resistance among mosquitoes, and repeated failure of vaccines as the parasite mutates. The first and as of 2015 the only licensed vaccine for any parasitic disease of humans is RTS,S for \"Plasmodium falciparum\" malaria.\nBiological control.\nSeveral groups of parasites, including microbial pathogens and parasitoidal wasps have been used as biological control agents in agriculture and horticulture.\nResistance.\nPoulin observes that the widespread prophylactic use of anthelmintic drugs in domestic sheep and cattle constitutes a worldwide uncontrolled experiment in the life-history evolution of their parasites. The outcomes depend on whether the drugs decrease the chance of a helminth larva reaching adulthood. If so, natural selection can be expected to favour the production of eggs at an earlier age. If on the other hand the drugs mainly affects adult parasitic worms, selection could cause delayed maturity and increased virulence. Such changes appear to be underway: the nematode \"Teladorsagia circumcincta\" is changing its adult size and reproductive rate in response to drugs.\nCultural significance.\nClassical times.\nIn the classical era, the concept of the parasite was not strictly pejorative: the \"parasitus\" was an accepted role in Roman society, in which a person could live off the hospitality of others, in return for \"flattery, simple services, and a willingness to endure humiliation\".\nSociety.\nParasitism has a derogatory sense in popular usage. According to the immunologist John Playfair,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In everyday speech, the term 'parasite' is loaded with derogatory meaning. A parasite is a sponger, a lazy profiteer, a drain on society.\nThe satirical cleric Jonathan Swift alludes to hyperparasitism in his 1733 poem \"On Poetry: A Rhapsody\", comparing poets to \"vermin\" who \"teaze and pinch their foes\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA 2022 study examined the naming of some 3000 parasite species discovered in the previous two decades. Of those named after scientists, over 80% were named for men, whereas about a third of authors of papers on parasites were women. The study found that the percentage of parasite species named for relatives or friends of the author has risen sharply in the same period.\nFiction.\nIn Bram Stoker's 1897 Gothic horror novel \"Dracula\", and its many film adaptations, the eponymous Count Dracula is a blood-drinking parasite (a vampire). The critic Laura Otis argues that as a \"thief, seducer, creator, and mimic, Dracula is the ultimate parasite. The whole point of vampirism is sucking other people's blood\u2014living at other people's expense.\"\nDisgusting and terrifying parasitic alien species are widespread in science fiction, as for instance in Ridley Scott's 1979 film \"Alien\". In one scene, a Xenomorph bursts out of the chest of a dead man, with blood squirting out under high pressure assisted by explosive squibs. Animal organs were used to reinforce the shock effect. The scene was filmed in a single take, and the startled reactions of the actors were genuine.\nThe entomopathogenic fungus \"Cordyceps\" is represented culturally as a deadly threat to the human race. The video game series \"The Last of Us\" (2013\u2013present) and its television adaptation present \"Cordyceps\" as a parasite of humans, causing a zombie apocalypse. Its human hosts initially become violent \"infected\" beings, before turning into blind zombie \"clickers\", complete with fruiting bodies growing out from their faces.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43938", "revid": "1217097013", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43938", "title": "Bacterial lawn", "text": "Bacterial lawn is a term used by microbiologists to describe the appearance of bacterial colonies when all the individual colonies on a Petri dish or agar plate merge to form a field or mat of bacteria. Bacterial lawns find use in screens for antibiotic resistance and bacteriophage titering.\nBacterial lawns (often of \"Serratia marcescens\") are also used extensively when as an assay method when using bacteriophage as tracers in studies of groundwater flow.\nAlthough occasionally used as a synonym for biofilm, the term primarily applies to the simple, clonal, unstructured mats of organisms that typically only form on laboratory growth media. Biofilms\u2014the aggregated form of microorganisms most commonly found in nature\u2014 are generally more complex and diverse and marked by larger quantities of extracellular structural matrix relative to the cellular biomass.\nTechniques.\nBacterial lawns can be produced manually by evenly spreading a high amount of bacteria onto an agar plate using a sterile cotton swab or a Drigalski spatula. Alternatively an automated machine can be used such as a spiral plater where the plate is rotated and the sample is spread evenly using an automated dispenser.\nThey may also be produced using the \"pour plate\" technique in which a concentrated inoculum of the appropriate bacteria are mixed with melted agar and spread evenly over the surface of a Petri dish.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43939", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43939", "title": "Bacterial mat", "text": ""}
{"id": "43941", "revid": "51056191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43941", "title": "Windows Media Player", "text": "Media player and media library application by Microsoft\nWindows Media Player (WMP, officially referred to as Windows Media Player Legacy to distinguish it from the new Windows Media Player introduced with Windows 11) is the first media player and media library application that Microsoft developed to play audio and video on personal computers. It has been a component of the Microsoft Windows operating system, including Windows 9x, Windows NT, Pocket PC, and Windows Mobile. Microsoft also released editions of Windows Media Player for classic Mac OS, Mac OS X, and Solaris, but has since discontinued them.\nIn addition to being a media player, the app can rip audio file from compact discs, burn Audio CDs or MP3 CDs, synchronize content with a digital audio player or mobile devices, and stream media over the local network. Originally, it could connect to a number of digital music stores, allowing its users to purchase digital music. The default file formats are Windows Media Video (WMV), Windows Media Audio (WMA), and Advanced Systems Format (ASF), and its own XML based playlist format called Windows Playlist (WPL). The player is also able to utilize a digital rights management service in the form of Windows Media DRM.\nWindows Media Player is a unique component, in that since 1999, each version of Windows came with two or more versions of it side-by-side. For example, Media Player versions 5.1, 6.4, and 8 were all included in Windows XP. Each versions of Windows may bundle several other media playback apps, namely ActiveMovie Control, CD Player, DVD Player, Windows Media Center, and Microsoft Movies &amp; TV.\nWindows Media Player 11 is the last out-of-band version of Media Player. It was made available for Windows XP and is included in Windows Vista and Windows Server 2008. Version 12 was released in 2009 along with Windows 7 and has not been made available for previous versions of Windows nor has it been updated ever since. Windows 8 bundled Windows Media Player 12 along two other media player apps, namely Xbox Video and Xbox Music which became the new default. The latter was renamed Groove Music in Windows 10, and then finally Media Player in Windows 11 which has also been backported to Windows 10.\nHistory.\nThe first version of Windows Media Player appeared in October 1991, when Windows 3.0 with Multimedia Extensions was released. Originally called Media Player, this component was included with \"Multimedia PC\"-compatible machines but not available for retail sale. It was capable of playing codice_1 animation files, and could be extended to support other formats. It used MCI to handle media files. Being a component of Windows, Media Player shows the same version number as that of the version Windows with which it was included.\nMicrosoft continually produced new programs to play media files. In November of the following year, Video for Windows was introduced with the ability to play digital video files in an AVI container format, with codec support for RLE and Video1, and support for playing uncompressed files. Indeo 3.2 was added in a later release. Video for Windows was first available as a free add-on to Windows 3.1, and later integrated into Windows 95 and Windows NT 4.0. In 1995, Microsoft released ActiveMovie with DirectX Media SDK. ActiveMovie incorporates a new way of dealing with media files, and adds support for streaming media (which the original Media Player could not handle). In 1996, ActiveMovie was renamed DirectShow. However, Media Player continued to come with Windows until Windows XP, in which it was officially renamed Windows Media Player v5.1. (\"v5.1\" is the version number of Windows XP).\nIn 1999, Windows Media Player's versioning broke away from that of Windows itself. Windows Media Player 6.x came as an out-of-band update for Windows 95-98 and Windows NT 4.0 that co-existed with Media Player and became a built-in component of Windows 98 SE and Windows 2000 with an \"mplayer2.exe\" stub allowing to use this built-in instead of newer versions. Windows Media Player 7.0 and its successors also came with an \"wmplayer.exe\" stub, replacing each other but leaving Media Player and Windows Media Player 6.4 intact. Windows Me and Windows XP is the operating systems to have three different versions of Windows Media Player side by side. All versions branded Windows Media Player (instead of simply Media Player) support DirectShow codecs. Version 7 of Windows Media Player was a large revamp, with a new user interface, visualizations and increased functionality. Windows Vista, however, dropped older versions of Windows Media Player in favor of v11, which included the removal of the Windows Media Source Filter (DirectShow codec).\nIn 2004, Microsoft launched digital music store MSN Music which came bundled with Windows Media Player 10 to compete with Apple\u2019s iTunes.\nHowever, MSN Music was discontinued already in 2006 with the launch of Zune music players.\nBeginning with Windows Vista, Windows Media Player supports the Media Foundation framework besides DirectShow; as such it plays certain types of media using Media Foundation as well as some types of media using DirectShow. Windows Media Player 12 was released with Windows 7. It included support for more media formats and added new features. With Windows 8, however, the player did not receive an upgrade.\nOn April 16, 2012, Microsoft announced that Windows Media Player would not be included in Windows RT, the line of Windows designed to run on ARM-based devices.\nWindows Media Player (2022).\nA different app called Media Player is the successor to Groove Music (previously Xbox Music) and Windows Media Player. Media Player started to be offered to all Windows 11 users on February 15, 2022, with Windows 10 users following in January 2023.\nThe new Media Player can also play video, as part of Groove's rebranding from a music streaming service to a media player. Other changes include the album cover view being in fullscreen, and a refresh to the mini player. Accessibility has also been optimized, with some improved keyboard shortcuts and hotkey support for keyboard users and with other assistive technologies.\nFeatures.\nCore playback and library functions.\nWindows Media Player supports playback of audio, video and pictures, along with fast forward, reverse, file markers (if present) and variable playback speed (seek &amp; time compression/dilation introduced in WMP 9 Series). It supports local playback, streaming playback with multicast streams and progressive downloads. Items in a playlist can be skipped over temporarily at playback time without removing them from the playlist. Full keyboard-based operation is possible in the player.\nWindows Media Player supports full media management, via the integrated media library introduced first in version 7, which offers cataloguing and searching of media and viewing media metadata. Media can be arranged according to album, artist, genre, date \"et al.\" Windows Media Player 9 Series introduced Quick Access Panel to browse and navigate the entire library through a menu. The Quick Access Panel was also added to the mini-mode in version 10 but was entirely removed in version 11. WMP 9 Series also introduced ratings and Auto Ratings. Windows Media Player 10 introduced support for aggregating pictures, Recorded TV shows, and other media into the library. A fully featured tag editor was featured in versions 9-11 of WMP, called the Advanced Tag Editor. However, the feature was removed in Windows Media Player 12. Since WMP 9 Series, the player features dynamically updated \"Auto Playlists\" based on criteria. Auto Playlists are updated every time users open them. WMP 9 Series or later also supports \"Auto Ratings\" which automatically assigns ratings based on the number of times a song is played. Pre-populated auto playlists are included in Windows Media Player 9 Series. Custom Auto Playlists can be created only on Windows XP or later.\nIn Windows Media Player 11, the \"Quick Access Panel\" was removed and replaced with an Explorer-style navigation pane on the left which can be customized for each library to show the user selected media or metadata categories, with contents appearing on the right, in a graphical manner with thumbnails featuring album art or other art depicting the item. Missing album art can be added directly to the placeholders in the Library itself (though the program re-renders all album art imported this way into 1x1 pixel ratio, 200x200 resolution JPEGs). There are separate \"Tiles\", \"Icons\", \"Details\" or \"Extended Tiles\" views for \"Music\", \"Pictures\", \"Video\" and \"Recorded TV\" which can be set individually from the navigation bar. Entries for \"Pictures\" and \"Video\" show their thumbnails. Version 11 also introduced the ability to search and display results on-the-fly as characters are being entered, without waiting for \"Enter\" key to be hit. Incremental search results are refined based on further characters that are typed. \"Stacking\" allows graphical representations of how many albums there are in a specific category or folder. The pile appears larger as the category contains more albums. The List pane includes an option to prompt the user to remove items skipped in a playlist upon save or skip them only during playback.\nVisualizations.\nWhile playing music, Windows Media Player can show visualizations, which were first introduced in version 7. The current three visualizations are Alchemy, which was first introduced in version 9, Bars and Waves, which has been used since version 7, and Battery, introduced version 8. Versions 7 and 8 included with Me and XP respectively includes an additional visualization called \"Musical Colors\", which is not present in out-of-band releases of version 7 as well as version 9 onwards, but is retained if Windows Media Player was upgraded from version 7 or 8. Version 11 and above refrains from having the former \"Ambience,\" \"Particle,\" \"Plenoptic,\" and \"Spikes\" visualizations from versions 7 to 10. The reason for their removal was that the visualizations do not support full screen controls (either the visualization gets shifted to the left while there is a thick black bar to the right side of the screen, or that there are no full screen controls). More visualizations could be downloaded from Microsoft's official website; however the downloads have since been taken down. These include \"BlazingColors,\" \"ColorCubes,\" \"PulsingColors,\" \"Softie the Snowman,\" and \"Yule Log\", which were originally offered as optional extras in version 7. As of today, these visualizations, among others, can still be found on some websites such as the WMP Goodies site.\nFormat support.\nThe player includes intrinsic support for Windows Media codecs and also WAV and MP3 media formats. On Windows XP and above with WMP 9 Series or later, the Windows Media Audio Professional codec is included which supports multichannel audio at up to 24-bit 192\u00a0kHz resolution. Windows Media Player 11 includes the Windows Media Format 11 runtime which adds low bitrate support (below 128\u00a0kbit/s for WMA Pro), support for ripping music to \"WMA Pro 10\" and updates the original WMA to version 9.2.\nSupport for any media codec and container format can be added using specific DirectShow filters or Media Foundation codecs (Media Foundation codecs only in Windows Vista or later). The player will not play MP3 files that contain compressed ID3 headers (\"tags\"); trying to do so results in a \"The input media file is invalid\" error message. MP3 playback support was built-in beginning with version 6.1 and audio CD playback was natively supported with version 7.\nDVD playback features minus the necessary decoders were integrated into Windows Media Player 8 for Windows XP. The player activates DVD and Blu-ray playback functionality with support for menus, titles and chapters, parental controls and audio track language selection if compatible decoders are installed. MPEG-2 and Dolby Digital (AC-3) decoders were included beginning with Windows Media Player 11 on Windows Vista (Home Premium and Ultimate editions only) and Windows 7 (Home Premium, Ultimate, or Enterprise editions) to allow DVD playback without additional software. However, the decoders were subsequently removed in Windows 8 and Windows 10 due to licensing costs.\nWindows Media Player 12 adds native support for H.264 and MPEG-4 Part 2 video formats, ALAC, AAC audio and 3GP, MP4 and MOV container formats. Windows Media Player 12 is also able to play AVCHD formats (\".M2TS\" and \".mts\").\nAs of Windows 10, Windows Media Player 12 can play FLAC, HEVC, and SubRip subtitle, and Matroska container formats. Although the WebM file type is not officially associated with Windows Media Player 12 (the default player is Microsoft Movies &amp; TV), playback of VP9 video in WebM container is possible on Windows 10 v1809 or later.\nWindows Media Player Mobile.\nWindows Media Player Mobile 10 on Windows Mobile 6.5 supports MP3, ASF, WMA, and WMV using WMV or MPEG-4 codecs.\nDisc burning, ripping, and playback.\nWindows Media Player features integrated Audio CD-burning support since version 7 as well as data CD burning support since Windows Media Player 9 Series on Windows XP or later. Data CDs can have any of the media formats supported by the player. While burning Data CDs, the media can, optionally, be transcoded into WMA format and playlists can be added to the CD as well. Starting with WMP 9 Series, audio CDs can be burnt with volume leveling.\nAudio CDs can be ripped as WMA or WMA 10 Pro (WMA 10 Pro in WMP 11 or later) at 48, 64, 96, 128, 160, and 192 kbit/s, WMA lossless (470 to 940\u00a0kbit/s) (9 Series on XP or later), WMA variable bitrate (from 40 to 75\u00a0kbit/s up to 240-355\u00a0kbit/s), MP3 at 128, 192, 256, and 320\u00a0kbit/s, or uncompressed WAV (WAV ripping in WMP 11 or later). Since WMP 9 Series, 20 bit high-resolution CDs (HDCDs) are also supported, if capable audio hardware is present. Audio can be ripped using error correction and ripped audio can be protected with Windows Media DRM. Ripping to MP3 is supported only in Windows Media Player 8 for Windows XP or later if a compatible MP3 encoder is installed. Windows Media Player 10 included the Fraunhofer MP3 Professional encoder. Information on CDs such as album name, artist and track listings can optionally be automatically downloaded from the online Windows Media database when the CD is inserted. Version 11 added support for ripping audio CDs to WAV and WMA 10 Pro formats. With their 2015 implementation in Windows 10, Version 12 also added lossless FLAC and ALAC formats for ripping and playback. For burning, version 11 shows a graphical bar indicating how much space will be used on the disc and introduced \"Disc spanning\" which splits a burn list onto multiple discs in case the content does not fit on one disc.\nPortable device sync.\nWindows Media Player allows the user to connect, share and sync data with portable handheld devices and game consoles since version 7. Media can be optionally transcoded to a format better suited for the target device, automatically, when synchronizing. When deleting playlists from devices, Windows Media Player can automatically remove their contents. Devices can be formatted using Windows Media Player 9 Series or later. Version 10 or later support the Media Transfer Protocol and Auto Sync. Auto Sync allows users to specify criteria such as recently added music or highest rated songs, by which media will be automatically synchronized with the portable device and other advanced features like setting the clock on the portable device automatically, communicating with the device to retrieve the user's preferences. Windows Media Player 10 also introduced the UMDF-based \"Windows Portable Devices\" API.\nVersion 11 has improved synchronization features for loading content onto PlaysForSure-compatible portable players. WMP 11 supports reverse-synchronization, by which media present on the portable device can be replicated back to the PC. \"Shuffle Sync\" can be used to randomize content synced with the portable device, \"Multi PC Sync\" to synchronize portable device content across multiple PCs and \"Guest Sync\" to synchronize different content from multiple PCs with the portable device. Portable devices appear in the navigation pane of the library where their content can be browsed and searched.\nWindows Media Player's 'Sync' function has options that allow it to be set to automatically down-convert (transcode) high bit-rate song files to a lower bit-rate. This down-conversion function is switched on by default. This is useful for providing low bit-rate files to those portable devices that need them, and to save space on portable devices with smaller storage capacities. For high bit-rate capable devices with sufficient storage capabilities, the down conversion process can be omitted.\nIn versions 11 (2006) and 12 (2009), the Quality settings that the user has selected in the Windows Media Player settings for Sync, for that specific portable device, are used to control the quality (bit-rate) of files that are copied to the portable device. Leaving the Quality settings to Automatic will often result in 192kbs files being copied to the portable device. Manual settings can also be made. 192kbs is the highest quality down-conversion bit-rate that can be manually selected when the Sync function's down-conversion function is turned on. Lower bit-rates can also be selected.\nFor portable devices that can handle high bit-rate files, the best quality files are obtained by leaving the down-conversion process switched off (unchecked) for that specific device. In Windows Media Player Version 11, switching off the down-conversion function is done in the Quality tab of the Advanced Options of the Sync settings for the device. In Windows Media Player Version 12, switching off the down-conversion function is done in the Quality tab of the Properties for the device in the Select Settings for the device in the Sync Options menu.\nWhen set up in such a way, Windows Media Player's 'Sync' function can be used to sync unchanged high bit-rate song files to suitable portable devices (i.e. those capable of using file formats such as WMA Lossless, mp3-360kbs, etc.). For example, some users have created large song libraries on their PCs containing .wma formatted song files using the high bit-rate WMA Lossless (WMA-LL) protocol, or using other high bit-rate song file formats. The WMA-LL protocol is selectable in Windows Media Player as an option when ripping songs from CDs. The resulting bit-rates seen on ripped WMA-LL files are often 3 to 6 times higher than 192kbs, and can typically fall anywhere in the range of 600kbs to 1200kbs, depending on the quality of the source file that was present on the CD in the first place. The sound quality is much improved over the default rate, although the file size is larger.\nAt the time that Versions 11 and 12 were released, the capabilities and capacities of portable devices typically required down-conversion of the bit-rates of the files placed on the portable devices. Thus, Sync down-conversion was turned on by default. This was to ensure playability of the files and to ensure that the file sizes were small enough to efficiently fit a reasonably large selection of songs on the portable device.\nIn recent years (circa 2012), portable devices became available that could natively play these Windows Media Player produced high bit-rate WMA-LL files (and others), and that have storage capacities suitable for large collections of high bit-rate song files. This made it much more practicable and desirable to use software programs such as Windows Media Player to synchronize previously PC-bound libraries of high bit-rate songs to these new portable devices.\nEnhanced playback features.\nWindows Media Player features universal brightness, contrast, saturation and hue adjustments and pixel aspect ratio for supported video formats. It also includes a 10-band graphic equalizer with presets and SRS WOW audio post-processing system. Windows Media Player can also have attached audio and video DSP plug-ins which process the output audio or video data. \"Video Smoothing\" was introduced in WMP 9 Series (Windows\u00a0XP or later only) which upscales frame-rate by interpolating added frames, in effect giving a smoother playback on low-framerate videos. The player supports subtitles and closed-captioning for local media, video on demand streaming or live streaming scenarios. Typically Windows Media captions support the SAMI file format but can also carry embedded closed caption data.\nThe player can use video overlays or VMR (Video Mixing Renderer) surfaces, if the video card supports them. In Windows XP, it uses VMR7 by default, but can also be made to use the more advanced YUV mixing mode by enabling the \"Use high quality mode\" option in Advanced Performance settings. This turns on deinterlacing, scaling and improved color accuracy. WMP 9 Series introduced native playback for deinterlacing for TV output. Version 9 introduced DXVA accelerated playback. Version 11 introduced improved support for DirectX accelerated decoding of WMV video (DXVA decoding). Up to version 11, it supported static lyrics and \"Synchronized Lyrics\", by which different lines of lyrics can be time-stamped, so that they display only at those times. Synchronized Lyrics also were accessible through the Advanced Tag Editor which was removed in version 12.\nSince Windows Media Player 9 Series, the player supports crossfading, audio dynamic range (Quiet Mode) for WMA Pro and WMA Lossless, and auto volume leveling for certain media which includes volume level/gain information such as MP3 or Windows Media. The player also supports extensive configurable privacy and security settings.\nShell integration.\nThe player has Windows Explorer shell integration to add files and playlist to the \"Now Playing\" pane and other playlists can be controlled from the Windows Explorer shell itself, via right-click menu. The My Music folder also includes a separate \"My Playlists\" folder where playlists are maintained. When the player is closed and reopened, simply clicking the play button restores the last playlist even if it was not saved. Starting with Windows Media Player 10, the playlist pane is also visible from the Library view. AutoPlay handlers in Windows expose various Windows Media Player tasks.\nUp to version 11, it featured a taskbar-mounted \"Mini-mode\" in which the most common media control buttons are presented as a toolbar on the Windows taskbar. Flyout windows can display media information, the active visualization or the video being played back. Mini-mode was introduced as a shell player powertoy for Windows Media Player 8 in Windows XP and integrated later into WMP 9 Series. Mini-mode has been removed as an option in Windows Media Player 12 in favor of controls in the taskbar's interactive thumbnail preview which lacks volume control, a progress bar and information displayed whenever a new song is played. However, mini-mode can be restored in Windows Media Player 12 by grabbing the wmpband.dll file from Windows Media Player 11 and registering it, where it will continue to function as intended.\nThe user interface has been redesigned in Windows Media Player 12 such that the \"Now Playing\" view plays media in a separate minimalist window with floating playback controls, and also gives access to the current playlist, visualizations, and enhancements. Enhancements are housed in individual undocked windows. The library view includes the rest of the media management functions. It also can preview songs from the library when users hover over the media file and click the Preview button. Windows Media Player 12 can play unprotected songs from the iTunes library. As previously mentioned, taskbar-integrated mini-mode has been replaced with controls in the taskbar's interactive thumbnail preview (called the \"Thumbnail Toolbar\"), albeit minus the volume control function, track and album information shown whenever a new song is played and the progress bar. The taskbar icon also supports jump lists introduced in Windows 7.\nExtensibility.\nThe player has had skinning support since Windows Media Player (WMP) 7 and includes a color chooser since the WMP 9 Series. Not all functions are usually exposed in skin mode. Windows Media Player 10 allows setting the video border color. Color chooser has been removed in WMP 12. It supports visualizations and \"Info Center View\" (Info Center View in WMP 9 Series or later) which displays media metadata fetched from the internet. Full screen visualizations are supported in WMP 9 Series or later. It supports Background plug-ins, window plug-ins and \"Now Playing\" plug-ins to control media playback besides DSP and renderer plug-ins. Plug-in support was introduced in WMP 9 Series.\nOnline features.\nThe player integrates web-browsing support to browse digital music stores, shop for music and tune to internet radio stations since version 7. It provides an embeddable ActiveX control for Internet Explorer so that developers can play Windows Media on web pages. Windows Media Player 10 or later feature integration with a large number of digital music stores and selecting a music store switches the Info Center view, radio and other online features to use services from that store. Purchased music from a particular store appears in a separate library node under the respective category.\nMedia streaming.\nPreviously, Microsoft had released Windows Media Connect for Windows XP to stream media content with its built-in UPnP media server. With version 11 of Windows Media Player, Media Sharing was integrated and allows content (Music, Pictures, Video) to be streamed to and from Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) AV enabled devices such as the PS3, Xbox 360, and Roku SoundBridge. This includes DRM protected PlaysForSure content. WMP 11 on Windows Vista can also act as a client to connect to remote media libraries using this feature; this is not available on the Windows XP version.\nWith version 12, media streaming was further improved. While previous versions streamed media to UPnP compliant devices (Digital Media Server role) and could play media by fetching it from a network share (Digital Media Player role), Windows Media Player 12 can access media from the shared media libraries on the network or HomeGroup, stream media to DLNA 1.5 compliant devices and allows itself (once the remote control option is turned on) to be remotely controlled by Digital Media Controller devices which stream media (Digital Media Renderer role). Similarly, the \"Play To\" feature once enabled for remote PCs, by turning on remote control of the player, allows compliant devices and computers to be discovered and controlled remotely from a computer running Windows Media Player 12 (Digital Media Controller role). If the devices do not support the streamed format, Windows Media Player 12 transcodes the format on-the-fly. Media from a home network can also be streamed over the internet using an \"Online ID Provider\" service, which handles discovery of the computer's IP address, authorization, security, connectivity and Quality of Service issues.\nSkin Mode.\nWindows Media Player also features skins, first introduced in version 7, which changes the appearance of the program. Currently, Windows Media Player has two default skins: \"Corporate\", which was first introduced in version 8, and \"Revert\", which first shipped with version 9. In previous versions of Windows Media Player, there were many skins offered, some of which were included with Windows starting with Windows Me. The initial set of skins in version 7 include \"Canvas\", \"Classic\", \"Headspace\", \"Heart\", \"Miniplayer\", \"Optik\", \"Pyrite\", \"Roundlet\", \"Rusty\", \"Splat\", and \"Toothy\", with Windows Me including its own dedicated skin under the name \"WinME\". Version 8 includes most of the skins from version 7 but adds some new ones, such as \"Atomic\", \"Bluesky\", \"Corporate\", \"Compact\", \"Goo\", \"Iconic\", and \"Radio\", alongside an updated \"Miniplayer\" skin based on version 8 as well as two additional skins, \"Windows Classic\" and \"Windows XP\". In version 9, the skins from version 7 and 8 are excluded (with the exception of the \"Corporate\" skin from version 8), with the only other skins being \"9SeriesDefault\" and \"Revert\". These skins, such as the ones included in previous version of Windows, are retained if the player is upgraded from a previous version. Some skins such as the ones listed above can be downloaded from Microsoft's website but have since been removed. Despite this, the page has been archived in 2016, along with the original download links. Other skins have also appeared in other products such as the two Microsoft Plus! add-ons for Windows XP, which includes four skins in the first pack and another set of skins in the second pack. The Corporate skin is not deletable.\nSecurity issues.\nMicrosoft Windows Media Runtime in Windows 2000, Windows XP, Windows Vista and Windows Server contained a bug that permitted \"remote code execution if a user opened a specially crafted media file\". Such a file would allow the attacker to \"then install programs; view, change, or delete data; or create new accounts with full user rights\", if the account on which the file was played had administrator privileges. The problem was addressed in a critical update issued on September 8, 2009.\nOther versions.\nMicrosoft has also released versions of Windows Media Player for other platforms including Windows Mobile, classic Mac OS, Mac OS X, Palm-size PC, Handheld PC, and Solaris. These versions are no longer supported by Microsoft. Version 1 of the Zune software was also based on Windows Media Player; later versions are not.\nWindows Mobile.\nWindows Media Player for Pocket PC was first announced on January 6, 2000, and has been revised on a schedule roughly similar to that of the Windows version. Currently known as \"Media Player 10 Mobile\", this edition (released in October 2004) closely resembles the capabilities of the Windows version of WMP 10, including playlist capabilities, a media library, album art, WMA Lossless playback, support for DRM-protected media, video playback at 640\u00d7480 with stereo sound, and the same Energy Blue interface aesthetics also seen in Windows XP Media Center Edition 2005. It also supports synchronization with the desktop version of WMP 10, and additionally supports synchronizing and transcoding of recorded television shows from Media Center. Media Player 10 Mobile is not available as a download from Microsoft, distribution is done solely through OEM partners, and is typically included on devices based on Windows Mobile.\nWindows Mobile 6 includes a copy of Windows Media Player 10 Mobile, but with a similar (but not quite identical) theme as Windows Media Player 11.\nMac OS X.\nVersion 9 was the final version of Windows Media Player to be released for Mac OS X before development was canceled by Microsoft. It was developed by the Windows Media team at Microsoft instead of the Macintosh Business Unit and released in 2003. On release the application lacked many basic features that were found in other media players such as Apple's iTunes and QuickTime. It also lacked support for many media formats that version 9 of the Windows counterpart supported on release 10 months earlier.\nThe Mac version supported only Windows Media encoded media (up to version 9) enclosed in the ASF format, lacking support for all other formats such as MP4, MPEG, and Microsoft's own AVI format. On the user interface front, it did not prevent screensavers from running during playback, it did not support file drag-and-drop, nor did it support playlists. While Windows Media Player 9 had added support for some files that use the WMV9 codec (also known as the WMV3 codec by the FourCC), in other aspects it was seen as having degraded in features from previous versions.\nOn January 12, 2006, Microsoft announced it had ceased development of Windows Media Player for Mac. Microsoft now distributes a third-party plugin called WMV Player (produced and maintained by Flip4Mac) which allows some forms of Windows Media to be played within Apple's QuickTime Player and other QuickTime-aware applications.\nEuropean Commission case.\nIn March 2004, the European Commission in the European Union Microsoft antitrust case fined Microsoft \u20ac497\u00a0million and ordered the company to provide a version of Windows without Windows Media Player, claiming Microsoft \"broke European Union competition law by leveraging its near monopoly in the market for PC operating systems onto the markets for work group server operating systems and for media players\". The company has made available a compliant version of its flagship operating system under the negotiated name \"Windows XP N\", though the product has not been very successful. Windows Vista, Windows 7 and Windows 8 are also available in \"N\" editions. However, it is possible to either install Windows Media Player (XP/Vista) or the Media Restore Pack through Windows Update (Vista) to add the media player.\nRelease history.\nPrior to the release of Windows Media Player in Windows 98 Second Edition, separate programs, CD Player, Deluxe CD Player, DVD Player and Media Player, were included in old versions of Microsoft Windows for playback of media files. Only Windows Media Player 11 is not available for Windows Server 2003.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43942", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43942", "title": "Petri dish", "text": "Shallow dish used to hold cell cultures\nA Petri dish (alternatively known as a Petri plate or cell-culture dish) is a shallow transparent lidded dish that biologists use to hold growth medium in which cells can be cultured, originally, cells of bacteria, fungi, and small mosses. The container is named after its inventor, German bacteriologist Julius Richard Petri. It is the most common type of culture plate. The Petri dish is one of the most common items in biology laboratories and has entered popular culture. The term is sometimes written in lower case, especially in non-technical literature.\nWhat was later called Petri dish was originally developed by German physician Robert Koch in his private laboratory in 1881, as a precursor method. Petri, as assistant to Koch, at Berlin University made the final modifications in 1887 as used today.\nPenicillin, the first antibiotic, was discovered in 1929 when Alexander Fleming noticed that penicillium mold contaminating a bacterial culture in a Petri dish had killed the bacteria around it.\nHistory.\nThe Petri dish was developed by German physician Julius Richard Petri (for whom the dish is named) while working as an assistant to Robert Koch at Berlin University. Petri did not invent the culture dish himself; rather, it was a modified version of Koch's invention which used an agar medium developed by Walther Hesse. Koch had published a precursor dish in a booklet in 1881 titled \"\" (\"On the Study of Pathogenic Organisms\"), which is now known as the \"Bible of Bacteriology\". He described a new bacterial culture method that used a glass slide with agar and a container (basically a Petri dish, a circular glass dish of 20\u2009\u00d7 5\u2009cm with matching lid) which he called \"\" (\"moist chamber\"). A bacterial culture was spread on the glass slide, then placed in the moist chamber with a small wet paper. Bacterial growth was easily visible.\nKoch publicly demonstrated his plating method at the Seventh International Medical Congress in London in August 1881. There, Louis Pasteur exclaimed, \"\" (\"What great progress, Sir!\") It was using this method that Koch discovered important pathogens of tuberculosis (\"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\"), anthrax (\"Bacillus anthracis\"), and cholera (\"Vibrio cholerae\"). For his research on tuberculosis, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1905. His students also made important discoveries. Friedrich Loeffler discovered the bacteria of glanders (\"Burkholderia mallei\") in 1882 and diphtheria (\"Corynebacterium diphtheriae\") in 1884; and Georg Theodor August Gaffky, the bacterium of typhoid (\"Salmonella enterica\") in 1884.\nPetri made changes in how the circular dish was used. It is often asserted that Petri developed a new culture plate, but this is incorrect. Instead of using a separate glass slide or plate on which culture media were placed, Petri directly placed media into the glass dish, eliminating unnecessary steps such as transferring the culture media, using the wet paper, and reducing the chance of contamination. He published the improved method in 1887 as \"\" (\"A minor modification of Koch's plating technique\"). Although it could have been named \"Koch dish\", the final method was given the eponymous name Petri dish.\nFeatures and variants.\nPetri dishes are usually cylindrical, mostly with diameters ranging from , and a height to diameter ratio ranging from 1:10 to 1:4. Four sided versions are also available.\nPetri dishes were traditionally reusable and made of glass; often of heat-resistant borosilicate glass for proper sterilization at 120\u2013160 \u00b0C.\nSince the 1960s, plastic dishes, usually disposable, are also common.\nThe dishes are often covered with a shallow transparent lid, resembling a slightly wider version of the dish itself. The lids of glass dishes are usually loose-fitting. Plastic dishes may have close-fitting covers that delay the drying of the contents. Alternatively, some glass or plastic versions may have small holes around the rim, or ribs on the underside of the cover, to allow for air flow over the culture and prevent water condensation.\nSome Petri dishes, especially plastic ones, feature rings and/or slots on their lids and bases so that they are less prone to sliding off one another when stacked or sticking to a smooth surface by suction.\nSmall dishes may have a protruding base that can be secured on a microscope stage for direct examination.\nSome versions may have grids printed on the bottom to help in measuring the density of cultures.\nA microplate is a single container with an array of flat-bottomed cavities, each being essentially a small Petri dish. It makes it possible to inoculate and grow dozens or hundreds of independent cultures of dozens of samples at the same time. Besides being much cheaper and convenient than separate dishes, the microplate is also more amenable to automated handling and inspection.\nSome plates are separated into different media known as biplates, triplates, and quadplates.\nUses.\nPetri dishes are widely used in biology to cultivate microorganisms such as bacteria, yeasts, and molds. It is most suited for organisms that thrive on a solid or semisolid surface. The culture medium is often an agar plate, a layer a few mm thick of agar or agarose gel containing whatever nutrients the organism requires (such as blood, salts, carbohydrates, amino acids) and other desired ingredients (such as dyes, indicators, and medicinal drugs). The agar and other ingredients are dissolved in warm water and poured into the dish and left to cool down. Once the medium solidifies, a sample of the organism is inoculated (\"plated\"). The dishes are then left undisturbed for hours or days while the organism grows, possibly in an incubator. They are usually covered, or placed upside-down, to lessen the risk of contamination from airborne spores. Virus or phage cultures require that a population of bacteria be grown in the dish first, which then becomes the culture medium for the viral inoculum.\nWhile Petri dishes are widespread in microbiological research, smaller dishes tend to be used for large-scale studies in which growing cells in Petri dishes can be relatively expensive and labor-intensive.\nPetri dishes can be used to visualize the location of contamination on surfaces, such as kitchen counters and utensils, clothing, food preparation equipment, or animal and human skin. For this application, the Petri dishes may be filled so that the culture medium protrudes slightly above the edges of the dish to make it easier to take samples on hard objects. Shallow Petri dishes prepared in this way are called Replicate Organism Detection And Counting (RODAC) plates and are available commercially.\nPetri dishes are also used for cell cultivation of isolated cells from eukaryotic organisms, such as in immunodiffusion studies, on solid agar or in a liquid medium.\nPetri dishes may be used to observe the early stages of plant germination, and to grow plants asexually from isolated cells.\nPetri dishes may be convenient enclosures to study the behavior of insects and other small animals.\nDue to their large open surface, Petri dishes are effective containers to evaporate solvents and dry out precipitates, either at room temperature or in ovens and desiccators.\nPetri dishes also make convenient temporary storage for samples, especially liquid, granular, or powdered ones, and small objects such as insects or seeds. Their transparency and flat profile allows the contents to be inspected with the naked eye, magnifying glass, or low-power microscope without removing the lid.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Petri dish is one of a small number of laboratory equipment items whose name entered popular culture. It is often used metaphorically, e.g. for a contained community that is being studied as if they were microorganisms in a biology experiment, or an environment where original ideas and enterprises may flourish.&lt;ref name=\"merriam-webster.com/dictionary/petridish\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nUnicode has a Petri dish emoji, \"\ud83e\uddeb\", which has the code point U+1F9EB (HTML entity \"&amp;#129515;\" or \"&amp;#x1F9EB;\", UTF-8 \"0xF0 0x9F 0xA7 0xAB\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "43943", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43943", "title": "Petri-dish", "text": ""}
