{"id": "30208", "revid": "48722824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30208", "title": "History of Turkmenistan", "text": "The history of Turkmenistan traditionally began with the arrival of Indo-European Iranian tribes around 2000 BC. Early tribes were nomadic or semi-nomadic due to the arid conditions of the region, preventing widespread adoption of agriculture. The steppe culture in Central Asia was an extension of a larger Eurasian series of horse cultures which spanned the entire spectrum of language families, including the Indo-Europeans and Turko-Mongol tradition groups. Some of the known early Iranian tribes included the Massagetae, the Scythians/Saka, and early Sogdia, who were most likely precursors of the Khwarazmians. Turkmenistan was a passing point for numerous migrations and invasions by tribes, which gravitated towards the settled regions of the south, including ancient Mesopotamia, Elam, and the Indus Valley Civilisation.\nThe region's written history begins with the region's conquest by the Achaemenid Empire of Ancient Iran, as the region was divided between the satraps of Margiana, Chorasmia and Parthia. Later conquerors included Alexander the Great, the Parni, Hephthalites, Iranian Huns, G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks, Sarmatians, and Sassanid Iranians. During this early phase of history, the majority of Turkmenistan's inhabitants were adherents of Zoroastrianism and Buddhism, and the region was largely dominated by Iranian peoples. These incursions and epochs, though pivotal, did not shape the region's history as the invasions of two later invading groups: Arabs and the Oghuz Turks. The vast majority of inhabitants were converted to Hanifism, while the Oghuz brought the beginnings of the Turkic Turkmen language that came to dominate the area. The Turkic period was a time of cultural fusion and growth, as Islamic traditions brought by the Arabs merged with local Iranian cultures, and the city of Merv became a centre of commerce, science, and innovation, being an influential capital of several Islamic caliphates. The cultural landscape of Turkmenistan was further altered by Turkic invaders and rulers such as the Seljuks. Genghis Khan and Mongol invasions devastated the region during the late Middle Ages, but their hold upon the area was transitional as Timur Leng and Uzbeks later contested the land.\nModern Turkmenistan was radically transformed by the invasion of the Russian Empire, which conquered and annexed the region in the late 19th century. Later, the Russian Revolution of 1917 would ultimately transform Turkmenistan from an Islamic and nomadic tribal society to an industrialized and urbanist Leninist socialist republic during the Soviet era. Independence came in 1991, as Saparmurat Niyazov, a former member of the local branch of the CPSU, declared himself the absolute president for life, taking up the title Turkmenbashi, also known as the \"Leader of the Turkmen\", and transformed the newly independent Turkmenistan into a totalitarian conservative dictatorship under his absolute rule. Turkmenistan has thus far been unable to significantly democratize itself, unlike most of the other former Soviet Republics, and Niyazov ruled the country until his death on December 21, 2006. He was succeeded by Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow in an election devoid of meaningful political competition and opposition, and Berdymuhamedow reversed many policies by Niyazov that were considered eccentric, including Niyazov's pervasive cult of personality and the country's near total international and socioeconomic isolation, passing several economic reforms and making limited moves towards a multi-party system, although each party represented in the legislative body was under the regime's direct oversight, and open dissent against the government still faced widespread repression. Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow was later succeeded by his son Serdar Berdimuhamedow after he stepped down from political office in March 2022, establishing a de facto political dynasty.\nAncient history.\nScant remains point to early human settlements east of the Caspian Sea, possibly including Neanderthals, although the archaeology of the region as a whole is under researched.\nBronze Age and Iron Age finds support the probability of advanced civilizations in the area including finds associated with a society known to the scholars as the Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC) \u2013 near the modern cities of Mary (previously Merv), Djeitun and Gonur Depe.\nBy 2000 BCE, Indo-European peoples had settled throughout the region. Most of the present-day Turkmenistan was occupied by BMAC-related societies and the Dahae (also known as the Daae, Dah\u0101, Daoi and similar names) \u2013 a tribal confederation located immediately east of the Caspian. The Massagetae and Scythians were also present, immediately north of BMAC and the Dahae.\nAlexander the Great conquered the territory in the 4th century BC on his way to South Asia. In 330 BC, Alexander marched northward into Central Asia and founded the city of Alexandria near the Murghab River. Located on an important trade route, Alexandria later became the city of Merv. The ruins of Alexander's ancient city are still to be found and have been extensively researched. After Alexander's death his empire quickly fell apart. It was ruled by Seleucids before the satrap of Parthia declared independence. The Parthians \u2013 fierce, nomadic warriors from the north of Iran \u2013 then established the kingdom of Parthia, which covered present-day Turkmenistan and Iran. The Parthian kings ruled their domain from the city of Nisa \u2013 an area now located near the modern-day capital of Ashgabat \u2013 founded by Arsaces I (reigned c. 250\u2013211 BC), and was reputedly the royal necropolis of the Parthian kings, although it has neither been established that the fortress at Nisa was a royal residence nor a mausoleum.\nExcavations at Nisa have revealed substantial buildings, mausoleums and shrines, many inscribed documents, and a looted treasury. Many Hellenistic art works have been uncovered, as well as a large number of ivory rhytons, the outer rims decorated with Iranian subjects or classical mythological scenes.\nDuring the 4th to early 7th century CE, much of the population was already in settlements around the fertile river valleys along the Amu Darya, and Merv and Nisa became centers of sericulture (the raising of silkworms). A busy caravan route, connecting Tang dynasty China and the city of Baghdad (in modern Iraq), passed through Merv. Thus, the city of Merv constituted an important prize for any conqueror.\nArab conquests and Islamization.\nCentral Asia came under Arab control after a series of invasions in the late 7th and early 8th centuries and was incorporated into Islamic Caliphate divided between provinces of \"Mawara'un Nahr\" and Khorasan. The Arab conquest brought the religion of Islam to all of the peoples of central Asia. The city of Merv was occupied by the lieutenants of the caliph Uthman ibn Affan, and was constituted as the capital of Khorasan. Using this city as their base, the Arabs, led by their commander Qutayba ibn Muslim, brought under subjection Balkh, Bukhara, Fergana and Kashgaria, and penetrated into China as far as the province of Gansu early in the 8th century.\nMerv achieved some political spotlight in February 748 when Abu Muslim (d. 750) declared a new Abbasid dynasty at Merv, and set out from the city to conquer Iran and Iraq and establish a new capital at Baghdad. Abu Muslim was famously challenged by the goldsmith of Merv to do the right thing and not make war on fellow Muslims. The goldsmith was put to death.\nIn the latter part of the 8th century Merv became obnoxious to Islam as the centre of heretical propaganda preached by al-Muqanna \"The Veiled Prophet of Khorasan\". Present Turkmenistan was ruled by Tahirids between 821 and 873. In 873, Arab rule in Central Asia came to an end as a result of the Saffarid conquest. During their dominion Merv, like Samarkand and Bokhara, was one of the great schools of learning, and the celebrated historian Yaqut studied in its libraries. Merv produced a number of scholars in various branches of knowledge, such as Islamic law, Hadith, history, literature, and the like. Several scholars have the name: Marwazi (\u0627\u0644\u0645\u0631\u0648\u0632\u064a) designating them as hailing from Merv. But Saffarid rule was brief and they were defeated by Samanid in 901. The Samanid dynasty weakened after the second half of the 10th century and Ghaznavids took present Turkmenistan in the 990s. But, they challenged with Seljuks, newcomers from north. Seljuks' decisive victory against them, present Turkmenistan was passed to them in 1041.\nOghuz tribes.\nThe origins of the Turkmen may be traced back to the Oghuz confederation of nomadic pastoral tribes of the early Middle Ages, who lived in present-day Mongolia and around Lake Baikal in present-day southern Siberia. This confederation was composed of Turkic-speaking peoples who formed the basis of powerful steppe empires in Inner Asia. In the second half of the 8th century, Oghuz components migrated through Jungaria into Central Asia, and Arabic sources located them under the term Guzz in the area of the middle and lower Syrdariya in the 8th century. By the 10th century, the Oghuz had expanded west and north of the Aral Sea and into the steppe of present-day Kazakhstan, absorbing not only Iranians but also Turks from the Kipchak and Karluk ethnolinguistic groups. In the 11th century, the Muslim Turk scholar Mahmud al-Kashgari described the language of the Oghuz and Turkmen as distinct from that of other Turks and identified twenty-two Oghuz clans or sub-tribes, some of which appear in later Turkmen genealogies and legends as the core of the early Turkmen.\nIn Old Turkic inscriptions, there are references to several Oghuz groups like simply \"Oghuz\", \"\u00dc\u00e7-Oghuz\" (\"three-Oghuz\"; possibly Karluks), \"Alt\u0131-Oghuz\" (\"six-Oghuz\"), \"Sekiz-Oghuz\" (\"eight-Oghuz\"), possibly *\"Otuz Oghuz\" (\"Thirty Oghuz\"), and the Tiele-affiliated Toquz Oghuz (\"nine-Oghuz\") (Chinese: \u4e5d\u59d3 Jiu Xing \"Nine Surnames\") in different areas in the vicinity of the Altai Mountains. Despite, the similarity of names, the Toquz Oghuz confederation, from whom emerged the founders of the Uyghur Khaganate, was distinct from the Transoxianan Oghuz Turks who'd later found the Oghuz Yabgu State: for instances, Istakhri and Muhammad ibn Muhmad al-Tusi kept the Toquz Oghuz and Oghuz distinct and Ibn al-Faqih mentioned \"the infidel Turk-Oghuz, the Toquz-Oghuz, and the Qarluq\" Even so, Golden notes the confusion in Latter G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks' and Uyghurs' inscriptions, where Oghuz apparently referred to Toquz Oghuz or another tribal grouping, who were also named Oghuz without a prefixed numeral; this confusion is also reflected in Sharaf al-Zaman al-Marwazi, who listed 12 Oghuz tribes, who were ruled by a \"Toquz Khaqan\" and some of whom were Toquz-Oghuz, on the border of Transoxiana and Khwarazm. At most, the Oghuz were possibly led by a core group of Toquz Oghuz clans or tribes. Likewise, Karluks and Oghuz Turks were distinct even though both were known as Turkmens in the 11th century; yet much later, Ilkhanate politician Rashid al-Din Hamadani in his \"Jami' al-tawarikh\" mentions Karluks as of the Oghuz (Turkmen) tribes.\nOghuz expansion by means of military campaigns went at least as far as the Volga River and Ural Mountains, but the geographic limits of their dominance fluctuated in the steppe areas extending north and west from the Aral Sea. Accounts of Arab geographers and travelers portray the Oghuz ethnic group as lacking centralized authority and being governed by a number of \"kings\" and \"chieftains.\" Because of their disparate nature as a polity and the vastness of their domains, Oghuz tribes rarely acted in concert. Hence, by the late 10th century, the bonds of their confederation began to loosen. At that time, a clan leader named Seljuk founded a dynasty and the empire that bore his name on the basis of those Oghuz elements that had migrated southward into present-day Turkmenistan and Iran. The Seljuk Empire was centered in Persia, from which Oghuz groups spread into Azerbaijan and Anatolia.\nAfter the fall of G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk kingdom, Oghuz tribes migrated to the area of Transoxiana, in western Turkestan, in modern Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan. This land became known as the \"Oghuz steppe\" which is an area between the Caspian and Aral seas. Ibn al-Athir, an Arab historian, stated that the Oghuz Turks had come to Transoxiana in the period of the caliph Al-Mahdi in the years between 775 and 785. In the period of the Abbasid caliph Al-Ma'mun (813\u2013833), the name Oghuz starts to appear in the Islamic historiography. By 780 AD, the eastern parts of the Syr Darya were ruled by the Karluk Turks and the western region (Oghuz steppe) was ruled by the Oghuz Turks.\nThe name Turkmen first appears in written sources of the 10th century to distinguish those Oghuz groups who migrated south into the Seljuk domains and accepted Islam from those that had remained in the steppe. Gradually, the term took on the properties of an ethnonym and was used exclusively to designate Muslim Oghuz, especially those who migrated away from the Syrdariya Basin. By the 13th century, the term Turkmen supplanted the designation Oghuz altogether. The origin of the word Turkmen remains unclear. According to popular etymologies as old as the 11th century, the word derives from Turk plus the Iranian element manand, and means \"resembling a Turk.\" Modern scholars, on the other hand, have proposed that the element man /men acts as an intensifier and have translated the word as \"pure Turk\" or \"most Turk-like of the Turks.\"\nSeljuks.\nIn the 11th century, Seljuk domains stretched from the delta of the Amu Darya delta into Iran, Iraq, the Caucasus region, Syria, and Asia Minor. In 1040 the Seljuk Turks crossed the Oxus from the north, and having defeated Masud, sultan of Ghazni, raised Toghrul Beg, grandson of Seljuk, to the throne of Iran, founding the Seljukid dynasty, with its capital at Nishapur. A younger brother of Toghrul, Daud, took possession of Merv and Herat. Toghrul was succeeded by his nephew Alp Arslan (the Great Lion), who was buried at Merv. It was about this time that Merv reached the zenith of her glory. In 1055 Seljuk forces entered Baghdad, becoming masters of the Islamic heartlands and important patrons of Islamic institutions. Until these revolts, Turkmen tribesmen were an integral part of the Seljuk military forces. Turkmen migrated with their families and possessions on Seljuk campaigns into Azerbaijan and Anatolia, a process that began the Turkification of these areas. During this time, Turkmen also began to settle the area of present-day Turkmenistan. Prior to the Turkmen habitation, most of this desert had been uninhabited, while the more habitable areas along the Caspian Sea, Kopetdag Mountains, Amu Darya, and Marghab River (Murgap Deryasy) were populated predominantly by Iranians. The city-state of Merv was an especially large sedentary and agricultural area, important as both a regional economic-cultural center and a transit hub on the Silk Road. The last powerful Seljuk ruler, Sultan Ahmad Sanjar (d. 1157), witnessed the fragmentation and destruction of the empire because of attacks by Turkmen and other tribes. During the reign of Sultan Sanjar or Sinjar of the same house, in the middle of the 11th century, Merv was overrun by the Turkish tribes of the Ghuzz from beyond the Oxus. It eventually passed under the sway of the rulers of Khwarizm (Khiva). After mixing with the settled peoples in Turkmenistan, the Oguz living north of the Kopet-Dag Mountains gradually became known as the Turkmen.\nThe Seljuk empire broke down in the second half of the 12th century, and the Turkmen became independent tribal federation.\nMongols and Timurids.\nIn 1157, the rule of Seljuks dynasty came to an end in the province of Khorasan. The Turkic rulers of Khiva took control of the area of Turkmenistan, under the title of Khwarazmshahs in 1221, central Asia suffered a disastrous invasion by Mongol warriors who swept across the region from their base in eastern Asia.\nUnder their commander, Genghis Khan, founder of the Mongol Empire, the Mongols conquered Khwarezm and burned the city of Merv to the ground. The Mongol leader ordered the massacre of Merv's inhabitants as well as the destruction of the province's farms and irrigation works which effectively ended the Iranian dominance in urban areas and agricultural communities of khwarezm. These areas were soon repopulated by the Turkmen who survived the invasion and had retreated northward to the plains of Kazakhstan or westward to the shores of the Caspian Sea. After the division of the Mongol Empire, present Turkmenistan was passed to Chagatai Khanate except southernmost part was belonged to Ilkhanate.\nSmall, semi-independent states arose under the rule of the region's tribal chiefs later in the 14th century. In the 1370s, Amir Timur (also known as Tamerlane), one of the greatest conquerors in human history, captured Turkmen states once more and established the short lived Timurid Empire, which collapsed after Timur's death in 1405, when Turkmens became independent once again.\nNew political arrangements.\nAs a whole, the 14th to 16th centuries was a period in which the Turkmen's dislocation due to the Mongol invasions gave way to new political groupings which became tribal groupings which have continued to modern day.\nIn addition to the new political arrangements, historical sources suggest that a large tribal union called the Salor confederation remained from the original Oghuz tribes and into modern times. In the late 17th century, the confederation fell apart and three senior tribes moved eastward and then southward. Of these tribes, the Yomud split into eastern and western groups, and the Teke migrated to the Ahal region near the Kopetdag Mountains and eventually into the Marghab River basin. Other Salor tribes moved into the region near the Amu Darya delta and into other parts of modern-day southeast Turkmenistan. Salor groups also live in Turkey, Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and China.\nTurkmenistan in the 16th and 17th centuries.\nThe history of Turkmenistan from the 16th until the 19th century is mostly known by the relations with the states of Iran, Khiva, Bukhara, and Afghanistan. Wars of the period took place mostly in the lands of Turkmenistan. The invasion of the Khan of Khiva, Abul Gazi Bahadur Khan, from 1645 to 1663, caused some difficulties to the Turkmens, coupled with the impact of the drought that occurred at about the same period, most of the Turkmens within the khanate moved to areas around Ahal, Atrek, Murgap and Tejen. In this period, many of the Turkmens tribes living around the Aral Sea also migrated because of pressures from both the Khiva Khanate and the Kalmyks, and migrated to Astrakhan and Stavropol in the northern Caucasus.\nPopular epics such as Koroglu, and other oral traditions, took shape during this period which could be taken as a beginning of Turkmen nation. The poets and thinkers of the time such as Devlet Mehmed Azadi and Magtymguly Pyragy became a voice for an emerging nation, calling for unity, brotherhood and peace among Turkmen tribes. Magtymguly Pyragy is venerated in Turkmenistan as the father of national literature. Most of present Turkmenistan was divided between Khanates of Khiva and Bukhara except southernmost parts were handed to Persia. Nader, Shah of Persia, conquered it in 1740 but after his assassination in 1747, Turkmen lands were recaptured by Uzbek khanates of Khiva and Bukhara. During the 1830s, the Teke Turkmen, then living on the Tejen River, were forced by the Persians to migrate northward. Khiva contested the advance of the Tekes, but ultimately, about 1856, the latter became the sovereign power of southern and southeastern parts of present Turkmenistan.\nRussian colonization and Great Game.\nIn the 18th century Turkoman tribes came into contact with Tsarist Empire. The Russian Empire began to move into the area in 1869 with the establishment of the Caspian Sea port of Krasnovodsk, present-day Turkmenbashy. After the subjugation of the Emirate of Bukhara (1868) and the Khanate of Khiva (1873), the Turkmen area remained independent. Russians decided to move into Transcaspian region, allegedly to subdue Turkmen slave trade and banditry. Turkmen tribal groups were the providers of the Khivan slave trade and the Bukhara slave trade, performing regular slave raids called \"alaman\" toward Russian and German settlers along the Ural, and Persian pilgrims to Mashad, two categories who as Christians and Shia-Muslims respectively were seen as religiously legitimate to target for enslavement in the Sunni Muslim Khiva and Bukhara. The service of some Turkmen tribes, especially the Yomut, for the Khivan Khan also encouraged the Russia to punish them by raids into Khwarazm, which killed hundreds. These wars culminated in the Battle of Geok Tepe in 1881, where General Skobelev massacred 7,000 Turkmens at the desert fortress of Geok Depe, near modern Ashgabat; another 8,000 were killed trying to flee across the desert. In September of that year, Qajar Iran signed the treaty of Akhal with Imperial Russia which officially recognized the territory that today incorporates modern Turkmenistan as part of the Russian Empire.\nBy 1894, Imperial Russia had taken control of almost all of Turkmenistan except around part of Konye-Urgench was in Khiva and around part of Charju was in the Emirate of Bukhara.\nThe Transcaspian Railway was started from the shores of the Caspian in 1879 in order to secure Russian control over the region and provide a rapid military route to the Afghan border. In 1885 a crisis was precipitated by the Russian annexation of the Pandjeh oasis, to the south of Merv, on a territory of modern Afghanistan, which nearly led to war with Britain. as it was thought that the Russians were planning to march on to Herat in Afghanistan. Until 1898 Transcaspia was part of the Governor-Generalship of the Caucasus and administered from Tiflis, but in that year it was made an Oblast of Russian Turkestan and governed from Tashkent. Nevertheless, Turkestan remained an isolated colonial outpost, with an administration that preserved many distinctive features from the previous Islamic regimes, including Qadis' courts and a 'native' administration that devolved much power to local 'Aksakals' (Elders). In 1897 the Transcaspian Railway reached Tashkent, and finally in 1906 a direct rail link with European Russia was opened across the steppe from Orenburg to Tashkent. This led to much larger numbers of Slavic settlers flowing into Turkestan than had hitherto been the case, and their settlement was overseen by a specially created Migration Department in St. Petersburg (\u041f\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0441\u0435\u043b\u0435\u043d\u0447\u0435\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0435 \u0423\u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u043b\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0435). This caused considerable discontent amongst the local Turkmen population, as mainly Russian-populated cities such as Ashgabat appeared.\nThe best-known Military Governor to have ruled the region from Ashkhabad was probably General Kuropatkin, whose authoritarian methods and personal style of governance made the province very difficult for his successors to control and led to a revolt in 1916. Consequently, the administration of Transcaspia became a byword for corruption and brutality within Russian Turkestan, as Russian administrators turned their districts into petty fiefdoms and extorted money from the local population. In 1908 Count Konstantin Konstantinovich Pahlen led a reforming commission to Turkestan which produced a monumental report detailing these abuses of power, administrative corruption and inefficiency.\nRevolution and civil war.\nFollowing the October Revolution of 1917 in Russia, Ashgabat became a base for anti-Bolshevik counter-revolutionaries, who soon came under attack from the Tashkent Soviet. The Communists succeeded in taking control of Ashkhabad in the summer of 1918, forming a Soviet. In response, Junaid Khan and forces loyal to the Czarist government joined together to drive out the Communists. In July 1919, these anti-Communist allies established the independent state of Transcaspia. A small British force, led by General Wilfrid Malleson, from Meshed (Persia) occupied Ashgabat and parts of southern Turkmenistan until 1919. It is alleged that 26 Baku Commissars were gunned down by British forces or their Transcaspian allies. The region was one of the last centres of Basmachi resistance to Bolshevik rule, with the last of the rebellious Turkoman fleeing across the border to Afghanistan and Iran in 1922\u201323.\nSoviet Union.\nOn 27 October 1924, the Turkestan ASSR was dissolved. In accordance with the decree of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR and the Turkmen SSR, it became one of the republics of the Soviet Union. At this time the modern borders of Turkmenistan were formed. The Turkmen Government renamed Ashgabat into Poltoratsk after a local revolutionary, however the name \"Ashgabat\" was restored in 1927. In February 1925, the Turkmenistan Communist Party held its first Congress in Ashkhabad. From this period onward the city experienced rapid growth and industrialisation, although it was severely disrupted by the October 1948 Ashgabat earthquake. With an estimated surface wave magnitude of 7.3, the earthquake killed 10,000\u2013110,000. According to other local sources, two-thirds of a population of 176,000 inhabitants perished.\nIn the 1950s, the 1,375 kilometre long Qaraqum Canal was built. Draining the Amu Darya river, it enabled huge areas to be opened for cotton production. It also greatly diminished the inflow of water to the Aral Sea, resulting in an ecological catastrophe.\nTurkmenistan was not among the most economically developed Soviet republics, with a largely agrarian economy. This is despite exploration and exploitation of enormous oil and gas resources \u2013 discovery of 62 trillion cubic feet Dauletabad gas field in the 1960s became the largest gas field find in the world outside Russia and Middle East.\nIndependence and Turkmenbashi.\nIndependent country and the Commonwealth.\nPost-Soviet countries have signed a series of treaties and agreements to settle the legacy of the former Soviet Union multilaterally and bilaterally.\nTurkmenistan became independent on October 27, 1991, amidst the dissolution of the Soviet Union (commemorated annually). The former head of Turkmenistan's Communist Party at the time of independence, Saparmurat Niyazov, was elected president of the newly independent nation in an uncontested election. At the 25th Congress of the Communist Party of Turkmenistan in the autumn of 1991, the party decided to dissolve itself, a process that continued into 1992. In its place, the Turkmenistan Democratic Party (TDP) was organized, and on December 16, 1991, Saparmurat Niyazov, who was elected President of Turkmenistan in October 1990, signed a decree officially conferring TDP membership on former TCP members.\nThe authoritarian Niyazov, who has assumed the title of \"Turkmenbashi\", or \"Leader of all Turkmen\", was accused of developing a totalitarian cult of personality. His opus, the \"Ruhnama\", was made a mandatory reading in Turkmenistan's schools and months of the calendar were renamed after members of his family. Opposition parties are banned in Turkmenistan and the government controls all sources of information. In December 1999, Turkmenistan's constitution was amended to allow Niyazov to serve as president for life.\nNiyazov was the main proponent of Turkmenistan's constitutional neutrality. Under this policy, Turkmenistan does not participate in any military alliance and does not contribute to United Nations monitoring forces. This in fact means an internal isolation of Turkmenistan from world politics.\nIn late 2004, Niyazov met with former Canadian prime minister Jean Chr\u00e9tien to discuss an oil contract in Turkmenistan for a Canadian corporation. In March 2005, news of this meeting caused an uproar amongst opposition circles in Canada, who claimed the affair could damage Chr\u00e9tien's legacy.\nIn 2005, Niyazov announced that his country would downgrade its links with the Commonwealth of Independent States, a loose alliance of post-Soviet states. He furthermore promised free and fair elections by 2010 in a move that surprised many Western observers.\nDeath of Niyazov.\nNiyazov acknowledged having heart disease in November 2006. On December 21, 2006, Niyazov died unexpectedly, leaving no heir-apparent and an unclear line of succession. A former deputy prime minister rumored to be the illegitimate son of Niyazov,http:// Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow, became acting president. Under the constitution the Chairman of the People's Council, \u00d6wezgeldi Ata\u00fdew, should have succeeded to the post. Ata\u00fdew was accused of crimes and removed from office.\nSince 2006.\nIn an election on February 11, 2007, Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow was elected president with 89% of the vote and 95% turnout, although the election was condemned by outside observers.http://\nFollowing his election, Berdimuhamedow moved to reduce foreign isolation and reversed some of Niyazov's more egocentric and damaging policies. Internet cafes offering free and uncensored Web access opened in Ashgabat, compulsory education was extended from nine to ten years and classes in sports and foreign languages were re-introduced into the curriculum, and the government announced plans to open several specialized schools for the arts. President Berdimuhamedow has called for reform of education, health care and pension systems, and government officials of non-Turkmen ethnic origin who had been sacked by Niyazov have returned to work.\nPresident Berdimuhamedow began to reduce the personality cult surrounding Niyazov and the office of the president. He called for an end to the elaborate pageants of music and dancing that formerly greeted the president on his arrival anywhere, and said that the Turkmen \"sacred oath\", part of which states that the speaker's tongue should shrivel if he ever speaks ill of Turkmenistan or its president, should not be recited multiple times a day but reserved for \"special occasions.\" Previously the oath was recited at the beginning and end of TV news reports, by students at the beginning of the school day, and at the beginning of virtually all meetings of any official nature that took place in the country.\nHowever, Berdimuhamedow is criticized for building a personality cult of his own (albeit a modest one compared to his predecessor's). For example, he is the only person whose first name is used in government press releases; other officials always have their first names abbreviated to a single letter. He is also sometimes called the \"Turkmen leader\" by his country's press. Additionally, while his regime is somewhat less heavy-handed than Niyazov's, it is still rigidly authoritarian.\nOn March 19, 2007, Berdimuhamedow reversed one of Niyazov's most unpopular decrees by giving pensions back to 100,000 elderly people whose pensions Niyazov had slashed in the face of an unspecified budget crisis.\nOn March 20, in a decision of significant symbolic weight in the ongoing rejection of Niyazov's personality cult, he abolished the power of the president to rename any landmarks, institutions, or cities.\nOn March 31, 2007, the 20th Congress of the Halk Maslahaty began in the city of Mary. New laws relating to agricultural efficiency were passed, and it was decreed that school teachers' wages would soon rise by 40%.\nOn May 12, Russia and Turkmenistan announced that they had reached an agreement to build a new natural gas pipeline from Turkmenistan to Russia, via Kazakhstan. This has led to speculation that the European Union will become more energy-dependent on Russia, which buys Turkmen gas at below-market prices, and that as a result Russia's political influence in Eastern Europe may increase.\nOn May 16, in what was described as one of his boldest moves up to that time, Berdimuhamedow sacked a high-ranking security official who had been instrumental in building and maintaining the late president Niyazov's extensive cult of personality. According to official Turkmen news media, Akmyrat Rejepow, the head of the presidential security service, was removed from office by presidential decree and transferred to \"another job.\" The nature of this job was not specified.\nOn June 14, Berdimuhamedow re-opened the Turkmen Academy of Sciences, which had been shut down by his predecessor. According to reports, as of June 25 Berdimuhamedow had also ordered the closure of the International Fund of Saparmurat Niyazov, the former Turkmenbashi's personal private fund, and stated his intent to begin a series of reforms in the military.\nBerdimuhamedow celebrated his 50th birthday on June 29, 2007. He was awarded the Watan Order (Order of the Motherland) for his \"outstanding achievements\" \u2013 a gold and diamond pendant weighing about 1 kilogram. The President also published his biography and held a gala birthday celebration. The government also issued 400 gold and silver coins decorated with the president's portrait.\nIn 2008, Berdimuhamedow restored the Latin-based names of the months and traditional Persian and Turkic days of the week (Niyazov had renamed them after himself and his mother, among other things), and announced plans to move the infamous gold rotating statue of Niyazov from Ashgabat's central square. He has not, however, moved toward Western-style democracy.\nIn September 2008, a new constitution was accepted by the People's Council. Parliamentary elections under this new constitution were held on December 14, 2008.\nIn December 2008, Berdimuhamedow announced changes to the national anthem, which involved removing the repeated references to former President Niyazov. The new version was to take effect on December 21, the second anniversary of Niyazov's death.\nIn February 2017, president Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov was re-elected for a third term in office, after receiving 97.69 percent of all votes according to official results, following a tightly controlled and largely ceremonial election. He continued to rule as authoritarian strongman.\nOn 19 March 2022, Serdar Berdimuhamedov was sworn in as Turkmenistan's new president to succeed his father. He was declared the winner of the March 12 presidential election.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30209", "revid": "48607067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30209", "title": "Geography of Turkmenistan", "text": " \nTurkmenistan is a landlocked country in Central Asia, bordering the Caspian Sea to the west, Iran and Afghanistan to the south, Uzbekistan to the north-east, and Kazakhstan to the north-west. It is the southernmost republic of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the loose federation created at the end of 1991 by most of the post-Soviet states.\nThe geographic coordinates are between 35\u00b008' and 42\u00b048' north latitude, 52\u00b027' and 66\u00b041' east longitude. Its longest border is with the Caspian Sea (). The other borders are with Iran (to the south, ), Afghanistan (to the south, ), Uzbekistan (to the north and east, ) and Kazakhstan (to the north, ). Turkmenistan is slightly larger than Cameroon in territory, occupying . By area, Turkmenistan ranks fourth among the former Soviet republics, after Russia, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine. The country's greatest extent from west to east is , and its greatest north-to-south distance is .\nPhysical features.\nTerrain of Turkmenistan consists of a flat-to-rolling sandy desert, the Karakum, with its dunes slowly rising to the south; by the time they reach the border with Iran, they become the mountains known as the Kopet Dag. The Caspian Sea washes the western shores of this mostly arid country.\nTurkmenistan's average elevation is above sea level, with its highest point being Mount A\u00fdrybaba () in the K\u00f6\u00fdtendag Range of the Pamir-Alay chain in the south-east, and its lowest point being the Akjaga\u00fda Depression in Sarygamysh Lake, close to below sea level (the actual water level in Sarygamysh Lake fluctuates widely from \u2013110 m at its shallowest to \u201360 m (). Mount Arlan rises sharply above sea level in the Great Balkan Range in western Turkmenistan (Balkan Province), and has a topographical prominence only slightly shorter than its height. Nearly 80% of the republic lies within the Turan Depression, which slopes from south to north and from east to west.\nTurkmenistan's mountains include of the northern reaches of the Kopet Dag Range, which it shares with Iran. The Kopet Dag Range is a region characterized by foothills, dry and sandy slopes, mountain plateaus, and steep ravines; Mount \u015eah\u015fah (), also known as Mount Rizeh, southwest of Ashgabat, is the highest elevation of the Kopet Dag Range in Turkmenistan. The Kopet Dag is undergoing tectonic transformation, meaning that the region is threatened by earthquakes such as the one that destroyed Ashgabat in 1948. The Krasnovodsk and \u00dcst\u00fdurt plateaus are the prominent topographical features of northwestern Turkmenistan.\nA dominant feature of the republic's landscape is the Garagum Desert (also known as Karakum), which occupies about . Shifting winds create desert mountains that range from in height and may be several kilometers in length. Chains of such structures are common, as are steep elevations and smooth, concrete-like clay deposits formed by the rapid evaporation of flood waters in the same area for a number of years. Large marshy salt flats, formed by capillary action in the soil, exist in many depressions, including the Gara\u015for, which occupies in the northwest. The Sandykly Desert west of the Amu Darya river is the southernmost extremity of the Qizilqum Desert, most of which lies in Uzbekistan to the northeast.\nClimate.\nTurkmenistan has a cold desert climate that is severely continental. Summers are long (from May through September), hot, and dry, while winters generally are mild and dry, although occasionally cold and damp in the north. Most precipitation falls between January and May; precipitation is slight throughout the country, with annual averages ranging from in the Kopet Dag to in the northwest. The capital, Ashgabat, close to the Iranian border in south-central Turkmenistan, averages of rainfall annually. Average annual temperatures range from in Ashgabat to in Da\u015foguz, on the Uzbek border in north-central Turkmenistan. The almost constant winds are northerly, northeasterly, or westerly.\nOn 28 July 1983, Repetek Biosphere State Reserve, south of T\u00fcrkmenabat, recorded a temperature of , which is the highest temperature to have ever been recorded in Turkmenistan.\nHydrological conditions.\nAlmost 80% of the territory of Turkmenistan lacks a constant source of surface water flow. Its main rivers are located only in the southern and eastern peripheries; a few smaller rivers on the northern slopes of the Kopetdag are diverted entirely to irrigation. The most important river is the Amu Darya, which has a total length of from its farthest tributary, making it the longest river in Central Asia. The Amu Darya flows across northeastern Turkmenistan, thence eastward to form the southern borders of Uzbekistan and Tajikistan. Damming and irrigation uses of the Amu Darya have had severe environmental effects on the Aral Sea, into which the river flows. The river's average annual flow is . Other major rivers are the Tejen (); the Murgab (); and the Atrek ().\nEnvironmental issues.\nBackground.\nSince the dissolution of the Soviet Union, environmental regulation is largely unchanged in Turkmenistan. The new government created the Ministry of Natural Resources Use and Environmental Protection in July\u00a01992, with departments responsible for environmental protection, protection of flora and fauna, forestry, hydrometeorology, and administrative planning. Like other CIS republics, Turkmenistan has established an Environmental Fund based on revenues collected from environmental fines, but the fines generally are too low to accumulate significant revenue. Thanks to the former Soviet system of game preserves and the efforts of the Society for Nature Conservation and the Academy of Sciences, flora and fauna receive some protection in the republic; however, \"hard-currency hunts\" by wealthy Western and Arab foreigners already are depleting animals on preserves.\nCurrent environmental issues.\nContamination of soil and groundwater with agricultural chemicals, pesticides; salination, water-saturation of soil due to poor irrigation methods; Caspian Sea pollution; diversion of a large share of the flow of the Amu Darya into irrigation contributes to that river's inability to replenish the Aral Sea; desertification\nDesertification.\nAccording to estimates, as a result of desertification processes and pollution, biological productivity of the ecological systems in Turkmenistan has declined by 30% to 50% in recent decades. The Karakum and Kyzyl Kum deserts are expanding at a rate surpassed on a planetary scale only by the desertification process in the Sahara and Sahel regions of Africa. Between 8,000 and 10,000\u00a0km2 of new desert now appears each year in Central Asia.\nThe most irreparable type of desertification is the salinization process that forms marshy salt flats. A major factor that contributes to these conditions is inefficient use of water because of weak regulation and failure to charge for water that is used. Efficiency in application of water to the fields is low, but the main problem is leakage in main and secondary canals, especially Turkmenistan's main canal, the Karakum Canal. Nearly half of the canal's water seeps out into lakes and salt swamps along its path. Excessive irrigation brings salts to the surface, forming salt marshes that dry into unusable clay flats. In 1989 Turkmenistan's Institute for Desert Studies claimed that the area of such flats had reached .\nThe type of desertification caused by year-round pasturing of cattle has been termed the most devastating in Central Asia, with the gravest situations in Turkmenistan and the Kazakh steppe along the eastern and northern coasts of the Caspian Sea. Wind erosion and desertification also are severe in settled areas along the Garagum Canal; planted windbreaks have died because of soil water-saturation and / or salinization. Other factors promoting desertification are the inadequacy of the collector-drainage system built in the 1950s and inappropriate application of chemicals.\nThe Aral Sea.\nTurkmenistan both contributes to and suffers from the consequences of the desiccation of the Aral Sea. Because of excessive irrigation, Turkmen agriculture contributes to the steady drawdown of sea levels. In turn, the Aral Sea's desiccation, which had shrunk that body of water by an estimated by 1994, profoundly affects economic productivity and the health of the population of the republic. Besides the cost of ameliorating damaged areas and the loss of at least part of the initial investment in them, salinization and chemicalization of land have reduced agricultural productivity in Central Asia by an estimated 20\u201325%. Poor drinking water is the main health risk posed by such environmental degradation. In Dashhowuz Province, which has suffered the greatest ecological damage from the Aral Sea's desiccation, bacteria levels in drinking water exceeded ten times the sanitary level; 70% of the population has experienced illnesses, many with hepatitis, and infant mortality is high. Experts have warned that inhabitants will have to evacuate the province by the end of the century unless a comprehensive cleanup program is undertaken. Turkmenistan has announced plans to clean up some of the Aral Sea fallout with financial support from the World Bank.\nChemical pollution.\nThe most productive cotton lands in Turkmenistan (the middle and lower Amu Darya and the Murgap oasis) receive as much as 250\u00a0kilograms of fertilizer per hectare (), compared with the average application of . Furthermore, most fertilizers are so poorly applied that experts have estimated that only 15\u201340% of the chemicals can be absorbed by cotton plants, while the remainder washes into the soil, and subsequently into the groundwater. Cotton also uses far more pesticides and defoliants than other crops, and application of these chemicals often is mishandled by farmers. For example, local herdsmen, unaware of the danger of DDT, have reportedly mixed the pesticide with water and applied it to their faces to keep away mosquitoes. In the late 1980s, a drive began in Central Asia to reduce agrochemical usage. In Turkmenistan the campaign reduced fertilizer use 30% between 1988 and 1989. In the early 1990s, the use of some pesticides and defoliants declined drastically because of the country's shortage of hard currency.\nMethane leaks.\nThe value of methane leakage in 2019/20, a form of greenhouse gas emission, has been estimated as 6 billion USD.\n*total: \n**\"country rank in the world:\" 52nd\n*land: \n*water: \n* slightly larger than Cameroon\n* Australia comparative: slightly less than half the size of South Australia\n* Canada comparative: slightly larger than the Yukon\n* United Kingdom comparative: approximately twice the size of the United Kingdom\n* United States comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Wyoming\n* EU comparative: slightly smaller than Spain\n*total: \n**border countries: Afghanistan , Iran , Kazakhstan , Uzbekistan \n*0\u00a0km\n**Note: Turkmenistan borders the Caspian Sea. Its coastline with the Caspian Sea is .\n Border disputes with Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Iran\nResources.\nNatural resources: petroleum, natural gas, sulfur, salt\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\" 3.89%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\" 0.12%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\" 95.98% (2011)\nIrrigated land: (2006)\nTotal renewable water resources: (2011)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30210", "revid": "38313133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30210", "title": "Demographics of Turkmenistan", "text": "The Demographics of Turkmenistan is about the demographic features of the population of Turkmenistan, including population growth, population density, ethnicity, education level, health, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population. The ethnic majority in Turkmenistan call themselves Turkmen.\nDemographic trends.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 17 January 1939 census showed a population of 1,251,883, of which 741.5 thousand Turkmen, 232.9 thousand Russians, 107.4 thousand Uzbeks, 61.4 thousand Kazakhs, 19.5 thousand Tatars, 8,300 Iranians, 5,400 Baloch, and 75.5 thousand other nationalities. The population of Turkmenistan increased from 1.5 million in the 1959 census to 4.5 million in the 1995 census. The population continued growing to over 5 million in 2001\u20132006. According to opposition media, Turkmenistan's population in 2019 was no more than 3.3 million. As of July 2021, anonymous official sources informed opposition news media that the population of Turkmenistan had fallen to between 2.7 and 2.8 million.\nAccording to some sources, deteriorating economic conditions have led to massive emigration of Turkmenistanis to other countries in search of work, possibly as many as 1,879,413 between 2008 and 2018, inclusive. Primary destinations are Russia, Turkey, and Ukraine. Between 2013 and 2019, the number of emigrants to Russia from Turkmenistan doubled. As one consequence, in 2018 Turkmen authorities began barring some citizens, particularly those younger than 40 years of age, from leaving the country in an apparent effort to stem emigration.\nA once-in-a-decade national census was conducted 17\u201327 December 2022. Opposition media reported that many people claimed not to have been interviewed by census workers, or that census workers merely telephoned respondents, and did not visit them to count residents. According to the results of the 2022 census, the results of which were published in July 2023, the population of Turkmenistan was 7,057,841. However, offshore media disputed that figure, with one source claiming it came out of \"thin air\". Official population estimates are likely too high, given known emigration trends.\nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\nNote that vital statistics were not published after 1994 by TurkmenStat.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nLife expectancy.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic groups.\nThe table shows the ethnic composition of Turkmenistan's population (in percent) between 1926 and 2022. There has been a sharp decline in the Slavic ethnic groups (Russians and Ukrainians) and also Kazakhs and Tatars since independence (as captured in the 1979 and 1995 censuses). Uzbeks are now the second largest ethnic group in Turkmenistan, with Russians relegated to the third place. According to data announced in Ashgabat in February 2001, 91% of the population are Turkmen, 3% are Uzbeks, and 2% are Russians. Between 1989 and 2001 the number of Turkmen in Turkmenistan doubled (from 2.5 to 4.9 million), while the number of Russians dropped by two-thirds (from 334,000 to slightly over 100,000).\nAzerbaijanis in Turkmenistan.\nThe significant presence of Azerbaijanis in Turkmenistan dates from the early twentieth century. A massive influx of Azerbaijanis migrated to Turkmenistan due to the devastating 1902 Shamakhi earthquake.\nBeyler of Shamakhi settled mainly in Krasnovodsk and Ashgabad (now known as Turkmenbashi and Ashgabat respectively). The Beyler's wealth spurred a big \"investment boom\" in Turkestan (Turkmenistan). Beyler began to build new buildings by using modernized technological equipment. In a short time, a large number of hotels, houses, teahouses, caravanserais, mosques, madrasas, schools, and theaters were built.\nAzerbaijanis were also involved in the fight against the Bolsheviks. Azerbaijanis were found among the Basmachi fighters led by Enver Pasha, and some helped finance the movement. For decades, the fight against the colonial policy of Bolsheviks failed. Most of the members of Basmachi movement were killed in the battles of the independence of Turkestan, the other part were exiled to labor camps of Gulag.\nDuring the 70 years of Soviet rule, Azerbaijani Bays and warriors were declared as a national enemy and their names were erased from history books. Today they have been rehabilitated.\nAt the period of the collapse of the USSR, 36,000 Azerbaijanis lived in Turkmenistan, now their population has reached over 52,000.\nWhile living in Turkmenistan, Azerbaijanis have contributed to the culture and art of the country. Musical instruments such as Gaval, Nagara, Tar, Saz and Kamancheh have gained popularity in Turkmenistan, and Azerbaijani dishes like dovga, syabzi-frying, and sweet rice have become favorite dishes of Turkmenistanis. Today, the Azerbaijani community of Turkmenistan has its own mosques, musicians, and dancers.\nSome famous Azerbaijanis from Turkmenistan are: the chief of Baku City Executive Power Hajibala Abutalibov, Elnur Huseynov who represented Azerbaijan twice in the Eurovision Song Contest and the winner of The Voice of Turkey, singer Natavan Habibi, a well-known geologist Shamil Azizbayov, film director Ajdar Ibrahimov, national heroes of Azerbaijan Fakhraddin Musayev and Tahir Bagirov, the first woman in the oil industry, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs from 1959 to 1983. Tahira Tahirova also was born in Turkmenistan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30211", "revid": "1317715869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30211", "title": "Politics of Turkmenistan", "text": " \nThe politics of Turkmenistan nominally takes place in the framework of a presidential republic, whereby the President of Turkmenistan is nominally both head of state and head of government. However, as of 21 January 2023 a \"national leader\" was appointed who chairs an independent People's Council (\"viz.\") with authority to amend the constitution, and who exercises supreme political authority. No true opposition parties are allowed; every registered political party supports the third and current President Serdar Berdimuhamedow. The country is frequently described as a totalitarian state.\nPolitical background.\nAfter 69 years as part of the Soviet Union (including 67 years as a union republic), Turkmenistan declared its independence on 27 October 1991.\nPresident for life Saparmurat Niyazov, a former bureaucrat of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, ruled Turkmenistan from 1985, when he became head of the Communist Party of the Turkmen SSR, until his death in 2006. He ruled with totalitarian control over the country after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. On 28 December 1999 the Mejlis (parliament) declared Niyazov President for Life. (The Mejlis itself had taken office only a week earlier in elections that included only candidates hand-picked by President Niyazov; no opposition candidates were allowed.)\nPrior to 2008, the authorities permitted only a single political party, the Democratic Party of Turkmenistan. Political gatherings are illegal unless government sanctioned.\nAll citizens must carry internal passports, noting place of residence\u2014a practice carried over from the Soviet era. Movement into and out of the country, as well as within its borders, is difficult. Turkmenistan is dominated by a pervasive cult of personality extolling the late president Niyazov as T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy (\"Head Turkmen\"), a title he assumed in 1993. His face adorned many everyday objects, from banknotes to bottles of vodka. The logo of Turkmen national television was his profile. The two books he wrote were mandatory reading in schools, and public servants were quizzed yearly about their knowledge of their contents. They were also common in shops and homes. Many institutions were named after Niyazov's mother. All watches and clocks made had to bear his portrait printed on the dial-face. A giant 15-meter (50\u00a0ft) tall gold-plated statue of Niyazov stood on a rotating pedestal in Ashgabat, so it would always face the sun and shine light onto the city.\nA slogan popular in Turkmen propaganda was \"Halk, Watan, T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy!\" (\"People, Motherland, Head of Turkmen!\"). Niyazov renamed the days of the week after members of his family and wrote the new Turkmen national anthem/oath himself.\nForeign companies seeking to exploit Turkmenistan's vast natural gas resources cooperated with Niyazov since he also controlled access to the natural resources. His book, \"Ruhnama\" (or \"Rukhnama\", 2001 and 2004), which was revered in Turkmenistan almost like a holy text, has been translated into 41 languages\nas of 2008[ [update]] and distributed for free among major international libraries.\nNiyazov once proclaimed that anyone who reads this book three times will \"become more intelligent, will recognise the divine being and will go straight to heaven\".\nAfter Niyazov's death, Deputy Prime Minister Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow became acting president, and was elected president in his own right on 11 February 2007 in elections condemned by international observers as fraudulent. On 20 March, in a decision of significant symbolic weight in the ongoing rejection of Niyazov's personality cult, he abolished the power of the president to rename any landmarks, institutions, or cities.\nAfter the death of Saparmurat Niyazov Turkmenistan's leadership made tentative moves to open up the country. Berdimuhamedow repealed some of Niyazov's most idiosyncratic policies, including banning opera and the circus for being \"insufficiently Turkmen\". In education, his government increased basic education from 9 years to 10 years, and restored higher education from two years to five. He has also increased contacts with the West, which is eager for access to the country's natural gas riches - but fears were mounting that the government would revert to Niyazov's draconian style of rule.\nThe constitution provides for freedom of the press, but the government does not practice it. The government effectively controls all media outlets. Only two newspapers, \"Adalat\" and \"Galkyny\u015f\", both created by presidential decree, and two private internet news portals, Infoabad and Arzuw, are nominally independent. Cable television, which existed in the late 1980s, was shut down. Access to foreign media is impeded by internet blockage of roughly one third of the world's IP addresses and a ban on use of virtual private networks.\nTurkmen authorities restrict the activities of all but the officially recognized Russian Orthodox and Sunni Islam faiths. Religious congregations must register with the government, and individual parishes must have at least 500 members to register. Severe measures deal with religious sects that have not been able to establish official ties of state recognition, especially Baptists, Pentecostals, Seventh-day Adventists, Hare Krishna, Jehovah's Witnesses, and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. Practitioners of these sects have allegedly been harassed, imprisoned, and/or tortured, according to some foreign human-rights advocacy groups.\nCorruption continues to be pervasive. Power is concentrated in the presidency; the judiciary is wholly subservient to the r\u00e9gime, with all judges appointed for five-year terms by the president without legislative review. Little has been done to prosecute corrupt officials. With regard to the legal profession, while law practice may be conducted in Turkmenistan in assorted ways (collegium of lawyers, lawyers' association, private practice, etc.), there is no clear indication as to how certain demographic groups, such as women, have fared in the field.\nThe United Nations General Assembly recognized and supported Turkmenistan's \"status of permanent neutrality\" on 11 January 1996.\nNew constitution of 2008.\nIn September 2008, the People's Council unanimously passed a resolution adopting a new constitution. The latter resulted in the abolition of the council and a significant increase in the size of Parliament in December 2008. The constitution also enables the formation of multiple political parties. President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow has stated that \"The new constitution corresponds to all international and democratic norms\".\nNational Leader appointed 2023.\nAs of 21 January 2023, President Serdar Berdimuhamedow appointed his father and predecessor, Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow, chairperson of the reformed People's Council of Turkmenistan with the title \"National Leader of the Turkmen People\" (). State media referred to the People's Council as the \"supreme organ of government authority\". Outside observers consider that the presidency has been stripped of all real authority so that it can be transferred to the National Leader, who is now the genuine chief executive of government. One commentator stated that this makes Turkmenistan an \"absolute monarchy.\"\nFreedom of association.\nFormally, according to the constitution, citizens of Turkmenistan have the right to set up political parties and other public associations, acting within the framework of the constitution and the laws, and public associations and groups of citizens have the right to nominate their candidates in accordance with the election law.\nList of heads of government of Turkmenistan (1925\u20131991).\nTurkmen Soviet Socialist Republic (1924\u20131991).\nChairmen of the Council of Ministers.\nUnder the 1992 constitution, the president is elected by popular vote for a five-year term. Niyazov added the post of chairman of the Supreme Soviet in January 1990, and was elected as the country's first president that October. He was the only candidate in Turkmenistan's first presidential elections in 1992. A 1994 plebiscite extended his term to 2002, and Parliament extended his term indefinitely in 1999.\nAfter Niyazov's death, Deputy Prime Minister for Science and Health Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow took over, despite the fact that \u00d6wezgeldi Ata\u00fdew, the Chairman of the Parliament of Turkmenistan, would be the next in line in the order of succession (allegedly because the prosecutor-general had initiated investigations against Ata\u00fdew). The president appoints the deputy chairmen of the cabinet of ministers.\nA presidential election to replace Niyazov was held on 11 February 2007.\nLegislative branch.\nAs of January 2023, Turkmenistan's Parliament (\"Assembly\", ) is unicameral, with a 125-seat single chamber. The Assembly is popularly elected.\nHistory.\nThe 1992 constitution established two parliamentary bodies, a unicameral People's Council or Halk Maslahaty (supreme legislative body of up to 2,500 delegates, some of whom were elected by popular vote and some of whom were appointed; met at least yearly) and a unicameral Assembly or Mejlis (originally 50 seats, eventually expanded to 125, whose members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms).\nIn late 2003 legislation was passed reducing the powers of the Mejlis and making the Halk Maslahaty the supreme legislative organ. The Halk Maslahaty could at that point legally dissolve the Mejlis, and the president was now able to participate in the Mejlis as its supreme leader. The Mejlis could no longer adopt or amend the constitution, or announce referendums or its elections. Since President Saparmurat Niyazov was both the \"Chairman for Life\" of the Halk Maslahaty and the supreme leader of the Mejlis, the 2003 law had the effect of making him the sole authority of both the executive and legislative branches of government.\nFollowing Niyazov's death, in 2008, President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow introduced a new constitution under which the Halk Maslahaty was reformed into an \"Elders Council\" with no legislative authority, and nominal legislative authority reverted to a unicameral Mejlis.\nIn October 2017, President Berdimuhamedow reorganized the Council of Elders into a new People's Council. In September 2020 the Turkmenistan Parliament adopted a constitutional amendment creating an upper chamber and thus making the Parliament bicameral. The People's Council became the upper chamber. Of its 56 members, 48 are indirectly elected and 8 are appointed by the president. Together with the previous unicameral parliamentary body, the 125-seat Mejlis, as the lower chamber, the Parliament is now called the National Council ().\nElection to the upper chamber was held 28 March 2021. Elections to the Mejlis were last held 25 March 2018.\nIn January 2023 both chambers of parliament proposed to abolish the Halk Maslahaty as a legislative organ, to reform it as an independent representative body, and to place all legislative authority in a unicameral Assembly (Mejlis). This proposal was adopted in a joint session of the National Council on 21 January 2023. \nDe facto authority.\nOutside observers consider the Turkmen legislature to be a rubber stamp parliament. The Turkmen legislature is described as under the \"full control\" of the president.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nTurkmenistan was until recently a one-party state wherein only the Democratic Party of Turkmenistan () was legally allowed to contest elections. Other parties are now formally allowed to exist following the adoption of the new Constitution.\nThere have been political parties and opposition groups in the past\u2014a group named Agzybirlik (Unity) was banned in January 1990. Its members formed the Party for Democratic Development which was itself banned in 1991. This led a coalition for democratic reform named Gengesh (Conference).\nThe latest opposition party, the Republican Party of Turkmenistan (), operates in exile. Since all opposition was banned within Turkmenistan, so it has been forced to form and operate from abroad.\nBelow is the list of parliamentary parties in Turkmenistan:\nAdministrative divisions.\nTurkmenistan is divided into five provinces (): Ahal Province, Balkan Province, Da\u015foguz Province, Lebap Province, and Mary Province. The capital city, Ashgabat, is a separate entity and though a city has the legal status of a province () under the Turkmen constitution.\nA list of administrative divisions as of 5 January 2018, can be seen on the OpenStreetMap wiki.\nForeign policy.\nForeign policy of Turkmenistan is based on the status of permanent positive neutrality recognized by the UN General Assembly Resolution on Permanent Neutrality of Turkmenistan on 12 December 1995.\nArticles on Turkmenistan's foreign policy as a neutral state:\nDomestic policy.\nRestrictions on communication.\nDespite the launch of Turkmenistan's first communication satellite\u2014T\u00fcrkmen\u00c4lem 52\u00b0E / MonacoSAT\u2014in April 2015, the Turkmen government banned all satellite dishes in Turkmenistan the same month. The statement issued by the government indicated that all existing satellite dishes would have to be removed or destroyed\u2014despite the communications receiving antennas having been legally installed since 1995\u2014in an effort by the government to fully block access of the population to many \"hundreds of independent international media outlets\" which are currently accessible in the country only through satellite dishes, including all leading international news channels in different languages. The main target of this campaign is Radio Azatlyk, the Turkmen-language service of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.\nInternet access is filtered and websites to which the government objects are blocked. Blocked websites include opposition news media, YouTube, many social media including Facebook, and encrypted communications applications. Use of virtual private networks to circumvent censorship is prohibited.\nInternational organization participation.\nTurkmenistan is affiliated to the CIS, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDB, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTO (observer)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30212", "revid": "4711431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30212", "title": "Economy of Turkmenistan", "text": "The economy of Turkmenistan continues to recover from the 2014 downturn in hydrocarbon prices, but remains \"in the grip of its worst economic crisis since the immediate post-independence period, driven in part by low gas prices, the suspension of gas exports to Russia between 2016 and 2019...and poor harvests.\" Former President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow at a session of the Cabinet of Ministers on 11 March 2021, called the rate of GDP growth unsatisfactory. When discussing the 2021 government budget, he noted that 2021 would be \"as difficult\" a year as 2020 had been.\nAccording to the 2020 Investment Climate Statement of the US Department of State, Turkmenistan's economy depends heavily on the production and export of natural gas, oil, petrochemicals and, to a lesser degree, cotton, wheat, and textiles. The economy is still recovering from a deep recession that followed the late 2014 collapse in global energy prices. The current investment climate is considered high risk for US foreign direct investment.\nTurkmenistan is largely a desert country with intensive agriculture in irrigated areas, and huge gas and oil resources. In terms of natural gas reserves, as of 2020 it is ranked 4th in the world. Turkmenistan's two largest agricultural crops are cotton, most of which is produced for export, and wheat, most of which is domestically consumed. Turkmenistan is among the top ten producers of cotton in the world.\nHistory.\nFrom 1998 to 2005, Turkmenistan suffered from a lack of adequate export routes for natural gas and from obligations on extensive short-term external debt. At the same time, however, total exports rose by an average of roughly 15% per year from 2003 to 2008, largely because of higher international oil and gas prices. As in the Soviet era, central planning and state control is prominent in the system, and the Niyazov government (in power 1991\u20132006) consistently rejected market reform programs. The state subsidized a wide variety of commodities and services from the early 1990s to 2019. Following his election in 2007, President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow unified the country's dual currency exchange rate, ordered the redenomination of the manat, reduced state subsidies for gasoline, and initiated development of a special tourism zone (Awaza) on the Caspian Sea.\nSince 2009, Turkmenistan has maintained a fixed exchange rate. In that year, the rate was set at US$1 to 2.85 manats. On 1 January 2015, the official exchange rate was changed to US$1 to 3.50 manats. However, the black-market exchange rate as of February 2021 was fluctuating around 29 to 30 manats to the dollar. As of mid-April, the black-market manat-dollar exchange rate had slid to 40 manat to the dollar.\nFiscal policy.\nThe government budget is developed and implemented in accord with the Law \u201cOn Budget System\u201d. The law fixes the legal foundations of organizing management and operating the budget system, and regulates interrelations between budgets at all levels. The government of Turkmenistan discusses the state budget draft and submits it to the President of Turkmenistan. One month prior to the beginning of the fiscal year the President of Turkmenistan submits to the Assembly of Turkmenistan (Mejlis) the state budget draft for consideration and adoption. The Ministry of Economy and Finance is responsible for state finances.\nBudget statistics are unreliable because the government spends large amounts of extra-budgetary funds. The 2021 budget of the Turkmenistan government totaled 79.5\u00a0billion\u00a0manats of revenue, down from 84.39\u00a0billion\u00a0manats in 2020, and 103.57\u00a0billion\u00a0manats in 2017. The 2021 expenditure budget was set at 72.1\u00a0billion\u00a0manats. In November 2023 state media reported the 2022 budget as 124.299 billion manats revenue and 117,601 billion manats expenditure.\nThe Central Bank of Turkmenistan controls the issue of money, but does not publish data on the money supply.\nThe Central Bank promotes cashless transactions. In the January\u2013April period of 2020, the volume of cashless transactions using debit cards slightly more than tripled compared to the same period in 2019, to just under 1.9 billion manat. This shift from cash to electronic payments was not without problems; shortages of cash in automatic teller machines and inadequate availability of card payment facilities at points of sale were reported.\nIndustry.\nIn the post-Soviet era, Turkmenistan's industrial sector has been dominated increasingly by the fuel and cotton processing industries to the detriment of light industry. Between 1991 and 2004, some 14 new cotton-processing plants were opened, sharply increasing the capability of processing domestically produced cotton. The construction industry depends mainly on government building projects because construction of private housing is a low priority.\nNatural gas.\nTurkmenistan's natural gas reserves are estimated at 50 trillion cubic meters.\nTurkmenistan's major gas deposits were discovered in its central and eastern areas in the 1940s and 1950s, and in the 1980s the republic became the second largest producer of gas in the Soviet Union, behind the Russian SFSR. During the Soviet era gas was exported mainly to other Soviet republics, as Turkmenistan steadily increased delivery from about 9.2 million m\u00b3 in 1940 to about 234 million m\u00b3 in 1960 and about 51 billion m\u00b3 in 1975. This export was under centralised control, and most of the export revenue was absorbed into the Soviet central budget.\nThis changed in 1991, when Turkmenistan gained independence and established full control over gas export and export revenues. However, Soviet-era pipelines dictated that much of the gas go to the Caucasus, Russia and Ukraine. In the 1990s many of Turkmenistan's gas customers in the CIS failed to pay on time or negotiated barter deals. In the mid-1990s Turkmenistan stopped delivering gas to some CIS members, citing failure to pay and unprofitable barter deals. At the same time, the government tried to attract investments in building gas pipelines via Iran to Turkey and Western Europe via Afghanistan to Pakistan. Neither deal went through due to an unfavourable regional security environment and high costs; inflation and the budget deficit rose but privatisation was resisted.\nIn the late 1990s the government renegotiated its export and price arrangements with Gazprom and renewed deliveries to Georgia, Ukraine, and some other countries. It also opened its first pipeline not to pass through Russia, the Korpezhe-Kurt Kui Pipeline.\nOn 14 December 2009, the Central Asia\u2013China gas pipeline was opened, and Turkmenistan began delivering large volumes of natural gas to the China National Petroleum Corporation. Combined design capacity of Lines A, B, and C of this pipeline system is 55 billion cubic meters per annum (bcma), of which Turkmenistan's quota was initially 35 bcma. In 2023, the Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that Turkmenistan's quota on this pipeline system was 40 bcma. By 2015 Turkmenistan was delivering approximately 35 bcma to China, counterbalancing declining exports to Russia, which ended on 1 January 2016. Russia had earlier restricted its imports to about 10 bcma, and then 5 bcma. Russian purchases resumed, albeit in smaller quantities, in 2019.\nSmall-volume sales of an estimated 12 bcma to Iran halted on 1 January 2017, when Turkmenistan unilaterally cut off supplies over payment arrears. Ashgabat claimed Tehran owed some $1.8 billion for supplies delivered nearly 10 years before. In March 2025 Turkmenistan began selling natural gas to Turkey via a Turkmenistan-Iran, Iran-Turkey swap with the goal of shipping 1.3 bcm by the end of the year.\nIn January\u2013November 2020, Turkmenistan extracted 62.3 billion m3 of natural gas, of which, according to one source, it exported 31 billion. The state-controlled official media reported in February 2024 natural gas production in calendar year 2023 as 80.6187 billion cubic meters.\nOne observes in the table below that production and exports peaked in 2008 and dramatically decreased in 2009. This was due an explosion in the Central Asia\u2013Center gas pipeline system in April 2009 for which Turkmenistan blamed Gazprom. Natural gas exports include pipeline gas directly to China and Russia, and to Azerbaijan via a swap with Iran, plus liquid petroleum gas shipped by rail and truck to Afghanistan.\nIn February 2022, Turkmenistan was identified as an ultra-emitter of methane by the European Space Agency's satellite-based TROPOspheric Monitoring Instrument, with the value of lost methane equalling about US$6\u00a0billion per year.\nNatural gas to gasoline production.\nOn 28 June 2019, a US$1.7\u00a0billion factory for producing gasoline out of natural gas was commissioned in Ovadandepe. Built by R\u00f6nesans and Kawasaki using technology from Haldor Topsoe, the factory has a design capacity of 600,000 tonnes of gasoline, 12,000 tonnes of diesel fuel, and 115,000 tonnes of liquefied petroleum gas per year, produced from 1.7 billion cubic meters of natural gas. According to opposition media, as of January 2023 the plant had halted production of export-grade ECO-93 gasoline due to a lack of catalyzers, and was producing only lower-quality gasoline for domestic consumption.\nOil.\n\"See also Turkmenistan / Oil\"\nTurkmenistan's major oil-producing area is in the west, mainly in Balkan Province, and is part of the South Caspian Basin, an intercontinental depression noted for oil production. Commercial oil production on the Turkmen side of the Caspian Sea began in the early 1900s, in the environs of the Cheleken Peninsula, and modern oil drilling began in the 1930s near Balkanabat. The Gumdag field was developed in 1949, then Goturdepe (1958), Ekerem (1962), and others. Offshore drilling began in the 1970s.\nMajor onshore oil fields include \u00c7eleken, Go\u00f1urdepe, Nebitdag, Gumdag, Barsagelmez, Gu\u00fdujyk. Gyzylgum, \u00d6rdekli, G\u00f6gerendag, Gamy\u015flyja, Ekerem, \u00c7eki\u015fler, Ke\u00fdmir, Ekizek, and Bugda\u00fdly. In 2019, capital investment in the oil industry totalled 3.29\u00a0billion\u00a0manats. In January\u2013November 2020, Turkmenistan extracted 8.7 million tonnes of oil and condensate. Production of liquid petroleum gas totalled 231,000 tonnes. Oil production in calendar year 2023 was reported in official state media as 8.3167 million tonnes.\nThe oil production and consumption data in the table below are taken from BP Statistical Review.\nPetroleum refining.\nOil is processed at two refineries, the T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy and Seydi oil refining complexes. The Turkmenbashy oil refinery had a refining capacity of more than 10 million tons of oil per year as of May 2016. The refinery produces a range of products, including unleaded gasoline, petroleum coke, asphalt, laundry detergent, hydro-treated Diesel, and lubricating oil. The Turkmenbashy oil refinery is Turkmenistan's largest producer of liquid petroleum gas, accounting for two-thirds of total production with annual output of about 300 thousand tonnes.\nThe Seydi refinery processed about 135,500 tonnes of oil in the first quarter of 2020, and 441,200 tonnes January\u2013November, implying capacity of about half a million tonnes of oil in 2020 despite design capacity of 6 million tonnes. In the first eight months of 2021, the Seydi refinery produced 135,200 tonnes of gasoline, 77,600 tonnes of diesel fuel, 22,800 tonnes of heavy gas oil, and 19,500 tonnes of asphalt. The Seydi refinery was built during the Soviet period to process oil from Siberia. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, however, the Seydi refinery has been supplied with hydrocarbons from Turkmenistan, including the Gokdumalak, Yashyldepe, Yoloten, and Kerwen fields.\nIn October 2020, President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow criticized low output from refineries, stating, \"...growth is not observed in oil extraction, half of which is exported. Processing enterprises do not operate at the appropriate level, and for a long time are used at barely 40%.\"\nNatural gas and oil exports.\nBased on Chinese and Turkmen official trade data, China is the major importer of Turkmenistan's natural gas, with historical volumes between 32 and 35 billion cubic meters per annum (bcma). Originally, thirty-five bcma was Turkmenistan's quota on the Central Asia\u2013China gas pipeline, but in August 2023, the Turkmenistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that Turkmenistan's quota on this pipeline system was 40 bcma. Turkmen media reported that in 2022 China imported 43.2 bcm of natural gas via that pipeline, but did not specify how much of that originated in Turkmenistan. Subsequently, press reports stated Turkmen natural gas exports to China in 2022 totalled 34.09 bcm.\nSmaller volumes of pipeline gas are also bought by Russia's Gazprom, with 4 bcm in 2019, 4.7 bcm in 2020, and approximately 10 bcm in 2021. Some of this gas is sold onward to Uzbekistan. In June 2019 Russia and Turkmenistan signed a five-year agreement for annual deliveries of 5.5 bcm.\nSales of pipeline gas to Iran ceased in 2017 due to a dispute over arrears, but resumed in Summer 2023 with test shipments of 10 million cubic meters (mcm) per day. The deal, signed in June 2023, envisions export of up to 20 mcm per day of natural gas to Iran.\nIn November 2021, the governments of Turkmenistan, Iran, and Azerbaijan announced agreement on a natural gas swap of up to 2 billion cubic meters per year, with Turkmen gas to flow to Iran, and Iranian gas to flow to Azerbaijan. Iran's oil minister, Javad Owji, declared readiness to increase the swap volume to 15 bcma. In August 2023 media reported that the volume of gas swapped had risen from 4.5 million cubic meters per day to 8 mcm per day.\nAccording to BP's \"Statistical Review of World Energy 2021\", Turkmenistan's natural gas exports in 2020, by destination, in billion cubic meters were:\nValue of exports.\nChinese sources reported that in 2021 Turkmenistan earned $6.79 billion for delivering natural gas to China. Chinese Customs statistics show China imported natural gas from Turkmenistan from January through November 2022 valued at $9.28 billion. Azerbaijan imported 857 million cubic meters (mcm) of natural gas from Turkmenistan in calendar year 2022, worth \"over $130.63 million\".\nIn June 2021 Turkmenistan and China announced award of a tender to CNPC Chuanging Drilling Engineering Company, Ltd. for drilling gas wells in the Galkynysh gas field in return for payment in kind of 17 bcm of natural gas delivered over a period of three years. The first of these wells was commissioned in January 2023.\nPower generation.\n\"See also Turkmenistan / Energy\"\nIn 2019, total electrical energy generation in Turkmenistan reportedly totalled 22,521.6 million kilowatt-hours (22.52 terawatt-hours).\nAs of 2013, Turkmenistan had 10 electrical power plants equipped with 32 turbines, including 14 steam-driven, 15 gas powered, and 3 hydroelectric. Power output in 2011 was 18.27 billion kWh, of which 2.5 billion kWh was exported. The Asian Development Bank reported in October 2018,Turkmenenergo, the State Energy Corporation is the vertically integrated power utility in\nthe country. In 2017, it produced more than 23 TWh of electricity, exporting 15% of that to neighboring countries.\nNew power plants have been constructed in Mary, Ahal province, and in \u00c7\u00e4rjew District of Lebap province. The Mary-3 combined cycle power plant, built by \u00c7al\u0131k Holding with GE turbines, commissioned in 2018, produces 1.574 gigawatts of electrical power and is specifically intended to support expanded exports of electricity to Afghanistan and Pakistan. The Zerger power plant built by Sumitomo, Mitsubishi, Hitachi, and R\u00f6nesans Holding in \u00c7\u00e4rjew District has a design capacity of 432 megawatts from three 144-megawatt gas turbines and was commissioned in September 2021. It is also primarily intended for export of electricity. The Zerger plant uses natural gas from the \u00dc\u00e7ajy Gas Field (), delivered via a 125-km high-pressure pipeline. The Ahal power plant, with capacity of 650 megawatts, was constructed to power the city of Ashgabat and in particular the Olympic Village. The Derweze State Electrical Power Station (), a 504.4 megawatt power plant built by \u00c7al\u0131k Enerji in 2015, is located near Ovadandepe. In March 2023, the government announced plans to build a 1,574-megawatt natural gas-fired combined cycle power plant in Balkan Province. In October 2023 the contract for construction of this plant was awarded to \u00c7al\u0131k Energji, with construction projected to be complete by May 2027. National Leader Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow announced in November 2023 that the power plant is intended to export electricity to Azerbaijan.\nA \"national grid strengthening project\" with support from the Asian Development Bank is underway, which will build four new power substations and add direct high-voltage lines, a 500-kilovolt line between Balkan province and Dashoguz, and a 200-kilovolt line between Buzmeyin and Balkanabat. The intention is to create an \"interconnected national transmission grid to improve reliability and energy efficiency...\"\nMinerals.\nThe following table is from \"Mineral Industry of Turkmenistan\" published by the United States Geological Survey, an agency of the US government, and is thus in the public domain.\nIn January 2023 the deputy prime minister for industry and construction reported discovery of iron oxide deposits near https://, T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy District, Balkan Province.\nConstruction materials.\nFour cement plants operate in Turkmenistan, and plans have been announced to construct three more. The four cement plants currently in operation, each designed to produce one million tons per year, are:\n* Baherden Cement Plant (Ahal Province)\n* Kelete Cement Plant (Ahal Province)\n* Lebap Cement Plant (in T\u00fcrkmenabat)\n* Balkan Cement Plant (in Jebel)\nIn 2019, President Berdimuhamedov noted that the Kelete plant was operating at 8.1%, the Lebap plant at 88%, the Baherden plant at 64%, and the Balkan plant at just over 40% of design capacity.\nIn 2019, Turkmenistan produced 5.1 million standard square meters (4mm thickness) of sheet glass. A $375 million float glass and glass container plant built by Tepe In\u015faat of Turkey was opened 14 February 2018, in Ovadandepe north of Ashgabat. It replaced a Soviet-era glass factory located in central Ashgabat. In 2019, the value of Turkmenistan's glass exports as reported by trading partners was US$9.5 million.\nA steel smelter, T\u00fcrkmen Demir \u00d6n\u00fcmleri D\u00f6wlet K\u00e4rhanasy () operating on scrap metal is located at kilometer 22 on the Ashgabat-Dashoguz Automobile Highway near Ovadandepe. It produces mainly rebar and channel iron.\nThe Ceramic Products Plant in B\u00e4herden, opened on 2025, produces 3.3 million square meters of ceramic tiles and 120,000 sanitary ware units annually using local raw materials. Equipped with advanced technology from SACMI, it meets Industry 4.0 standards, is environmentally friendly, provides 460 jobs.\nChemicals.\nAs of 2019, Turkmenistan had \"nine chemical plants that produce nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizers (700,000 tons per year), sulfuric and nitric acids, iodine, bromine, and mineral salts.\"\nIn 2019, the country was the world's 3rd largest producer of iodine.\nPetrochemicals.\nThree plants in Turkmenistan produce urea (carbamide), primarily intended for export, one each in Tejen, Mary, and Garabogaz. The $1.3 billion Garabogaz plant, built by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and GAP \u0130n\u015faat (a subsidiary of \u00c7al\u0131k Holding), was inaugurated on 18 September 2018, with a design capacity of 1.16 million tonnes of urea per year. The US$650 million Mary ammonia and urea plant, commissioned on 17 October 2014, was built by R\u00f6nesans Holding, Kawasaki, and Sojitz with design capacity of 400 thousand tonnes of ammonia and 640 thousand tonnes of urea. The $240 million Tejen plant, inaugurated on 18 March 2005, has a design capacity of 350,000 tonnes of urea per year. Reportedly, none of these plants currently produces at full capacity, however. Between January and October 2019, the Garabogaz plant produced approximately 392,000 tonnes of urea, of which 261,000 tonnes was exported. Production of nitrogenous fertilizers in Turkmenistan totalled 550,500 tonnes (active ingredient basis) in 2019.\nThe Kiyanly Polymer Factory (), inaugurated 17 October 2018, features design capacity to produce 381 thousand tonnes of polyethylene and 81 thousand tonnes of polypropylene per year. Built at a cost of US$3.4 billion by LG International, Hyundai Engineering, Toyo Engineering, and Gap In\u015faat, the plant cracks methane and ethane for production of polymers. In the first ten months of 2019, however, the factory produced only 67,900 tonnes of polyethylene and 12,700 tonnes of polypropylene. As of January 2023, the polymer plant had reportedly ceased operation, and it had not resumed as of a year later. Opposition media reported in May 2024 that the plant remained closed, and that Hyundai Engineering was auditing the plant to determine what was needed to refurbish and restart it, with an expected cost of repairs of one billion U.S. dollars.\nNon-hydrocarbon chemicals.\nIn March 2017 the for production of potash fertilizer was inaugurated. Built by Belarus's Belgorkhimprom at a cost of US$1.1 billion, the factory is designed to produce 1.4 million tonnes of fertilizer per year, primarily for export to China and India. It reportedly operates at from 2 to 7 percent of rated capacity, however.\nThree factories produce iodine in Turkmenistan, one each in Balkanabat, Hazar, and Bereket. The Bereket plant is designed to produce 150 tonnes per year of iodine. Following planned renovations and upgrades, the Balkanabat and Hazar plants will have design capacities of 250 tonnes and 300 tonnes of iodine, respectively, plus 2400 tonnes and 4500 tonnes of bromine, respectively, per year. Total production of iodine in 2019 was 681.4 tonnes.\nIn May 2025 the president issued a decree authorizing to sign a contract with Daewoo Engineering &amp; Construction Co., Ltd for construction of a fertilizer plant in T\u00fcrkmenabat for production of 350,000 tonnes of superphosphate and 100,000 tonnes of ammonium sulfate per year.\nTextiles and Garments.\nAs a cotton producer, from its conquest by the Russian Empire in the 1880s until independence in 1991 Turkmenistan mainly exported raw cotton to Russia for spinning. Since independence, Turkmenistan has invested roughly $2 billion in 70 plants and factories for production of cotton yarn, textiles, and garments made from other materials, including shoes. Of these, 13 are large ginning, spinning, or textile mills. In 2019, Turkmenistan exported cotton textiles worth $123.6 million. In 2019, Turkmenistan produced 118,600 tonnes of cotton yarn, and 209.4 million square meters of fabric, of which 192.9 million was cotton, 14.9 million was terrycloth, and 1.4 million was silk. In addition, Turkmenistan produced in 2019 40.9 million pairs of stockings, 5.5 million knit items, 1.5 million pairs of shoes, and 3,400 tonnes of knitted fabric.\nConstruction.\nThe Turkmenistan government centrally funds and controls major construction projects. As of January 2021, the government acknowledged over 2,500 large-scale projects under construction at a cost of $37 billion. In 2020, about two million square meters of new residential housing was built at government expense, as well as 45 \"important government\" structures. In 2021 construction was completed of five major facilities in Ashgabat (a new State Tribune, the Arkadag Hotel, two bank headquarters, and a new Congress Center, all by Bouygues). Total cost of these five projects was $1.5 billion.\nA current major project is the $4.8 billion being spent on construction of the city of Arkadag, the new capital of Ahal province. In addition, $2.3 billion has been allocated for construction of the Ashgabat-Turkmenabat motorway by a consortium of four Turkmen construction firms.\nServices.\nTransport.\nAs a crossroads for centuries and part of the Silk Road, Turkmenistan serves as a transit point for cargoes shipped by air, sea, and land. Under normal conditions, Ashgabat International Airport is a stopover and transfer point for air passengers between India (Amritsar and New Delhi) and England (London and Birmingham), as well as between Frankfurt-am-Main and Bangkok.\nSeaports.\nTurkmenistan's major seaport is the Turkmenbashy International Seaport on the Caspian. Expanded at a cost of $2 billion between 2013 and 2018 by Gap In\u015faat, the seaport has capacity to handle annually 25 million tonnes of dry cargo (17 million in the newly expanded port, 8 million in the old port), 300,000 passengers, 75,000 freight trucks, and 400,000 containers. The port features regular ferry service to Baku. This seaport also manages three oil loading terminals, Kenar, Alaja, and Ekerem. Turkmenistan's only other seaports are the loading terminals for factories at Kiyanly (Gy\u00fdanly) and Garabogaz and an oil loading terminal at Hazar.\nAirports.\nFive major airports in Turkmenistan feature regular domestic passenger service: Ashgabat, Dashoguz, Mary, Turkmenabat, and Turkmenbashy. A sixth international-class airport at Kerki was commissioned in June 2021 and was slated to begin regular domestic passenger service in January 2022. A seventh airport, Balkanabat, is in operation for special flights. Under normal conditions, only Ashgabat International Airport offers regular international passenger service. Turkmenbashy International Airport is used for international cargo, chiefly by Cargolux. The lone domestic air carrier is state-owned T\u00fcrkmen Howa \u00ddollary (Turkmenistan Airlines). In 2019, Turkmenistan Airlines hauled 12 thousand tonnes of cargo. It also flew 2.5 million passengers and 2.98 billion passenger-kilometers.\nMinor airports are found in some smaller cities and towns, including Balkanabat, Etrek, Garabogaz, Hazar, and Jebel in Balkan Province. A former military airfield at Gala\u00fdmor in Mary Province is slated for conversion to civil aviation. There are also small landing strips at Aeroport village and G\u00e4wers in Ahal Province.\nRail.\nThe domestic rail system is operated by state-owned T\u00fcrkmendemir\u00fdollary (Turkmen Railways). No scheduled international passenger service exists, but domestic passenger service connects major Turkmen cities. Freight service is available to both domestic and international destinations. In 2019, 23.8 million tonnes of freight was transported by rail in Turkmenistan. In the same year, Turkmen Railways handled 5.44 million passengers and counted 2.53 billion passenger-kilometers.\nRoads.\nAs of 2011, Turkmenistan featured 13.7 thousand kilometers of roads, of which 12.3 thousand were paved. In 2019, road transport accounted for 27.1 billion passenger-kilometers, or 83% of passenger traffic in Turkmenistan. Motor vehicles transported \n448.9 million tonnes of cargo in 2019, 85.5% of the total, and accounted for 14.2 billion tonne-kilometers. Major highways in Turkmenistan include the M37 connecting the seaport at T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy to the border with Uzbekistan at Farap, the Ashgabat-Dashoguz Highway connecting Ashgabat and Dashoguz, and the P-7 highway connecting the M37 at Tejen to the border with Iran at Sarahs.\nBanking.\nThe financial system is under full state control. The banking system, which was reduced substantially after the 1998 financial crisis, includes 9 national banks. These include a nominally private bank owned by the Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs, Rysgal Bank, and Turkmen-Turkish Bank, a joint venture between Dayhan Bank and Turkish state-owned Ziraat Bankas\u0131. These institutions have the same basic division of responsibility as in the Soviet era, overseen by the Central Bank of Turkmenistan. Lending operations and household savings have not been important functions of this system. In 2005 an estimated 95 percent of loans went to state enterprises. Two branches of foreign banks, National Bank of Pakistan and Iran Saderat Bank, are located in Ashgabat, where they offer retail banking services. Two German banks, Deutsche Bank and Commerzbank, offer institutional services through offices in Ashgabat.\nAs of 1 January 2021, total assets of all banks in Turkmenistan amounted to 135.8 billion manats. Deposits by individuals totalled 3.3 billion manats, including 2.8 billion in demand deposits and 437 million manats in time deposits. Business deposits totalled 39.1 billion manats, of which 14.6 billion in demand deposits and 53.7 billion in time deposits. Total business deposits were broken out into state-owned firms (32.5 billion manats), privately owned firms (21.1 billion manats), and individual unincorporated entrepreneurs (7.9 billion manats).\nIn 2019, 84.1 billion manats worth of credit was extended to individuals, firms, and organizations, up from 76.3 billion in 2018 and 69.2 billion in 2017. Of these figures, 60.9 billion, 52.1 billion, and 46.7 billion were in Turkmen manats, respectively.\nCredit and debit cards.\nSeveral types of national plastic cards are used in Turkmenistan: Milli Kart, Altyn Asyr, Turkmen Kart. The number of bank cards issued in Turkmenistan for 2023 amounted to over 5 million 177 thousand units, according to the Central Bank of Turkmenistan. Cashback services are provided by Halkbank, Daykhanbank, Rysgal Bank, Senagat Bank, Turkmenbashi Bank, Turkmenistan Bank, Turkmen-Turkish Joint-Stock Commercial Bank. Cashback amounts range from 2% to 3%. In Turkmenistan, the card can be used to pay not only for purchases in a store, but also for the services of healthcare institutions, utility bills and services of all types of communications and the Internet, railway, bus and air tickets. In 2019, contactless payment technology was introduced in the country for the first time.\nThe number of ATMs in 2023 in the country was 2,144 devices with 42,131 bank payment terminals. The number of users of the Internet Bank service reached 932,730 people with the Mobile Bank service reaching 60,654. \nTurkmen banks have the ability to issue new Visa, MasterCard and Maestro cards. Using MasterCard and VISA plastic cards supported by international payment systems, citizens of Turkmenistan can make non-cash payments and withdraw funds from ATMs in foreign countries.\nInsurance.\nTurkmengosstrakh is the state insurance firm.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2019, Turkmenistan produced:\nin addition to other agricultural products.\nIn the early 2000s, the contribution of Turkmenistan's state-run agriculture sector to gross domestic product increased under close state supervision. The top crop in terms of area planted is wheat (761 thousand hectares in 2019), followed by cotton (551 thousand hectares in 2019). In recent years state policy makers have increased the range of crops with the aim of making Turkmenistan self-sufficient in food. In the post-Soviet era, the area planted to grains (mainly wheat) has nearly tripled. However, most agricultural land is of poor quality and requires irrigation. Turkmenistan's irrigation infrastructure and water-use policies have not responded efficiently to this need. Irrigation in areas distant from natural rivers depends mainly on the decrepit Karakum Canal, which carries water across Turkmenistan from the Amu Darya to near Bereket. The Dostluk Dam, opened at Sarahs on the border with Iran in 2005, has increased available irrigation water and improved efficiency. Plans call for a similar dam on the Atrek River.\nDuring the 2020 season, Turkmenistan reportedly produced roughly 1.5 million tons of raw cotton. Prior to imposition of a ban on export of raw cotton in October 2018, Turkmenistan exported raw cotton to Russia, Iran, South Korea, United Kingdom, China, Indonesia, Turkey, Ukraine, Singapore and the Baltic states. Beginning in 2019, the Turkmenistan government shifted focus to export of cotton yarn and finished textiles and garments.\nPrivate farmers grow most of Turkmenistan's fruits and vegetables (chiefly tomatoes, watermelons, grapes, and onions), but all production phases of the main cash crops\u2014grain and cotton\u2014remain under state control. In 2006 grain crop failures led to steadily increasing bread lines and reinstatement of a rationing system in most regions. At the root of those failures was a culture of falsifying output figures together with poor administration of the sector.\nSince 2018, independent media have reported food shortages in the country, with hundreds of people queuing for hours to buy bread and flour. Despite official government figures indicating good harvests, independent media report low output due to drought and mismanagement, and that shortages of flour and bread have reappeared.\nMechanization of agriculture.\nSince independence, the Turkmenistan government has spent considerable sums on imported agricultural tractors, harvesters, and implements. In 2012, around 7,000 tractors, 5,000 cotton cultivators, 2,200 seeders, and other machines, mainly procured from Belarus and the United States, were used.\nJohn Deere and Case IH each began selling farm machinery in Turkmenistan in 1994. Claas combines were first used for grain harvesting in Turkmenistan in 2011. Belarus tractors, in use since Soviet times, continue to be popular due to competitive pricing and deep familiarity with the product line. Turkmenistan also buys cotton harvesters from Uzbekistan.\nBetween 2017 and 2020 Claas delivered 1,000 Tucano 420 grain combines, 800 Axion 850 plowing tractors, and 1,550 Axos 340 tractors. In the 2017 and 2018 crop years John Deere delivered 440 Model 9970 cotton harvesters, and between 2019 and 2020 another 600.\nTrade.\nThe following table presents the value of Turkmenistan's exports and imports in millions of US dollars, by year, from 2015 through 2019.\nTurkmenistan's most important export commodity is natural gas, delivered by pipelines to China and in lesser quantities to Russia and via a swap through Iran to Azerbaijan, and by road and rail to Afghanistan as liquid petroleum gas. According to Chinese Customs data, the value of Chinese imports of natural gas from Turkmenistan fell from US$8,686,022,768 in 2019 to US$6,071,165,273 in 2020 due to a combination of reduced Chinese import volumes and falling hydrocarbon prices. Crude oil and refined petroleum products accounted for another US$3 billion of exports in 2019, followed by US$123.6 million for cotton textiles. Among imports, major categories in 2019 were machinery (US$1.5 billion), base metals (US$968.3 million), chemicals (US$682.3 million), vehicles (US$453.5 million), and plastic and rubber and products thereof (US$342.9 million).\nIn March 2023 the Turkmenistan parliament passed a law adopting the Harmonized System of tariff nomenclature.\nLabour.\nIn 2019, Turkmenistan counted 666,500 employees of large- and medium enterprises, and 103,900 employees of non-state (private, mixed public-private, or foreign) enterprises. The structure of employment was 25.3% in the state sector, 50.3% in the private sector, 22.0% mixed public-private enterprises, 0.2% in public associations, 0.4% in cooperatives, and 1.8% in foreign-owned enterprises, including joint ventures. According to official statistics, in 2019 77,474 individuals were employed by individual entrepreneurs, including self employment.\nMajor sectors for employment were:\n43.5% in agriculture&lt;br&gt;\n9.8% in manufacturing&lt;br&gt;\n8.4% in education&lt;br&gt;\n7.4% in trade and vehicle repair&lt;br&gt;\n5.8% in construction&lt;br&gt;\n4.3% in transport and storage&lt;br&gt;\n3.6% in health and social work&lt;br&gt;\n2.9% in arts, entertainment&lt;br&gt;\nThe average monthly wage in 2019 was 1,685.10 manats per month, up from 943.40 in 2012 and 507 in 2007.\nIn 2004 the labour force was estimated to include more than 2.3 million workers, 48.2 percent of whom worked in agriculture, 37.8 percent in services, and 14 percent in industry and construction. Because the state dominates the economy, an estimated 90 percent of workers are in reality effectively state employees. It is believed that downsizing the government workforce, which began in 2003, increased unemployment in subsequent years. Unemployment in 2014 was estimated at 11%. In recent years, due to the economic downturn linked to falling hydrocarbon prices, unemployment is estimated to be as high as 60 percent, despite official figures of less than four percent.\nPrivatization.\nAccording to official statistics, between 1994 and the end of 2020, 2,628 former state-owned properties had been privatized.\nThe breakout by type of enterprise privatized was:&lt;br&gt;\n845 wholesale and retail trade, vehicle repair\n143 manufacturing\n108 real estate operations\n95 agriculture, forestry, fisheries\n51 transportation and storage\n27 construction\n18 hospitality industry\n1,341 other services\nIn March 2021, President Berdimuhamedow ordered conversion of Der\u00fda\u00fdollary Production Association, a subordinate unit of the State Service of Maritime and River Transportation of Turkmenistan (T\u00fcrkmende\u0148izder\u00fda\u00fdollary) state agency responsible for river and canal transport, into an open joint-stock company.\nAll land remains property of the government, as during the Soviet era.\nMacro-economic trends.\nThe following table shows the main official economic indicators in 1993\u20132020 as provided by the Turkmenistan government to the International Monetary Fund. \nThe accuracy of GDP figures has been called into doubt by the Asian Development Bank, which in 2006 noted, \"According to official statistics, the economy continued to grow rapidly in 2005, but actual growth was likely much lower than the official estimate. Government has overstated growth in the past.\" The UK government's \"Overseas Business Risk\" report for 2021 notes, \"No reliable economic data are published in Turkmenistan. Most sources cite figures which the government releases to the international financial institutions. These do not always square with observation on the ground.\" Outside observers have also expressed skepticism about the official figures for the rate of inflation. In the June 2021 \"Global Economic Prospects\" report, the World Bank excluded Turkmenistan \"[d]ue to lack of reliable data of adequate quality\".\nAt a session of the Cabinet of Ministers on 11 March 2021, government officials revealed that in \"recent years\" Turkmenistan had borrowed over US$14\u00a0billion in foreign exchange loans from foreign creditors, of which US$5\u00a0billion remained outstanding as of 8 March 2021. However, a chart shown on television indicated debt in 2021 of US$1.3524 billion. Opposition media seized on this figure to estimate GDP of US$12.3 billion based on a statement by Central Bank Chairman Rahimberdi Jepbarov that external debt equals 11% of GDP.\nIn June 2021, official state media reported that debts to China for construction of natural gas pipelines had been paid in full.\nMiscellaneous statistics.\nExchange rates prior to 2009\nDuring the early years of independence, the official exchange rate of the Turkmen manat to the US dollar grew dramatically. At the same time, the black-market exchange rate grew even faster, eventually hovering around 24,000 to 25,000\u00a0manats to the dollar.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30213", "revid": "36550958", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30213", "title": "Telecommunications in Turkmenistan", "text": " \nTurkmenistan has a state-controlled press and monitored communication systems. \nTurkmenistan's telecommunications services are considered to be the least developed of all the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries. Overall, the telecom market in this predominantly rural country is relatively small but has been trying boldly to expand in recent years. The state-owned Turkmen Telecom has been the primary provider of public telephone, email and internet services, and through a subsidiary has been operating a GSM mobile network in competition with a private mobile operator, BCTI (BCTI became MTS Turkmenistan in 2005).\nSatellite.\nThe launch of the first Turkmen communication satellite TurkmenSat 1 was launched in April 2015, the satellite has an anticipated service life of 15 years. The satellite was launched aboard SpaceX Falcon 9. The satellite is built by French Thales Alenia Space and is from the Spacebus 4000 family. The satellite will cover Europe and significant part of Asian countries and Africa and will have transmission for TV, radio broadcasting and the internet. The satellite's operations will be controlled by the state-run Turkmenistan National Space Agency (TNSA).\nMobile.\nBCTI was the only GSM operator in the country with a 10-year exclusive license granted in 1994. Due to lack of competition, BCTI continued to operate without investing much to cover rural areas. The expensive cost of the service has limited the number of subscribers to a very small percentage of the general population.\nThe Mobile phone sector started to improve rapidly after the expiration of company's exclusive license in 2004. The Russian mobile phone operator MTS acquired BCTI and state-owned communication company TurkmenTelekom opened a new subsidiary, Altyn Asyr. The number of mobile phone subscribers has now reached over 4,440,000 (MTS - 1,440,000 and Altyn Asyr GSM 3,000,000). With a population of 5 million, this translates into 88.8% mobile penetration rate.\nIn November 2023 Altyn Asyr was the first in Turkmenistan to present an opportunity to switch over to eSIM.\nIn June 2025 T\u00fcrkmenaragatna\u015fyk Agency announced that it has launched 5G network across Arkadag city in Turkmenistan. \nInternet service.\nTurkmenistan gained access to the Internet in 1997 through a contract with MCI Communications (later became MCI WorldCom). A small number of independent Internet Service Providers were forced out of business in 2001 when Turkmentelecom was granted a monopoly over data services. Dependence on expensive satellite channels limited the availability of Internet to only two thousand subscribers. To upgrade the Internet backbone, Ministry of Communication signed a contract with TATA Communications for routing traffic through Transit-Asia-Europe fiber optic channel. As a result of this development, TurkmenTelecom started offering an access to the higher speed Internet with ADSL to the consumers in Turkmenistan.\nIn 2008, MTS started offering Internet service to mobile subscribers via GPRS. Altyn Asyr was first to launch 3G and 2\u00a0Mbit/s mobile internet service in March 2010. The move surprised mobile customers as the provider were known for inferior but cheaper service. In 2013 Altyn Asyr launched a 4G network based on LTE. In 2013, unlimited use of the internet became available, reducing the total cost of services from Turkmentelecom.\nIn Turkmenistan, as of November 2023, 3,149,178 people are connected to the Internet. Of these, 421,609 are wired Internet users, and 2,727,569 are mobile users.\nThe Top-level domain of Turkmenistan is \".tm\".\nCensorship.\nIndividual access to the Internet was first authorised in 2008, and access has since increased.\nTurkmenistan ranks among the most repressive and closed societies in the world. The Internet is heavily regulated and available only to a small fraction of the population. Censorship is ubiquitous and extensive. Surveillance is significant, and the few citizens who benefit from access to the Internet are closely monitored by state agencies. Self-censorship is common.\nWebsites run by human rights organisations and news agencies are blocked. Moreover, ordinary citizens have no access to the World Wide Web, and instead are limited to the use of the Turkmenet, an online community in Turkmen language, but effectively a censored version of the Internet. Social networks such as Facebook, YouTube and X (formerly Twitter) are not accessible through the Turkmenet. Attempts to get around this censorship can lead to grave consequences. However, there is a local Turkmen social network, Gyzgyn, founded on 27 March 2012, which is currently accessible.\nInternet censorship in Turkmenistan was classified as pervasive in the political area and as selective in the social, conflict/security and internet tools areas by the OpenNet Initiative in December 2010. Turkmenistan was listed as an internet enemy by Reporters Without Borders in 2011.\nTelevision.\nAn analog TV signal feed of 5 national channels is receivable over-the-air in all living areas across the country. Foreign TV channels are watched with a digital satellite receiver. In some places of Ashgabat, cable service is available where satellite dishes are not allowed to be installed. DVB-T test transmissions have only taken place in the capital and there are no digital switch-over plans as yet.\nList of broadcast stations:\nPreviously, all 7 of the national channels were aired on the Yamal satellites for an international audience. Since 1 July 2016 all national channels in Turkmenistan are broadcast by the T\u00fcrkmen\u00c4lem 52\u00b0E national satellite that was launched on 27 April 2015.\nIPTV.\nIPTV has been developing fast as a cheap alternative to regular television. The IPTV service is used by more than 100,000 subscribers in Ashgabat.\nTelephone.\nTelephones - main lines in use:\n500,000 (2006)\n\"domestic:\"\n500 automatic telephone stations and 500,000 telephone numbers.\n\"international:\"\nlinked by cable and microwave radio relay to other Commonwealth of Independent States republics and to other countries by leased connections to the Moscow international gateway switch; a new telephone link from Ashgabat to Iran has been established; a new exchange in Ashgabat switches international traffic through Turkey via Intelsat; satellite earth stations - 1 Orbita and 1 Intelsat\nNewspapers.\nList of newspapers in Turkmenistan:\nTurkmenTel.\nStarting from 2007 the Ministry of Communication has organised the international exhibition \"TurkmenTel\" each year. Leading companies from all around the world are invited to Ashgabat to exhibit their technologies."}
{"id": "30214", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30214", "title": "Transport in Turkmenistan", "text": " \nTransport in Turkmenistan includes roadways, railways, airways, seaways, and waterways, as well as oil-, gas-, and water pipelines. Road-, rail-, and waterway transport fall under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Industry and Communications.\nDuring Soviet times Turkmenistan's transportation infrastructure was in general disrepair and neglected.\nSince 1991, Turkmenistan has completed a number of major national and international transportation projects.\nTurkmenistan is also part of the international transport corridor created under the Ashgabat Agreement, signed by India, Oman, Iran, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan, for creating an international transport and transit corridor facilitating transportation of goods between Central Asia and the Persian Gulf.\nAirways.\nAir service began in 1927 with a route between Chardzhou (T\u00fcrkmenabat) and Tashauz (Dashoguz), flying German Junkers 13 and Soviet K-4 aircraft, each capable of carrying four passengers. In 1932, an aerodrome was built in Ashgabat on the site of the current Howdan neighborhoods, for both passenger and freight service, the latter mainly to deliver supplies to sulfur mines near Derweze in the Karakum Desert.\nAirports serving the major cities of Ashgabat, Dashoguz, Mary, Turkmenabat, and T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy, which are operated by Turkmenistan's civil aviation authority, T\u00fcrkmenhowa\u00fdollary, feature scheduled domestic commercial air service. Under normal circumstances international scheduled commercial air service is limited to Ashgabat. During the COVID-19 pandemic, however, international flights take off from and land at Turkmenabat, where quarantine facilities have been established.\nState-owned Turkmenistan Airlines is the only Turkmen air carrier. Turkmenistan Airlines' passenger fleet is composed only of Boeing aircraft. Air transport carries more than two thousand passengers daily in the country. Under normal conditions, international flights annually transport over half a million people into and out of Turkmenistan, and Turkmenistan Air operates regular flights to Moscow, London, Frankfurt, Birmingham, Bangkok, Delhi, Abu Dhabi, Amritsar, Kyiv, Lviv, Beijing, Istanbul, Minsk, Almaty, Tashkent, and St. Petersburg.\nSmall airfields serve industrial sites near other cities, but do not feature scheduled commercial passenger service. Airfields slated for modernization and expansion include Garabogaz, Jebel, and Galaymor. A new airport at Kerki was commissioned in June 2021 and is slated to begin regular domestic passenger service in January 2022. The new Turkmenabat International Airport was commissioned in February 2018.\nIn 2014, Turkmenistan had an estimated 26 airports. One heliport was in operation.\nRailways.\nThe first rail line in Turkmenistan was built in 1880, from the eastern shore of the Caspian Sea to Mollagara. By October 1881 the line was extended to Kyzyl-Arvat (today's Gyzylarbat), by 1886 had reached Chardzhou (today's Turkmenabat). In 1887 a wooden rail bridge was built over the Amu Darya, and the line was continued to Samarkand (1888) and Tashkent (1898). The rail line connecting Mary to Serhetabat was completed in 1898, and the train ferry between Krasnovodsk (today's T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy) and Baku began operating in 1905.\nRail service in Turkmenistan began as part of Imperial Russia's Trans-Caspian Railway, then of the Central Asian Railway. After the collapse of the USSR, the railway network in Turkmenistan was transferred to and operated by state-owned T\u00fcrkmendemir\u00fdollary.\nRail gauge is the standard Russian- and Soviet 1520 millimeters.\nThe total length of railways is 3181\u00a0km. Only domestic passenger service is available, except for special trains operated by tour operators. The railway carries approximately 5.5 million passengers and moves nearly 24 million tons of freight per year.\nThe Tejen-Sarahs-Mashhad railway, built in 1996 by Turkmenistan and Iran, has become a vital freight link of Central Asian-, Russian-, and European rail systems with South Asia and the Persian Gulf. In 2006 the Trans-Karakum Railway, a direct link between Ashgabat and Dashoguz, halved travel time between the southern and northern borders.\nThe Kazakhstan-Turkmenistan-Iran railway link, part of the North\u2013South Transport Corridor, is a -long railway line connecting Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan with Iran and the Persian Gulf since 2014. It links Uzen in Kazakhstan with Bereket and Etrek in Turkmenistan and ends at Gorgan in Iran's Golestan province. In Iran, the railway connects to the national network, including seaports on the Persian Gulf. The project cost an estimated $620 million, shared by the governments of Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Iran. This link of the North-South Transnational Railway runs 137\u00a0km in Kazakhstan, 470\u00a0km in Turkmenistan and 70\u00a0km in Iran. Work in Turkmenistan commenced in Bereket in December 2007 and in Kazakhstan in July 2009, and was completed in late 2014.\nIn late 2016, a railway line from Kerki south to Ymamnazar on the border with Afghanistan and beyond to Aqina in Andkhoy District was opened. It is expected to become part of a railway corridor through northern Afghanistan. This line was subsequently extended to Andkhoy.\nIn February 2018, the existing rail line between Serhetabat and Torghundi in Afghanistan was restored to service. This line is planned to be extended to Herat, where it could potentially connect to a rail line under construction from Khaf, Iran.\nRolling stock.\nThe Asian Development Bank reported in 2021,In 2019, TRA had a rolling stock fleet of 119 diesel locomotives, 10,056 freight wagons, and 425 passenger cars. The majority of locomotives and all the passenger cars were purchased from the PRC (25 CKD9A-series passenger locomotives and 83 CKD9C-series freight locomotives). The freight wagon fleet included 2,849 tanker wagons, 1,738 gondola wagons, 1,637 platform wagons, 1,358 closed hopper wagons, 1,143 box wagons and 654 refrigerated wagons... In 2019, 6,607 wagons\n(65% of the fleet) [were] at least 30 years old, with many of these wagons having exceeded their normal economic life and in need of replacement.\nRoadways.\nPrior to the 1917 Russian Revolution only three automobiles existed in Turkmenistan, all of them foreign models in Ashgabat. No automobile roads existed between settlements. After the revolution, Soviet authorities graded dirt roads to connect Mary and Kushky (Serhetabat), Tejen and Sarahs, Kyzyl-Arvat (Serdar) with Garrygala (Magtymguly) and Chekishler, i.e., with important border crossings. In 1887-1888 the Gaudan Highway () was built between Ashgabat and the Persian border at Gaudan Pass, and Persian authorities extended it to Mashad, allowing for easier commercial relations. Municipal bus service began in Ashgabat in 1925 with five routes, and taxicab service began in 1938 with five vehicles. The road network was extended in the 1970s with construction of republic-level highways connecting Ashgabat and Kazanjik (Bereket), Ashgabat and Bayramaly, Nebit Dag (Balkanabat) and Krasnovodsk (T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy), Chardzhou (T\u00fcrkmenabat) and Kerki, and Mary and Kushka (Serhetabat). As of 2001 Turkmenistan had an estimated 22,000 kilometers of roads, about 18,000 kilometers of which were paved.\nThe primary west-east motor route is the M37 highway linking the Turkmenbashy International Seaport to the Farap border crossing via Ashgabat, Mary, and Turkmenabat. The primary north-south route is the Ashgabat-Dashoguz Automobile Road (), built in the 2000s. Major international routes include European route E003, European route E60, European route E121, and Asian Highway (AH) routes AH5, AH70, AH75, AH77, and AH78.\nA new toll motorway is under construction between Ashgabat and Turkmenabat by \u201cT\u00fcrkmen Awtoban\u201d company, which was originally scheduled to construct the 600-km highway in three phases: Ashgabat-Tejen by December 2020, Tejen-Mary by December 2022 and Mary-Turkmenabat by December 2023. As a result of delays due to financial shortfalls, the Ashgabat-Tejen phase is now scheduled for completion in September 2021. A sister project to link T\u00fcrkmenba\u015fy and Ashgabat was suspended when the Turkish contractor, Polimeks, walked away from the project, reportedly because of non-payment.\nAs of 29 January 2019, the Turkmen Automobile Roads state concern () was subordinated by presidential decree to the Ministry of Construction and Architecture, and responsibility for road construction and maintenance was shifted to provincial and municipal governments. Operation of motor coaches (buses) and taxicabs is the responsibility of the Automobile Services Agency () of the Ministry of Industry and Communication. The Turkmen Automobile Roads state concern was upgraded to ministry status on 11 July 2025 by presidential decree.\nTurkmenistan has one of the lowest gasoline prices in the world. In 2011 95-octane gasoline was priced at $0.72 per gallon ($0.19 per liter). As of March 2021, the state-controlled price was 1.50 manat per liter, or U.S. 43\u00a2 per liter ($1.62 per gallon).\nRiverways.\nThe main inland waterways are the Amu Darya River, which runs along the northern border, and the Karakum Canal, which runs from east to west from the Amu Darya near the Afghanistan border through Mary and Ashgabat to Bereket.\nThe official beginning of organized navigation on the Amu Darya occurred in 1873. Steamboats began plying the Amu Darya in 1888, with reassembly and launching of a Russian-built steamboat delivered to \u00c7\u00e4rjew in pieces. Navigation was hindered by the constantly shifting sandbars and islands that the river current formed and swept away. In 1917 there were on the Amu Darya between 20 and 50 self-propelled vessels and about 1500 boats. In 1923 the Central Asian Turkmenabat Shipping Company began providing services to Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and 10 regions of Kazakhstan, and transported loads by water across 1500 kilometers.\nOn August 15, 1992, the Turkmen River Shipping Company was established. In 2003, it was renamed State Concern Turkmen Riverways (T\u00fcrkmender\u00fda\u00fdollary), but subsequently reverted to a state agency subordinate to a series of ministries. In February 2021 the production subsidiary of T\u00fcrkmender\u00fda\u00fdollary was converted into an open joint-stock company.\nIn the mid-20th century Soviet authorities began construction of the Karakum Canal. The first phase was approved in 1952, and construction began in 1954. By 1959 in the first phase the canal had connected the Amu Darya to the Murghab River. In 1961 the canal was extended to the Tejen River in a second phase. A third phase, to bring water to Ashgabat, was accelerated due to the 1961 drought, and water from the Amu Darya was first delivered to the capital city on May 12, 1962. Next followed construction of the Gurtly and K\u00f6petdag Water Reservoirs, and then came the fourth phase, extension of the canal as far as Bereket, which was completed in 1981. From Bereket, water is delivered to Balkanabat, Hazar and Turkmenbashy by pipeline. The 1,100-kilometer canal, designed mainly for irrigation, is navigable for 200 kilometers from the Amu Darya. The Amu Darya is navigable in Turkmenistan for about 320 kilometers downstream from the Afghanistan border to Turkmenabat.\nMajor ports and harbours.\nTurkmenistan's largest seaport by far is Turkmenbashy International Seaport. The port was opened in October 1896. The Merchant Seaport Authority was founded in 1903. The port was substantially reconstructed between 2000 and 2003. Passenger ferry service to the port of Baku, Azerbaijan as well as rail ferries to other ports on the Caspian Sea (Baku, Aktau) began in 1962. In recent years tanker transport of oil to the ports of Baku and Makhachkala has increased.\nIn May 2018 construction was completed of a major expansion of the Turkmenbashy seaport. Cost of the project was $1.5 billion. The general contractor for the project was Gap In\u015faat, a subsidiary of \u00c7al\u0131k Holding of Turkey. The expansion added 17 million tons of annual capacity, making total throughput including previously existing facilities of over 25 million tons per year. The international ferry and passenger terminals can serve 300,000 passengers and 75,000 vehicles per year, and the container terminal is designed to handle 400,000 TEU (20-foot container equivalent) per year. Turkmenbashy International Seaport includes a shipyard. The port authority also oversees operations of the Kenar, Alaja, and Ekerem oil loading terminals.\nSmaller industrial loading terminals are located at Hazar (oil), Kiyanly () (plastics), and Garabogaz (urea).\nIn 2006 Turkmenistan had eight merchant marine vessels of more than 1,000 tons displacement, of which four were cargo ships, two were oil tankers, one was for refrigerated cargo, and one was a combination ore and oil ship. As of 2019 the national maritime carrier, closed joint-stock company Marine Merchant Fleet, possessed 19 ships, including 4 dry cargo vessels, 7 oil tankers, 2 Ro-Pax ferries, 3 passenger-only ferries, 2 tugboats, and one yacht.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30215", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30215", "title": "Armed Forces of Turkmenistan", "text": "National military of Turkmenistan\nThe Armed Forces of Turkmenistan (), known informally as the Turkmen National Army () is the national military of Turkmenistan. It consists of the Ground Forces, the Air Force and Air Defense Forces, Navy, and other independent formations (etc. Border Troops, Internal Troops and National Guard).\nHistory.\nBeginnings.\nAfter the fall of the Soviet Union, significant elements of the Soviet Armed Forces Turkestan Military District remained on Turkmen soil, including several motor rifle divisions. From V.I. Feskov et al. 2013 and Michael Holm's data, it appears that the three divisions were the 58th, 88th, and 209th District Training Centre (former 61 Training MRD) at Ashkhabad. In June 1992, the new Russian government signed a bilateral defense treaty with Turkmenistan, encouraging the new Turkmen government to create its own armed forces but stipulating that they were to be placed under joint command.\nThe United States Library of Congress Country Studies said that 'the Treaty on Joint Measures signed by Russia and Turkmenistan in July 1992 provided for the Russian Federation to act as guarantor of Turkmenistan's security and made former Soviet army units in the republic the basis of the new national armed forces. The treaty stipulated that, apart from border troops and air force and air defense units remaining under Russian control, the entire armed forces would be under joint command, which would gradually devolve to exclusive command by Turkmenistan over a period of ten years. For a transitional period of five years, Russia would provide logistical support and pay Turkmenistan for the right to maintain special installations, while Turkmenistan would bear the costs of housing, utilities, and administration.'\nThe Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies's \"Moscow Defence Brief\" said that in 1992\u201393 Turkmenistan attempted to create a small national armed force based on the former Soviet 52nd Army, which was located in the country and depended on support from Russia. Of the 300 formations and units, numbering 110,000 people, 200 were transferred to the command of Turkmenistan, 70 remained under Russia's jurisdiction, and 30 were either withdrawn or demobilized.\"\"\nIn 1994, the chief of staff and first deputy minister of defense was Major General Annamurat Soltanov, a career officer who had served in Cuba and Afghanistan; another deputy minister of defense, Major General Begdzhan Niyazov, had been a law enforcement administrator prior to his appointment. Russian commanders included Major General Viktor Zavarzin, chief of staff and first deputy commander of the Separate Combined-Arms Army of Turkmenistan, and commander of the Separate Combined-Arms Army of Turkmenistan and deputy minister of defense Lieutenant General Nikolai Kormiltsev. Russian Major General Vladislav Shunevich served together with Turkmen Major General Akmurad Kabulov as joint commanders of the border troops in the Turkmen Border Guard. Under a 1993 bilateral military cooperation treaty, some 2,000 Russian officers served in Turkmenistan on contract, and border forces (about 5,000 in 1995) are under joint Russian and Turkmenistani command. Altogether, about 11,000 Russian troops remained in Turkmenistan in mid-1996.'\nMilitary policy of Niyazov.\nTurkmenistan's military is considered to be the most neutral of all former republics of the Soviet Union. The country's military did not sign the Tashkent Treaty in May 1992, becoming an observer in the Council of Ministers of Defense of the CIS. Turkmenistan's first military doctrine was adopted in 1994 enforcing this. The neutral policy of Turkmenistan was also emphasized in relation to the 1996 Afghan War, maintaining an even relationship with both the Taliban and the Afghan government. Following the September 11 terrorist attacks, coalition troops did not appear on Turkmen territory. President Niyazov refused to provide the German government with a base to store German aircraft, arguing that the country intends to continue to follow the principles of neutrality.\nIn 2002, a \"labor army\" was created by Niyazov's orders which saw the creation of specialized labor military units. Soldiers in these units began to be sent from military units to enterprises, construction sites and hospitals as cheap labor, being removed from the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Defense.\nSince 2006.\nJane's Information Group said in 2009 that \"Turkmenistan's military is, even by the standards of Central Asia, poorly maintained and funded.\"\nWeeks after he was inaugurated for a first term, President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov announced his decision to endorse the country's second military doctrine, officially declaring neutrality and stating that the border with Afghanistan will be a national security priority. In 2016, a new military doctrine was adopted by Berdimuhamedov. In November 2018, President Berdimuhamedov reiterated this at a session of the State Security Council.\nMilitary organization.\nDefense Ministry.\nThe Ministry of Defense of Turkmenistan is a government agency of the armed forces which is the executive body in implementing defense policies in Turkmenistan. It was founded in January 1992 with the assistance of the Russian Armed Forces. Most of the original employees were retired Soviet officials in the Communist Party of the Turkmen SSR.\nGeneral Staff.\nThe Chief of the General Staff of Turkmen Armed Forces is the highest-ranking military officer in the military, being responsible for maintaining the operational command of the military and its three major branches.\nThe territorial Armed Forces of Turkmenistan are divided into 5 military districts in accordance with the administrative division of the country into 5 regions:\nEach military district includes district military command and control bodies, military units, individual military units and subunits, military commissariats of etraps and cities with etrap rights. The Territorial Defence Troops of Turkmenistan also serve regional purposes.\nGround Forces.\nThe Turkmen Ground Forces inherited several motor rifle divisions from the Soviet Armed Forces Turkestan Military District, forming the basis for the branch. Among them was the 58th Motor Rifle Division at Kyzyl-Arvat. Today the ground forces include the 2nd, 3rd, 11th, and 22nd Motor Rifle Divisions. The 11th Motor Rifle Division \"Sultan Sanjar\" is the former Soviet 88th Motor Rifle Division, with its headquarters at Kushka/Serhetabat. It was reported in January 2007 that on the Caspian Sea and the coastal zone to a depth of 350 kilometers, and on the Turkmen-Iranian border is located about 90% of the Army (22nd Motorized Division on the Caspian coast, 2nd and 3rd motorized divisions on the Turkmen-Iranian border, 11th Motorized Division on the Tajik-Afghan border).\nThe number of vehicles is around 2,000, the number of tanks is around 700 and the number of artillery pieces is around 560. Turkmen ground forces equipment includes 702 T-72, and 10 T-90, ordered in 2009 for approximately $30 million. AIFV / APC include BTR-60/BTR-70/BTR-80 - 829, BMP-1/BMP-2 - 930, BRM-1 12, and BRDM-2 - 170. In 2021 Turkmenistan is to receive batch of Lazar 3 8x8 armored vehicle from Serbia.\nAir Force.\nThe IISS in 2012 said the Air Force had 3,000 personnel with 94 combat capable aircraft. The total number of aircraft is around 120. It said there were two fighter/ground attack squadrons with MiG-29/MiG-29UB (total of 24 both types), Sukhoi Su-17 Fitter-Bs (65) and two Sukhoi Su-25 Frogfoots (with 41 more being refurbished). It reported one transport squadron with Antonov An-26 'Curl' (1), and Mi-8s and Mi-24s (8 and 10 listed in service respectively). Training units had Sukhoi Su-7 Fitter-As (3 listed in service) and L-39 Albatross. Air defence missile units had SA-2, SA-3, and SA-5\nUnits: \nNaval Forces.\nThe Turkmen naval forces are currently directed by the defense ministry and consist of around 700 servicemen and sixteen patrol boats. The Congressional Research Service, citing the International Institute for Strategic Studies, reports a number of six patrol boats.\nThe International Institute for Strategic Studies reported in 2007 that Turkmenistan intended to form a navy and had a minor base at Turkmenbashy with one USCG Point class cutter and five Kalkan-class patrol vessels. Jane's Fighting Ships 2001-2002 reported that the Point-class cutter was the \"Merjin,\" PB-129, (ex \"Point Jackson,\" 82378), which was transferred on 30 May 2000.\nThe country acquired four missile boats in 2011. In 2014 it acquired 10 Tuzla-class patrol boats which were all delivered by 2015.\nIn 2012, Turkmenistan announced its first naval exercises in the Caspian Sea programmed for early September. Named Hazar-2012 (\"Hazar\" is the Turkic name of the Caspian Sea), these tactical exercises came after a summer of somewhat heightened tensions with Azerbaijan over natural gas fields in a contested part of the sea.\nOther security forces.\nT\u00fcrkmen Edermen.\nThe Special Task Force \"T\u00fcrkmen Edermen\" (Valiant Turkmen in English) is a composite military unit drawn from the armed forces and national law enforcement agencies such as the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the State Border Service, and the Ministry for National Security.\nPresidential Security Service.\nThe Presidential Security Service () is responsible for ensuring the protection and security of the president. Established in November 1990, it is a directly reporting body of the President of Turkmenistan and not part of the Ministry of Defense. During state visits to foreign countries, the service provides at least 10 agents to protect the president. The Presidential Security Service is currently composed of 2,000 employees.\nBorder Guard.\nThe State Border Service of Turkmenistan is a public service department in the government of the country and is under the command of the Ministry for National Security of Turkmenistan. The main tasks of the service include the following: protecting of the national border of the country, combating international terrorism and drug trafficking, targeting illegal migration and human trafficking, and protecting oil and gas platforms and pipelines in the Caspian Sea. The head of the service is a member of the Council of Border Guard Commanders of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).\nInternal Troops.\nThe Internal Troops is under the auspices of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. It is designed to maintain law and order and enforce the status quo in terms of state sovereignty. It aides the Turkmen National Police in its everyday activities, being organized similarly to the ground forces.\nPersonnel.\nMilitary education.\nFounded in 1993 and 2007 respectively, the Military Institute of the Ministry of Defense of Turkmenistan and the Military Academy of Turkmenistan are the senior most military academies of their kind in Turkmenistan. Other military academies include the Turkmen Police Academy, the Turkmen National Security Institute, and the Turkmen Naval Institute. Border guards are trained at special institutes in military universities.\nUniforms.\nMilitary uniforms are sewn in the following factories of the Ministry of Textile Industry on the orders of the Ministry of Defense of Turkmenistan:\nThe semi-woolen fabrics that are not produced in Turkmenistan are supplied through the Turkmendokma Foreign Trade Enterprise of the Ministry of Textile Industry.\nConscription.\nService in the armed forces is required for all males under 27 years of age. Minister of Defence Dangatar Kopekov stated in 1992 that legislation was drafted to where draft dodgers would face \"very severe measures, including criminal responsibility\". Despite this, desertion is rampant, and was at a 20% rate in 1994. For many military units, it has often been accepted that commanders extort bribes for an early demobilization of conscripts.\nThere have been reported cases of mistreatment of army conscripts on duty and Hazing.\nWomen in the National Army.\nWomen under the age of 21 who have a secondary education and have volunteered for military service can qualify for higher educational studies at the military institute. In 2016, Senior Lieutenant Jahan Yazmuhammedova became the first female paratrooper in the Armed Forces, serving in the 152nd Independent Air Assault Battalion. A parade in 2019 was the first parade in which female siblings (Captains Shirin and Aknabat Velikurbanov) took part in the parade as part of the same contingent. The contingent in question was led by Major Nabat Nurgeldyeva, who was in her 16th parade.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30216", "revid": "50922406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30216", "title": "Foreign relations of Turkmenistan", "text": " \nTurkmenistan's declaration of \"permanent neutrality\" was formally recognized by the United Nations in 1995. Former President Niyazov stated that the neutrality would prevent Turkmenistan from participating in multi-national defense organizations, but allows military assistance. Its neutral foreign policy has an important place in the country's constitution. Although the Government of Turkmenistan claims to favour trade with and export to the United States, and Turkey, its single largest commercial partner is China, which buys the vast bulk of Turkmen natural gas via the Central Asia\u2013China gas pipeline. Turkmenistan has significant commercial relationships with Russia and Iran and growing cross-border trade with Afghanistan. The Government of Turkmenistan often appears to use the conflicting interests of these regional powers as a means to extract concessions, especially on energy issues.\nInternational disputes.\nSigning of the Caspian Sea convention in 2018 brought only partial resolution of boundary disputes in the Caspian. Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan have disputes over water-sharing. Turkmenistan shares a long border with Afghanistan, a principal producer of heroin and opium. As a result, a large volume of narcotics are trafficked through Turkmenistan on their way to lucrative markets in Europe and Russia.\nNatural resources.\nTurkmenistan is rich in natural gas, and currently sells most of its gas to China. Turkmenistan unilaterally cut off exports of pipeline natural gas to Iran in 2017 over a payment arrears dispute. Russia ceased buying gas from Turkmenistan in 2016, but resumed small purchases of pipeline gas in 2019. Afghanistan buys liquid petroleum gas, shipped by rail to Ymamnazar and Torghundi for onward delivery by truck. Pakistan provides Turkmenistan warm water as well as Iran and Russia.\nTurkmenistan is a partner country of the EU INOGATE energy programme, which has four key topics: enhancing energy security,\nconvergence of member state energy markets on the basis of EU internal energy market principles, \nsupporting sustainable energy development, and attracting investment for energy projects of common and regional interest.\nOrganisations.\nTurkmenistan is a member of the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, the Islamic Development Bank, Asian Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Food and Agriculture Organization, and the International Organization of Turkic Culture.\nTurkmenistan maintains permanent representatives to the United Nations offices in New York City, Vienna, and Geneva.\nThe United Nations maintains a permanent representation staffed by a resident coordinator along with representatives of some UN agencies in Ashgabat. The Asian Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and European Union have missions in Ashgabat, as well.\nAccording to the European Commission's website, as of 2025, \"A Partnership and Cooperation Agreement concluded with Turkmenistan in 1998 is yet to be ratified by all EU Member States. Pending ratification, an Interim Agreement on trade and trade-related matters entered into force on 1 August 2010. Other areas of cooperation remain based on the Trade and Cooperation Agreement signed with the Soviet Union in 1989 and subsequently endorsed by Turkmenistan.\"\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Turkmenistan maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30217", "revid": "47705917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30217", "title": "Turks and Caicos Islands", "text": "British Overseas Territory in the Atlantic\nTurks and Caicos Islands ( and ) are a British Overseas Territory consisting of the larger Caicos Islands and smaller Turks Islands, two groups of tropical islands in the Lucayan Archipelago of the Atlantic Ocean and northern West Indies. They are known primarily for tourism and as an offshore financial centre. The resident population in 2023 was estimated by \"The World Factbook\" at 59,367, making it the third-largest of the British overseas territories by population. However, according to a Department of Statistics estimate in 2022, the population was 47,720.\nThe islands are southeast of Mayaguana in the Bahamas island chain and north of the island of Hispaniola (Haiti and the Dominican Republic). Cockburn Town, the capital since 1766, is situated on Grand Turk about east-southeast of Miami. They have a total land area of .\nThe islands were inhabited for centuries by Ta\u00edno people. The first recorded European sighting of them was in 1512. In subsequent centuries, they were claimed by several European powers, with the British Empire eventually gaining control. For many years they were governed indirectly through Bermuda, the Bahamas, and Jamaica. When the Bahamas gained independence in 1973, the islands received their own governor, and have remained an autonomous territory since.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Caico[s]\" is from the Lucayan , meaning 'string of islands'. The Turks Islands are named after the Turk's cap cactus, \"Melocactus intortus\", whose red cephalium resembles the fez hat worn by Turks in the late Ottoman Empire.\nHistory.\nPrecolonial era.\nThe first inhabitants of the islands were the Arawakan-speaking Ta\u00edno people, who most likely crossed over from Hispaniola some time from AD 500 to 800.18 Together with Ta\u00edno who migrated from Cuba to the southern Bahamas around the same time, these people developed as the Lucayan. Around 1200, the Turks and Caicos Islands were resettled by Classical Ta\u00ednos from Hispaniola.\nEuropean arrival.\nIt is unknown precisely who the first European to sight the islands was. Some sources state that the explorer Christopher Columbus saw the islands on his voyage to the Americas in 1492. However, other sources state that it is more likely that Spanish conquistador Juan Ponce de Le\u00f3n was the first European in Turks and Caicos, in 1512. In either case, by 1512 the Spanish had begun capturing the Ta\u00edno and Lucayans as labourers in the \"encomienda\" system to replace the largely depleted native population of Hispaniola. As a result of this, and the introduction of diseases to which the native people had no immunity, the southern Bahama Islands and the Turks and Caicos Islands were completely depopulated by about 1513, and remained so until the 17th century.\nEuropean settlement.\nFrom the mid-1600s Bermudian salt collectors began seasonally visiting the islands, later settling more permanently with their African slaves. For several decades around the turn of the 18th century, the islands became popular pirate hideouts. During the Anglo-French War (1778\u20131783) the French captured the archipelago in 1783; however, it was later confirmed as a British colony with the Treaty of Paris (1783). After the American War of Independence (1775\u20131783), many Loyalists fled to British Caribbean colonies, also bringing with them African slaves. They developed cotton as an important cash crop, but it was superseded by the development of the salt industry, with the labour carried out by slaves bought and transported from Africa or the other Caribbean islands and their descendants, who soon came to outnumber the European settlers.\nIn 1799, both the Turks and the Caicos island groups were annexed by Britain as part of the Bahamas. The processing of sea salt was developed as a highly important export product from the West Indies and continued to be a major export product into the nineteenth century.\n19th century.\nIn 1807, Britain prohibited the slave trade and, in 1833, abolished slavery in its colonies. British ships sometimes intercepted slave traders in the Caribbean, and some ships were wrecked off the coast of these islands. In 1837, the \"Esperan\u00e7a,\" a Portuguese slaver, was wrecked off East Caicos, one of the larger islands. While the crew and 220 captive Africans survived the shipwreck, 18 Africans died before the survivors were taken to Nassau. Africans from this ship may have been among the 189 liberated Africans whom the British colonists settled in the Turks and Caicos from 1833 to 1840.211\nIn 1841, the \"Trouvadore\", an illegal Spanish slave ship, was wrecked off the coast of East Caicos. All of the 20-man crew and 192 captive Africans survived the sinking. Officials freed the Africans and arranged for 168 persons to be apprenticed to island proprietors on Grand Turk for one year. They increased the small population of the colony by seven per cent.212 The remaining 24 were resettled in Nassau, Bahamas. The Spanish crew were also taken there, to be turned over to the custody of the Cuban consul and taken to Cuba for prosecution. An 1878 letter documents the \"Trouvadore Africans\" and their descendants as constituting an essential part of the \"labouring population\" on the islands.210 In 2004, marine archaeologists affiliated with the Turks and Caicos National Museum discovered a wreck, called the \"Black Rock Ship\", that subsequent research has suggested might be that of the \"Trouvadore\". In November 2008, a cooperative marine archaeology expedition, funded by the United States National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, confirmed that the wreck has artifacts whose style and date of manufacture link them to the \"Trouvadore\".\nIn 1848, Britain designated the Turks and Caicos as a separate colony under a council president. In 1873\u20134, the islands were made part of the Jamaica colony; in 1894, the chief colonial official was restyled commissioner. In 1917, Canadian Prime Minister Robert Borden suggested that the Turks and Caicos join Canada, but this suggestion was rejected by British Prime Minister David Lloyd George and the islands remained a dependency of Jamaica.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nOn 4 July 1959 the islands were again designated as a separate colony, the last commissioner being restyled administrator. The governor of Jamaica also continued as the governor of the islands. When Jamaica was granted independence from Britain in August 1962, the Turks and Caicos Islands became a Crown colony. Beginning in 1965, the governor of the Bahamas was also governor of the Turks and Caicos Islands and oversaw affairs for the islands.\nWhen the Bahamas gained independence in 1973, the Turks and Caicos received their own governor (the last administrator was restyled). In 1974, Canadian New Democratic Party MP Max Saltsman proposed in his private member's bill C-249, \"An Act Respecting a Proposed Association Between Canada and the Caribbean Turks and Caicos Islands\" that Canada form an association with the Turks and Caicos Islands; however, it was never submitted to a vote. Since August 1976, the islands have had their own government headed by a chief minister (now premier), the first of whom was J. A. G. S. McCartney. Moves towards independence in the early 1980s were stalled by the election of an anti-independence party in 1980 and since then the islands have remained British territory. Local government was suspended from 1986 to 1988, following allegation of government involvement with drug trafficking which resulted in the arrest of Chief Minister Norman Saunders.\nIn 2002 the islands were re-designated a British Overseas Territory, with islanders gaining full British citizenship. A new constitution was promulgated in 2006; however in 2009 Premier Michael Misick of the Progressive National Party (PNP) resigned in the face of corruption charges, and the United Kingdom took over direct control of the government.\nDuring this period of direct British rule, in 2010 the leaders of The Bahamas and the Turks and Caicos Islands discussed the possibility of forming a federation.\nA new constitution was promulgated in October 2012 and the government was returned to full local administration after the November 2012 elections.56 Rufus Ewing of the PNP was elected as the new, restored, premier.\nIn the 2016 elections, the PNP lost for the first time since they replaced Derek Hugh Taylor's government in 2003. The People's Democratic Movement (PDM) came to power with Sharlene Cartwright-Robinson as Premier. She was replaced by Washington Misick after the PNP returned to power after winning the 2021 general elections.\nGeography and environment.\nThe two island groups are in the North Atlantic Ocean about north of Hispaniola and about from Miami in the United States, at . The territory is geographically contiguous to the Bahamas, both comprising the Lucayan Archipelago, but is politically a separate entity. The Caicos Islands are separated by the Caicos Passage from the closest Bahamian islands, Mayaguana and Great Inagua. The nearest foreign landmass from the Turks and Caicos Islands is the Bahamian island of Little Inagua, about 30 miles (48\u00a0km) from West Caicos.\nThe eight main islands and more than 22 smaller islands have a total land area of , consisting primarily of low, flat limestone with extensive marshes and mangrove swamps and of beach front. The tallest peaks in the islands are Blue Hills on Providenciales and Flamingo Hill on East Caicos, both at a modest 48\u00a0m. The weather is usually sunny (it is generally regarded that the islands receive 350 days of sun each year) and relatively dry, but suffers frequent hurricanes. The islands have limited natural fresh water resources; private cisterns collect rainwater for drinking. The primary natural resources are spiny lobster, conch, and other shellfish. Turks and Caicos contains three terrestrial ecoregions: Bahamian dry forests, Bahamian pineyards, and Bahamian-Antillean mangroves.\nThe two distinct island groups are separated by the Turks Island Passage.\nTurks Islands.\nThe Turks Islands are separated from the Caicos Islands by Turks Island Passage, which is more than deep. The islands form a chain that stretches north\u2013south. The 2012 census population was 4,939 on the two main islands, the only inhabited islands of the group:\nTogether with nearby islands, all on Turks Bank, those two main islands form the two administrative districts of the territory (out of six in total) that fall within the Turks Islands. Turks Bank, which is smaller than Caicos Bank, has a total area of about .149\nThe main uninhabited islands are:\nMouchoir Bank.\n east of the Turks Islands and separated from them by Mouchoir Passage is the Mouchoir Bank. Although it has no emergent cays or islets, some parts are very shallow and the water breaks on them. Mouchoir Bank is part of the Turks and Caicos Islands and falls within its Exclusive Economic Zone. It measures in area.127 Two banks further east, Silver Bank and Navidad Bank, are geographically a continuation, but belong politically to the Dominican Republic.\nCaicos Islands.\nThe largest island in the Caicos archipelago is the sparsely inhabited Middle Caicos, which measures in area, but had a population of only 168 at the 2012 Census. The most populated island is Providenciales, with 23,769 inhabitants in 2012, and an area of . North Caicos ( in area) had 1,312 inhabitants. South Caicos ( in area) had 1,139 inhabitants, and Parrot Cay ( in area) had 131 inhabitants. East Caicos (which is administered as part of South Caicos District) is uninhabited, while the only permanent inhabitants of West Caicos (administered as part of Providenciales District) are resort staff.\nThe Caicos Islands comprise the following main islands:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nThe Turks and Caicos Islands feature a tropical savannah climate (AW), with relatively consistent temperatures throughout the course of the year. Summertime temperatures rarely exceed and winter nighttime temperatures rarely fall below . Water temperature in the summer is 82 to 84 degrees (28\u201329 degrees Celsius) and in winter about 74 to 78 degrees (23\u201326 degrees Celsius). A constant trade wind keeps the climate at a very comfortable level.\nBiodiversity.\nThe Turks and Caicos Islands are a biodiversity hotspot. The islands have many endemic species and others of international importance, due to the conditions created by the oldest established salt-pan development in the Caribbean. The variety of species includes a number of endemic species of lizards, snakes, insects and plants, and marine organisms; in addition to being an important breeding area for seabirds.\nThe UK and Turks and Caicos Islands Governments have joint responsibility for the conservation and preservation to meet obligations under international environmental conventions.\nDue to this significance, the islands are on the United Kingdom's tentative list for future UNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nPolitics.\nThe Turks and Caicos Islands are a British Overseas Territory. As a British territory, its sovereign is Charles III, King of the United Kingdom, represented by a governor appointed by the monarch, on the advice of the Foreign Office. With the election of the territory's first Chief Minister, J. A. G. S. McCartney, the islands first adopted a constitution on 30 August 1976. The national holiday, Constitution Day, is celebrated annually on 30 August.\nThe territory's legal system is based on English common law, with a small number of laws adopted from Jamaica and the Bahamas. Suffrage is universal for those over 18 years of age. English is the official language. Grand Turk is the administrative and political capital of the Turks and Caicos Islands and Cockburn Town has been the seat of government since 1766.\nThe Turks and Caicos Islands participate in the Caribbean Development Bank, is an associate in CARICOM, a member of the Universal Postal Union and maintains an Interpol sub-bureau. The United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization includes the territory on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories.\nUnder the new Constitution that came into effect in October 2012, legislative power is held by a unicameral House of Assembly, consisting of 19 seats, 15 elected and four appointed by the governor; of elected members, five are elected at large and 10 from single-member districts for four-year terms.\nIn the 2021 elections the Progressive National Party won in a landslide and Washington Misick became Premier.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe Turks and Caicos Islands are divided into six administrative districts (two in the Turks Islands and four in the Caicos Islands), headed by district commissioners. For the House of Assembly, the Turks and Caicos Islands are divided into 15 electoral districts (four in the Turks Islands and eleven in the Caicos Islands).\nJudiciary.\nThe judicial branch of government is headed by a Supreme Court; appeals are heard by the Court of Appeal and final appeals by the United Kingdom's Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. There are three justices of the Supreme Court, a Chief Justice and two others. The Court of Appeal consists of a president and at least two justices of appeal.\nMagistrates' Courts are the lower courts and appeals from Magistrates' Courts are sent to the Supreme Court.\nAs of April 2020, the Chief Justice is Justice Mabel Agyemang.\nPublic safety.\nPolicing is primarily the responsibility of the Royal Turks and Caicos Islands Police Force. Customs and border enforcement is the responsibility of the Border Force. At times these may be supported by the Turks and Caicos Islands Regiment.\nAs of November 2024, the Turks and Caicos Islands had the highest murder rate of countries worldwide.\nMilitary and defence.\nThe defence of the Turks and Caicos Islands is the responsibility of the United Kingdom. The Royal Navy maintains a persistent presence in the Caribbean through the Atlantic Patrol Task (North) mission. HMS Medway, a River-class offshore patrol vessel, is regularly deployed to the region, including visits to the Turks and Caicos Islands. During a visit in November 2024, HMS Medway conducted disaster response exercises and engaged with local authorities to reinforce the UK's commitment to regional security and humanitarian assistance. In response to a surge in gang-related violence in 2022, the Royal Fleet Auxiliary deployed RFA Tideforce to the Turks and Caicos Islands. Equipped with a Wildcat helicopter, Tideforce provided surveillance support to local law enforcement agencies to address the escalating security concerns.\nTurks and Caicos Islands Regiment.\nIn December 2019, Governor Nigel Dakin announced the formation of the Turks and Caicos Islands Regiment, with assistance from the UK's Ministry of Defence. The regiment is modeled after similar units in other British Overseas Territories and focuses on national security, disaster response, and engineering support.\nIn spring 2020, a Security and Assistance Team from the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence arrived in Turks and Caicos to assist with the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2020 Atlantic hurricane season, and to help build the new Turks and Caicos Regiment. The regiment became operational in 2020, with Lieutenant Colonel Ennis Grant appointed as its first commanding officer. Since its inception, the regiment has participated in various training exercises and operations, including joint disaster response drills with HMS Medway during its 2024 visit.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEight of the thirty islands in the territory are inhabited, with a total population estimated from preliminary results of the census of 25 January 2012 (released on 12 August 2012) of 31,458 inhabitants, an increase of 58.2% from the population of 19,886 reported in the 2001 census. July 2021 estimates put the population at 57,196. One-third of the population is under 15 years old, and only 4% are 65 or older. In 2000 the population was growing at a rate of 3.55% per year. The infant mortality rate was 18.66 deaths per 1,000 live births and the life expectancy at birth was 73.28 years (71.15 years for males, 75.51 years for females). The total fertility rate was 3.25 children born per woman. The annual population growth rate is 2.82%.\n\"The CIA World Factbook\" breaks down the islanders' ethnicity as African 87%, European 7.9%, Mixed 2.5.%, East Indian 1.3% and Other 0.7%. There is a small Dominican and Haitian community on the islands.\nLanguage.\nThe official language of the islands is English, but the population also speaks Turks and Caicos Islands Creole. Due to its proximity to Cuba and Hispaniola, large Haitian Creole and Spanish-speaking communities have developed in the territory due to immigration, both legal and illegal, from Haitian Creole-speaking Haiti and from Spanish-speaking Cuba and Dominican Republic.\nReligion.\n86% of the population of Turks and Caicos are Christian (Baptists 35.8%, Church of God 11.7%, Roman Catholics 11.4%, Anglicans 10%, Methodists 9.3%, Seventh-day Adventists 6%, Jehovah's Witnesses 1.8%), with other faiths making up the remaining 14%.\nCatholics are served by the Mission \"Sui Iuris\" for Turks and Caicos, which was erected in 1984 with territory taken from the then Diocese of Nassau.\nCulture.\nThe Turks and Caicos Islands are perhaps best known musically for ripsaw music, a genre which originated on the islands.34 The Turks and Caicos Islands are known for their annual Music and Cultural Festival showcasing many local talents and other dynamic performances by many music celebrities from around the Caribbean and United States.\nWomen continue traditional crafts of using straw to make baskets and hats on the larger Caicos islands. It is possible that this continued tradition is related to the liberated Africans who joined the population directly from Africa in the 1830s and 1841 from shipwrecked slavers; they brought cultural craft skills with them.216\nThe island's most popular sports are fishing, sailing, football (soccer) and cricket (which is the national sport).\nTurks and Caicos cuisine is based primarily around seafood, especially conch. Two common local dishes are conch fritters and conch salad.\nCitizenship.\nBecause the Turks and Caicos is a British Overseas Territory and not an independent country, its nationality laws are partly determined by British nationality law and its history. People with close ties to Britain's Overseas Territories all hold the same nationality: British Overseas Territories citizenship (BOTC), originally defined by the British Nationality Act 1981 as British Dependent Territories citizenship. BOTC, however, does not confer any right to live in any British Overseas Territory, including the territory from which it is derived. Instead, the rights normally associated with citizenship derive from what is called belonger status and island natives or those descended from natives are said to be Belongers. The Turks and Caicos government amended its immigration law in 2021 in that regard, making the granting of Belonger Status exclusive to \"being married for ten years to a Belonger (other than a Belonger by marriage), or by being the dependent child of someone who becomes a Belonger by marriage.\" It was also made possible \"for someone who has invested $500,000 or more in Providenciales or West Caicos, or $250,000 or more in Grand Turk or the family Islands, to obtain a residence permit for up to ten years.\"\nIn 2002, the British Overseas Territories Act restored full British citizenship status to all citizens of British Overseas Territories, including the Turks and Caicos.\nEducation.\nThe Ministry of Education, Youth, Sports and Library Services oversees education in Turks and Caicos. Public education is supported by taxation and is mandatory for children aged five to sixteen. Primary education lasts for six years and secondary education lasts for five years. In the 1990s the Primary In-Service Teacher Education Project (PINSTEP) was launched in an effort to increase the skills of its primary school teachers, nearly one-quarter of whom were unqualified. Turks and Caicos also worked to refurbish its primary schools, reduce textbook costs, and increase equipment and supplies given to schools. For example, in September 1993, each primary school was given enough books to allow teachers to establish in-class libraries. In 2001, the student-teacher ratio at the primary level was roughly 15:1.\nPublic secondary schools include:\nInternational School of the Turks and Caicos Islands, a private school which serves preschool through grade six, is in Leeward, Providenciales. In 2014 it had 106 students. It was known as The Ashcroft School until 2014.\nThe Turks and Caicos Islands Community College offers free higher education to students who have successfully completed their secondary education. The community college also oversees an adult literacy program. Once a student completes their education at Turks and Caicos Islands Community College, they are allowed to further their education at a university in the United States, Canada, or the United Kingdom for free. They have to commit to working in the Turks and Caicos Islands for four years to receive this additional education.\nCharisma University is a non-profit private university recognised by the Turks and Caicos Islands Ministry of Education, Youth, Sports and Library Services that offers accredited undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate degree programmes, along with certificate programs in various disciplines taught by over 100 faculty members.\nThe public University of the West Indies Open Campus has one site in the territory.\nHealthcare.\nThe Turks and Caicos established a National Health Insurance Plan in 2010.231 Residents contribute to a National Health Insurance Plan through salary deduction and nominal user fees. The majority of care is provided by private-public-partnership hospitals managed by Interhealth Canada, one hospital in Providenciales and one hospital on Grand Turk. In addition, there are a number of government clinics and private clinics. The hospitals opened in 2010 and have been accredited by Accreditation Canada since 2012.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Turks and Caicos is dominated by tourism, offshore finance and fishing. The US dollar is the main currency used on the islands.\nHistorically, the salt industry, along with small sponge and hemp exports, sustained the Turks and Caicos Islands (only barely, however; there was little population growth and the economy stagnated). The economy grew in the 1960s, when American investors arrived on the islands and funded the construction of an airstrip on Providenciales and built the archipelago's first hotel, \"The Third Turtle\". A small trickle of tourists began to arrive, supplementing the salt-based economy. Club Med set up a resort at Grace Bay soon after. In the 1980s, Club Med funded an upgrading of the airstrip to allow for larger aircraft, and since then, tourism has been gradually on the increase.\nIn 2009, GDP contributions were as follows: Hotels &amp; Restaurants 34.67%, Financial Services 13.12%, Construction 7.83%, Transport, Storage &amp; Communication 9.90%, and Real Estate, Renting &amp; Business Activities 9.56%. Most capital goods and food for domestic consumption are imported.\nIn 2010/2011, major sources of government revenue included Import Duties (43.31%), Stamp Duty on Land Transaction (8.82%), Work Permits and Residency Fees (10.03%) and Accommodation Tax (24.95%). The territory's gross domestic product as of late 2009 is approximately US$795 million (per capita $24,273).\nThe labour force totalled 27,595 workers in 2008. The labour force distribution in 2006 is as follows:\nThe unemployment rate in 2008 was 8.3%. In 2007\u20132008, the territory took in revenues of $206.79 million against expenditures of $235.85 million. In 1995, the island received economic aid worth $5.7 million. The territory's currency is the United States dollar, with a few government fines (such as airport infractions) being payable in pounds sterling. Most commemorative coin issues are denominated in crowns.\nThe primary agricultural products include limited amounts of maize, beans, cassava (tapioca) and citrus fruits. Fish and conch are the only significant export, with some $169.2 million of lobster, dried and fresh conch, and conch shells exported in 2000, primarily to the United Kingdom and the United States. In recent years, however, the catch has been declining. The territory used to be an important trans-shipment point for South American narcotics destined for the United States, but due to the ongoing pressure of a combined American, Bahamian and Turks and Caicos effort this trade has been greatly reduced.\nThe islands import food and beverages, tobacco, clothing, manufacture and construction materials, primarily from the United States and the United Kingdom. Imports totalled $581 million in 2007.\nThe islands produce and consume 236.5 GWh of electricity, per year, all of which comes from fossil fuels.\nTourism.\nTourism is one of the largest sources of income for the islands, with most visitors coming from America via ship. Tourist arrivals had risen to 264,887 in 2007 and to 351,498 by 2009. In 2010, a total of 245 cruise ships arrived at the Grand Turk Cruise Terminal, carrying a total of 617,863 visitors.\nThe government is pursuing a two-pronged strategy to increase tourism. Upmarket resorts are aimed at the wealthy, while a large new cruise-ship port and recreation centre has been built for the masses visiting Grand Turk. Turks and Caicos Islands has one of the longest coral reefs in the world and the world's only conch farm.\nThe French vacation village company of Club M\u00e9diterann\u00e9e (Club Med) has an all-inclusive adult resort called 'Turkoise' on Providenciales.\nThe islands have become popular with various celebrities. Several Hollywood stars have owned homes in the Turks and Caicos, including Dick Clark and Bruce Willis. Ben Affleck and Jennifer Garner married on Parrot Cay in 2005. Actress Eva Longoria and her ex-husband Tony Parker went to the islands for their honeymoon in July 2007. Musician Nile Rodgers has a vacation home on the island.\nTo boost tourism during the Caribbean low season of late summer, since 2003 the Turks and Caicos Tourist Board has organised and hosted an annual series of concerts during this season called the Turks &amp; Caicos Music and Cultural Festival. Held in a temporary bandshell at The Turtle Cove Marina in The Bight on Providenciales, this festival lasts about a week and has featured several notable international recording artists, such as Lionel Richie, LL Cool J, Anita Baker, Billy Ocean, Alicia Keys, John Legend, Kenny Rogers, Michael Bolton, Ludacris, Chaka Khan, and Boyz II Men. More than 10,000 people attend annually. In 2024 several American tourists were arrested for being in possession of small arms ammunition, each facing 12 year mandatory prison terms.\nCrime.\nAccording to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Turks and Caicos Islands had the highest intentional homicide rate of any country or dependent territory, at 76.5 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants.\nOn 6 March 2025, it was announced that the U.S. State Department had issued a Level 2 travel advisory, warning travellers to be cautious when visiting due to crime. This advisory does not mean that travel is discouraged, but visitors should exercise increased caution.\nTransportation.\nProvidenciales International Airport is the main entry point for the Turks and Caicos Islands.\nThe Norman B. Saunders Sr. International Airport on South Caicos offers direct international service, with American Airlines operating flights between Miami and South Caicos (Flight AA 3815), as well as domestic flights to Providenciales and Grand Turk.\nThe JAGS McCartney International Airport serves the capital, Cockburn Town, on Grand Turk. Altogether, there are seven airports, located on each of the inhabited islands. Five have paved runways (three of which are approximately long and one is approximately long), and the remaining two have unpaved runways (one of which is approximately long and the other is significantly shorter).\nThe islands have of highway, paved and unpaved. Like the United States Virgin Islands and British Virgin Islands, the Turks and Caicos Islands drive on the left.\nThe territory's main international ports and harbours are on Grand Turk, Providenciales, and South Caicos.\nThe islands have no significant railways. In the early twentieth century East Caicos operated a horse-drawn railway to transport sisal from the plantation to the port. The route was removed after sisal trading ceased.\nSpaceflight.\nFrom 1950 to 1981, the United States had a missile tracking station on Grand Turk. In the early days of the American space program, NASA used it. After his three earth orbits in 1962, American astronaut John Glenn successfully landed in the nearby ocean and was brought back ashore to Grand Turk.\nIn 2025, the seventh flight test of SpaceX Starship exploded within sight of the islands, resulting in more than 230 airline flights needing to alter course or delay departure as a precaution against flying near falling debris, disrupting the travels of more than 40,000 people, and reports of damage on the ground, but official investigations revealed no injuries and only minor damage to one vehicle on the ground. The later eighth flight test had a similar outcome, disrupting about 240 flights according to the FAA. As in Starship's seventh flight test, debris was seen from the islands causing the government to issue an advisory, however according to the FAA there were no reports of injuries or damage on the ground.\nPostal system.\nThere is no postal delivery in the Turks and Caicos; mail is picked up at one of four post offices on each of the major islands. Mail is transported three or seven times a week, depending on the destination. The Post Office is part of the territory's government and reports to the Minister of Government British support services\nMedia.\nMobile phone service is provided by Cable &amp; Wireless Communications, through its Flow brand, using GSM 850 and TDMA, and Digicel, using GSM 900 and 1900 and Islandcom Wireless, using 3G 850. Cable &amp; Wireless provides CDMA mobile phone service in Providenciales and Grand Turk. The system is connected to the mainland by two submarine cables and an Intelsat earth station. There were three AM radio stations (one inactive) and six FM stations (no shortwave) in 1998. The most popular station is Power 92.5 FM which plays Top 100 hits. Over 8000 radio receivers are owned across the territory.\nWest Indies Video (WIV) has been the sole cable television provider for the Turks and Caicos Islands for over two decades and WIV4 (a subsidiary of WIV) has been the only broadcast station in the islands for over 15 years ; broadcasts from the Bahamas can also be received. The territory has two internet service providers and its country code top-level domain (ccTLD) is \".tc\". Amateur radio callsigns begin with \"VP5\" and visiting operators frequently work from the islands.\nTurks and Caicos is served by the ARCOS-1 submarine cable, connecting the territory to the Dominican Republic to the south, to the Bahamas to the north and onto the US and countries in Central America.\nWIV introduced Channel 4 News in 2002 broadcasting local news and infotainment programs across the country. Channel 4 was re-launched as WIV4 in November 2007.\nIn 2013 4NEWS became the islands' first high-definition cable news service with television studios in Grace Bay, Providenciales. DigicelPlay is the local cable provider.\nTurks and Caicos's newspapers include the \"Turks and Caicos Weekly News\", the \"Turks and Caicos Sun\" and the \"Turks and Caicos Free Press\". All three publications are weekly. The \"Weekly News\" and the \"Sun\" both have supplement magazines. Other local magazines \"Times of the Islands\", \"s3 Magazine\", \"Real Life Magazine\", \"Baller Magazine\", and \"Unleashed Magazine\".\nSports.\nCricket is the islands' national sport. The national team takes part in regional tournaments in the ICC Americas Championship, as well as having played one Twenty20 match as part of the 2008 Standford 20/20. Two domestic leagues exist, one on Grand Turk with three teams and another on Providenciales.\nAs of December 2020, the Turks and Caicos Islands' football team is ranked 203rd out of 210 teams in the FIFA World Rankings. Its highest ever ranking was 158th, achieved in 2008.\nBecause the territory is not recognised by the International Olympic Committee, Turks and Caicos Islanders compete for Great Britain at the Olympic Games.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30218", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30218", "title": "Turks and Caicos Islands/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "30219", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30219", "title": "Turks and Caicos Islands/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "30220", "revid": "30395827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30220", "title": "Demographics of the Turks and Caicos Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "30221", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30221", "title": "Government of the Turks and Caicos Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "30222", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30222", "title": "Economy of the Turks and Caicos Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "30223", "revid": "1277030069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30223", "title": "Telecommunications in the Turks and Caicos Islands", "text": " \nCommunications in the Turks and Caicos Islands\nTelephone.\nTelephones - main lines in use: 4,000 (2021)\nTelephones - mobile cellular: 25,085 (2004)\nTelephone system: fair cable and radiotelephone services\n\"domestic:\" NA\n\"international:\" 1 submarine cable (Arcos-1); satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations: AM 3 (one inactive), FM 6, shortwave 0 (1998)\nA partial list of AM/FM/SW stations in the Turks and Caicos Islands is provided below:\nAM Radio:\nFM Radio:\nShortwave:\nDefunct:\nRadios: 8,000 (1997)\nTelevision.\nTelevision broadcast stations: 2\nWIV Cable has been operating on the islands for over 10 years (Channel 4)\nNew to Turks &amp; Caicos, TCeyeTV started broadcasting on 3 July 2007\nbroadcasts from The Bahamas are also received; cable television is established) (1997)\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs): 3 (2013)\nCountry code (Top level domain): TC\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30224", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30224", "title": "Turks and Caicos Islands/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "30225", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30225", "title": "Turks and Caicos Islands/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "30226", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30226", "title": "Turks and Caicos Islands/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "30227", "revid": "51021859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30227", "title": "Tuvalu", "text": "Country in Oceania\nTuvalu ( ) is an island country in the Polynesian sub-region of Oceania in the Pacific Ocean, about midway between Hawaii and Australia. It lies east-northeast of the Santa Cruz Islands (which belong to the Solomon Islands), northeast of Vanuatu, southeast of Nauru, south of Kiribati, west of Tokelau, northwest of Samoa and Wallis and Futuna, and north of Fiji.\nTuvalu is composed of three reef islands and six atolls spread out between the latitude of 5\u00b0 and 10\u00b0 south and between the longitude of 176\u00b0 and 180\u00b0. They lie west of the International Date Line. The 2022 census determined that Tuvalu had a population of 10,643,5 making it the 194th most populous country, exceeding only Niue and the Vatican City in population. Tuvalu's total land area is .\nThe first inhabitants of Tuvalu were Polynesians arriving as part of the migration of Polynesians into the Pacific that began about three thousand years ago. Long before European contact with the Pacific islands, Polynesians frequently voyaged by canoe between the islands. Polynesian navigation skills enabled them to make elaborately planned journeys in either double-hulled sailing canoes or outrigger canoes. Scholars believe that the Polynesians spread out from Samoa and Tonga into the Tuvaluan atolls, which then served as a stepping stone for further migration into the Polynesian outliers in Melanesia and Micronesia.\nIn 1568, Spanish explorer and cartographer \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a became the first European known to sail through the archipelago, sighting the island of Nui during an expedition he was making in search of Terra Australis. The island of Funafuti, currently serving as the capital, was named Ellice's Island in 1819. Later, the whole group was named Ellice Islands by English hydrographer Alexander George Findlay. In the late 19th century, Great Britain claimed control over the Ellice Islands, designating them as within their sphere of influence. Between 9 and 16 October 1892, Captain Herbert Gibson of declared each of the Ellice Islands a British protectorate. Britain assigned a resident commissioner to administer the Ellice Islands as part of the British Western Pacific Territories (BWPT). From 1916 to 1975, they were managed as part of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony.\nA referendum was held in 1974 to determine whether the Gilbert Islands and Ellice Islands should each have their own administration. As a result, the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony legally ceased to exist on 1 October 1975; on 1 January 1976, the old administration was officially separated, and two separate British colonies, Kiribati and Tuvalu, were formed. On 1 October 1978, Tuvalu became fully independent as a sovereign state within the Commonwealth, and is a constitutional monarchy with Charles III as King of Tuvalu. On 5 September 2000, Tuvalu became the 189th member of the United Nations.\nThe islands do not have a significant amount of soil, so the country relies heavily on imports and fishing for food. Licensing fishing permits to international companies, grants and aid projects, and remittances to their families from Tuvaluan seafarers who work on cargo ships are important parts of the economy. Because it is a low-lying island nation, Tuvalu is extremely vulnerable to sea level rise due to climate change. It is active in international climate negotiations as part of the Alliance of Small Island States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe origins of the people of Tuvalu are addressed in the theories regarding the migration into the Pacific that began about 3,000 years ago. During pre-European-contact times, there was frequent canoe voyaging between the nearer islands including Samoa and Tonga. Eight of the nine islands of Tuvalu were inhabited. This explains the origin of the name, Tuvalu, which means 'eight standing together' in Tuvaluan (compare to \"*walu\" meaning 'eight' in Proto-Austronesian). Possible evidence of human-made fires in the Caves of Nanumanga suggests humans may have occupied the islands for thousands of years.\nAn important creation myth in the islands of Tuvalu is the story of \"te Pusi mo te Ali\" (the Eel and the Flounder), who are said to have created the islands of Tuvalu. \"Te Ali\" (the flounder) is believed to be the origin of the flat atolls of Tuvalu and \"te Pusi\" (the eel) is the model for the coconut palms that are important in the lives of Tuvaluans. The stories of the ancestors of the Tuvaluans vary from island to island. On Niutao, Funafuti and Vaitupu, the founding ancestor is described as being from Samoa, whereas on Nanumea, the founding ancestor is described as being from Tonga.\nEarly contacts with other cultures.\nTuvalu was first sighted by Europeans on 16 January 1568, during the voyage of \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a from Spain, who sailed past Nui and charted it as \"Isla de Jes\u00fas\" (Spanish for \"Island of Jesus\") because the previous day was the feast of the Holy Name. Menda\u00f1a made contact with the islanders but was unable to land. During Menda\u00f1a's second voyage across the Pacific, he passed Niulakita on 29 August 1595, which he named \"La Solitaria\".\nCaptain John Byron passed through the islands of Tuvalu in 1764, during his circumnavigation of the globe as captain of the . He charted the atolls as \"Lagoon Islands\". The first recorded sighting of Nanumea by Europeans was by Spanish naval officer Francisco Mourelle de la R\u00faa who sailed past it on 5 May 1781 as captain of the frigate \"La Princesa\", when attempting a southern crossing of the Pacific from the Philippines to New Spain. He charted Nanumea as \"San Augustin\". Keith S. Chambers and Doug Munro (1980) identified Niutao as the island that Mourelle also sailed past on 5 May 1781, thus solving what Europeans had called \"The Mystery of Gran Cocal\". Mourelle's map and journal named the island \"El Gran Cocal\" ('The Great Coconut Plantation'); however, the latitude and longitude was uncertain. Longitude could be reckoned only crudely at the time, as accurate chronometers did not become available until the late 18th century.\nIn 1809, Captain Patterson in the brig \"Elizabeth\" sighted Nanumea while passing through the northern Tuvalu waters on a trading voyage from Port Jackson, Sydney, Australia to China.\nIn May 1819, Arent Schuyler de Peyster, of New York, captain of the armed brigantine or privateer \"Rebecca\", sailing under British colours, passed through the southern Tuvaluan waters. De Peyster sighted Nukufetau, and Funafuti which he named Ellice's Island after an English politician, Edward Ellice, the Member of Parliament for Coventry and the owner of the \"Rebecca\"'s cargo. The name Ellice was applied to all nine islands after the work of English hydrographer Alexander George Findlay.\nIn 1820, the Russian explorer Mikhail Lazarev visited Nukufetau as commander of the \"Mirny\". Louis-Isidore Duperrey, captain of \"La Coquille\", sailed past Nanumanga in May 1824 during a circumnavigation of the Earth (1822\u20131825). A Dutch expedition by the frigate \"Maria Reigersberg\" under captain Koerzen, and the corvette \"Pollux\" under captain C. Eeg, found Nui on the morning of 14 June 1825 and named the main island (Fenua Tapu) as \"Nederlandsch Eiland\".\nWhalers began roving the Pacific, although they visited Tuvalu only infrequently because of the difficulties of landing on the atolls. The American Captain George Barrett of the Nantucket whaler \"Independence II\" has been identified as the first whaler to hunt the waters around Tuvalu. He bartered coconuts from the people of Nukulaelae in November 1821, and also visited Niulakita. He established a shore camp on Sakalua islet of Nukufetau, where coal was used to melt down the whale blubber.\nChristianity came to Tuvalu in 1861 when Elekana, a deacon of a Congregational church in Manihiki, Cook Islands, became caught in a storm and drifted for eight weeks before landing at Nukulaelae on 10 May 1861. Elekana began preaching Christianity. He was trained at Malua Theological College, a London Missionary Society (LMS) school in Samoa, before beginning his work in establishing the Church of Tuvalu. In 1865, the Rev. Archibald Wright Murray of the LMS, a Protestant congregationalist missionary society, arrived as the first European missionary; he also evangelised among the inhabitants of Tuvalu. By 1878 Protestantism was considered well established, as there were preachers on each island. In the later 19th and early 20th centuries, the ministers of what became the Church of Tuvalu (\"Te Ekalesia Kelisiano Tuvalu\") were predominantly Samoans, who influenced the development of the Tuvaluan language and the music of Tuvalu.\nFor less than a year between 1862 and 1863, Peruvian ships engaged in the so-called \"blackbirding\" trade, by which they recruited or impressed workers, combed the smaller islands of Polynesia from Easter Island in the eastern Pacific to Tuvalu and the southern atolls of the Gilbert Islands (now Kiribati). They sought recruits to fill the extreme labour shortage in Peru. On Funafuti and Nukulaelae, the resident traders facilitated the recruiting of the islanders by the \"blackbirders\". The Rev. Archibald Wright Murray, the earliest European missionary in Tuvalu, reported that in 1863 about 170 people were taken from Funafuti and about 250 were taken from Nukulaelae, as there were fewer than 100 of the 300 recorded in 1861 as living on Nukulaelae.\nThe islands came into Britain's sphere of influence in the late 19th century, when each of the Ellice Islands was declared a British protectorate by Captain Herbert Gibson of , between 9 and 16 October 1892.\nTrading firms and traders.\nTrading companies became active in Tuvalu in the mid-19th century; the trading companies engaged white (palagi) traders who lived on the islands. John (also known as Jack) O'Brien was the first European to settle in Tuvalu; he became a trader on Funafuti in the 1850s. He married Salai, the daughter of the paramount chief of Funafuti. Louis Becke, who later found success as a writer, was a trader on Nanumanga from April 1880 until the trading station was destroyed later that year in a cyclone. He then became a trader on Nukufetau.\nIn 1892, Captain Edward Davis of reported on trading activities and traders on each of the islands visited. Captain Davis identified the following traders in the Ellice Group: Edmund Duffy (Nanumea); Jack Buckland (Niutao); Harry Nitz (Vaitupu); Jack O'Brien (Funafuti); Alfred Restieaux and Emile Fenisot (Nukufetau); and Martin Kleis (Nui). During this time, the greatest number of palagi traders lived on the atolls, acting as agents for the trading companies. Some islands would have competing traders, while dryer islands might only have a single trader.\nIn the 1890s, structural changes occurred in the operation of the Pacific trading companies; they moved from a practice of having traders resident on each island to instead becoming a business operation where the supercargo (the cargo manager of a trading ship) would deal directly with the islanders when a ship visited an island. After the high point in the 1880s, the numbers of palagi traders in Tuvalu declined; the last of them were Fred Whibley on Niutao, Alfred Restieaux on Nukufetau, and Martin Kleis on Nui. By 1909 there were no more resident palagi traders representing the trading companies, although Whibley, Restieaux and Kleis remained in the islands until their deaths.\nScientific expeditions and travellers.\nThe United States Exploring Expedition under Charles Wilkes visited Funafuti, Nukufetau, and Vaitupu in 1841. During this expedition, engraver and illustrator Alfred Thomas Agate recorded the dress and tattoo patterns of the men of Nukufetau.\nIn 1885 or 1886, the New Zealand photographer Thomas Andrew visited Funafuti and Nui.\nIn 1890, Robert Louis Stevenson, his wife Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson and her son Lloyd Osbourne sailed on the \"Janet Nicoll\", a trading steamer owned by Henderson and Macfarlane of Auckland, New Zealand, which operated between Sydney and Auckland and into the central Pacific. The \"Janet Nicoll\" visited three of the Ellice Islands; while Fanny records that they made landfall at Funafuti, Niutao and Nanumea, Jane Resture suggests that it was more likely they landed at Nukufetau rather than Funafuti, as Fanny describes meeting Alfred Restieaux and his wife Litia; however, they had been living on Nukufetau since the 1880s. An account of this voyage was written by Fanny Stevenson and published under the title \"The Cruise of the Janet Nichol\", together with photographs taken by Robert Louis Stevenson and Lloyd Osbourne.\nIn 1894, Count Rudolf Festetics de Tolna, his wife Eila (\"n\u00e9e\" Haggin) and her daughter Blanche Haggin visited Funafuti aboard the yacht \"Le Tolna\". The Count spent several days photographing men and women on Funafuti.\nThe boreholes on Funafuti, at the site now called \"Darwin's Drill\", are the result of drilling conducted by the Royal Society of London for the purpose of investigating the formation of coral reefs to determine whether traces of shallow water organisms could be found at depth in the coral of Pacific atolls. This investigation followed the work on \"The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs\" conducted by Charles Darwin in the Pacific. Drilling occurred in 1896, 1897 and 1898. Professor Edgeworth David of the University of Sydney was a member of the 1896 \"Funafuti Coral Reef Boring Expedition of the Royal Society\", under Professor William Sollas and led the expedition in 1897. Photographers on these trips recorded people, communities, and scenes at Funafuti.\nCharles Hedley, a naturalist at the Australian Museum, accompanied the 1896 expedition, and during his stay on Funafuti he collected invertebrate and ethnological objects. The descriptions of these were published in \"Memoir III of the Australian Museum Sydney\" between 1896 and 1900. Hedley also wrote the \"General Account of the Atoll of Funafuti\", \"The Ethnology of Funafuti\", and \"The Mollusca of Funafuti\". Edgar Waite was also part of the 1896 expedition and published \"The mammals, reptiles, and fishes of Funafuti\". William Rainbow described the spiders and insects collected at Funafuti in \"The insect fauna of Funafuti\".\nHarry Clifford Fassett, captain's clerk and photographer, recorded people, communities and scenes at Funafuti in 1900 during a visit of USFC \"Albatross\" when the United States Fish Commission was investigating the formation of coral reefs on Pacific atolls.\nColonial administration.\nThe Ellice Islands were administered as a British Protectorate from 1892 to 1916, as part of the British Western Pacific Territories (BWPT), by a Resident Commissioner based in the Gilbert Islands. The administration of the BWPT ended in 1916, and the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony was established, which existed until October 1975.\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Second World War, as a British colony the Ellice Islands were aligned with the Allies of the war. Early in the war, the Japanese invaded and occupied Makin, Tarawa and other islands in what is now Kiribati. The United States Marine Corps landed on Funafuti on 2 October 1942, and on Nanumea and Nukufetau in August 1943. Funafuti was used as a base to prepare for the subsequent seaborne attacks on the Gilbert Islands (Kiribati) that were occupied by Japanese forces.\nThe islanders assisted the American forces to build airfields on Funafuti, Nanumea and Nukufetau and to unload supplies from ships. On Funafuti, the islanders shifted to the smaller islets so as to allow the American forces to build the airfield and Naval Base Funafuti on Fongafale. A Naval Construction Battalion (Seabees) built a seaplane ramp on the lagoon side of Fongafale islet, for seaplane operations by both short- and long-range seaplanes, and a compacted coral runway was also constructed on Fongafale, with runways also constructed to create Nanumea Airfield and Nukufetau Airfield. USN Patrol Torpedo Boats (PTs) and seaplanes were based at Naval Base Funafuti from 2 November 1942 to 11 May 1944.\nThe atolls of Tuvalu acted as staging posts during the preparation for the Battle of Tarawa and the Battle of Makin that commenced on 20 November 1943, which were part of the implementation of \"Operation Galvanic\". After the war, the military airfield on Funafuti was developed into Funafuti International Airport.\nPost-World War II \u2013 transition to independence.\nThe formation of the United Nations after World War II resulted in the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization committing to a process of decolonisation; as a consequence, the British colonies in the Pacific started on a path to self-determination.\nIn 1974, the ministerial government was introduced to the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony through a change to the Constitution. In that year a general election was held, and a referendum was held in 1974 to determine whether the Gilbert Islands and Ellice Islands should each have their own administration. As a consequence of the referendum, separation occurred in two stages. The Tuvaluan Order 1975, which took effect on 1 October 1975, recognised Tuvalu as a separate Crown Colony with its own government. The second stage occurred on 1 January 1976, when separate administrations were created out of the civil service of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony.\nIn 1976, Tuvalu adopted the Tuvaluan dollar, whose currency circulates alongside the Australian dollar, which was previously adopted in 1966.\nElections to the House of Assembly of the British Colony of Tuvalu were held on 27 August 1977, with Toaripi Lauti being appointed chief minister in the House of Assembly of the Colony of Tuvalu on 1 October 1977. The House of Assembly was dissolved in July 1978, with the government of Toaripi Lauti continuing as a caretaker government until the 1981 elections were held.\nPost-Independence.\nToaripi Lauti became the first prime minister on 1 October 1978, when Tuvalu became an independent state. That date is also celebrated as the country's Independence Day and is a public holiday.\nOn 26 October 1982, Queen Elizabeth II made a special royal tour to Tuvalu.\nOn 5 September 2000, Tuvalu became the 189th member of the United Nations.\nOn 15 November 2022, amidst sea level rises, Tuvalu announced plans as the first country in the world to build a self-digital replica in the metaverse in order to preserve its cultural heritage.\nOn 10 November 2023, Tuvalu signed the Falepili Union treaty with Australia. In the Tuvaluan language, \"Falepili\" describes the traditional values of good neighbourliness, care and mutual respect. The Treaty addresses climate change and security, with security threats encompassing major natural disasters, health pandemics and traditional security threats. The implementation of the Treaty will involve Australia increasing its contribution to the Tuvalu Trust Fund and the Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project. Australia will also provide a pathway for 280 citizens of Tuvalu to migrate to Australia each year, to enable climate-related mobility for Tuvaluans.\nGeography and environment.\nGeography.\nTuvalu is a volcanic archipelago, and consists of three reef islands (Nanumanga, Niutao and Niulakita) and six true atolls (Funafuti, Nanumea, Nui, Nukufetau, Nukulaelae and Vaitupu). Its small, scattered group of low-lying atolls have poor soil and a total land area of only about making it the fourth smallest country in the world. The highest elevation is above sea level on Niulakita; however, the low-lying atolls and reef islands of Tuvalu are susceptible to seawater flooding during cyclones and storms. The sea level at the Funafuti tide gauge has risen at 3.9\u00a0mm per year, which is approximately twice the global average. However, over four decades, there had been a net increase in land area of the islets of (2.9%), although the changes are not uniform, with 74% increasing and 27% decreasing in size. A 2018 report stated that the rising sea levels are identified as creating an increased transfer of wave energy across reef surfaces, which shifts sand, resulting in accretion to island shorelines. The Tuvalu Prime Minister objected to the report's implication that there were \"alternate\" strategies for Islanders to adapt to rising sea levels, and criticised it for neglecting issues such as saltwater intrusion into groundwater tables as a result of sea level rise.\nFunafuti is the largest atoll, and comprises numerous islets around a central lagoon that is approximately (N\u2013S) by (W-E), centred on 179\u00b07'E and 8\u00b030'S. On the atolls, an annular reef rim surrounds the lagoon with seven natural reef channels. Surveys were carried out in May 2010 of the reef habitats of Nanumea, Nukulaelae and Funafuti; a total of 317 fish species were recorded during this \"Tuvalu Marine Life\" study. The surveys identified 66 species that had not previously been recorded in Tuvalu, which brings the total number of identified species to 607. Tuvalu's exclusive economic zone (EEZ) covers an oceanic area of approximately 900,000\u00a0km2.\nTuvalu signed the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in 1992, and ratified it in December 2002. The predominant vegetation type on the islands of Tuvalu is the cultivated coconut woodland, which covers 43% of the land. The native broadleaf forest is limited to 4.1% of the vegetation types, with 40% of the native broadleaf forest of Funafuti contained in the Funafuti Conservation Area. Tuvalu contains the Western Polynesian tropical moist forests terrestrial ecoregion.\nEnvironmental pressures.\nThe eastern shoreline of Funafuti Lagoon on Fongafale was modified during World War II when the airfield (now Funafuti International Airport) was constructed. The coral base of the atoll was used as fill to create the runway. The resulting borrow pits impacted the fresh-water aquifer. In the low-lying areas of Funafuti, the sea water can be seen bubbling up through the porous coral rock to form pools with each high tide. In 2014, the Tuvalu Borrow Pits Remediation (BPR) project was approved so that 10 borrow pits would be filled with sand from the lagoon, leaving Tafua Pond, which is a natural pond. The New Zealand Government funded the BPR project. The project was carried out in 2015, with 365,000 sqm of sand being dredged from the lagoon to fill the holes and improve living conditions on the island. This project increased the usable land space on Fongafale by eight per cent.\nDuring World War II, several piers were also constructed on Fongafale in the Funafuti Lagoon; beach areas were filled and deep-water access channels were excavated. These alterations to the reef and shoreline resulted in changes to wave patterns, with less sand accumulating to form the beaches, compared to former times. Attempts to stabilise the shoreline did not achieve the desired effect. In December 2022, work on the Funafuti reclamation project commenced, which is part of the Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project. Sand was dredged from the lagoon to construct a platform on Fongafale islet that is meters long and meters wide, giving a total area of approximately 7.8 ha. (19.27 acres), which is designed to remain above sea level rise and the reach of storm waves beyond the year 2100. The platform starts from the northern boundary of the Queen Elizabeth Park (QEP) reclamation area and extends to the northern Tausoa Beach Groyne and the Catalina Ramp Harbour.\nThe reefs at Funafuti suffered damage during the El Ni\u00f1o events that occurred between 1998 and 2001, with an average of 70% of the Staghorn (\"Acropora spp.\") corals becoming bleached as a consequence of the increase in ocean temperatures. A reef restoration project has investigated reef restoration techniques; and researchers from Japan have investigated rebuilding the coral reefs through the introduction of foraminifera. The project of the Japan International Cooperation Agency is designed to increase the resilience of the Tuvalu coast against sea level rise, through ecosystem rehabilitation and regeneration and through support for sand production.\nThe rising population has resulted in an increased demand on fish stocks, which are under stress, although the creation of the Funafuti Conservation Area has provided a fishing exclusion area to help sustain the fish population across the Funafuti lagoon. Population pressure on the resources of Funafuti, and inadequate sanitation systems, have resulted in pollution. The Waste Operations and Services Act of 2009 provides the legal framework for waste management and pollution control projects funded by the European Union directed at organic waste composting in eco-sanitation systems. The Environment Protection (Litter and Waste Control) Regulation 2013 is intended to improve the management of the importation of non-biodegradable materials. Plastic waste is a problem in Tuvalu, for much imported food and other commodities are supplied in plastic containers or packaging.\nIn 2023 the governments of Tuvalu and other islands vulnerable to climate change (Fiji, Niue, the Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu) launched the \"Port Vila Call for a Just Transition to a Fossil Fuel Free Pacific\", calling for the phase out fossil fuels and the 'rapid and just transition' to renewable energy and strengthening environmental law including introducing the crime of ecocide.\nClimate.\nTuvalu experiences two distinct seasons, a wet season from November to April and a dry season from May to October. Westerly gales and heavy rain are the predominant weather conditions from November to April, the period that is known as \"Tau-o-lalo\", with tropical temperatures moderated by easterly winds from May to October.\nTuvalu experiences the effects of El Ni\u00f1o and La Ni\u00f1a, which is caused by changes in ocean temperatures in the equatorial and central Pacific. El Ni\u00f1o effects increase the chances of tropical storms and cyclones, while La Ni\u00f1a effects increase the chances of drought. Typically the islands of Tuvalu receive between of rainfall per month. The central Pacific Ocean experiences changes from periods of La Ni\u00f1a to periods of El Ni\u00f1o.\nImpact of climate change.\nAs low-lying islands lacking a surrounding shallow shelf, the communities of Tuvalu are especially susceptible to changes in sea level and undissipated storms. At its highest, Tuvalu is only above sea level. Tuvaluan leaders have been concerned about the effects of rising sea levels. It is estimated that a sea level rise of in the next 100 years could make Tuvalu uninhabitable. A study published in 2018 estimated the change in land area of Tuvalu's nine atolls and 101 reef islands between 1971 and 2014, indicating that 75% of the islands had grown in area, with an overall increase of more than 2%. Enele Sopoaga, the prime minister of Tuvalu at the time, responded to the research by stating that Tuvalu is not expanding and has gained no additional habitable land. Sopoaga has also said that evacuating the islands is the last resort.\nWhether there are measurable changes in the sea level relative to the islands of Tuvalu is a contentious issue. There were problems associated with the pre-1993 sea level records from Funafuti which resulted in improvements in the recording technology to provide more reliable data for analysis. The degree of uncertainty as to estimates of sea level change relative to the islands of Tuvalu was reflected in the conclusions made in 2002 from the available data. The uncertainty as to the accuracy of the data from this tide gauge resulted in a modern Aquatrak acoustic gauge being installed in 1993 by the Australian National Tidal Facility (NTF) as part of the AusAID-sponsored South Pacific Sea Level and Climate Monitoring Project. The 2011 report of the \"Pacific Climate Change Science Program\" published by the Australian Government, concludes: \"The sea-level rise near Tuvalu measured by satellite altimeters since 1993 is about per year.\"\nTuvalu has adopted a national plan of action as the observable transformations over the last ten to fifteen years show Tuvaluans that there have been changes to the sea levels. These include sea water bubbling up through the porous coral rock to form pools at high tide and the flooding of low-lying areas including the airport during spring tides and king tides.\nIn November 2022, Simon Kofe, Minister for Justice, Communication &amp; Foreign Affairs, proclaimed that in response to rising sea levels and the perceived failures by the outside world to combat global warming, the country would be uploading a virtual version of itself to the metaverse in an effort to preserve its history and culture.\nThe major concerns about climate change has led to the launching and development of the National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA). These adaptation measures are needed to decrease the amount and volume of the negative effects from climate change. NAPA has selected seven adaptation projects with all different themes. These are: coastal, agricultural, water, health, fisheries (two different projects) and disaster. For example, a \"target\" of one of these projects, like the project \"coastal\", is \"increasing resilience of coastal areas and settlement to climate change\". And for the project \"water\" it is \"adaptation to frequent water shortages through increasing household water capacity, water collection accessories, and water conservation techniques\".\nThe Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project (TCAP) was launched in 2017 for the purpose on enhancing the resilience of the islands of Tuvalu to meet the challenges resulting from higher sea levels. Tuvalu was the first country in the Pacific to access climate finance from Green Climate Fund, with the support of the UNDP. In December 2022, work on the Funafuti reclamation project commenced. The project is to dredge sand from the lagoon to construct a platform on Funafuti that is meters long and meters wide, giving a total area of approximately 7.8 ha. (19.27 acres), which is designed to remain above sea level rise and the reach of storm waves beyond the year 2100. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) also provided funding for the TCAP. Further projects that are part of TCAP are capital works on the outer islands of Nanumea and Nanumaga aimed at reducing exposure to coastal damage resulting from storms.\nCyclones and king tides.\nCyclones.\nBecause of the low elevation, the islands that make up this country are vulnerable to the effects of tropical cyclones and by the threat of current and future sea level rise. A warning system, which uses the Iridium satellite network, was introduced in 2016 to allow outlying islands to be better prepared for natural disasters.\nThe highest elevation is above sea level on Niulakita. Tuvalu thus has the second-lowest maximum elevation of any country (after the Maldives). The highest elevations are typically in narrow storm dunes on the ocean side of the islands which are prone to overtopping in tropical cyclones, as occurred with Cyclone Bebe, which was a very early-season storm that passed through the Tuvaluan atolls in October 1972. Cyclone Bebe submerged Funafuti, eliminating 95% of structures on the island, with 6 people lost in the cyclone. Sources of drinking water were contaminated as a result of the system's storm surge and the flooding of the sources of fresh water.\nGeorge Westbrook, a trader on Funafuti, recorded a cyclone that struck Funafuti on 23\u201324 December 1883. A cyclone struck Nukulaelae on 17\u201318 March 1886.\nA cyclone caused severe damage to the islands in 1894.\nTuvalu experienced an average of three cyclones per decade between the 1940s and 1970s; however, eight occurred in the 1980s. The impact of individual cyclones is subject to variables including the force of the winds and also whether a cyclone coincides with high tides. Funafuti's Tepuka Vili Vili islet was devastated by Cyclone Meli in 1979, with all its vegetation and most of its sand swept away during the cyclone. Along with a tropical depression that affected the islands a few days later, Severe Tropical Cyclone Ofa had a major impact on Tuvalu with most islands reporting damage to vegetation and crops. Cyclone Gavin was first identified during 2 March 1997, and was the first of three tropical cyclones to affect Tuvalu during the 1996\u201397 cyclone season, with Cyclones Hina and Keli following later in the season.\nIn March 2015, the winds and storm surge created by Cyclone Pam resulted in waves of breaking over the reef of the outer islands, causing damage to houses, crops and infrastructure. A state of emergency was declared. On Nui, the sources of fresh water were destroyed or contaminated. The flooding in Nui and Nukufetau caused many families to shelter in evacuation centres or with other families. Nui suffered the most damage of the three central islands (Nui, Nukufetau and Vaitupu); with both Nui and Nukufetau suffering the loss of 90% of the crops. Of the three northern islands (Nanumanga, Niutao and Nanumea), Nanumanga suffered the most damage, with from 60 to 100 houses flooded, with the waves also causing damage to the health facility. Vasafua islet, part of the Funafuti Conservation Area, was severely damaged by Cyclone Pam. The coconut palms were washed away, leaving the islet as a sand bar.\nThe Tuvalu Government carried out assessments of the damage caused by Cyclone Pam to the islands and has provided medical aid, food as well as assistance for the cleaning-up of storm debris. Government and Non-Government Organisations provided assistance technical, funding and material support to Tuvalu to assist with recovery, including WHO, UNICEF EAPRO, UNDP Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme, OCHA, World Bank, DFAT, New Zealand Red Cross &amp; IFRC, Fiji National University and governments of New Zealand, Netherlands, UAE, Taiwan and the United States.\nDespite passing over to the south of the island nation, Cyclone Tino and its associated convergence zone impacted the whole of Tuvalu between January 16\u00a0- 19 of 2020.\nKing tides.\nTuvalu is also affected by perigean spring tide events which raise the sea level higher than a normal high tide. The highest peak tide recorded by the Tuvalu Meteorological Service is , on 24 February 2006 and again on 19 February 2015. As a result of the historical sea level rise, the king tide events lead to flooding of low-lying areas, which is compounded when sea levels are further raised by La Ni\u00f1a effects or local storms and waves.\nWater and sanitation.\nRainwater harvesting is the principal source of fresh water in Tuvalu. Nukufetau, Vaitupu and Nanumea are the only islands with sustainable groundwater supplies. The effectiveness of rainwater harvesting is diminished because of poor maintenance of roofs, gutters and pipes. Aid programmes of Australia and the European Union have been directed to improving the storage capacity on Funafuti and in the outer islands.\nReverse osmosis (R/O) desalination units supplement rainwater harvesting on Funafuti. The 65 m3 desalination plant operates at a real production level of around 40 m3 per day. R/O water is only intended to be produced when storage falls below 30%; however, demand to replenish household storage supplies with tanker-delivered water means that the R/O desalination units are continually operating. Water is delivered at a cost of A$3.50 per m3. Cost of production and delivery has been estimated at A$6 per m3, with the difference subsidised by the government.\nIn July 2012, a United Nations Special Rapporteur called on the Tuvalu Government to develop a national water strategy to improve access to safe drinking water and sanitation. In 2012, Tuvalu developed a National Water Resources Policy under the Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) Project and the Pacific Adaptation to Climate Change (PACC) Project, which are sponsored by the Global Environment Fund/SOPAC. Government water planning has established a target of between 50 and 100L of water per person per day accounting for drinking water, cleaning, community and cultural activities.\nTuvalu is working with the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) to implement composting toilets and to improve the treatment of sewage sludge from septic tanks on Fongafale, for septic tanks are leaking into the freshwater lens in the sub-surface of the atoll as well as the ocean and lagoon. Composting toilets reduce water use by up to 30%.\nGovernment.\nParliamentary democracy.\nThe \"Constitution of Tuvalu\" states that it is \"the supreme law of Tuvalu\" and that \"all other laws shall be interpreted and applied subject to this Constitution\"; it sets out the Principles of the Bill of Rights and the Protection of the Fundamental Rights and Freedoms. On 5 September 2023, Tuvalu's parliament passed the Constitution of Tuvalu Act 2023, with the changes to the constitution came into effect on 1 October 2023.\nTuvalu is a parliamentary democracy and Commonwealth realm with Charles III as King of Tuvalu. Since the King resides in the United Kingdom, he is represented in Tuvalu by a governor general, whom he appoints upon the advice of the prime minister of Tuvalu. Referendums were carried out in 1986 and 2008 seeking to abolish the monarchy and establish a republic, but on both occasions the monarchy was retained.\nFrom 1974 (the creation of the British colony of Tuvalu) until independence, the legislative body of Tuvalu was called the \"House of the Assembly\" or \"Fale I Fono\". Following independence in October 1978, the House of the Assembly was renamed the Parliament of Tuvalu or \"Palamene o Tuvalu\". The place at which the parliament sits is called the \"Vaiaku maneapa\". The \"maneapa\" on each island is an open meeting place where the chiefs and elders deliberate and make decisions.\nThe unicameral Parliament has 16 members, with elections held every four years. The members of parliament select the Prime Minister (who is the head of government) and the Speaker of Parliament. The ministers that form the Cabinet are appointed by the Governor General on the advice of the Prime Minister. There are no formal political parties; election campaigns are largely based on personal/family ties and reputations.\nThe 2023 amendments to the Constitution recognise the Falekaupule as the traditional governing authorities of the islands of Tuvalu.\nThe Tuvalu National Library and Archives holds \"vital documentation on the cultural, social and political heritage of Tuvalu\", including surviving records from the colonial administration, as well as Tuvalu government archives.\nTuvalu is a state party to the following human rights treaties: the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC); the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and; the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). Tuvalu has commitments to ensuring human rights are respected under the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).\nThe national strategy plan \"Te Kete \u2013 National Strategy for Sustainable Development 2021\u20132030\" sets out the development agenda of the Government of Tuvalu, which followed on from \"Te Kakeega III \u2013 National Strategy for Sustainable Development-2016-2020\" (TK III). The areas of development in these strategic plans include education; climate change; environment; migration and urbanisation.\nThe Tuvalu National Council for Women acts as an umbrella organisation for non-governmental women's rights groups throughout the country and works closely with the government.\nLegal system.\nThere are eight Island Courts and Lands Courts; appeals in relation to land disputes are made to the Lands Courts Appeal Panel. Appeals from the Island Courts and the Lands Courts Appeal Panel are made to the Magistrates Court, which has jurisdiction to hear civil cases involving up to $T10,000. The superior court is the High Court of Tuvalu as it has unlimited original jurisdiction to determine the Law of Tuvalu and to hear appeals from the lower courts. Rulings of the High Court can be appealed to the Court of Appeal of Tuvalu. From the Court of Appeal, there is a right of appeal to His Majesty in Council, i.e., the Privy Council in London.\nWith regard to the judiciary, \"the first female Island Court magistrate was appointed to the Island Court in Nanumea in the 1980s and another in Nukulaelae in the early 1990s.\" There were 7 female magistrates in the Island Courts of Tuvalu (as of 2007) in comparison \"to the past where only one woman magistrate served in the Magistrate Court of Tuvalu.\"\nThe Law of Tuvalu comprises the Acts voted into law by the Parliament of Tuvalu and statutory instruments that become law; certain Acts passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom (during the time Tuvalu was either a British protectorate or British colony); the common law; and customary law (particularly in relation to the ownership of land). The land tenure system is largely based on \"kaitasi\" (extended family ownership).\nForeign relations.\nTuvalu participates in the work of the Pacific Community (SPC) and is a member of the Pacific Islands Forum, the Commonwealth of Nations and the United Nations. It has maintained a mission at the United Nations in New York City since 2000. Tuvalu became a member of the Asian Development Bank in 1993, and became a member of the World Bank in 2010.\nTuvalu maintains close relations with Fiji, New Zealand, Australia (which has maintained a High Commission in Tuvalu since 2018), Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the European Union. It has diplomatic relations with Taiwan; which maintains an embassy in Tuvalu and has a large assistance programme in the islands.\nA major international priority for Tuvalu in the UN, at the 2002 Earth Summit in Johannesburg, South Africa and in other international fora, is promoting concern about global warming and the possible sea level rising. Tuvalu advocates ratification and implementation of the Kyoto Protocol. In December 2009, the islands stalled talks on climate change at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen, fearing some other developing countries were not committing fully to binding deals on a reduction in carbon emissions. Their chief negotiator stated, \"Tuvalu is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate change and our future rests on the outcome of this meeting.\"\nTuvalu participates in the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), which is a coalition of small island and low-lying coastal countries that have concerns about their vulnerability to the adverse effects of global climate change. Under the Majuro Declaration, which was signed on 5 September 2013, Tuvalu has made a commitment to implement power generation of 100% renewable energy (between 2013 and 2020), which is proposed to be implemented using Solar PV (95% of demand) and biodiesel (5% of demand). The feasibility of wind power generation will be considered. Tuvalu participates in the operations of the Pacific Islands Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) and the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP).\nTuvalu is party to a treaty of friendship with the United States, signed soon after independence and ratified by the US Senate in 1983, under which the United States renounced prior territorial claims to four Tuvaluan islands (Funafuti, Nukufetau, Nukulaelae and Niulakita) under the Guano Islands Act of 1856.\nTuvalu participates in the operations of the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC). The Tuvaluan government, the US government, and the governments of other Pacific islands are parties to the South Pacific Tuna Treaty (SPTT), which entered into force in 1988. Tuvalu is also a member of the Nauru Agreement which addresses the management of tuna purse seine fishing in the tropical western Pacific. The United States and the Pacific Islands countries have negotiated the Multilateral Fisheries Treaty (which encompasses the South Pacific Tuna Treaty) to confirm access to the fisheries in the Western and Central Pacific for US tuna boats. Tuvalu and the other members of the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and the United States have settled a tuna fishing deal for 2015; a longer-term deal will be negotiated. The treaty is an extension of the Nauru Agreement and provides for the US flagged purse seine vessels to fish 8,300 days in the region in return for a payment of US$90\u00a0million made up by tuna fishing industry and US-Government contributions. In 2015, Tuvalu refused to sell fishing days to certain nations and fleets that have blocked Tuvaluan initiatives to develop and sustain their own fishery. In 2016, the Minister of Natural Resources drew attention to Article 30 of the WCPF Convention, which describes the collective obligation of members to consider the disproportionate burden that management measures might place on small-island developing states.\nIn July 2013, Tuvalu signed the memorandum of understanding (MOU) to establish the Pacific Regional Trade and Development Facility, which Facility originated in 2006, in the context of negotiations for an Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) between Pacific ACP States and the European Union. The rationale for the creation of the Facility being to improve the delivery of aid to Pacific island countries in support of the Aid-for-Trade (AfT) requirements. The Pacific ACP States are the countries in the Pacific that are signatories to the Cotonou Agreement with the European Union. On 31 May 2017 the first enhanced High Level Political Dialogue between Tuvalu and the European Union under the Cotonou Agreement was held in Funafuti.\nOn 18 February 2016, Tuvalu signed the Pacific Islands Development Forum Charter and formally joined the Pacific Islands Development Forum (PIDF). In June 2017, Tuvalu signed the Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations (PACER). Tuvalu ratified the PACER agreement in January 2022. The agreement is designed to reduce trade barriers between signatories of the agreement. Existing import tariffs will reduce to zero, and the agreement contemplates additional actions to reduce trade barriers, including harmonizing customs procedures and rules of origin, as well as eliminating restrictions to services trade, and improving labour mobility schemes between countries.\nDefence and law enforcement.\nTuvalu has no regular military forces, and spends no money on the military. Its national police force, the Tuvalu Police Force headquartered in Funafuti, includes a maritime surveillance unit, customs, prisons and immigration. Police officers wear British-style uniforms.\nFrom 1994 to 2019 Tuvalu policed its 200-kilometre exclusive economic zone with the Pacific-class patrol boat HMTSS \"Te Mataili\", provided by Australia. In 2019, Australia gifted a Guardian-class patrol boat as replacement. Named HMTSS \"Te Mataili II\", it is meant for use in maritime surveillance, fishery patrol and for search-and-rescue missions. (\"HMTSS\" stands for \"His/Her Majesty's Tuvaluan State Ship\" or for \"His/Her Majesty's Tuvalu Surveillance Ship\".) \"Te Mataili II\" was severely damaged by cyclones. On 16 October 2024 Australia handed over a Guardian-class patrol boat to Tuvalu, which was named HMTSS \"Te Mataili III\".\nIn May 2023 the Government of Tuvalu signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Sea Shepherd Global, which is based in the Netherlands, to combat illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing in Tuvalu's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). Sea Shepherd Global will provide the \"Allankay\", a motor vessel, to support Tuvalu's law enforcement activities. \"Allankay\" will accommodate officers from the Tuvalu Police Force, who have the authority to board, inspect, and arrest fishing vessels engaged in IUU activity in Tuvalu's EEZ.\nMale homosexuality is illegal in Tuvalu. Crime in Tuvalu is not a significant social problem due to an effective criminal justice system, also due to the influence of the \"Falekaupule\" (the traditional assembly of elders of each island) and the central role of religious institutions in the Tuvaluan community.\nAdministrative divisions.\nTuvalu consists of six atolls and three reef islands, each constituting a district of the country. The smallest, Niulakita, is administered as part of Niutao. The districts, their island counts, and their populations as of the 2022 census are as follows:\nEach island has its own high-chief (ulu-aliki), several sub-chiefs (alikis), and a community council (Falekaupule). The \"Falekaupule\", also known as \"te sina o fenua\" (grey-hairs of the land), is the traditional assembly of elders.\nThe ulu-aliki and aliki exercise informal authority at the local level, with the former chosen on the basis of ancestry. Since the passage of the Falekaupule Act in 1997, the powers and functions of the \"Falekaupule\" are shared with the \"pule o kaupule\", a village president elected on each atoll.\nTuvalu has defined for one town council (Funafuti) and seven island councils. Niulakita, which now has its own island council, is not listed, as it is administered as part of Niutao.\nSociety.\nDemographics.\nThe population at the 2002 census was 9,561, and the population at the 2017 census was 10,645. The most recent evaluation in 2020 puts the population at 11,342. The population of Tuvalu is primarily of Polynesian ethnicity, with approximately 5.6% of the population being Micronesians speaking Gilbertese, especially on Nui.\nLife expectancy for women in Tuvalu is 70.2 years and 65.6 years for men (2018 est.). The country's population growth rate is 0.86% (2018 est.). The net migration rate is estimated at \u22126.6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2018 est.). The threat of global warming in Tuvalu is not yet a dominant motivation for migration as Tuvaluans appear to prefer to continue living on the islands for reasons of lifestyle, culture and identity.\nFrom 1947 to 1983, a number of Tuvaluans from Vaitupu migrated to Kioa, an island in Fiji. The settlers from Tuvalu were granted Fijian citizenship in 2005. In recent years, New Zealand and Australia have been the primary destinations for migration or seasonal work.\nIn 2014, attention was drawn to an appeal to the New Zealand Immigration and Protection Tribunal against the deportation of a Tuvaluan family on the basis that they were \"climate change refugees\", who would suffer hardship resulting from the environmental degradation of Tuvalu. However, the subsequent grant of residence permits to the family was made on grounds unrelated to the refugee claim. The family was successful in their appeal because, under the relevant immigration legislation, there were \"exceptional circumstances of a humanitarian nature\" that justified the grant of resident permits, for the family was integrated into New Zealand society with a sizeable extended family that had effectively relocated to New Zealand. Indeed, in 2013 a claim of a Kiribati man of being a \"climate change refugee\" under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (1951) was determined by the New Zealand High Court to be untenable, as there was no persecution or serious harm related to any of the five stipulated Refugee Convention grounds. Permanent migration to Australia and New Zealand, such as for family reunification, requires compliance with the immigration legislation of those countries.\nNew Zealand announced the \"Pacific Access Category\" in 2001, which provided an annual quota of 75 work permits for Tuvaluans. The applicants register for the Pacific Access Category (PAC) ballots; the primary criterion is that the principal applicant must have a job offer from a New Zealand employer. Tuvaluans also have access to seasonal employment in the horticulture and viticulture industries in New Zealand under the \"Recognised Seasonal Employer\" (RSE) Work Policy introduced in 2007 allowing for employment of up to 5,000 workers from Tuvalu and other Pacific islands. Tuvaluans can participate in the Australian \"Pacific Seasonal Worker Program\", which allows Pacific Islanders to obtain seasonal employment in the Australian agriculture industry, in particular, cotton and cane operations; fishing industry, in particular aquaculture; and with accommodation providers in the tourism industry.\nOn 10 November 2023, Tuvalu signed the Falepili Union, a bilateral diplomatic relationship with Australia, under which Australia will provide a pathway for citizens of Tuvalu to migrate to Australia, to enable climate-related mobility for Tuvaluans.\nLanguages.\nThe Tuvaluan language and English are the national languages of Tuvalu. Tuvaluan is of the Ellicean group of Polynesian languages, distantly related to all other Polynesian languages such as Hawaiian, M\u0101ori, Tahitian, Rapa Nui, Samoan and Tongan. It is most closely related to the languages spoken on the Polynesian outliers in Micronesia and northern and central Melanesia. The Tuvaluan language has borrowed from the Samoan language, as a consequence of Christian missionaries in the late 19th and early 20th centuries being predominantly Samoan.\nThe Tuvaluan language is spoken by virtually everyone, while a Micronesian language very similar to Gilbertese is spoken on Nui. English is also an official language but is not spoken in daily use. Parliament and official functions are conducted in the Tuvaluan language.\nThere are about 13,000 Tuvaluan speakers worldwide. Radio Tuvalu transmits Tuvaluan-language programming.\nReligion.\nThe Congregational Christian Church of Tuvalu, which is part of the Calvinist tradition, is the state church of Tuvalu; although in practice this merely entitles it to \"the privilege of performing special services on major national events\". Its adherents comprise about 86% of the 10,632 (2022 census) inhabitants of the archipelago. The Constitution of Tuvalu guarantees freedom of religion, including the freedom to practice, the freedom to change religion, the right not to receive religious instruction at school or to attend religious ceremonies at school, and the right not to \"take an oath or make an affirmation that is contrary to his religion or belief\".\nOther Christian groups include the Catholic community served by the Mission Sui Iuris of Funafuti (1%), and the Seventh-day Adventist which has 2% of the population. The Tuvalu Brethren Church has 3% of the population.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith is the largest minority religion and the largest non-Christian religion in Tuvalu. It constitutes 1% of the population. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds are present on Nanumea, and Funafuti. The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community consists of about 50 members (0.4% of the population).\nThe introduction of Christianity ended the worship of ancestral spirits and other deities (animism), along with the power of the \"vaka-atua\" (the priests of the old religions). Laumua Kofe describes the objects of worship as varying from island to island, although ancestor worship was described by the Rev. Samuel James Whitmee in 1870 as being common practice.\nHealth.\nThe Princess Margaret Hospital on Funafuti is the only hospital in Tuvalu and the primary provider of medical services.\nSince the late 20th century, the biggest health problems in Tuvalu have been obesity-related. The leading cause of death has been heart disease, which is closely followed by diabetes and high blood pressure. In 2016 the majority of deaths resulted from cardiac diseases, with diabetes mellitus, hypertension, obesity, and cerebral-vascular disease among the other causes of death.\nEducation.\nEducation in Tuvalu is free and compulsory between the ages of 6 and 15 years. Each island has a primary school. Motufoua Secondary School is located on Vaitupu. Students board at the school during the school term, returning to their home islands each school vacation. Fetuvalu Secondary School, a day school operated by the Church of Tuvalu, is on Funafuti.\nFetuvalu offers the Cambridge syllabus. Motufoua offers the Fiji Junior Certificate (FJC) at year 10, Tuvaluan Certificate at Year 11 and the Pacific Senior Secondary Certificate (PSSC) at Year 12, which is set by SPBEA, the Fiji-based exam board. Sixth form students who pass their PSSC go on to the Augmented Foundation Programme, funded by the Tuvalu government. This program is required for tertiary education programmes outside of Tuvalu and is available at the University of the South Pacific (USP) Extension Centre in Funafuti.\nRequired attendance at school is 10 years for males and 11 years for females (2001). The adult literacy rate is 99.0% (2002). In 2010, there were 1,918 students who were taught by 109 teachers (98 certified and 11 uncertified). The teacher-pupil ratio for primary schools in Tuvalu is around 1:18 for all schools with the exception of Nauti School, which has a ratio of 1:27. Nauti School on Funafuti is the largest primary school in Tuvalu with more than 900 students (45 per cent of the total primary school enrolment). The pupil-teacher ratio for Tuvalu is low compared to the entire Pacific region (ratio of 1:29).\nCommunity Training Centres (CTCs) have been established within the primary schools on each atoll. They provide vocational training to students who do not progress beyond Class 8 because they failed the entry qualifications for secondary education. The CTCs offer training in basic carpentry, gardening and farming, sewing and cooking. At the end of their studies the graduates can apply to continue studies either at Motufoua Secondary School or the Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute (TMTI). Adults can also attend courses at the CTCs.\nFour tertiary institutions offer technical and vocational courses: Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute (TMTI), Tuvalu Atoll Science Technology Training Institute (TASTII), Australian Pacific Training Coalition (APTC) and University of the South Pacific (USP) Extension Centre.\nThe Tuvaluan Employment Ordinance of 1966 sets the minimum age for paid employment at 14 years and prohibits children under the age of 15 from performing hazardous work.\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nThe traditional buildings of Tuvalu used plants and trees from the native broadleaf forest, including timber from \"pouka\" (\"Hernandia peltata\"); \"ngia\" or \"ingia\" bush (\"Pemphis acidula\"); \"miro\" (\"Thespesia populnea\"); \"Tonga\" (\"Rhizophora mucronata\"); \"fau\" or \"fo fafini\", or woman's fibre tree (\"Hibiscus tiliaceus\"). Fibre is from coconut; \"ferra\", native fig (\"Ficus aspem\"); \"fala\", screw pine or \"Pandanus\". The buildings were constructed without nails, lashed together with plaited sennit rope handmade from dried coconut fibre.\nFollowing contact with Europeans, iron products were used including nails and corrugated roofing material. Modern buildings in Tuvalu are constructed from imported building materials, including imported timber and concrete.\nChurch and community buildings (\"maneapa\") are usually coated with white paint that is known as \"lase\", which is made by burning a large amount of dead coral with firewood. The whitish powder that is the result is mixed with water and painted on the buildings.\nArt.\nThe women of Tuvalu use cowrie and other shells in traditional handicrafts. The artistic traditions of Tuvalu have traditionally been expressed in the design of clothing and traditional handicrafts such as the decoration of mats and fans. Crochet (\"kolose\") is one of the art forms practised by Tuvaluan women. The design of women's skirts (\"titi\"), tops (\"teuga saka\"), headbands, armbands, and wristbands, which continue to be used in performances of the traditional dance songs of Tuvalu, represents contemporary Tuvaluan art and design. The material culture of Tuvalu uses traditional design elements in artefacts used in everyday life such as the design of canoes and fish hooks made from traditional materials.\nIn 2015, an exhibition was held on Funafuti of the art of Tuvalu, with works that addressed climate change through the eyes of artists and the display of \"Kope ote olaga\" (possessions of life), a display of the various artefacts of Tuvalu culture.\nDance and music.\nThe traditional music of Tuvalu consists of a number of dances, including \"fakaseasea\", \"fakanau\" and \"fatele\". The \"fatele\", in its modern form, is performed at community events and to celebrate leaders and other prominent individuals, such as the visit of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge in September 2012. The Tuvaluan style can be described \"as a musical microcosm of Polynesia, where contemporary and older styles co-exist\". Tuvalu is also the winner of the 3rd 2025 edition of the Novision Song Contest with the song \"Bulldoze!\" by malohi te afi.\nCuisine.\nThe cuisine of Tuvalu is based on the staple of coconut and the many species of fish found in the ocean and lagoons of the atolls. Desserts made on the islands include coconut and coconut milk, rather than animal milk. The traditional foods eaten in Tuvalu are pulaka, taro, bananas, breadfruit and coconut. Tuvaluans also eat seafood, including coconut crab and fish from the lagoon and ocean. Another traditional food source is seabirds (\"taketake\" or black noddy and \"akiaki\" or white tern), with pork being eaten mostly at \"fateles\" (or parties with dancing to celebrate events).\nPulaka is the main source for carbohydrates. Seafood provides protein. Bananas and breadfruit are supplemental crops. Coconut is used for its juice, to make other beverages (such as toddy) and to improve the taste of some dishes.\nA 1560-square-metre pond was built in 1996 on Vaitupu to sustain aquaculture in Tuvalu.\nFlying fish are also caught as a source of food; and as an exciting activity, using a boat, a butterfly net and a spotlight to attract the flying fish.\nHeritage.\nThe traditional community system still survives to a large extent on Tuvalu. Each family has its own task, or \"salanga\", to perform for the community, such as fishing, house building or defence. The skills of a family are passed on from parents to children.\nMost islands have their own \"fusi\", community-owned shops similar to convenience stores, where canned foods and bags of rice can be purchased. Goods are cheaper, and fusis give better prices for their own produce.\nAnother important building is the \"falekaupule\" or \"maneapa\", the traditional island meeting hall, where important matters are discussed and which is also used for wedding celebrations and community activities such as a \"fatele\" involving music, singing and dancing. \"Falekaupule\" is also used as the name of the council of elders \u2013 the traditional decision-making body on each island. Under the Falekaupule Act, \"Falekaupule\" means \"traditional assembly in each island\u00a0... composed in accordance with the Aganu of each island\". \"Aganu\" means traditional customs and culture.\nHistorical records are held by the Tuvalu National Library and Archives. The creation of a Tuvalu National Cultural Centre and Museum was discussed in the government's strategic plan for 2018\u201324.\nTraditional single-outrigger canoe.\n\"Paopao\" (from the Samoan language, meaning a small fishing-canoe made from a single log), is the traditional single-outrigger canoe of Tuvalu, of which the largest could carry four to six adults. The variations of single-outrigger canoes that had been developed on Vaitupu and Nanumea were reef-type or paddled canoes; that is, they were designed for carrying over the reef and being paddled, rather than being sailed. Outrigger canoes from Nui were constructed with an indirect type of outrigger attachment and the hull is double-ended, with no distinct bow and stern. These canoes were designed to be sailed over the Nui lagoon. The booms of the outrigger are longer than those found in other designs of canoes from the other islands. This made the Nui canoe more stable when used with a sail than the other designs.\nSport and leisure.\nA traditional sport played in Tuvalu is \"kilikiti\", which is similar to cricket. A popular sport specific to Tuvalu is \"Te ano\" (The ball), which is played with two round balls of diameter. \"Te ano\" is a traditional game that is similar to volleyball, in which the two hard balls made from pandanus leaves are volleyed at great speed with the team members trying to stop the ball hitting the ground. Traditional sports in the late 19th century were foot racing, lance throwing, quarterstaff fencing and wrestling, although the Christian missionaries disapproved of these activities.\nThe popular sports in Tuvalu include \"kilikiti\", \"Te ano\", association football, futsal, volleyball, handball, basketball and rugby sevens. Tuvalu has sports organisations for athletics, badminton, tennis, table tennis, volleyball, football, basketball, rugby union, weightlifting and powerlifting. At the 2013 Pacific Mini Games, Tuau Lapua Lapua won Tuvalu's first gold medal in an international competition in the weightlifting 62 kilogram male snatch. (He also won bronze in the clean and jerk, and obtained the silver medal overall for the combined event.) In 2015, Telupe Iosefa received the first gold medal won by Tuvalu at the Pacific Games in the powerlifting 120\u00a0kg male division.\nFootball in Tuvalu is played at club and national team level. The Tuvalu national football team trains at the Tuvalu Sports Ground in Funafuti and competes in the Pacific Games. The Tuvalu National Football Association is an associate member of the Oceania Football Confederation (OFC) and is seeking membership in FIFA. The Tuvalu national futsal team participates in the Oceanian Futsal Championship.\nA major sporting event is the \"Independence Day Sports Festival\" held annually on 1 October. The most important sports event within the country is arguably the Tuvalu Games, which are held yearly since 2008. Tuvalu first participated in the Pacific Games in 1978 and in the Commonwealth Games in 1998, when a weightlifter attended the games held at Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Two table tennis players attended the 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester, England; Tuvalu entered competitors in shooting, table tennis and weightlifting at the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne, Australia; three athletes participated in the 2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi, India, entering the discus, shot put and weightlifting events; and a team of 3 weightlifters and 2 table tennis players attended the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow. Tuvaluan athletes have also participated in the men's and women's 100 metres sprint at the World Championships in Athletics from 2009.\nThe Tuvalu Association of Sports and National Olympic Committee (TASNOC) was recognised as a National Olympic Committee in July 2007. Tuvalu entered the Olympic Games for the first time at the 2008 Summer Games in Beijing, China, with a weightlifter and two athletes in the men's and women's 100 metres sprint. A team with athletes in the same events represented Tuvalu at the 2012 Summer Olympics. Etimoni Timuani was the sole representative of Tuvalu at the 2016 Summer Olympics in the 100m event. Karalo Maibuca and Matie Stanley represented Tuvalu at the 2020 Summer Olympics in the 100m events. Tuvalu sent a team to the 2023 Pacific Games. Tuvalu was represented in athletic events at the 2024 Summer Olympics by Karalo Maibuca in the men's 100 metres, and Temalini Manatoa in the women's 100 metres.\nEconomy and government services.\nEconomy.\nFrom 1996 to 2002, Tuvalu was one of the best-performing Pacific Island economies and achieved an average real gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 5.6% per annum. Economic growth slowed after 2002, with GDP growth of 1.5% in 2008. Tuvalu was exposed to rapid rises in world prices of fuel and food in 2008, with the level of inflation peaking at 13.4%. Tuvalu has the smallest total GDP of any sovereign state in the world.\nTuvalu joined the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on 24 June 2010.\nIn 2023, the IMF Article IV consultation with Tuvalu concluded that a successful vaccination strategy allowed Tuvalu to lift coronavirus disease (COVID) containment measures at the end of 2022. However, the economic cost of the pandemic was significant, with real gross domestic product growth falling, and an increase in the rate of inflation. The increase in inflation in 2022 was due to the rapid rise in the cost of food resulting from a drought that affected food production and from rising global food prices, following Russia's invasion of Ukraine (food imports represent 19 percent of Tuvalu's GDP, while agriculture makes up for only 10 percent of GDP).\nThe growth of GDP of Tuvalu was at a high point in 2019. The global pandemic resulted in a retraction in the level of GDP (-3.7% in 2020, -0.5% in 2021, and -2.3% in 2022). Tuvalu experienced a 7.9% GDP growth in 2023, however the growth was estimated to moderate to 3.3 percent in 2024. An important factor in the moderation in growth is an expected decline in fishing revenue.\nIn 2025, GDP growth was estimated to further moderate to 3 percent of GDP. In 2026, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects GDP growth to ease further to 2.1 percent. This trend towards more modest and sustainable growth levels reflects underlying structural challenges in the economy of Tuvalu, including sluggish productivity, rising emigration, and growing exposure to climate-related risks, and also Tuvalu\u2019s exposure to global economic conditions. Tuvalu\u2019s economy is small and heavily reliant on a few sectors, including fishing, government services, and remittances from Tuvaluans participated in regional employment programmes in Australia and New Zealand. The National Bank of Tuvalu calculated remittances from New Zealand and Australia rose to 7% of GDP between 2021 and 2023.\nThe government is the primary provider of medical services through Princess Margaret Hospital on Funafuti, which operates health clinics on the other islands. Banking services are provided by the National Bank of Tuvalu. Public sector workers make up about 65% of those formally employed. Remittances from Tuvaluans living in Australia and New Zealand, and remittances from Tuvaluan sailors employed on overseas ships are important sources of income for Tuvaluans. Approximately 15% of adult males work as seamen on foreign-flagged merchant ships. Agriculture in Tuvalu is focused on coconut trees and growing pulaka in large pits of composted soil below the water table. Tuvaluans are otherwise involved in traditional subsistence agriculture and fishing.\nTuvaluans are well known for their seafaring skills, with the Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute on Amatuku motu (island), Funafuti, providing training to approximately 120 marine cadets each year so that they have the skills necessary for employment as seafarers on merchant shipping. The Tuvalu Overseas Seamen's Union (TOSU) is the only registered trade union in Tuvalu. It represents workers on foreign ships. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) estimates that 800 Tuvaluan men are trained, certified and active as seafarers. The ADB estimates that, at any one time, about 15% of the adult male population works abroad as seafarers. Job opportunities also exist as observers on tuna boats where the role is to monitor compliance with the boat's tuna fishing licence.\nGovernment revenues largely come from sales of fishing licences, income from the Tuvalu Trust Fund, and from the lease of its \".tv\" internet Top Level Domain (TLD). Tuvalu began deriving revenue from the commercialisation of its \".tv\" internet domain name, which was managed by Verisign until 2021. In 2023, an agreement between the government of Tuvalu and the GoDaddy company, outsourced the marketing, sales, promotion and branding of the .tv domain to the Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation, which established a .tv unit. Tuvalu also generates income from postage stamps by the Tuvalu Philatelic Bureau, and from the Tuvalu Ship Registry.\nThe Tuvalu Trust Fund (TTF) was established in 1987 by the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand. The TTF is a sovereign wealth fund that is owned by Tuvalu but is administered by an international board and the government of Tuvalu. When the performance of the TTF exceeds its operating target each year, excess funds are transferred to the Consolidated Investment Fund (CIF), and can be freely drawn upon by the Tuvaluan government to finance budgetary expenditures. In 2022, the value of the Tuvalu Trust Fund is approximately $190\u00a0million. In 2021 the market value of the TTF rose by 12 percent to its highest level on record (261 percent of GDP). However, the volatility in global equity markets in 2022 resulted in the TTF's value falling by 7 percent as compared to the end of 2021.\nFinancial support to Tuvalu is also provided by Japan, South Korea and the European Union. Australia and New Zealand continue to contribute capital to the TTF, and provide other forms of development assistance.\nThe U.S. government is also a major revenue source for Tuvalu. In 1999, the payment from the South Pacific Tuna Treaty (SPTT) was about $9\u00a0million, with the value increasing in the following years. In May 2013, representatives from the United States and the Pacific Islands countries agreed to sign interim arrangement documents to extend the Multilateral Fisheries Treaty (which encompasses the South Pacific Tuna Treaty) for 18 months.\nThe United Nations designates Tuvalu as a least developed country (LDC) because of its limited potential for economic development, absence of exploitable resources and its small size and vulnerability to external economic and environmental shocks. Tuvalu participates in the Enhanced Integrated Framework for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries (EIF), which was established in October 1997 under the auspices of the World Trade Organisation. In 2013, Tuvalu deferred its graduation from least developed country (LDC) status to a developing country to 2015. Enele Sopoaga, the prime minister in 2013, said that this deferral was necessary to maintain access by Tuvalu to the funds provided by the United Nations's National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), as \"Once Tuvalu graduates to a developed country, it will not be considered for funding assistance for climate change adaptation programmes like NAPA, which only goes to LDCs\". Tuvalu had met targets so that Tuvalu was to graduate from LDC status. Enele Sopoaga wanted the United Nations to reconsider its criteria for graduation from LDC status as not enough weight is given to the environmental plight of small island states like Tuvalu in the application of the Environmental Vulnerability Index (EVI).\nTransport.\nThere are limited transport services in Tuvalu. There are about of roads. The streets of Funafuti were paved in mid-2002, but other roads are unpaved. Tuvalu does not have any railways.\nFunafuti is the only port, but there is a deep-water berth in the lagoon at Nukufetau. Landing passengers and cargo on some of the islands is difficult as the reef islands do not have a lagoon that shipping can enter or the atoll's lagoon does not have navigable channels. Landing on these islands involves passengers and cargo being transferred from ships to workboats for delivery to landing points on the islands. The Outer Island Maritime Infrastructure Project was developed by the government of Tuvalu and funded by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Australian Infrastructure Financing Facility for the Pacific (AIFFP). The shipping infrastructure on Nukulaelae, Nanumaga, Nui and Niutao was damaged by Tropical Cyclone Pam in March 2015. Nukulaelae is an atoll, with access to the Nukulaelae lagoon involves navigating a passage through the fringing reef into a central channel or passage. Niutao and Nanumanga are reef islands, so that access to these islands involves transferring passengers and cargo from a ship standing off the island, using work boats to land on the fringing reef that surrounds each island. The Outer Island Maritime Infrastructure Project also involved constructing a small boat harbour construction on Nui and Nukulaelae, and rehabilitating and expanding the landing facilities on Nanumaga and Niutao to construct workboat harbours. Hall Contracting Pty Ltd was contracted by the Government of Tuvalu to carrying out the work, which has carried out other infrastructure projects in Tuvalu, including on Nanumea, which involved the construction of a 1.3-kilometre-long berm top barrier, a 170-metre-long Seabee seawall and seven reef-top barriers, and also work to upgrade facilities at the Port of Funafuti.\nThe merchant marine fleet consists of two passenger/cargo ships, \"Nivaga III\" and \"Manu Sina\", both of which were donated by Japan. They provide round-trip visits to the outer islands every three or four weeks, and travel between Suva, Fiji and Funafuti three or four times a year. \"Manu Sina\" (IMO: 1024182) is a passenger/general cargo ship with a capacity for 200 passengers. Her length overall (LOA) is 67 meters, width is 13 meters, and Gross Tonnage of 1,888. The launching ceremony was held in Saiki, Oita (Japan) in July 2024 in a ship yard of Honda Heavy Industries Co. Ltd. The construction of the vessel was funded by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the Government of Tuvalu. The ship arrived at Funafuti harbour on 2 April 2025, after a 13 day maiden voyage. The new ship replaces the aging ship, the \"Manu Folau\".\nIn 2015 \"Nivaga III\" replaced \"Nivaga II\", which had been in service in Tuvalu from 1989.\nIn 2020, the government of Tuvalu purchased a landing barge, which is intended to transport of dangerous goods and building material from the capital to the outer islands. The barge was named \"Moeiteava\". The government of Taiwan provided financial assistance.\nThe Tuvalu Fisheries Department operates two vessels for carrying out its activities within the country's exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and outer islands. These are the 18-metre \"Manaui\" and 32-metre \"Tala Moana\". The vessels are used for fisheries research, deploying fish aggregating devices (FADs), visiting outer islands for monitoring and consultations, including to implement Tuvalu's National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) to address climate change. The \"Manaui\" was procured through the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) in 1989 and is nearing the end of its life. In 2015, the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) provided assistance to acquire \"Tala Moana\"; which is also used for Monitoring Control and Surveillance (MCS) patrols. \"Tala Moana\" is a steel monohull oil rig supply vessel that is equipped with facilities for a team of about 15 people.\nThe only international airport in Tuvalu is Funafuti International Airport. Fiji Airways operates services to Funafuti International Airport. Fiji Airways operates services three times a week (Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday) between Suva and Funafuti with ATR 72\u2013600 aircraft, which has a capacity of 72 passengers. Beginning 18 March 2024, flights also operate on Mondays between Nadi and Funafuti.\nTourism.\nDue to the country's remoteness, tourism is not significant. Visitors totalled 1,684 in 2010: 65% were on business, development officials or technical consultants, 20% were tourists (360 people), and 11% were expatriates returning to visit family. In 2016, the number of visitors had increased to 2,000.\nThe main island of Funafuti is the focus of travellers, since the only airport in Tuvalu is the Funafuti International Airport and Funafuti is the only island that has hotel facilities. However, there are no tour guides, tour operators or organised activities and no cruise ships visit. Ecotourism is a motivation of travellers to Tuvalu. The Funafuti Conservation Area consists of of ocean, reef, lagoon, channel and six uninhabited islets.\nThe outer atolls can be visited on the two passenger-cargo ships, \"Nivaga III\" and \"Manu Sina\", which provide round-trip visits to the outer islands every three or four weeks. There is guesthouse accommodation on many of the outer islands.\nTelecommunications and media.\nThe Tuvalu Media Department of the Government of Tuvalu operates \"Radio Tuvalu\" which broadcasts from Funafuti. In 2011, the Japanese government provided financial support to construct a new AM broadcast studio. The installation of upgraded transmission equipment allows Radio Tuvalu to be heard on all nine islands of Tuvalu. The new AM radio transmitter on Funafuti replaced the FM radio service to the outer islands and freed up satellite bandwidth for mobile services. \"Fenui \u2013 news from Tuvalu\" is a free digital publication of the Tuvalu Media Department that is emailed to subscribers and operates a Facebook page, which publishes news about government activities and news about Tuvaluan events.\nCommunications in Tuvalu rely on satellite dishes for telephone, television, and internet access. The Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation (TTC) is a state-owned enterprise that provides fixed line telephone communications to subscribers on each island, mobile phone services on Funafuti, Vaitupu and Nukulaelae, and is a distributor of the Fiji Television service (Sky Pacific satellite television service).\nThe Tuvalu Vaka subsea cable was connected in 2025, together with the introduction of Starlink community gateways, they transform digital connectivity and expand access to essential services by providing continuous access to telecommunication services. The roll out of Fibre to the Premises (FTTP) in Funafuti, also expanded access to high-speed internet. The Starlink Community Gateway was funded under a World Bank ICT project, and provides redundancy with the VAKA cable.\nIn July 2020, the Government of Tuvalu signed a five-year agreement with Kacific Broadband Satellites to supply Tuvalu with internet via sixty 1.2\u00a0metre VSAT satellite receivers. The agreement provided a combined data transfer capacity of 400 to 600\u00a0Mbit/s to schools, medical clinics, government agencies, small businesses, and 40 outdoor Wi-Fi hotspots, as well as Tuvaluan interisland ferries via three maritime antennae. A Ka band antenna was installed to provide the island's mobile phone network with trunking and backhaul services. By February 2022, Kacific and Agility Beyond Space (ABS) satellites provided the island with a combined capacity of 510\u00a0Mbit/s. \nThe average download of data per device is about 9\u00a0GB/user/month, with 95% of devices in use supporting 4G LTE service. Also, Tuvalu has 5,915 active broadband users (the largest base of users is on Funafuti), with dedicated satellite and hotspot users on the outer islands, each of which having three to five hotspots.\nFilmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDocumentary films about Tuvalu:\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; \nBiodiversity\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCulture, customs and traditions\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; \nLanguage\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMusic and dance\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30229", "revid": "50233433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30229", "title": "Geography of Tuvalu", "text": " \nThe Western Pacific archipelagic nation of Tuvalu, formerly known as the Ellice Islands, is situated northeast of Australia and is approximately halfway between Australia and Hawaii. It lies east-northeast of the Santa Cruz Islands (belonging to the Solomons), southeast of Nauru, south of Kiribati, west of Tokelau, northwest of Samoa and Wallis and Futuna and north of Fiji. It is a very small island country of . Due to the spread-out islands it has the 38th largest Exclusive Economic Zone of . In size, it is the second-smallest country in Oceania.\nThe islands of Tuvalu consists of three reef islands and six atolls, containing approximately of reef platforms. The reef islands have a different structure to the atolls, and are described as reef platforms as they are smaller tabular reef platforms that do not have a salt-water lagoon, although they have a completely closed rim of dry land, with the remnants of a lagoon that has no connection to the open sea or that may be drying up. For example, Niutao has two lakes, which are brackish to saline, and are the degraded lagoon as the result of coral debris filling the lagoon.\nThe soils of Tuvalu's islands are usually shallow, porous, alkaline, and coarse-textured, with carbonate mineralogy and high pH values of up to 8.2 to 8.9. The soils are usually deficient in most of the important nutrients needed for plant growth (such as nitrogen, potassium and micronutrients such as iron, manganese, copper and zinc), so garden beds need to be enhanced with mulch and fertiliser to increase their fertility. The Tuvalu islands have a total land area of only about 26\u00a0km2, less than .\nThe land is very low-lying, with narrow coral atolls. The highest elevation is above sea level on Niulakita. Over four decades, there had been a net increase in land area of the islets of 73.5\u2009ha (2.9%), although the changes are not uniform, with 74% increasing and 27% decreasing in size. The sea level at the Funafuti tide gauge has risen at 3.9\u00a0mm per year, which is approximately twice the global average. The rising sea levels are identified as creating an increased transfer of wave energy across reef surfaces, which shifts sand, resulting in accretion to island shorelines, although this process does not result in additional habitable land. As of March 2018 Enele Sopoaga, the prime minister of Tuvalu, stated that Tuvalu is not expanding and has gained no additional habitable land.\nTuvalu experiences two distinct seasons, a wet season from November to April and a dry season from May to October. Westerly gales and heavy rain are the predominant weather conditions from November to April, the period that is known as \"Tau-o-lalo\", with tropical temperatures moderated by easterly winds from May to October.\nGeography.\nLocation:\nOceania, island group of nine islands comprising three reef islands and six true atolls in the South Pacific Ocean. The islands of Tuvalu are spread out between the latitude of 5\u00b0 to 10\u00b0 south and longitude of 176\u00b0 to 180\u00b0, west of the International Date Line.\nGeographic coordinates: to \nMap references:\nOceania\nArea:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n26\u00a0km2\n&lt;br&gt;\"land:\"\n26\u00a0km2\n&lt;br&gt;\"water:\"\n0\u00a0km2\nArea \u2013 comparative:\n0.1 times the size of Washington, DC\nLand boundaries:\n0\u00a0km\nCoastline:\nMaritime claims:\n&lt;br&gt;\"contiguous zone:\"\n&lt;br&gt;\"exclusive economic zone:\"\n and \n&lt;br&gt;\"territorial sea:\"\nTuvalu's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) covers an oceanic area of approximately .\nOn 29 August 2012 an \"Agreement between Tuvalu and Kiribati concerning their Maritime Boundary\", was signed by their respective leaders that determined the boundary as being seaward of Nanumea and Niutao in Tuvalu on the one hand and Tabiteuea, Tamana and Arorae in Kiribati on the other hand, along the geodesics connecting the points of latitude and longitude set out in the agreement.\nIn October 2014 the prime ministers of Fiji and Tuvalu signed the \"Fiji-Tuvalu Maritime Boundary Treaty\", which establishes the extent of the national areas of jurisdiction between Fiji and Tuvalu as recognized in international law under the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.\nClimate:\ntropical; moderated by easterly trade winds (March to November); westerly gales and heavy rain (November to March).\nTerrain:\nlow-lying and narrow coral atolls.\nElevation extremes:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest point:\"\nPacific Ocean 0 m\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest point:\"\nunnamed location, on Niulakita.\nExtreme points:\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Tuvalu, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location:\nNatural resources:\nfish. coconut\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\"\n0%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\"\n60%\n&lt;br&gt;\"forest:\"\n33.3%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n6.7% (2022 est.)\nIrrigated land:\n0 km2\nTrees and shrubs.\nMost common trees.\nThaman (2016) described about 362 species or distinct varieties of vascular plants that have been recorded at some time on Tuvalu, of which only about 59 (16%) are possibly indigenous. The most common trees found on all islands are coconut (\"Cocos nucifera\") stands, hibiscus (\"Hibiscus tiliaceus\"), papaya (\"Carica papaya\"), pandanus (\"Pandanus tectorius\"), salt bush (\"Scaevola taccada\"), \"Premna serratifolia\", \"Tournefortia samoensis\", zebra wood (\"Guettarda speciosa\"), Kanava (\"Cordia subcordata\"), (beach cordia) and terminalia (\"Terminalia samoensis\"). Indigenous broadleaf species, including Fetau (\"Calophyllum inophyllum\"), make up single trees or small stands around the coastal margin. While Coconut palms are common in Tuvalu, they are usually cultivated rather than naturally seeding and growing. Tuvaluan traditional histories are that the first settlers of the islands planted Coconut palms as they were not found on the islands.\nThe two recorded mangrove species in Tuvalu are the common Togo (\"Rhizophora stylosa\") and the red-flowered mangrove Sagale (\"Lumnitzera littorea\"), which is only reported on Nanumaga, Niutao, Nui and Vaitupu. Mangrove ecosystems are protected under Tuvaluan law.\nThe land cover types found on Funafuti include inland broadleaf forest and woodland, coastal littoral forest and scrub, mangroves and wetlands, and coconut woodland and agroforest.\nNative broadleaf forest.\nThe native broadleaf forest is limited to 4.1% of the vegetation types on the islands of Tuvalu. The islets of the Funafuti Conservation Area have 40% of the remaining native broadleaf forest on Funafuti atoll. The native broadleaf forest of Funafuti would include the following species, that were described by Charles Hedley in 1896, which include the Tuvaluan name (some of which may follow Samoan plant names):\nThe blossoms that are valued for their scent and for use in flower necklaces and headdresses include: \"Fetau\", (\"Calophyllum inophyllum\"); \"Jiali\", (\"Gardenia taitensis\"); \"Boua\" (\"Guettarda speciosa\"); and \"Crinum\".\nDonald Gilbert Kennedy, the resident District Officer in the administration of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony from 1932 to 1938, identified other trees found in the broadleaf forest:\nCharles Hedley (1896) identified the uses of plants and trees from the native broadleaf forest as including:\nThaman (1992) provides a literature review of the ethnobiology of the Pacific Islands.\nClimate and natural hazards.\nEl Ni\u00f1o and La Ni\u00f1a.\nTuvalu experiences the effects of El Ni\u00f1o and La Ni\u00f1a that flow from changes in ocean temperatures in equatorial and central Pacific. El Ni\u00f1o effects increase the chances of tropical storms and cyclones; while La Ni\u00f1a effects increase the chances of drought conditions in Tuvalu. On 3 October 2011, drought conditions resulted in a state of emergency being declared as water reserves ran low. Typically the islands of Tuvalu receive between 200mm to 400mm of rainfall per month, however a weak La Ni\u00f1a effect causes a drought by cooling the surface of the sea around Tuvalu.\nTropical cyclones.\nSevere tropical cyclones are usually rare, but the low level of islands makes them very sensitive to sea-level rise. Tuvalu experienced an average of three cyclones per decade between the 1940s and 1970s, however eight occurred in the 1980s. The impact of individual cyclones is subject to variables including the force of the winds and also whether a cyclone coincides with high tides. A warning system, which uses the Iridium satellite network, was introduced in 2016 in order to allow outlying islands to be better prepare for natural disasters.\nGeorge Westbrook recorded a cyclone that struck Funafuti on 23\u201324 December 1883. A cyclone struck Nukulaelae on 17\u201318 March 1886. Captain Edward Davis of HMS \"Royalist\", who visited the Ellice Group in 1892, recorded in the ship's diary that in February 1891 the Ellice Group was devastated by a severe cyclone. A cyclone caused severe damage to the islands in 1894.\nCyclone Bebe caused severe damage to Funafuti during the 1972\u201373 South Pacific cyclone season. Funafuti's Tepuka Vili Vili islet was devastated by Cyclone Meli in 1979, with all its vegetation and most of its sand swept away during the cyclone. Cyclone Gavin was first identified during 2 March 1997, and was the first of three tropical cyclones to affect Tuvalu during the 1996\u201397 cyclone season with Cyclones Hina and Keli following later in the season. Cyclone Ofa had a major impact on Tuvalu in late January and early February 1990. On Vaitupu Island around 85 percent of residential homes, trees and food crops were destroyed, while residential homes were also destroyed on the islands of Niutao, Nui and Nukulaelae. The majority of the islands in Tuvalu reported damage to vegetation and crops especially bananas, coconuts and breadfruit, with the extent of damage ranging from 10 to 40 percent. In Funafuti sea waves flattened the Hurricane Bebe bank at the southern end of the airstrip, which caused sea flooding and prompted the evacuation of several families from their homes. In Nui and Niulakita there was a minor loss of the landscape because of sea flooding while there were no lives lost. Soon after the systems had impacted Tuvalu, a Disaster Rehabilitation Sub-Committee was appointed to evaluate the damage caused and make recommendations to the National Disaster Committee and to the Cabinet of Tuvalu, on what should be done to help rehabilitate the affected areas.\nIn March 2015 Cyclone Pam, the Category 5 cyclone that devastated Vanuatu, caused damage to houses, crops and infrastructure on the outer islands. A state of emergency was subsequently declared on 13 March. An estimated 45\u00a0percent of the nation's nearly 10,000\u00a0people were displaced, according to Prime Minister Enele Sopoaga. The three northern islands, Nanumea, Nanumanga and Niutao were badly affected by flooding as the result of storm surges. More than 400 people from the northern island of Nanumanga were moved to emergency accommodation in the school buildings, as well as another 85 families from Nukulaelae in the south of Tuvalu. On Nui the storm surges contaminated the water supplies and damaged septic tanks and grave sites. The central islands of Vaitupu and Nukufetau were also affected by flooding caused by storm surges. The Situation Report published on 30 March reported that on Nukufetau all the displaced people have returned to their homes.\nNui suffered the most damage of the three central islands (Nui, Nukufetau and Vaitupu); with both Nui and Nukufetau suffering the loss of 90% of the crops. Of the three northern islands (Nanumanga, Niutao, Nanumea), Nanumanga suffered the most damage, with 60\u2013100 houses flooded and damage to the health facility. Vasafua islet, part of the Funafuti Conservation Area, was severely damaged by Cyclone Pam. The coconut palms were washed away, leaving the islet as a sand bar.\nDespite passing over to the south of the island nation, Cyclone Tino and its associated convergence zone impacted the whole of Tuvalu between January 16\u00a0- 19 of 2020.\nTsunami.\nNui was struck by a giant wave on 16 February 1882; earthquakes and volcanic eruptions occurring in the basin of the Pacific Ocean and along the Pacific Ring of Fire are a possible cause of a tsunami. There is earthquake activity in the Solomon Islands, where earthquakes occurred in relation to the New Hebrides Trench, and movement along the boundary of the Pacific Plate with, respectively, the Indo-Australia, Woodlark, and Solomon Sea plates.\nTuvalu has the third lowest tsunami risk of Pacific Island countries, with a maximum tsunami amplitude of 1.6m for a 2000-year return period (comparatively, the highest is 5.2m for PNG, and the lowest is 1m for Nauru). The assessment of the tsunami risk of Tuvalu was that major source of risk was activity associated with the New Hebrides trench. The orientation of the trench vis-\u00e0-vis the islands of Tuvalu results in the conclusion that most of the energy originating from New Hebrides trench is likely to be directed towards the southern islands of Tuvalu, so that the tsunami risk is lower for the northern islands when compared to the southern islands.\nEnvironment.\nIsland, reef and lagoon habitats.\nTuvalu consists of three reef islands and six true atolls. Its small, scattered group of atolls have poor soil and a total land area of only about 26.26\u00a0square kilometres (less than 10\u00a0sq.\u00a0mi.) making it the fourth smallest country in the world. The islets that form the atolls are very low-lying. Nanumaga, Niutao, Niulakita are reef islands and the six true atolls are Funafuti, Nanumea, Nui, Nukufetau, Nukulaelae and Vaitupu. Funafuti is the largest atoll of the nine low reef islands and atolls that form the Tuvalu volcanic island chain. It comprises numerous islets around a central lagoon that is approximately (N\u2013S) by (W-E), centred on 179\u00b07\u2019E and 8\u00b030\u2019S. On the atolls an annular reef rim surrounds the lagoon, with several natural reef channels. A standard definition of an \"atoll\" is \"an annular reef enclosing a lagoon in which there are no promontories other than reefs and islets composed of reef detritus\". The northern part of the Funafuti lagoon has a deep basin (maximum depth recorded of 54.7 m) basin, and the southern part of the lagoon has very narrow shallow basin.\nThe eastern shoreline of Fongafale in the Funafuti lagoon (\"Te Namo\") was modified during World War II; several piers were constructed, beach areas filled, and deep water access channels were excavated. These alternations to the reef and shoreline have resulted in changes to wave patterns with less sand accumulating to form the beaches as compared to former times; and the shoreline is now exposed to wave action. Several attempts to stabilize the shoreline have not achieved the desired effect.\nThe rising population results in increased demand on fish stocks, which are under stress; although the creation of the Funafuti Conservation Area has provided a fishing exclusion area that helps sustain fish populations across the Funafuti lagoon. Population pressure on the resources of Funafuti and in-adequation sanitation systems have resulted in pollution. The Waste Operations and Services Act 2009 provides the legal framework for the waste management and pollution control projects funded by the European Union that are directed to organic waste composting in eco-sanitation systems.\nSurveys were carried out in May 2010 of the reef habitats of Nanumea, Nukulaelae and Funafuti (including the Funafuti Conservation Area) and a total of 317 fish species were recorded during this \"Tuvalu Marine Life\" study. The surveys identified 66 species that had not previously been recorded in Tuvalu, which brings the total number of identified species to 607.\nThe terrestrial invertebrates are land and shore crabs, including \"Paikea\" (\"Discoplax rotunda\"), \"Tupa\" (\"Cardisoma carnifex\"), \"Kamakama\" (\"Grapsus albolineatus\"), a range of hermit crabs, \"Uga\" (\"Coenobita spp\") and the coconut crab, \"Uu\" (\"Birgus latro\"). Also important are a range of land snails, misa (\"Melampus spp\") used to make shell leis (ula) and traditional handicrafts, which includes the decoration of mats, fans and wall hangings.\nEnvironment \u2013 climate change issues.\nSince there are no streams or rivers and groundwater is not potable, most water needs must be met by catchment systems with storage facilities; beachhead erosion because of the use of sand for building materials; excessive clearance of forest undergrowth for use as fuel; damage to coral reefs from the bleaching of the coral as a consequence of the increase of the ocean temperatures and acidification from increased levels of carbon dioxide; Tuvalu is very concerned about global increases in greenhouse gas emissions and their effect on rising sea levels, which threaten the country's underground water table. Tuvalu has adopted a national plan of action as the observable transformations over the last ten to fifteen years show Tuvaluans that there have been changes to the sea levels.\nBecause of the low elevation, the islands that make up this nation are threatened by current and future sea level rise. The highest elevation is above sea level on Niulakita, which gives Tuvalu the second-lowest maximum elevation of any country (after the Maldives). However, the highest elevations are typically in narrow storm dunes on the ocean side of the islands which are prone to over topping in tropical cyclones, such as occurred on Funafuti with Cyclone Bebe.\nTuvalu is mainly composed of coral debris eroded from encircling reefs and pushed up onto the islands by winds and waves. Paul Kench at the University of Auckland in New Zealand and Arthur Webb at the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission in Fiji released a study in 2010 on the dynamic response of reef islands to sea level rise in the central Pacific. Tuvalu was mentioned in the study, and Webb and Kench found that seven islands in one of its nine atolls have spread by more than 3 per cent on average since the 1950s. One island, Funamanu, gained 0.44 hectares, or nearly 30 per cent of its previous area. In contrast, Tepuka Vili Vili has suffered a net loss in area of 22 percent since 1896. The shape and orientation of the reef has also changed over time.\nFurther research by Kench et al., published in 2018 identifies rising sea levels as creating an increased transfer of wave energy across the reef surfaces of the atolls of Tuvalu, which shifts sand, resulting in accretion to island shorelines. Over 4 decades, there had been a net increase in land area of the islets of 73.5\u2009ha (2.9%), although the changes are not uniform, with 74% increasing and 27% decreasing in size. However, this process does not result in additional habitable land.\nThe storm surge resulting from a tropical cyclone can dramatically shift coral debris. In 1972 Funafuti was in the path of Cyclone Bebe. Tropical Cyclone Bebe was a pre-season tropical cyclone that impacted the Gilbert, Ellice Islands, and Fiji island groups. The storm surge created a wall of coral rubble along the ocean side of Fongafale and Funafala that was about long, and about thick at the bottom. The cyclone knocked down about 90% of the houses and trees on Funafuti and contaminated sources of drinking water as a result of the system's storm surge and fresh water flooding.\nTuvalu is affected by perigean spring tide events which raise the sea level higher than a normal high tide. The highest peak tide recorded by the Tuvalu Meteorological Service was on 24 February 2006 and again on 19 February 2015. As a result of historical sea level rise, the king tide events lead to flooding of low-lying areas, which is compounded when sea levels are further raised by La Ni\u00f1a effects or local storms and waves. In the future, sea level rise may threaten to submerge the nation entirely as it is estimated that a sea level rise of in the next 100 years could make Tuvalu uninhabitable.\nTuvalu experiences westerly gales and heavy rain from October to March \u2013 the period that is known as \"Tau-o-lalo\"; with tropical temperatures moderated by easterly winds from April to November. Drinking water is mostly obtained from rainwater collected on roofs and stored in tanks; these systems are often poorly maintained, resulting in lack of water. Aid programs of Australia and the European Union have been directed to improving the storage capacity on Funafuti and in the outer islands.\nBorrow Pits Remediation (BPR) project.\nWhen the airfield, which is now Funafuti International Airport, was constructed during World War II. The coral base of the atoll was used as fill to create the runway. The resulting borrow pits impacted the fresh-water aquifer. In the low areas of Funafuti the sea water can be seen bubbling up through the porous coral rock to form pools with each high tide. Since 1994 a project has been in development to assess the environmental impact of transporting sand from the lagoon to fill all the borrow pits and low-lying areas on Fongafale. In 2013 a feasibility study was carried out and in 2014 the Tuvalu Borrow Pits Remediation (BPR) project was approved, so that all ten borrow pits would be filled, leaving Tafua Pond, which is a natural pond. The New Zealand Government funded the BPR project. The project was carried out in 2015 with 365,000 sqm of sand being dredged from the lagoon to fill the holes and improve living conditions on the island. This project increased the usable land space on Fongafale by eight per cent.\nTuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project (TCAP).\nThe Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project (TCAP) was launched in 2017 for the purpose on enhancing the resilience of the islands of Tuvalu to meet the challenges resulting from higher sea levels. Tuvalu was the first country in the Pacific to access climate finance from Green Climate Fund, with the support of the UNDP. In December 2022, work on the Funafuti reclamation project commenced. The project is to dredge sand from the lagoon to construct a platform on Fongafale, Funafuti that is meters long and meters wide, giving a total area of approximately 7.8 ha. (19.27 acres), which is designed to remain above sea level rise and the reach of storm waves beyond the year 2100. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) also provided funding for the TCAP. Further projects that are part of TCAP are capital works on the outer islands of Nanumea and Nanumaga aimed at reducing exposure to coastal damage resulting from storms.\nTopographic and Bathymetric Survey.\nIn May 2019, TCAP signed an agreement with Fugro, for it to carry out an airborne LIDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) survey across the nine islands of Tuvalu. LIDAR is a remote sensing method that uses light in the form of a pulsed laser that will produce high quality mapping of the reef and lagoon bathymetry (sea floor mapping to 50-meter depths) and accurate topography (land elevation data). This aerial survey will provide high quality baseline data to assess the relationship between water levels and wave dynamics and their impact on the islands of Tuvalu. The survey will also provide baseline data for shoreline monitoring, coastal vulnerability assessment and planning.\nControls on plastic waste and recycling of domestic waste.\nFrom 1 August 2019, specific single-use plastic items are subject to a ban on importation into Tuvalu, an importation levy was also imposed on specific items, such as refrigerators and vehicles, to raise money to pay for their recycling or shipment out of the country when they cease to be usable. The new rules are contained in two regulations: the Waste Management (Prohibition on the Importation of Single-Use Plastic) Regulation 2019 and the Waste Management (Levy Deposit) Regulation 2019, which regulations are made under the Waste Operations and Services Act 2009.\nEnvironment \u2013 international agreements.\nTuvalu is a party to:\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Hazardous Waste, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling\n&lt;br&gt;\"signed, but not ratified:\" none\nTuvalu signed the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in 1992, and ratified it in December 2002.\nTuvalu signed the Pacific Islands Cetaceans Memorandum of Understanding on 9 September 2010.\nTuvalu is a party to the Waigani Convention that bans the importation into forum island countries of hazardous and radioactive wastes and to control the transboundary movement and management of hazardous wastes within the south pacific region and is also a party to the Minamata Convention on Mercury, Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. Tuvalu is in the process of completing its accession to the Basel Convention to protect human health and the environment against the adverse effects that may result from the generation, transboundary movements and management of hazardous and other wastes.\nFunafuti atoll.\nStructure of Funafuti atoll.\nFunafuti atoll consists of a narrow sweep of land between wide, encircling a large lagoon (\"Te Namo\") of about long and wide. The average depth in the Funafuti lagoon is about . With a surface of , it is by far the largest lagoon in Tuvalu. The northern part of the lagoon has a deep basin (maximum depth recorded of 54.7 m) basin, and the southern part of the lagoon has very narrow shallow basin. The land area of the 33 islets aggregates to , less than one percent of the total area of the atoll.\nThe boreholes on Fongafale islet at the site now called \"Darwin's Drill\", are the result of drilling conducted by the Royal Society of London for the purpose of investigating the formation of coral reefs to determine whether traces of shallow water organisms could be found at depth in the coral of Pacific atolls. This investigation followed the work on The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs conducted by Charles Darwin in the Pacific. Drilling occurred in 1896, 1897 and 1898. Professor Edgeworth David of the University of Sydney was a member of the 1896 \"Funafuti Coral Reef Boring Expedition of the Royal Society\", under Professor William Sollas and lead the expedition in 1897. However, the geologic history of atolls is more complex than Darwin (1842) and Davis (1928) envisioned. The survey of the atoll published in 1970 described its structure as being:\nAquifer salinization of Fongafale Islet, Funafuti.\nThe investigation of groundwater dynamics of Fongafale Islet, Funafuti, show that tidal forcing results in salt water contamination of the surficial aquifer during spring tides. The degree of aquifer salinization depends on the specific topographic characteristics and the hydrologic controls in the sub-surface of the atoll. About half of Fongafale islet is reclaimed swamp that contains porous, highly permeable coral blocks that allow the tidal forcing of salt water. There was extensive swamp reclamation during World War II to create the air field that is now the Funafuti International Airport. As a consequence of the specific topographic characteristics of Fongafale, unlike other atoll islands of a similar size, Fongafale does not have a thick freshwater lens. The narrow fresh water and brackish water sheets in the sub-surface of Fongafale islet results in the taro swamps and the fresh groundwater resources of the islet being highly vulnerable to salinization resulting from the rising sea-level.\nIn addition to the increased risk of salinized by the sea-level rise, the freshwater lens is at risk from over extraction due to the large population that now occupies Fongafale islet; the increased extraction can be exacerbated by a decrease of the rainfall recharge rate associated with the climate change. Water pollution is also a chronic problem, with domestic wastewater identified as the primary pollution source. Approximately 92% of households on Fongafale islet have access to septic tanks and pit toilets. However, these sanitary facilities are not built as per the design specifications or they are not suitable for the geophysical characteristics, which results in seepage into the fresh water lens and run off into coastal waters.\nOn Funafuti and on the other islands, rainwater collected off the corrugated iron roofs of buildings is now the primary source of fresh water. On Funafuti a desalination unit that was donated by Japan in 2006 also provides fresh water. In response to the 2011 drought, Japan funded the purchase of a 100 m3/d desalination plant and two portable 10 m3/d plants as part of its Pacific Environment Community (PEC) program. Aid programs from the European Union and Australia also provided water tanks as part of the longer-term solution for the storage of available fresh water.\nAquifer salinization and the impact on Pulaka production.\nSwamp taro (\"Cyrtosperma merkusii\"), known in Tuvalu as \"Pulaka\", is grown in large pits of composted soil below the water table, Pulaka has been the main source for carbohydrates, it is similar to taro, but \"with bigger leaves and larger, coarser roots\".\nIn recent years the Tuvaluan community have raised concerns over increased salinity of the groundwater in pits that are used to cultivate pulaka. Pits on all islands of Tuvalu (except Niulakita) were surveyed in 2006. Nukulaelae and Niutao each had one pit area in which salinity concentrations thought to be too high for successful swamp taro growth. However, on Fongafale in Funafuti all pits surveyed were either too saline or very marginal for swamp taro production, although a more salt tolerant species of taro (\"Colocasia esculenta\") was being grown in Fongafale.\nThe extent of the salinization of the aquifer on Fongafale Islet is the result of both man-made changes to the topography that occurred when the air field was built in World War II by reclaiming swamp land and excavating coral rock from other parts of the islet. These topographic changes are exacerbated by the groundwater dynamics of the islet, as tidal forcing pushes salt water into the surficial aquifer during spring tides.\nThe freshwater lens of each atoll is a fragile system. Tropical cyclones and other storm events also result in wave wash over and extreme high water also occurs during spring tides. These events can result in salt water contamination of the fresh groundwater lens. Periods of low rainfall can also result in contraction of the freshwater lens as the coconut trees and other vegetation draw up the water at a greater than recharge than it can be recharged. The over extraction of ground water to supply human needs has a similar result as drought conditions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30230", "revid": "1303973544", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30230", "title": "Demographics of Tuvalu", "text": " \nDemographic features of the population of Tuvalu include the age structure, ethnicity, education level, life expectancy, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nSummary.\nThe population of Tuvalu is predominately of Polynesian ethnicity with approximately 5.6% of the population being Micronesian. Tuvaluans are ethnically related to the people of Samoa and Tonga. There is evidence for a dual genetic origin of Pacific Islanders in Asia and Melanesia, which results from an analysis of Y chromosome (NRY) and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) markers. There is also evidence of Fiji playing a pivotal role in west-to-east expansion within Polynesia. The pattern of settlement believed to have occurred is that the Polynesians spread out from the Samoan Islands into the Tuvaluan atolls, with Tuvalu providing a stepping stone to migration into the Polynesian Outlier communities in Melanesia and Micronesia.\nThe vast majority of Tuvaluans belong to the Church of Tuvalu, a Protestant denomination. Their ancestors were converted by Christian missionaries in the 19th century.\nInfant mortality in Tuvalu was 25 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2012, with an under-five mortality rate of 30 deaths per 1,000 live births. There has been a consistent decline in the under-five mortality rate since 1990.\nSchool attendance at school is 10 years for males and 11 years for females (2001). Adult literacy rate is 99.0% (2002).\nLife expectancy for women in Tuvalu is 68.41 years and 64.01 years for men (2015 est.).\nThe population of Tuvalu is recorded by the Central Statistics Department (CSD) of Tuvalu in the census information:\nThe net migration rate is estimated at -6.81 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2015 est.). The threat of global warming in Tuvalu is not a dominant motivation for migration as Tuvaluans appear to prefer to continue living on the islands for reasons of lifestyle, culture and identity.\nThe Census Monograph on Migration, Urbanization and Youth provides an analysis of the 2012 census and reported:\nPopulation.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 12.XI.2017) (Data of mini-census taken in 2017.): \nEthnic groups.\nFrom the 2022 census:\nMigration.\nEmigration.\nNew Zealand.\nThe 2013 Census of New Zealand reported 3,537 Tuvaluans, an increase of 80% from the 1,965 reported in the 2001 census. In the 2013 census, only about 40% (1,419) had been born in Tuvalu. The high proportion of Tuvaluans who are New Zealand born illustrates the significance of New Zealand as a long term destination for Tuvaluan migrants.\nAustralia.\nThe Tuvaluan community in Australia is recorded in the 2011 Australian Census as 228 people who put Tuvaluan as their first response to a question on \u2018ancestry\u2019; of these 120 were born in Tuvalu.\nThe islands of Nanumea, Nanumaga, Nukufetau and Niutao had relatively high net migration losses, with most being internal migrants to Funafuti. Vaitupu had the largest net migration gain, although this is attributed to the location of Motufoua Secondary School on Vaitupu and the movement of students from the other islands.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30233", "revid": "50233433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30233", "title": "Telecommunications in Tuvalu", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Tuvalu cover Tuvalu's 6 atolls and 3 reef islands. The islands of Tuvalu rely on satellite dishes for communication and internet access.\nThe Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation (TTC), a state-owned enterprise, provides fixed line telephone communications to subscribers on each island and mobile phone services on Funafuti, Vaitupu and Nukulaelae. TTC is a distributor of Fiji Television service (Sky Pacific satellite television service).\nTelephones.\nTelephones - main lines in use:\n2,000 (2021)\nTelephones - mobile cellular:\n9000 (2021)\nTelephone system:\n\"domestic:\"\nfixed-line teledensity is 18 per 100 and mobile-cellular is 80 per 100\n\"international:\"\ncountry code - 688; international calls can be made by satellite\nRadio and television.\nRadio broadcast stations:\nAM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0 (2011) - The Tuvalu Media Department of the Government of Tuvalu operates \"Radio Tuvalu\", which broadcasts on the AM frequency. In 2011 the Japanese government provided financial support to construct a new AM broadcast studio. The new AM radio transmitter on Funafuti replaced the FM radio service to the outer islands and freed up satellite bandwidth for mobile services.\nRadios:\n4,000 (1997)\nTelevision broadcast stations:\nTTC is a distributor of Fiji Television service (Sky Pacific satellite television service).\nTelevisions:\nunknown number.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs).\nCountry code (Top level domain): TV (see .tv)\n\"Tuvalu.tv\" is the sole provider of Internet access in Tuvalu. The ISP is operated by the ICT (Information and Communications Technology) Department of the Government of Tuvalu.\nIn 2012 the available bandwidth was only 512\u00a0kbit/s uplink, and 1.5\u00a0Mbit/s downlink. Throughout Tuvalu are more than 900 subscribers who want to use the satellite service, with demand slowing down the speed of the entire system. TTC currently operates satellite internet services with less than 20\u00a0Mbit/s of capacity. In June 2014 TTC signed a five-year agreement with Kacific Broadband Satellites for the supply of provide high speed bandwidth to the islands of Tuvalu.\nFrom 2017 the service was provided by the Kacific-1 satellite - Ka band High-throughput satellite (HTS) provided by Kacific Broadband Satellites which provided TTC with increased levels of capacity over the period. \nIn July 2020, the Government of Tuvalu signed a five-year agreement with Kacific for 400\u00a0Mbps to 600\u00a0Mbps of satellite capacity. the agreement provides a comprehensive turnkey service including sixty 1.2 metre VSAT terminals (satellite dishes) for schools, medical clinics, government agencies and small businesses, forty outdoor WiFi access points to support community connectivity with WiFi hotspots, three maritime antennae to connect ferry services, and one Ka-band antennae to provide trunking and backhaul services for the mobile phone network.\nAs of February 2022, the delivered satellite capacity into Tuvalu was a combined capacity of 510\u00a0mbps split between Agility Beyond Space (ABS) (Ku Band) and Kacific (Ka band). The average download of data per device is about 9\u00a0GB/user/month, with 95% of devices in use being 4G/ LTE capable. Also, Tuvalu has 5,915 active broadband users (the largest base of users is on Funafuti), with dedicated satellite and hotspot users on the outer islands, each of which has 3 to 5 hotspots.\nTuvalu Telecommunications and ICT Development Project.\nIn January 2019 the World Bank approved a US$29 million grant for the Tuvalu Telecommunications and ICT Development Project which is intended to boost internet connectivity in Tuvalu, including to the country's outer islands. The project will also support investments in an international optical fiber submarine cable to provide faster, lower-cost internet bandwidth. \nThe project will include reforms of the Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation (TCC) to redevelop the government-run entity as a public-private partnership (PPP) in cooperation with an experienced international telecommunications operator, which will be selected using a competitive process.\nThe project will involve the government of Tuvalu using a submarine cable system to connect Funafuti atoll to the international optical fibre network. The private sector partner in the PPP will be responsible for the design, installation and operation of the cable and network. The Tuvalu Vaka subsea cable was connected in 2025, together with the introduction of Starlink community gateways, they transform digital connectivity and expand access to essential services by providing continuous access to telecommunication services. The roll out of Fibre to the Premises (FTTP) in Funafuti, also expanded access to high-speed internet. The Starlink Community Gateway was funded under a World Bank ICT project, and provides redundancy with the VAKA cable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30234", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30234", "title": "Transport in Tuvalu", "text": ""}
{"id": "30235", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30235", "title": "Military of Tuvalu", "text": ""}
{"id": "30236", "revid": "37740198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30236", "title": "Tuvalu/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "30238", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30238", "title": "Mind-body problem", "text": ""}
{"id": "30242", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30242", "title": "The Hitch Hikers Guide To The Galaxy", "text": ""}
{"id": "30243", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30243", "title": "Text adventure games", "text": ""}
{"id": "30245", "revid": "37987116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30245", "title": "Traveller (role-playing game)", "text": "Tabletop science fiction role-playing game\nTraveller is a science fiction role-playing game first published in 1977 by Game Designers' Workshop. Marc Miller designed \"Traveller\" with help from Frank Chadwick, John Harshman, and Loren Wiseman. Editions were published for \"GURPS\", d20, and other role-playing game systems. From its origin and in the currently published systems, the game relied upon six-sided dice for random elements. \"Traveller\" has been featured in a few novels and at least two video games.\n\"Traveller\" is a tabletop game where characters journey through star systems, engaging in exploration, ground and space battles, and interstellar trading. The game is influenced by various literary works and emphasizes commerce, sociological stratification, and a mix of low and high technology. The setting is centered around the human-dominated Third Imperium, a feudalistic interstellar empire. Despite the focus on humans, the \"Traveller\" universe is cosmopolitan and features various other sophont peoples. The game's history also features the Ancients, a highly advanced race that left behind ruins and artifacts scattered throughout the universe.\n\"Traveller\" has been published in various editions since 1977. The original version, known as \"Classic Traveller\", was published by Game Designers' Workshop (GDW). Throughout the years, the game has evolved, with notable editions including \"MegaTraveller\", \"Traveller: The New Era\", \"Marc Miller's Traveller\", \"GURPS Traveller\", \"Traveller20\", \"Traveller Hero\", \"Mongoose Traveller\", and \"Traveller5\". The current rulesets are \"Traveller5\" and \"Mongoose Traveller 2nd Ed.\", both of which draw from the original \"Traveller\" rules and rely on six-sided dice. Each edition presents different settings, timelines, and mechanics, showcasing the game's adaptability and enduring popularity.\n\"Traveller\" is highly regarded for its production value, sophisticated character generation system, and consistent rules. It has received positive reviews across various editions, with some critics calling it the best science-fiction RPG. \"Traveller\" has won multiple Origins Awards and was inducted into the Origins Hall of Fame in 1996. While the game has faced some criticism, such as slow character growth and anachronistic weapons, it remains a classic in the role-playing hobby. Some video games and software have been based on the \"Traveller\" universe, including \"The Imperial Data Recovery System\", \"MegaTraveller 1: The Zhodani Conspiracy\", and \"MegaTraveller 2: Quest for the Ancients\".\nDesign.\nTraveller is a tabletop role-playing game. Characters journey between star systems, engaging in exploration, ground and space battles, and interstellar trading. One player, the game master or referee, oversees task attempts and guides events as the players explore the setting.\nCharacters are defined not by the need to increase native skill and ability but by achievements, discoveries, wealth, and so on.\nInfluences and inspiration.\nMarc Miller lists a number of books that influenced \"Traveller\" and provided its key features:\nKey features.\nSome of these key features include:\nCharacters.\n\"Traveller\" uses a lifepath-style system for character generation. Characters get skills and experience in a mini-game where the player makes career choices determining the character's life up to the point before adventuring begins.\nA character can be human, robot, alien, or of a genetically engineered species. A character can be civilian, military, or noble, a young cadet, or a tried-and-true veteran, each with strengths and weaknesses. Death during character generation is possible in some editions, a mechanic that became infamous.\nCharacters have six primary characteristics, generated by a roll of two six-sided dice. Other characteristics also exist to add nuance to alien characters.\nSome characters have extra-sensory perception, telekinesis, telepathy, and other psychic abilities, which are organized and standardized into \"psionics\".\nEquipment.\nEquipment emphasizes wilderness exploration, hazardous environments, and combat. As a result, equipment lists are heavy on vehicles, sensor equipment, communicators, rations, personal armor, and weapons.\nStarships.\nStarships range from small one-person scouts, to giant planetoid colony ships. Design rules balance power, life support, and defenses for consistent ships. GDW published several board games allowing \"Traveller\" space battles to be played out as games in their own right - \"Mayday\", \"Brilliant Lances\" and \"Battle Rider\" for example.\nWorlds.\nWorlds range from barren planetoid moons to large gas giant worlds, from uncolonized territories to planets with billions of people. The world generation rules produce a random mix of worlds.\nSetting.\nEarly in the adventures and supplements, a default setting emerged, based on in-house play tests done for the game. In this setting, the human-dominated Third Imperium is the largest interstellar empire in charted space, a feudalistic union of worlds, where local nobility operate largely free from oversight and restricted by convention and feudal obligations.\nSophonts.\nThe setting features descendants of humanity who are collectively called \"Humaniti\". These include the \"Solomani\", humans emigrated from Earth within the last few thousand years, the \"Vilani\", humans transplanted from Earth tens of thousands of years ago by the Ancients (see below) who founded the First Imperium, and the \"Zhodani\", psychic humans ruled by psionically gifted nobles.\nDespite the thematic dominance of the human race, with most adventures taking place in human space, the \"Traveller\" universe is cosmopolitan and contains many technologically advanced \"sophonts\", a term borrowed from earlier science fiction material. The setting principally concerns itself with six \"major races\" that developed faster-than-light travel independently. In addition to Humaniti, the standard list of major races includes the honor-bound catlike \"Aslan\", the winged lizard-like \"Droyne\", the sixfold-symmetric and manipulative \"Hivers\", the centaur-like militant vegetarian \"K'kree\", and the wolf-hybrid \"Vargr\".\nAdditional minor races are numerous. An early publication from GDW notes that \"The minor races, of which there are hundreds within the area of known space, will be largely left up to individual referees.\" GDW's quarterly publication, the \"Journal of the Travellers Aid Society\" designed by Loren K. Wiseman, sketched out about one race per quarter, starting with the Aslan in Issue 7. Taken together with aliens casually mentioned or introduced in separate scenarios or adventures\u2014often arbitrarily\u2014there is therefore no indication that the number of minor races is limited in any sense.\nAncients.\nThe \"Ancients\" were a major race in the distant past; their ruins dot planets throughout charted space and their artifacts are more technically advanced than those of any existing civilization. For unknown reasons, they transplanted humans from Earth to dozens of worlds, uplifted Terran wolves to create the Vargr and transplanted them to another world, and undertook many megascale engineering projects before destroying their civilization in a catastrophic civil war.\nPublishing history.\nFormat.\nThe original gamebooks were black and digest-sized (known as the \"little black books\") produced by Game Designers' Workshop (GDW). The main rules were detailed in three such booklets, sold as a boxed set while the same format was used for early support material, such as the adventures, supplements and further books. Later supplements and updated versions of the main game system introduced full sized booklets, complete re-writes of the game system and significant changes to the Third Imperium.\nEditions.\n\"Mongoose Traveller 2nd Ed.\" and \"Traveller5\" are the current rulesets. Both rely on six-sided dice and both draw from the original \"Traveller\" rules. Nearly all older versions of \"Traveller\" are available in PDF format.\nMongoose \"Traveller\".\nMongoose Publishing published this version both in a traditional format and as an open gaming SRD around which other games may be built.\nA second edition was published in 2016 and updated in 2022. It uses a full color production style while resembling the original \"Traveller\" rules in scope.\n\"Traveller5\".\nA new set of rules made by re-working and integrating concepts from earlier rulesets.\nThe current version, v5.10, was printed in 2019 as three distinct books: \"Characters and Combat\", \"Starships\", and \"Worlds and Adventures\". This edition uses Uncertain checks in which one of the dice in certain situations is rolled in secret by the gamemaster.\n\"Traveller Hero\".\nA port of the \"Traveller\" setting to the \"Hero System\", produced under license by Comstar Games in 2006.\n\"GURPS Traveller: Interstellar Wars\".\nIn 2006, Steve Jackson Games released \"\" (\"GTISW\", sometimes \"GTIW\") for the 4th edition of GURPS from 2004. The timeline was rolled back to 2170, which is several millennia earlier than the usual \"Traveller\" setting, to the early days of Earth's presence in space at the time when Earth first started to send out interstellar ships to include the period just after the Third Interstellar War between the Terran Confederation (Earth) and the gigantic \"Ziru Sirka Empire (Vland)\".\n\"Traveller20\".\nPublished by QuickLink Interactive (QLI) in 2002, this version uses the d20 System as its base and is set at the time of the Solomani Rim War around Imperial year 990, about a century before the era depicted in the original game. The preferred setting is the \"Gateway Domain\" region of the Imperium. After the company's license to the \"Traveller\" brand and setting lapsed, the purely mechanical elements of this game were republished as the generic \"SciFi20\" system.\n\"GURPS Traveller\".\nDesigned by Loren K. Wiseman and published in 1998, \"GURPS Traveller\" uses the third edition of the \"GURPS\" system and takes place in an alternate timeline in which no Rebellion occurred and Virus was never released.\n\"Marc Miller's Traveller\".\nT4 is set in the early days of the Third Imperium (\"Milieu 0\"), with the small, newly formed empire surrounded by regressed or barbaric worlds.\n\"Traveller: The New Era\".\n\"\" is set in the former territory of the Third Imperium after interstellar government and society had largely collapsed. \"TNE\" introduced \"Virus\", a silicon-chip life form that infected and took over computers. The game mechanics used GDW's house system, derived from \", 2nd Ed\".\n\"MegaTraveller\".\nThe game was set during a rebellion which shattered the Imperium. Supplements and magazines produced during this era detailed the progression of the rebellion from the initial assassination of the Emperor in 1116 to the collapse of large-scale interstellar trade in roughly 1124 (the beginning of the supplement \"Hard Times\").\n\"Traveller\".\nThe original version was designed and published by GDW in 1977. The core rules originally came as a box set of three black digest-sized books, and were later compiled into a single volume rulebook. This edition is also sometimes called by the retronym \"Classic Traveller\".\nReception.\nIn the April\u2013May 1978 edition of \"White Dwarf\" (Issue #6), Don Turnbull gave a strong recommendation for the new game, saying, \"Altogether, what is here is very satisfactory and much of it is stimulating. The presentation is exemplary, the detail impressive, the treatment exacting and the inventiveness inspired.\"\nIn Issue 29 of the British wargaming magazine \"Perfidious Albion\", Charles Vasey commented, \"The game depends a lot on the players and especially on the referee. You really have to think it all out and provisions must be made to prevent too large a reward. It is probably better fitted for a long campaign or a PBM.\"\nIn the September 1978 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue 18), Tony Watson complimented the game on the high production value of its components, saying, \"Physically, \"Traveller\" is first class, a tradition with Game Designer's Workshop. The box lid and covers of the three booklets are done in a simple but highly effective combination of red and white lettering on a black background. The interior layout and printing is also of the best quality; the printing is an entirely professional job.\" Watson liked that experience points were not emphasized in gameplay: \"It is refreshing to see that the adventures and color of the game's play is reward enough and the players are not channeling their energy into the rather silly chase of ethereal experience points. Too often, this chase becomes more important than actual play itself!\" He concluded with a strong recommendation, saying, \"\"Traveller\" is a unique SF game and probably the best of the role-playing variety. It offers a colorful but consistent future for players to adventure in.\"\nIn the inaugural edition of \"Ares\" (March 1980), David Ritchie was enthusiastic about \"Traveller\", giving it an above average rating of 8 out of 9 and commenting, \"This game starts off where \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" left off, but, if there is any justice, will end up being more popular than that venerable relic. For one thing, the \"Traveller\" rules are fairly consistent (moreso than is usual for such games).\"\nIn the May\u2013June 1980 edition of \"The Space Gamer\" (Issue No. 28), Forrest Johnson gave a good review, saying, \"\"Traveller\" is the best game of its type, recommended for the sophisticated science fiction gamer.\"\nIn the November 1980 edition of \"Ares\" (Issue #5), Eric Goldberg called \"Traveller\" \"a most impressive achievement from a design standpoint... This mark of distinction is the main reason why I consider \"Traveller\" the finest commercially available role-playing game.\" Goldberg didn't consider it perfect, criticizing the game's lack of imaginary vision of technology of the future. Although he liked the \"sophisticated and elegant\" character generation system, he felt that \"All too often, a player will have to spend an entire afternoon rolling dice before he gains a reasonable character.\" Goldberg concluded with a positive recommendation: \"If you have at least a casual interest in science fiction and role-playing, you should definitely invest in a copy of \"Traveller\"\"\nIn the 1980 book \"The Complete Book of Wargames\", game designer Jon Freeman commented, \"\"Traveller\" is the only serious attempt to provide a really comprehensive set of role-playing rules for science fiction: interstellar travel, exploration, trade, combat at all levels, and so on.\" Freeman warned potential players, \"Considering the territory it seeks to cover, \"Traveller\" is necessarily complex, and it presumes on the part of the potential referee considerable familiarity with other role-playing games and the literature of science fiction.\" Freeman gave this game an Overall Evaluation of \"Good\", concluding, \"For experienced players wishing a truly open-ended, science fiction, role-playing campaign, there is no real alternative.\"\nIn the October\u2013November 1981 edition of \"White Dwarf\", Andy Slack reviewed the \"Deluxe Traveller Edition\", a compilation of the three original rules booklets, plus \"Book 0 - An Introduction to Traveller\", and an adventure, \"The Imperial Fringe\". Slack thought this edition was better laid out, and \"typos have been rectified.\" Because he believed that this edition was not substantially different than the original set, he only rated this edition a 4 out of 10 for experienced players who already owned the original rule booklets; but for new players, he rated it a perfect 10 out of 10.\nIn the inaugural edition of \"Games International\" (October 1988), Jake Thornton gave \"MegaTraveller\" an above-average rating of 4 out of 5, saying, \"Although there are some typos and omissions, overall, \"MegaTraveller\" is a success. If you like your SF on a grand, starspanning scale [...] then \"MegaTraveller\" is the system for you.\"\nIn his 1990 book \"The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games\", game critic Rick Swan called this science fiction role-playing game \"the standard by which all others are measured ... a brilliant design of remarkable scope ... and a milestone in the hobby.\" Swan felt this game's popularity stemmed from two reasons: \"First, many of the \"Traveller\" concepts are so inventive and revolutionary that they continue to ripple through the RPG industry ... Second, the sheer volume of \"Traveller\" material ... ensures that the game will continue to attract attention.\" Swan concluded by giving the game his top rating of 4 out of 4.\nChris W. McCubbin reviewed \"Traveller: The New Era\" for \"Pyramid\" #2 (July/Aug. 1993) and concluded that, despite some complaints he had about the new version, \"\"Traveller\"'s still around and that's good. I hope it always will be.\"\nAndy Butcher reviewed \"Traveller\" for \"Arcane\" magazine, rating it a 9 out of 10 overall, and stated that \"\"Traveller\" is a great game. Marc Miller and Imperium Games have done an outstanding job at capturing the essential elements that gave \"Traveller\" its appeal in the first place. Gaming has been without a high-quality, strongly-supported hard science fiction game for too long, but there's no doubt that, on the strength of this, \"Traveller\" is back to stay.\"\n\"Pyramid\" magazine reviewed \"Marc Miller's Traveller\" and stated that \"After ogling it assiduously, I finally picked up a copy of the latest edition of \"Traveller\" at Gen Con, and I must say I was extremely pleased with it. The questionable changes initiated in \"The New Era\" were dumped in favor of the original rules, and all the background information has been retained, making for an extremely vivid and consistent history. Everything the GM needs to play has been condensed into one book.\"\nIn the August 1997 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue 238), Rick Swan reviewed the fourth edition of \"Traveller\", and called it \"a masterful effort... the best science-fiction RPG I've ever played.\" On the downside, Swan thought that \"The inclusion of anachronistic weapons like swords and crossbows can turn combat into a bad episode of \"Star Trek\".\" He also pointed out that character growth in the game is very slow: \"PCs acquire new skills and abilities about as fast as a tree trunk acquires new growth rings.\" He also wanted to see more setting information. But he concluded that the fourth edition of \"Traveller\" was close to perfect, giving it a top rating of 6 out of 6 and saying, \"Time-tested and buffed to a sheen, \"Traveller\" will endure as long there's enough plastic to manufacture six-sided dice.\"\nIn a 1996 reader poll by \"Arcane\" magazine to determine the 50 most popular roleplaying games of all time, \"Traveller\" (as either \"Traveller\", \"MegaTraveller\", or \"Traveller: The New Era\") was ranked 3rd. The magazine's editor Paul Pettengale commented: \"Although originally intended as a generic science fiction system, \"Traveller\" quickly became linked with the Imperium campaign background developed by GDW... This background offers a great degree of freedom for individual referees to run campaigns of their own devising, while providing enough basic groundwork to build from, and has proved to be immensely successful. Everything from political intrigue to action-packed mercenary actions, trading or scientific exploration is possible, and a lot more besides... \"Traveller\" [is] one of the true classics of the roleplaying hobby\".\nScott Taylor for \"Black Gate\" in 2013 rated \"Traveller\" as #2 in the top ten role-playing games of all time, saying \"Packaged in a plain black jacket with some simple bars of color, there is nothing inherently fancy about Traveller, and yet it has remained a viable source of entertainment to gamers through ten editions and six gaming companies that have controlled its license.\"\nIn a review of the Mongoose version of \"Traveller\" in \"Black Gate\", M Harold Page compared it to what came before and said \"The new \"Mongoose Traveller Core Rule Book\" is a worthy successor to this tradition.\"\nIn his 2023 book \"Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground\", RPG historian Stu Horvath noted, \"\"Traveller\" is the first RPG that feels like a distinct game, free of \"D&amp;D\"'s direct influence on its design ... The original \"Traveller\" still stands as one of the most significant traditional sci-fi RPGs, thanks in part, to its proximity to the dawn of the hobby, but also to both its scope and the crisp simplicity of its systems. Any game since that involves complex technology ... builds on a foundation established by \"Traveller\".\"\nIn other media.\nSoftware.\n\"The Imperial Data Recovery System\" is a computer program published by FASA in 1981 as a play aid to speed up bookkeeping for \"Traveller\", and assist with game aspects such as sector maps, records of characters and ships, and in-game encounters. John M. Morrison reviewed \"The Imperial Data Recovery System\" in \"The Space Gamer\" No. 50. Morrison commented that \"I would seriously recommend that FASA take this off the market and re-write it from the ground up. There's definitely room for a \"Traveller\" aid program on the market, but not this one.\"\nThe \"Traveller Navigator\" was designed by Planet III Software in the 1990s.\nGDW licensee Paragon produced two video games based on the \"Traveller\" universe:\nTravellerMap is an interactive map detailing the primary setting for Traveller. While it was originally fan-made, it has been made canon by reference, which reference states that what appears in real life on that site is what appears in-universe to users of a certain widely used stellar navigational tool.\nNovels.\nSeveral novels have been specifically set in the various \"Traveller\" universes:\nPeriodicals.\nGaming magazine \"White Dwarf\" ran a comic strip called \"The Travellers\" by Mark Harrison from 1983 to 1986. The strip spoofed \"Traveller\" and other space opera settings.\nThe Traveller newsletter https:// was created to showcase Traveller5 features.\nThe Traveller fanzine https:// was created and printed for Kickstarter fans in 2019.\nMusic.\nThe concept album \"Traveller\" by heavy metal band The Lord Weird Slough Feg is based on the game.\nRelated role-playing games.\n\"Traveller: 2300\" or \"2300 AD\".\nOriginally published by GDW as an updated replacement for \"Traveller\", eschewing classic space opera to take inspiration from the grittier contemporary hard science fiction media of the 1980s. The first edition was named \"Traveller: 2300\", which incited both confusion and criticism since the game carried over neither the rules nor setting of its namesake. The second edition was renamed \"2300 AD\", and added some cyberpunk rules and adventures. It is presented as a future extrapolation of the speculative World War III of GDW's popular military role-playing game \"Twilight: 2000\". In the \"2300 AD\" setting, interstellar travel is relatively new, Earth is still divided into nation-states, and the most powerful nations are competitively exploring and colonizing the fifty light-year sphere of surrounding space. Mongoose Publishing released a sourcebook for the setting in 2012 that adapted it to their version of the \"Traveller\" rules.\nCultural impact.\nComputer programs have been created to model and predict starship combat using \"Traveller\" rules. The most famous case involved Douglas Lenat applying his \"Eurisko\" heuristic learning program to the scenario in the \"Traveller\" adventure \"\", which contains rules for resolving large space battles statistically. Eurisko exploited corner-case features and built unusual fleets that won the 1981 and 1982 championships. The sponsor stated that if Lenat entered and won the next year they would stop the sponsorship, so Lenat stopped attending.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30246", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30246", "title": "The meaning of meaning", "text": ""}
{"id": "30247", "revid": "2325890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30247", "title": "Tracking shot", "text": "Shot with the camera follows a moving subject\nIn cinematography, a tracking shot is any shot where the camera follows backward, forward or moves alongside the subject being recorded. Mostly the camera\u2019s position is parallel to the character, creating a sideway motion, tracking the character. Tracking shots (also called travel shots) differ in motion from dolly shots, where the camera follows behind or before the character resulting in either an inward or an outward movement. Often the camera is mounted on a camera dolly which rides on rails similar to a railroad track; in this case, the shot is referred to as a dolly shot. A handheld steadycam or gimbal may also be used for smaller scale productions. The camera is then pushed along the track while the scene is being filmed, or moved manually when using a handheld rig. The effect can be used to create a sense of movement, to follow a character or object, or a sense of immersion to draw the viewer into the action.\nThe technique is often used to follow a subject that would otherwise leave the frame (thus also called a following shot), such as an actor or vehicle in motion. A handheld or Steadicam mounted camera following a similar trajectory is called a tracking shot as well. In fact a tracking shot can use any manual or motorized conveyance, and may include careful planning for passing the camera between vehicles or modes. While the core idea is that the camera moves parallel to its subject, a tracking shot may move in a circular or semi-circular fashion, rotating around its subject while remaining equidistant.\nThis kind of shot, in which the camera itself moves along with the subject or in relationship to it, should not be confused with panning, in which the camera remains stationary but pivots right or left on its axis.\nTerminology.\nA tracking shot is a blanket term used to refer to any camera shot with movement, with \"trucking shot\" and \"dolly shot\" being tracking shot variations. Generally, a \"dolly shot\" refers to a specific variation of tracking shot in which the camera moves forwards or backwards with respect to the subject. \nThe term \"trucking shot\" is less common but usually specifically refers to a shot in which the camera moves left or right in respect to the subject. \nVariant.\nA variant of the tracking shot is the onride video, also known as a phantom ride, where the camera films during a ride on a train, an amusement ride (especially a roller coaster) or another vehicle. Such videos may be used to document the route, and the camera may be fixed to the vehicle or held by a person in the vehicle.\nUse in sporting events.\nThe \"rail cam\" made a public debut in the NHL on November 20, 2006 in the Colorado Avalanche/Dallas Stars hockey game. The Versus cable television network used the camera during the game to test it out for a live use on a nationally broadcast program. The camera was fastened to a rail system that ran on the top of the glass on one side of the ice rink. As the play shifted from end to end, the motorized mount allowed the camera to follow the action, sliding rapidly down the side of the ice. The system was developed by Fletcher Chicago. The experiment was short-lived, and the \"rail-cam\" is no longer used in NHL hockey games.\nFor live TV broadcast of sporting events, a remote stabilized camera head is often mounted on a cable suspended system or a vehicle to track the athletes. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30248", "revid": "10521907", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30248", "title": "Justification (epistemology)", "text": "Concept in epistemology\nJustification (also called epistemic justification) is a property of beliefs that fulfill certain norms about what a person should believe. Epistemologists often identify justification as a component of knowledge distinguishing it from mere true opinion. They study the reasons why someone holds a belief. Epistemologists are concerned with various features of belief, which include the ideas of warrant (a proper justification for holding a belief), knowledge, rationality, and probability, among others.\nDebates surrounding epistemic justification often involve the \"structure\" of justification, including whether there are foundational justified beliefs or whether mere coherence is sufficient for a system of beliefs to qualify as justified. Another major subject of debate is the sources of justification, which might include perceptual experience (the evidence of the senses), reason, and authoritative testimony, among others.\nJustification and knowledge.\n\"Justification\" involves the reasons why someone holds a belief that one \"should\" hold based on one's current evidence. Justification is a property of beliefs insofar as they are held blamelessly. In other words, a justified belief is a belief that a person is entitled to hold.\nMany philosophers from Plato onward have treated \"justified true belief\" (JTB) as constituting knowledge. It is particularly associated with a theory discussed in his dialogues \"Meno\" and \"Theaetetus\". While in fact Plato seems to disavow justified true belief as constituting knowledge at the end of \"Theaetetus\", the claim that Plato unquestioningly accepted this view of knowledge stuck until the proposal of the Gettier problem.\nThe subject of justification has played a major role in the value of knowledge as \"justified true belief\". Some contemporary epistemologists, such as Jonathan Kvanvig, assert that justification isn't necessary in getting to the truth and avoiding errors. Kvanvig attempts to show that knowledge is no more valuable than true belief, and in the process dismissed the necessity of justification due to justification not being connected to the truth.\nConceptions of justification.\nWilliam P. Alston identifies two conceptions of justification. One conception is \"deontological\" justification, which holds that justification evaluates the obligation and responsibility of a person having only true beliefs. This conception implies, for instance, that a person who has made his best effort but is incapable of concluding the correct belief from his evidence is still justified. The deontological conception of justification corresponds to epistemic internalism. Another conception is \"truth-conducive\" justification, which holds that justification is based on having sufficient evidence or reasons that entails that the belief is at least likely to be true. The truth-conductive conception of justification corresponds to epistemic externalism.\nTheories of justification.\nThere are several different views as to what entails justification, mostly focusing on the question \"How beliefs are justified?\". Different theories of justification require different conditions before a belief can be considered justified. Theories of justification generally include other aspects of epistemology, such as defining knowledge.\nNotable theories of justification include:\nCriticism of theories of justification.\nRobert Fogelin claims to detect a suspicious resemblance between the theories of justification and Agrippa's five modes leading to the suspension of belief. He concludes that the modern proponents have made no significant progress in responding to the ancient modes of Pyrrhonian skepticism.\nWilliam P. Alston criticizes the very idea of a theory of justification. He claims: \"There isn't any unique, epistemically crucial property of beliefs picked out by 'justified'. Epistemologists who suppose the contrary have been chasing a will-o'-the-wisp. What has really been happening is this. Different epistemologists have been emphasizing, concentrating on, \"pushing\" different epistemic desiderata, different features of belief that are positively valuable from the standpoint of the aims of cognition.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30249", "revid": "28195662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30249", "title": "Regress argument (epistemology)", "text": "Problem in epistemology that any proposition can be endlessly questioned\nIn epistemology, the regress argument is the argument that any proposition requires a justification. However, any justification itself requires support. This means that any proposition whatsoever can be endlessly (infinitely) questioned, resulting in infinite regress. It is a problem in epistemology and in any general situation where a statement has to be justified.\nThe argument is also known as diallelus (Latin) or diallelon, from Greek \"di' allelon\" \"through or by means of one another\" and as the epistemic regress problem. It is an element of the M\u00fcnchhausen trilemma.\nStructure.\nAssuming that knowledge is justified true belief, then:\nResponses.\nThroughout history many responses to this problem have been generated. The major counter-arguments are:\nFoundationalism.\nPerhaps the chain begins with a belief that is justified, but which is not justified by another belief. Such beliefs are called basic beliefs. In this solution, which is called foundationalism, all beliefs are justified by basic beliefs. Foundationalism seeks to escape the regress argument by claiming that there are some beliefs for which it is improper to ask for a justification. (See also \"a priori\".)\nFoundationalism is the belief that a chain of justification begins with a belief that is justified, but which is not justified by another belief. Thus, a belief is justified if and only if:\nFoundationalism can be compared to a building. Ordinary individual beliefs occupy the upper stories of the building; basic, or foundational beliefs are down in the basement, in the foundation of the building, holding everything else up. In a similar way, individual beliefs, say about economics or ethics, rest on more basic beliefs, say about the nature of human beings; and those rest on still more basic beliefs, say about the mind; and in the end the entire system rests on a set of basic beliefs which are not justified by other beliefs.\nCoherentism.\nAlternatively, the chain of reasoning may loop around on itself, forming a circle. In this case, the justification of any statement is used, perhaps after a long chain of reasoning, in justifying itself, and the argument is circular. This is a version of coherentism.\nCoherentism is the belief that an idea is justified if and only if it is part of a coherent system of mutually supporting beliefs (i.e., beliefs that support each other). In effect Coherentism denies that justification can only take the form of a chain. Coherentism replaces the chain with a holistic web.\nThe most common objection to na\u00efve Coherentism is that it relies on the idea that circular justification is acceptable. In this view, P ultimately supports P, begging the question. Coherentists reply that it is not just P that is supporting P, but P along with the totality of the other statements in the whole system of belief.\nCoherentism accepts any belief that is part of a coherent system of beliefs. In contrast, P can cohere with P1 and P2 without P, P1 or P2 being true. Instead, Coherentists might say that it is very unlikely that the whole system would be both untrue and consistent, and that if some part of the system was untrue, it would almost certainly be inconsistent with some other part of the system.\nA third objection is that some beliefs arise from experience and not from other beliefs. An example is that one is looking into a room which is totally dark. The lights turn on momentarily and one sees a white canopy bed in the room. The belief that there is a white canopy bed in this room is based entirely on experience and not on any other belief. Of course other possibilities exist, such as that the white canopy bed is entirely an illusion or that one is hallucinating, but the belief remains well-justified. Coherentists might respond that the belief which supports the belief that there is a white canopy bed in this room is that one saw the bed, however briefly. This appears to be an immediate qualifier which does not depend on other beliefs, and thus seems to prove that Coherentism is not true because beliefs can be justified by concepts other than beliefs. But others have argued that the experience of seeing the bed is indeed dependent on other beliefs, about what a bed, a canopy and so on, actually look like.\nAnother objection is that the rule demanding \"coherence\" in a system of ideas seems to be an unjustified belief.\nInfinitism.\nInfinitism argues that the chain can go on forever. Critics argue that this means there is never adequate justification for any statement in the chain.\nSkepticism.\nSkeptics reject the three above responses and argue that beliefs cannot be justified as beyond doubt. Note that many skeptics do not deny that things may appear in a certain way. However, such sense impressions cannot, in the skeptical view, be used to find beliefs that cannot be doubted. Also, skeptics do not deny that, for example, many laws of nature give the appearance of working or that doing certain things give the appearance of producing pleasure/pain or even that reason and logic seem to be useful tools. Skepticism is in this view valuable since it encourages continued investigation.\nSynthesized approaches.\nCommon sense.\nThe method of common sense espoused by such philosophers as Thomas Reid and G. E. Moore points out that whenever we investigate anything at all, whenever we start thinking about some subject, we have to make assumptions. When one tries to support one's assumptions with reasons, one must make yet more assumptions. Since it is inevitable that we will make some assumptions, why not assume those things that are most obvious: the matters of common sense that no one ever seriously doubts.\n\"Common sense\" here does not mean old adages like \"Chicken soup is good for colds\" but statements about the background in which our experiences occur. Examples would be \"Human beings typically have two eyes, two ears, two hands, two feet\", or \"The world has a ground and a sky\" or \"Plants and animals come in a wide variety of sizes and colors\" or \"I am conscious and alive right now\". These are all the absolutely most obvious sorts of claims that one could possibly make; and, said Reid and Moore, these are the claims that make up \"common sense\".\nThis view can be seen as either a version of foundationalism, with common sense statements taking the role of basic statements, or as a version of coherentism. In this case, commonsense statements are statements that are so crucial to keeping the account coherent that they are all but impossible to deny.\nIf the method of common sense is correct, then philosophers may take the principles of common sense for granted. They do not need criteria in order to judge whether a proposition is true or not. They can also take some justifications for granted, according to common sense. They can get around Sextus' problem of the criterion because there is no infinite regress or circle of reasoning, because the principles of common sense ground the entire chain of reasoning.\nWhile the approach seems intuitively reasonable, it is important to note its reliance on the sound state of mind; People under the influence of mind-altering drugs for example, or more commonly people who are dreaming, can have a skewed perception of reality. In such cases, even basic truths and assumptions can be perceived as false, and accordingly falsehood perceived as truths, without the person realising their altered state. Relying on common sense in such situations could therefore lead to wrong conclusions, given such common sense is unreliable as a fundamental proposition. Postulations like the Dream argument therefore stand in opposition to the common sense approach. \nCritical philosophy.\nAnother escape from the diallelus is critical philosophy, which denies that beliefs should ever be \"justified\" at all. Rather, the job of philosophers is to subject all beliefs (including beliefs about truth criteria) to \"criticism\", attempting to discredit them rather than justifying them. Then, these philosophers say, it is rational to act on those beliefs that have best withstood criticism, whether or not they meet any specific criterion of truth. Karl Popper expanded on this idea to include a \"quantitative\" measurement he called verisimilitude, or truth-likeness. He showed that even if one could never justify a particular claim, one \"can\" compare the verisimilitude of two competing claims by criticism to judge which is superior to the other.\nPragmatism.\nThe pragmatist philosopher William James suggests that, ultimately, everyone settles at some level of explanation based on one's personal preferences that fit the particular individual's psychological needs. People select whatever level of explanation fits their needs, and things other than logic and reason determine those needs. In \"The Sentiment of Rationality\", James compares the philosopher, who insists on a high degree of justification, and the boor, who accepts or rejects ideals without much thought:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The philosopher's logical tranquillity is thus in essence no other than the boor's. They differ only as to the point at which each refuses to let further considerations upset the absoluteness of the data he assumes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30252", "revid": "1838690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30252", "title": "Justification for the state", "text": "Source of authority for the state or government\nThe justification of the state refers to the source of legitimate authority for the state or government. Typically, such a justification explains why the state should exist, and to some degree scopes the role of government \u2013 what a legitimate state should or should not be able to do.\nThere is no single, universally accepted justification of the state. In fact, anarchists believe that there is no justification for the state at all, and that human societies would be better off without it. However, most political ideologies have their own justifications, and thus their own vision of what constitutes a legitimate state. Indeed, a person's opinions regarding the role of government often determine the rest of their political ideology. Thus, discrepancy of opinion in a wide array of political matters is often directly traceable back to a discrepancy of opinion in the justification for the state.\nThe constitutions of various countries codify views as to the purposes, powers, and forms of their governments, but they tend to do so in rather vague terms, which particular laws, courts, and actions of politicians subsequently flesh out. In general, various countries have translated vague talk about the purposes of their governments into particular state laws, bureaucracies, enforcement actions, etc.\nThe following are just a few examples.\nTranscendent sovereignty.\nIn feudal Europe the most widespread justification of the state was the emerging idea of the divine right of kings, which stated that kings derived their authority from God and could not therefore be held accountable for their actions by any earthly authority such as a parliament. The legitimacy of the state's lands derived from the lands being the personal possession of the monarch. The divine-right theory, combined with primogeniture, became a theory of hereditary monarchy in the nation states of the early modern period. The Holy Roman Empire was not a state in that sense, and was not a true theocracy, but rather a federal entity.\nThe political ideas current in China at that time involved the idea of the mandate of heaven. It resembled the theory of divine right in that it placed the ruler in a divine position, as the link between Heaven and Earth, but it differed from the divine right of kings in that it did not assume a permanent connection between a dynasty and the state. Inherent in the concept was that a ruler held the mandate of heaven only as long as he provided good government. If he did not, heaven would withdraw its mandate and whoever restored order would hold the new mandate. This is true theocracy; the power and wisdom to govern is granted by a higher power, not by human political schemes, and can be equally removed by heaven. This has similarities to the idea presented in the Judeo-Christian Bible from the time when Israel requests \"a king like the nations\" through to Christ himself telling his contemporary leaders that they only had power because God gave it to them. The classic Biblical example comes in the story of King Nebuchadnezzar, who according to the Book of Daniel ruled the Babylonian empire because God ordained his power, but who later ate grass like an ox for seven years because he deified himself instead of acknowledging God. Nebuchadnezzar is restored when he again acknowledges God as the true sovereign.\nSelf-aggrandizement.\nIn Renaissance Italy, contemporary theoreticians saw the primary purpose of the less-overtly monarchical Italian city-states as civic glory.\nThe social contract.\nIn the period of the eighteenth century, usually called the Enlightenment, a new justification of the European state developed. Jean-Jacques Rousseau's social contract theory states that governments draw their power from the governed, its 'sovereign' people (usually a certain ethnic group, and the state's limits are legitimated theoretically as that people's lands, although that is often not, rarely exactly, the case), that no person should have absolute power, and that a \"legitimate\" state is one which meets the needs and wishes of its citizens. These include security, peace, economic development and the resolution of conflict. Also, the social contract requires that an individual gives up some of his natural rights in order to maintain social order via the rule of law. Eventually, the divine right of kings fell out of favor and this idea ascended; it formed the basis for modern democracy.\nPublic goods.\nWhile a market system may allow self-interested firms to create and allocate many goods optimally, there exists a class of \"collective\" \u2013 or \"public goods\" that are not produced adequately in a market system, such as infrastructure or social services. Market forces may not be sufficient to incentivize rational individuals to adequately produce these public goods; therefore, coercive institutions must intervene and guarantee the production of such public goods, whether by assuming their production under the state (e.g., the building of public roads) or by introducing market forces to incentivize their production in the private sector (e.g., providing subsidies for electric vehicles).\nPolitical ideologies.\nIt is on those questions that one can find the differences between conservatism, socialism, liberalism, libertarianism, fascism, especially the latter, and other political ideologies. There are also two ideologies\u00a0\u2013 anarchism and communism\u00a0\u2013 which argue that the existence of the state is ultimately unjustified and harmful. For this reason, the kind of society they aim to establish would be stateless.\nArguments against a State.\nAnarchism claims that the community of those fighting to create a new society must themselves constitute a stateless society. Communism wishes to immediately or eventually replace the communities, unities and divisions that things such as work, money, exchange, borders, nations, governments, police, religion, and race create with the universal community possible when these things are replaced.\nState socialism states that the degree to which a state is working class is the degree to which it fights government, class, work, and rule. The degree to which it wins such a fight is held to be the degree to which it is communist instead of capitalist, socialist, or the state. Anarcho-capitalism argues that taxes are theft, that government and the business community complicit in governance is organized crime and is equivalent to the criminal underworld, and that defense of life and property is just another industry, which must be privatized. Anarcho-communism and anarcho-collectivism says that taxes, being theft, are just property, which is also theft, and that the state is inherently capitalist and will never result in a transition to communism, and says that those fighting against capitalism and the state to produce a communist society must themselves already form such a community. However, the majority of viewpoints agree that the existence of \"some\" kind of government is morally justified. What they disagree about is the proper role and the proper form of that government.\nThere are several ways to conceive of the differences between these different political views. For example, one might ask \"in what areas\" should the government have jurisdiction, to \"what extent\" it may intervene in those areas, or even what constitutes \"intervention\" in the first place. Some institutions can be said to exist only because the government provides the framework for their existence; for instance, Marxists argue that the institution of private property only exists due to government. The intervention debate can be framed in terms of big government versus small government.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30253", "revid": "34387623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30253", "title": "Tertiary period", "text": "Former term for the geologic period from 65 million to 2.58 million years ago\nThe Tertiary ( , ) is an obsolete geologic period spanning 66\u00a0million to 2.6 or 1.8 million years ago. The period began with the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs in the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, at the start of the Cenozoic Era, and extended to the beginning of the Quaternary glaciation at the end of the Pliocene Epoch. The Tertiary has not been recognised by the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) since the late 1980s, with the timespan of the Tertiary now being split into the earlier Paleogene and the more recent Neogene periods, though the Tertiary continues to be used in some scientific publications.\nHistorical use of the term.\nThe term Tertiary was first used by Giovanni Arduino during the mid-18th century. He classified geologic time into primitive (or primary), secondary, and tertiary periods based on observations of geology in Northern Italy. Later a fourth period, the Quaternary, was applied.\nIn the early development of the study of geology, the periods were thought by scriptural geologists to correspond to the Biblical narrative, the rocks of the Tertiary being thought to be associated with the Great Flood.\nIn 1833, Charles Lyell incorporated a Tertiary Period into his own, far more detailed system of classification, based on fossil mollusks he collected in Italy and Sicily in 1828\u20131829. He subdivided the Tertiary Period into four epochs according to the percentage of fossil mollusks resembling modern species found in those strata. He used Greek names: Eocene, Miocene, Older Pliocene, and Newer Pliocene.\nAlthough these divisions seemed adequate for the region to which the designations were originally applied (parts of the Alps and plains of Italy), when the same system was later extended to other parts of Europe and to America, it proved to be inapplicable. Therefore, the use of mollusks was abandoned from the definition and the epochs were renamed and redefined.\nFor much of the time during which the term 'Tertiary' was in formal use, it referred to the span of time between 65 and 1.8 million years ago. The end date of the Cretaceous and the start date of the Quaternary were subsequently redefined at c. 66 and 2.6 million years ago respectively.\nIn 1989, the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) eliminated the use of \"Tertiary\" on their stratigraphic charts, instead dividing this timespan into the Paleogene and Neogene periods (terms which had been coined over a century earlier in the 1850s by Austrian geologist Moritz H\u00f6rnes), which in previous stratigraphic charts were treated as subdivisions of the Tertiary. In 2004, the ICS considered the Neogene to also include the entire Quaternary period, thus making the Neogene span until the present, but this was not widely followed and the ICS later restored the Quaternary to full period status by 2009. In 2006 it was remarked that despite the ICS elimination of the term over a decade earlier, at that time, \"Tertiary\" was still more common than Paleogene and Neogene.\nModern equivalents.\nThe Tertiary period lies between the Mesozoic Era and the Quaternary Period, although it is no longer recognized as a formal unit by the International Commission on Stratigraphy.\nThe span of the Tertiary is subdivided into the Paleocene (66\u201356\u00a0million years BP), the Eocene (56\u201333.9\u00a0million years BP), the Oligocene (33.9\u201323.04\u00a0million years BP), the Miocene (23.04\u20135.333\u00a0million years BP) and the Pliocene (5.333\u20132.58\u00a0million years BP), extending to the first stage of the Pleistocene, the Gelasian Stage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30254", "revid": "668752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30254", "title": "Purpose of government", "text": ""}
{"id": "30258", "revid": "244263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30258", "title": "Traditional anarchism", "text": ""}
{"id": "30262", "revid": "1319453203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30262", "title": "Tamara E. Jernigan", "text": "American astronaut and astrophysicist (born 1959)\nTamara Elizabeth \"Tammy\" Jernigan (born May 7, 1959) is an American astrophysicist and former NASA astronaut. During her career she completed five Space Shuttle program missions (three on \"Columbia\" and one each on \"Endeavour\" and \"Discovery\"), logging over 1512 hours in space. Jernigan left NASA in 2001, and is Deputy Principal Associate Director in the Weapons and Complex Integration (WCI) organization at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.\nEarly life and education.\nTamara Elizabeth Jernigan was born on May 7, 1959, in Chattanooga, Tennessee, to Mary and Terry Jernigan. She attended Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe Springs, California, graduating in 1977. Jernigan attended Stanford University, where she played varsity volleyball. She earned a B.S. degree in physics in 1981 and an M.S. in engineering science in 1983. At the University of California, Berkeley, she received an M.S. in astronomy in 1985. In 1989, she was awarded a Ph.D. in space physics and astronomy from Rice University. She wrote her doctoral dissertation on \"a plasma diagnostic study of two wind-blown shell nebulae: NGC 7635 and NGC 2359\", under the supervision of Reginald Dufour. Her research focused on the modeling of \"a high-velocity outflows in regions of star formation, gamma-ray bursters, and the radiation produced by interstellar shock waves\". \nNASA career.\nJernigan, under the supervision of Reginald Dufour, began working for NASA in June 1981 at the Ames Research Center while earning her degrees at Stanford and Berkeley. She worked in the Theoretical Studies Branch as a research scientist until June 1985 when she was among the 13 people selected as astronaut candidates.\nShe entered the NASA Astronaut Corps in July 1986. Her first trip to space was on June 5, 1991. She flew on five Space Shuttle program missions (three on \"Columbia\" and one each on \"Endeavour\" and \"Discovery\") and logged over 1512 hours in space. In her last mission on \"Discovery\" in 1999, she performed an extra-vehicular activity for 7 hours and 55.5 minutes.\nJernigan has served as Deputy Chief of the Astronaut Office, assisting with the management of both military and civilian astronauts and support personnel and as Deputy for the Space Station program where she developed and advocated Astronaut Office positions on the design and operation of the International Space Station. She also represented NASA management on the U.S. negotiating team in Moscow during technical interchange meetings designed to resolve crew training, crew rotation, and operational issues.\nJernigan retired from NASA in 2001 and currently serves as Deputy Principal Associate Director in the Weapons and Complex Integration (WCI) organization at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.\nAwards.\nJernigan is the recipient of the NASA Distinguished Service Medal and the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal.\nPersonal.\nShe currently resides in Pleasanton, California. She is married to former astronaut Peter Wisoff and has two children, Jeffrey Wisoff and Michael Wisoff. Both Peter and Jeffrey currently work at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30263", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30263", "title": "Problem of other minds", "text": "Type of epistemological problem\nThe problem of other minds is a philosophical problem traditionally stated as the following epistemological question: \"Given that I can only observe the behavior of others, how can I know that others have minds?\" The problem is that knowledge of other minds is always indirect. The problem of other minds does not negatively impact social interactions due to people having a \"theory of mind\" \u2013 the ability to spontaneously infer the mental states of others \u2013 supported by innate mirror neurons, a theory of mind mechanism, or a tacit theory. There has also been an increase in evidence that behavior results from cognition, which in turn requires a brain, and often involves consciousness.\nIt is a problem of the philosophical idea known as solipsism: the notion that for any person only one's own mind is known to exist. The problem of other minds maintains that no matter how sophisticated someone's behavior is, that does not reasonably guarantee that someone has the presence of thought occurring within them as when oneself engages in behavior. Phenomenology studies the subjective experience of human life resulting from consciousness. The specific subject within phenomenology studying other minds is intersubjectivity.\nIn 1953, Karl Popper suggested that a test for the other minds problem is whether one would seriously argue with the other person or machine: \"This, I think, would solve the problem of 'other minds'...In arguing with other people (a thing which we have learnt from other people), for example about other minds, we cannot but attribute to them intentions, and this means mental states. We do not argue with a thermometer.\"\nPhilosophers such as Christian List have argued that there exists a connection between the problem of other minds and Benj Hellie's vertiginous question, i.e. why people exist as themselves and not as someone else. List argues that there exists a \"quadrilemma\" for metaphysical consciousness theories where at least one of the following must be false: 'first-person realism', 'non-solipsism', 'non-fragmentation', and 'one world'. List proposes a philosophical model he calls the \"many-worlds theory of consciousness\" in order to reconcile the subjective nature of consciousness without lapsing into solipsism. \nCaspar Hare has argued for a weak form of solipsism with the concept of egocentric presentism, in which other persons can be conscious, but their experiences are simply not present in the way one's own current experience is. A related concept is perspectival realism, in which things within perceptual awareness have a defining intrinsic property that exists absolutely and not relative to anything, of which several other philosophers have written reviews. Vincent Conitzer has argued for similar ideas on the basis of there being a connection between the A-theory of time and the nature of the self. He argues that one's current perspective could be \"metaphysically privileged\" on the basis of arguments for A-theory being stronger as arguments for both A-theory and a metaphysically privileged self, and arguments against A-theory are ineffective against this combined position.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30265", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30265", "title": "Tom Clancy", "text": "American author (1947\u20132013)\nThomas Leo Clancy Jr. (April 12, 1947\u00a0\u2013 October 1, 2013) was an American novelist. He is best known for his technically detailed espionage and military-science storylines set during and after the Cold War. Seventeen of his novels have been bestsellers and more than 100 million copies of his books have been sold. His name was also used on screenplays written by ghostwriters, nonfiction books on military subjects occasionally with co-authors, and video games. He was a part-owner of his hometown Major League Baseball team, the Baltimore Orioles, and vice-chairman of their community activities and public affairs committees.\nOriginally an insurance agent, Clancy launched his literary career in 1984 when his first military thriller novel \"The Hunt for Red October\" was published by the small academic Naval Institute Press of Annapolis, Maryland.\n\"The Hunt for Red October\", \"Patriot Games\" (1987), \"Clear and Present Danger\" (1989), and \"The Sum of All Fears\" (1991) have been turned into commercially successful films. Tom Clancy's works also inspired games such as the \"Rainbow Six\", \"Ghost Recon\", \"Splinter Cell\" and \"The Division\" series. Since Clancy's death in 2013, his Ryanverse franchise has been continued by his family estate through a series of authors.\nEarly life and education.\nClancy was born on April 12, 1947, at Franklin Square Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland, and grew up in the Northwood neighborhood in northeast Baltimore. The family was Irish-American. He was the second of three children to Thomas Leo Clancy (1918\u20131995), who worked for the United States Postal Service, and Catherine Mary Clancy (n\u00e9e Langan; 1918\u20132001), who worked in a store's credit department. He was a member of Troop 624 of the Boy Scouts of America. Clancy's siblings are Patrick and Margaret.\nClancy's mother worked to send him to Loyola High School in Towson, Maryland, a private Catholic secondary school taught by the Jesuit religious order (Society of Jesus). He graduated from Loyola High School in 1965. He then attended the associated Loyola College (now Loyola University Maryland) in Baltimore. Clancy began his college career as a physics major. Due to poor grades, he later changed his concentration to English since \"it was an easy major.\" Despite the academic change, he continued to be an indifferent student spending a majority of his time reading books on military and naval history instead of tending to his studies. Clancy graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in English Literature in 1969 receiving a 1.9/4.0 GPA. While at Loyola College, he was president of the chess club. He joined the Army Reserve Officers' Training Corps; however, he was ineligible to serve due to his myopia (nearsightedness), which required him to wear thick eyeglasses.\nAfter graduating, Clancy earned certifications in business and insurance and worked for an insurance company in Hartford, Connecticut.\nIn 1973, Clancy joined the O. F. Bowen Agency, a small insurance agency based in Owings, Maryland, founded by his wife's grandfather. In 1980, he purchased the insurance agency from his wife's grandmother and wrote novels in his spare time. While working at the insurance agency, he wrote his debut novel, \"The Hunt for Red October\" (1984).\nCareer.\nClancy's literary career began in 1982 when he started writing \"The Hunt for Red October\", which in 1984 he sold for publishing to the Naval Institute Press for $5,000. The publisher was impressed with the work; Deborah Grosvenor, the Naval Institute Press editor who read through the book, said later that she convinced the publisher: \"I think we have a potential best seller here, and if we don't grab this thing, somebody else would.\" She believed Clancy had an \"innate storytelling ability, and his characters had this very witty dialogue\". Clancy, who had hoped to sell 5,000 copies, ended up selling over 45,000. After publication, the book received praise from President Ronald Reagan, who called the work \"the best yarn\", subsequently boosting sales to 300,000 hardcover and two million paperback copies of the book, making it a national bestseller. The book was critically praised for its technical accuracy, which led to Clancy's meeting several high-ranking officers in the U.S. military, as well as Steve Pieczenik, and to inspiration for recurring characters in his works. Clancy's novels focus on the hero, most notably Jack Ryan and John Clark, both Irish Catholics like himself. He repeatedly uses the formula whereby the heroes are \"highly skilled, disciplined, honest, thoroughly professional, and only lose their cool when incompetent politicians or bureaucrats get in their way. Their unambiguous triumphs over evil provide symbolic relief from the legacy of the Vietnam War.\"\nThe Cold War epic \"Red Storm Rising\" (1986) was co-written (according to Clancy in the book's foreword) with fellow military-oriented author Larry Bond. The book was published by Putnam and sold almost a million copies within its first year. Clancy became the cornerstone of a publishing list by Putnam, which emphasized authors like Clancy who would produce annually. His publisher, Phyllis E. Grann, called these \"repeaters.\"\nFinances.\nClancy has author status on the cover of dozens of books. Seventeen of his novels made it to the top of the \"New York Times\" best seller list. He co-authored memoirs of top generals, and produced numerous guided tours of the elite aspects of the American military. Andrew Bacevich states:\nClancy did for military pop-lit what Starbucks did for the preparation of caffeinated beverages: he launched a sprawling, massively profitable industrial enterprise that simultaneously serves and cultivates an insatiable consumer base. Whether the item consumed provides much in terms of nourishment is utterly beside the point. That it tastes yummy going down more than suffices to keep customers coming back.\nBy 1988, Clancy had earned $1.3 million for \"The Hunt for Red October\" and had signed a $3 million contract for his next three books. In 1992, he sold North American rights to \"Without Remorse\" for $14 million, a record for a single book. By 1997, Penguin Putnam Inc. (part of Pearson Education) paid Clancy $50 million for world rights to two new books and another $25 million to Red Storm Entertainment for a four-year book/multimedia deal. Clancy followed this up with an agreement with Penguin's Berkley Books for 24 paperbacks to tie in with the ABC television miniseries \"Tom Clancy's Net Force\", which aired in the fall/winter of 1998. The Op-Center universe has laid the ground for the series of books written by Jeff Rovin, which was in an agreement worth $22 million, bringing the total value of the package to $97 million.\nIn 1993, Clancy joined a group of investors that included Peter Angelos, and bought the Baltimore Orioles from Eli Jacobs. In 1998, he tentatively reached an agreement to purchase the Minnesota Vikings, but had to abandon the deal because of a divorce settlement cost.\nThe first NetForce novel, titled \"Net Force\" (1999), was adapted as a 1999 TV movie starring Scott Bakula and Joanna Going. The first Op-Center novel (\"Tom Clancy's Op-Center\" published in 1995) was released to coincide with a 1995 NBC television miniseries of the same name starring Harry Hamlin and a cast of stars. Though the miniseries did not continue, the book series did, but later had little in common with the first TV miniseries other than the title and the names of the main characters.\nClancy wrote several nonfiction books about various branches of the U.S. Armed Forces (see nonfiction listing, in the bibliography article). He also branded several lines of books and video games with his name that are written by other authors, following premises or storylines generally in keeping with Clancy's works.\nWith the release of \"The Teeth of the Tiger\" (2003), Clancy introduced Jack Ryan's son and two nephews as main characters; those characters continued in his last four novels, \"Dead or Alive\" (2010), \"Locked On\" (2011), \"Threat Vector\" (2012), and \"Command Authority\" (2013).\nIn 2008, the French video game manufacturer Ubisoft purchased the use of Clancy's name for an undisclosed sum. It has been used in conjunction with video games and related products such as movies and books. Based on his interest in private spaceflight and his US$ investment in the launch vehicle company Rotary Rocket,\nClancy was interviewed in 2007 for the documentary film \"Orphans of Apollo\" (2008).\nPolitical views.\nClancy was a conservative and Republican, and dedicated several of his books to American conservative political figures, including Ronald Reagan. Clancy supported the National Rifle Association and opposed abortion. \nClancy praised President George W. Bush as a \"good guy\"; however, he opposed the Iraq War and argued it lacked a casus belli. Clancy once clashed with Richard Perle, with Clancy stating he almost \"came to blows\" with Perle, after Perle criticized Colin Powell for being too concerned with the lives of American troops.\nAhead of the 2004 U.S. presidential election, Clancy said that voting for Democrat John Kerry would be \"a stretch for me\", while also declining to endorse Bush.\nNumerous scholars have examined the political dimensions of Clancy's books, especially in the context of the Cold War. Historian Walter Hixson has argued that Clancy's novels, especially \"The Hunt for Red October\" and \"Red Storm Rising,\" were \"popular representations of Reagan-era Cold War values. They reflect both popular perceptions of Soviet behavior and the predominant national security values of the Reagan era.\"\nSeptember 11 attacks.\nOn September 11, 2001, Clancy was interviewed by Judy Woodruff on CNN. During the interview, he noted that orthodox \"Islam does not permit suicide.\" Among other observations during this interview, Clancy cited discussions he had with military experts on the lack of planning to deal with a hijacked plane being used in a suicide attack and criticized the news media's treatment of the United States Intelligence Community. Clancy appeared again on PBS's \"Charlie Rose\", to discuss the implications of the day's events with Richard Holbrooke, \"New York Times\" journalist Judith Miller, and Senator John Edwards, among others. Clancy was interviewed on those shows because his book \"Debt of Honor\" (1994) included a scenario wherein a disgruntled Japanese airline pilot crashes a fueled Boeing 747 into the U.S. Capitol dome during an address by the President to a joint session of Congress, killing the President and most of Congress. In the book, Clancy also implies that Japan's prosperity is due primarily to unequal trading terms. In the book's sequel \"Executive Orders\" (1996), the president announces a new foreign policy doctrine, under which the United States will hold personally accountable any foreign leader who orders attacks on U.S. citizens, territory, or possessions in the future.\nA week after the September 11 attacks, Clancy suggested on \"The O'Reilly Factor\" that American left-wing politicians were partly responsible for the failure to prevent the attacks due to their \"gutting\" of the Central Intelligence Agency.\nPersonal life.\nClancy's first wife, Wanda Thomas King, was a nurse. They married in 1969 and had four children. The couple separated briefly in 1995, and they permanently separated in December 1996. Wanda Clancy filed for divorce in November 1997, which became final in January 1999. As part of the divorce, she and Clancy split his minority stake in the Baltimore Orioles.\nOn June 26, 1999, Clancy married freelance journalist Alexandra Marie Llewellyn, whom he had met in 1997. Llewellyn is the daughter of J. Bruce Llewellyn and a family friend of Colin Powell, who originally introduced the couple to each other. They remained together until Clancy's death in October 2013. They had one daughter.\nClancy was a Roman Catholic. The plot of his novel \"Red Rabbit\" revolves around John Paul II. In a June 27, 1993, interview with \"The Washington Post\", he was quoted as saying, \"I've had [sex scenes] in my books before, but you had to look real fast because, you know, I'm a married Catholic and I don't do that.\" In a 2002 interview with Lev Grossman for \"Time\" magazine, Clancy lamented what he perceived as society's double standard in the way Catholics are viewed by some people in society in relation to other demographic segments: \"You can't hate black people any more, of course, and you can't hate homosexuals any more, but you can hate all the Catholics you want.\"\nProperty.\nClancy's 80-acre estate, which was once a summer camp, is located in Calvert County, Maryland. It has a panoramic view of the Chesapeake Bay. The stone mansion, which cost $2 million, has 24 rooms and features a shooting range in the basement. The property also features a World War II\u2013era M4 Sherman tank, a Christmas gift from his first wife.\nClancy also purchased a 17,000-square-foot penthouse condominium in the Ritz-Carlton, in Baltimore's Inner Harbor, for $16 million. Clancy and his wife combined four units to create the apartment.\nHis Chesapeake Bay estate sold for $4.9 million in 2020.\nDeath.\nClancy died of heart failure on October 1, 2013, at Johns Hopkins Hospital, near his Baltimore home. John D. Gresham, a co-author and researcher with Clancy on several books, said Clancy had been suffering heart problems for some time prior: \"Five or six years ago Tom suffered a heart attack and he went through bypass surgery. It wasn't that he had another heart attack, his heart just wore out.\"\nThe \"Chicago Tribune\" quoted Pulitzer Prize\u2013winning film critic and author Stephen Hunter as saying, \"When he published \"The Hunt for Red October\", he redefined and expanded the genre, and as a consequence of that, many people were able to publish such books who had previously been unable to do so.\"\nOn March 31, 2014, the Orioles honored Clancy with a video tribute during their home opener, and the team wore a tribute patch on their jerseys through the season.\nFilm, TV and video game adaptations.\nVideo games.\nOfficially licensed games based on \"The Hunt for Red October\" and \"Red Storm Rising\" were released in the late 1980s and early 1990s for various 8-bit home computers such as the Commodore 64 and ZX Spectrum. Those included a submarine combat simulation (based on the book) and an action game (based on the film).\nMore recently, Ubisoft has made many video game series based on Tom Clancy's books, or which were endorsed by Clancy and use his name in the series' titles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScholarly studies"}
{"id": "30266", "revid": "44721228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30266", "title": "Tonyukuk", "text": "Military commander of the Second Turkic Khaganate\nTonyukuk or Ashide Yuanzhen (, , , born c.\u2009646, died c.\u2009726) was the baga-tarkhan (supreme commander) and adviser of four successive G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk khagans \u2013 Ilterish Qaghan, Qapaghan Qaghan, Inel Qaghan and Bilge Qaghan. He conducted victorious campaigns against various Turkic and non-Turkic steppe peoples, such as the T\u00f6lis, Xueyantuo, Toquz Oguz, Yenisei Kyrgyz, Kurykans, Thirty Tatar, Khitan and Tatabi as well as the Tang dynasty. He was described as a kingmaker by historians such as E. P. Thompson and Peter Benjamin Golden.\nName.\nThe name is spelled as \"t1-o-\u0272-uq1-uq1\" (\ud803\udc43\ud803\udc06\ud803\udc2a\ud803\udc38\ud803\udc38\u200e) in the Old Turkic script, variously interpreted as \"Tunuquq\", \"Tonuquq\", \"Tuj-uquq\", \" To\u0272 Yuguq\", \"Tujun-oq\", \"Tojuquq\", \"Tu\u0272oqoq\" with a number of suggestions for its etymology. According to Sertkaya, \"Tunuk\" means \"clear, pure, abyss, who reached the depth\" or \"pure, penetrative\", and \"uq\" or \"oq\" means \"idea, wise, well-informed\". Thus, Tonuquq is the owner of deep and pure idea. His title \"Bilge\" means wise or master in Old Turkic. According to Klyashtorny, the element \"yuquq\" means \"hidden, protected thing, value, treasure, jewelry\", which is derived from the verb \"yoq/yuq\" meaning \"to hide, to protect\" (used in Uyghur legal documents); meanwhile, the other \"ton\" means \"first\"; thus his Chinese name \u5143\u73cd \"Yu\u00e1nzh\u0113n\" is a calque of his Turkic name \"Tonyuquq\", both meaning \"first treasure\" Ren\u00e9 M. Giraud read the name as \"ton\u00efuquq\", from \"ton\" \"dress, clothes\" with \"I\" possessive and \"yuquq\" (from the verb \"yuk-\" \"to stick\") and meaning \"whose dress is blessed with oil\"; Likewise, Jean-Paul Roux explained the name as \"with oiled dress\" while discussing the culinary culture of the Mongols and suggesting that they had dirty and stained clothes.\nLife.\nEarly years.\nTonyukuk was born around 646, near Tuul River in the land of the Ashide tribe. He fled the Tang dynasty in 679 and joined Ilterish Qaghan in 681.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nChinese sources state that Tonyukuk's name was \"Yuanzhen,\" and he learned all Chinese traditions and was aware of the gaps in the borders and the Chinese wall. While he was supervising the surrendered clans in Chany\u00fc military governorship, he was dismissed and jailed by the military governor Changshih.\nDuring Ilterish Qaghan's reign.\nAlthough he lost early wars against Xue Rengui, he was a formidable force in establishing the Second Turkic Khaganate. In 687, the Tang invaded G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk land again. Empress Dowager Wu commissioned the ethnically Baekje general Heichi Changzhi, assisted by Li Duozuo, to defend against Turkic attack and were able to defeat the Turkic forces at Huanghuadui (modern day Shuozhou, Shanxi) causing the Turkic forces to flee.\nDuring Qapaghan Qaghan's reign.\nIn 703, he was sent by Qapaghan Qaghan for a marriage proposal to the Wu Zhou dynasty. Wu Zetian accepted the proposal, in exchange Wu Yanxiu was released on the Khagan's order. However, Emperor Zhongzhong's accession changed the political climate, causing the cancellation of the marriage.\nIn 712, he commanded a Turkic army during Battle of Bolchu which proved disastrous for the Turgesh army.\nDuring Inel Qaghan's reign.\nHe was not in active politics during Inel Qaghan's reign and accepted him as a legitimate ruler. Although this did not cost him his life and was spared, perhaps because of his great authority and his age. Another reason would the fact that he was Bilge Qaghan's father-in-law.\nDuring Bilge Qaghan's reign.\nIn 716 he was appointed as master strategist (bagha tarkhan) by his son-in-law Bilge Qaghan.\nChinese sources state that Bilge Qaghan wanted to convert to Buddhism and establish cities and temples. However, Tonyukuk discouraged him from this by pointing out that their nomadic lifestyle was what made them a greater military power when compared to the Tang dynasty. While the Turks' power rested on their mobility, conversion to Buddhism would bring pacifism among population. Therefore sticking to Tengriism was necessary to survive.\nIn 720 the Tang chancellor Wang Jun proposed a plan to attack Bilge Qaghan' along with the Baximi, Xi, and Khitan. Emperor Xuanzong also recruited Qapaghan Qaghan's sons Bilg\u00e4 Tegin and Mo Tegin, Yenisei Kyrgyz Qa\u03b3an Qutlu\u011f Bilg\u00e4 Qa\u03b3an and Huoba Guiren to fight against the Turks. Tonyukuk launched a first attack on Baximi in the autumn of 721, completely crushing them. Meanwhile Bilge raided Gansu, taking much of the livestock. Later that year the Khitans, the next year the Xi were crushed.\nHe died around 726.\nFamily.\nHe was father to Qutlu\u011f S\u00e4b\u00e4g Qatun and a father-in-law of Bilge Qaghan', thus a grandfather to Yoll\u0131g Khagan and Tengri Qaghan.\nLegacy.\nHis biography, achievements and advice for state administration were carved in Old Turkic script on two stele erected around 716 (before his death) at a site known as Bayn Tsokto, in Ulaanbaatar's Nalaikh district. Yuan era Uyghur official Xie Wenzhi (\u6954\u6587\u8cea), as well as Korean Gyeongju Seol clan claimed descent from Tonyukuk.\nHe was mentioned and remembered in some Uyghur Manichaean texts later in Qocho.\nThe Berlin Manichaean manuscript found in Qocho read as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then the wise To\u00f1uk(uk) spoke as follows: The Turk (nation) is ruined and has lost its chance of (salvation).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30267", "revid": "1304448565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30267", "title": "Tyburn", "text": "Former manor in Middlesex, England\nTyburn was a manor (estate) in London, Middlesex, England, one of two which were served by the parish of Marylebone. Tyburn took its name from the Tyburn Brook, a tributary of the River Westbourne. The name Tyburn, from Teo Bourne, means 'boundary stream'.\nThe parish, and probably therefore also the manor, was bounded by Roman roads to the west (modern Edgware Road) and south (modern Oxford Street). The junction of these was the site of the famous Tyburn Gallows (known colloquially as the \"Tyburn Tree\"), now occupied by Marble Arch. For many centuries the name Tyburn was synonymous with capital punishment: it was the principal place for execution for London and Middlesex criminals and convicted traitors, including many religious martyrs. In the 18th century it was also known as \"God's Tribunal\". Hangings at Tyburn often included a sometimes raucous procession of the condemned from Newgate Gaol in the City \u2013 at the end of the 18th century, the hangings were moved to Newgate.\nHistory.\nThe manor of Tyburn, and the neighbouring Lisson, were recorded in the Domesday Book of 1086, and were together served by the parish of Marylebone, itself named after the stream. The original name of the parish was simply Marybourne, the stream of St Mary; the French \"le\" appeared in the 17th century, under the influence of names like Mary-le-Bow. Domesday showed that the manor was held, both before and after the Norman Conquest, by the Barking Abbey nunnery. The Domesday survey records it as having eight households, suggesting a population of around 40. In the 1230s and 1240s, the manor was held by Gilbert de Sandford, the son of John de Sandford, who had been the chamberlain to Eleanor of Aquitaine. In 1236, the City of London contracted with Sir Gilbert to draw water from Tyburn Springs, which he held, to serve as the source of the first piped water supply for the city. The water was supplied in lead pipes that ran from where Bond Street station stands today, 800\u00a0m east of Hyde Park, down to the hamlet of Charing (Charing Cross), along Fleet Street and over the Fleet Bridge, climbing Ludgate Hill (by gravitational pressure) to a public conduit at Cheapside. Water was supplied free to all comers.\nThe junction of the two Roman roads had significance from ancient times, and was marked by a monument known as \"Oswulf's Stone\", which gave its name to the Ossulstone Hundred of Middlesex. The stone was covered over in 1851 when Marble Arch was moved to the area, but it was shortly afterwards unearthed and propped up against the Arch. It has not been seen since it was stolen in 1869.\nTyburn gallows.\nAlthough executions took place elsewhere (notably on Tower Hill, generally related to treason by gentlemen), the Roman road junction at Tyburn became associated with the place of criminal execution for the City of London and Middlesex after most were moved here from Smithfield in the 1400s. In the 12th century, the Sheriff of London had been given the jurisdiction in Middlesex, as well as in the City of London. Prisoners were taken in public procession from Newgate Prison in the city, via St Giles in the Fields and Oxford Street (then known as Tyburn Road). From the late 18th century, when public executions were no longer carried out at Tyburn, they occurred at Newgate Prison itself and at Horsemonger Lane Gaol in Southwark.\nThe first recorded execution took place at a site next to the stream in 1196. William Fitz Osbert, a populist leader who played a major role in an 1196 popular revolt in London, was cornered in the church of St Mary-le-Bow. He was dragged naked behind a horse to Tyburn, where he was hanged.\nIn 1537, Henry VIII used Tyburn to execute the ringleaders of the Pilgrimage of Grace, including Sir Nicholas Tempest, one of the northern leaders of the Pilgrimage and the King's own Bowbearer of the Forest of Bowland.\nIn 1571, the Tyburn Tree was erected near the junction of today's Edgware Road, Bayswater Road and Oxford Street, 200 m west of Marble Arch. The \"Tree\" or \"Triple Tree\" was a form of gallows, consisting of a horizontal wooden triangle supported by three legs (an arrangement known as a \"three-legged mare\" or \"three-legged stool\"). Multiple criminals could be hanged at once, and so the gallows were used for mass executions, such as that on 23 June 1649 when 24 prisoners (23 men and 1 woman) were hanged simultaneously, having been conveyed there in eight carts.\nAfter executions, the bodies would be buried nearby or in later times removed for dissection by anatomists. The crowd would sometimes fight over a body with surgeons, for fear that dismemberment could prevent the resurrection of the body on Judgement Day (see Jack Sheppard, Dick Turpin or William Spiggot).\nThe first victim of the \"Tyburn Tree\" was John Story on 1 June 1571. Story was a Roman Catholic who was tried for and convicted of treason. There is a plaque to the Catholic martyrs executed at Tyburn in the period 1535\u20131681 at 8 Hyde Park Place, the site of Tyburn convent. Among the more notable individuals suspended from the \"Tree\" in the following centuries were John Bradshaw, Henry Ireton and Oliver Cromwell, who were already dead but were disinterred and hanged at Tyburn in January 1661 on the orders of the Cavalier Parliament in an act of posthumous revenge for their part in the beheading of King Charles I.\nThe gallows seem to have been replaced several times, probably because of wear, but in general, the entire structure stood all the time in Tyburn. After some acts of vandalism, in October 1759 it was decided to replace the permanent structure with new moving gallows. These remained until the last execution in Tyburn, probably carried out in November 1783. On the night of Wednesday, 28 March 1759, part of the gallows was blown down. Further evidence of the fixed gallows's disrepair was noted on Friday, 22 June 1759 with the execution of Katharine Knowland, \"When she came to Tyburn, all the crossbeams were pulled down; so she was tied up on the top of one of the upright posts, and hung with her back to it.\" One of the first mentions of the gallows being used again was on 7 October 1759, when four people were executed on the \"new moving gallows\" which afterwards was \"carried off in a cart\".\nThe executions were public spectacles which attracted crowds of thousands. Spectator stands provided deluxe views for a fee. On one occasion, the stands collapsed, reportedly killing and injuring hundreds of people. A hanging as public spectacle was depicted by William Hogarth in his satirical print \"The Idle 'Prentice Executed at Tyburn\" (1747).\nTyburn was commonly invoked in euphemisms for capital punishment: for instance, to \"take a ride to Tyburn\" (or simply \"go west\") was to go to one's hanging, \"Lord of the Manor of Tyburn\" was the public hangman, \"dancing the Tyburn jig\" was the act of being hanged. Convicts would be transported to the site in an open ox-cart from Newgate Prison. They were expected to put on a good show, wearing their finest clothes and going to their deaths with insouciance.\nOn 19 April 1779, clergyman James Hackman was hanged there following his 7 April murder of courtesan and socialite Martha Ray, the mistress of John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich. The Tyburn gallows were last used on 3 November 1783, when John Austin, a highwayman, was hanged; for the next eighty-five years, hangings were staged outside Newgate prison. Then, in 1868, due to public disorder during these public executions, it was decided to execute the convicts inside the prison.\nThe site of the gallows is now marked by three young oak trees that were planted in 2014 on a traffic island in the middle of Edgware Road at its junction with Bayswater Road. Between the trees is a roundel with the inscription \"The site of Tyburn Tree\". It is also commemorated by the Tyburn Convent, a Catholic convent dedicated to the memory of martyrs executed there and in other locations for the Catholic faith.\nAlthough most historical records and modern science agree that the Tyburn gallows were situated where Oxford Street meets Edgware Road and Bayswater Road, in the January 1850 issue of \"Notes and Queries\", the book collector and musicologist Edward Francis Rimbault published a list of faults he had found in Peter Cunningham's 1849 \"Handbook of London\", in which he claimed that the correct site of the gallows is where 49 Connaught Square was later built, stating that \"in the lease granted by the Bishop of London, this is particularly mentioned\".\nProcess of executions.\nTyburn was primarily known for its gallows, which functioned as the main execution site for London-area prisoners from the 16th through to the 18th centuries. For those found guilty of capital crimes who could not obtain a pardon, which accounted for about 40%, a probable destiny was to be hanged at Tyburn. Other contemporary methods of punishment that may have been used as alternatives to Tyburn included execution, followed by being hung in chains at the place where the crime was committed; or burning at the stake; and being drawn and quartered, of which the latter two were common in cases of treason.\nThe last days of the condemned were marked by religious events. On the Sunday before every execution, a sermon was preached in Newgate's chapel, which those unaffiliated with the execution could pay to attend. Furthermore, the night before the execution, around midnight, the sexton of St Sepulchre's church, adjacent to Newgate, recited verses outside the wall of the condemned. The following morning, the convicts heard prayers, and those who wished to do so received the sacrament.\nOn the day of execution, the condemned were transported to the Tyburn gallows from Newgate in a horse-drawn open cart. It was about from Newgate to Tyburn, but as the streets were often crowded with onlookers, the journey could last up to three hours. The cart usually stopped at the \"Bowl Inn\" public house in St Giles High Street. This was the \"halfway house\". Here the condemned were allowed to drink strong liquors, wine or strong ale.\n\"Here Jack Ketch and the criminal who was about to expiate his offence on the scaffold were wont to stop on their way to the gallows for a 'last glass'. Mr. W. T. Purkiss, the proprietor, however, was prevailed upon to stay the work of demolition for a time\".\nThe draught itself was described in a 19th-century ballad as being of a \"nutty brown ale drunk from a 'broad wooden bowl'\". At various times the St Giles Bowl appears to have been administered at a number of inns (or perhaps one inn under a number of names) in St Giles, each successively being referred to as \"The Bowl\". According to Walter Thornbury in his classic \"London Old and New\", \"The Bowl\" would appear to have become associated with the \"Angel Inn\" on St Giles High Street. In 1873, the \"City Press\" feared that the Angel Inn, another memorial of ancient London, was about to pass away. The Angel was remodelled in 1898 and stands to this day.\nHaving arrived at Tyburn, the condemned found themselves in front of a crowded and noisy square; the wealthy paid to sit on the stands erected for the occasion, in order to have an unobstructed view. Before the execution, the condemned were allowed to say a few words; the authorities expected that most of the condemned, before commending their own souls to God, would admit their guilt. It is reported that the majority of the condemned did so. A noose was then placed around their neck and the cart pulled away, leaving them hanging.\nInstances of pickpocketing have been reported in the crowds of executions, a mockery of the deterrent effect of capital punishment, which at the time was considered proper punishment for theft.\nSocial aspects.\nSites of public executions were significant gathering places and executions were public spectacles. Scholars have described the executions at Tyburn as \"carnivalesque occasion[s] in which the normative message intended by the authorities is reappropriated and inverted by an irreverent crowd\" that found them a source of \"entertainment as well as conflict.\" This analysis is supported by the presence of shouting street traders and food vendors and the erection of seating for wealthier onlookers. Additionally, a popular belief held that the hand of an executed criminal could cure cancers, and it was not uncommon to see mothers brushing their child's cheek with the hand of the condemned. The gallows at Tyburn were sources of cadavers for surgeons and anatomists.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30268", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30268", "title": "Tube map", "text": "Schematic transport map of the London Underground network\nThe Tube map (sometimes called the London Underground map) is a schematic transport map of the lines, stations and services of the London Underground, known colloquially as \"the Tube\", hence the map's name. The first schematic Tube map was designed by Harry Beck in 1931. Since then, it has been expanded to include more of London's public transport systems, including the Docklands Light Railway, London Overground, the Elizabeth line, Tramlink, the London Cable Car and Thameslink.\nAs a schematic diagram, it shows not the geographic locations but the relative positions of the stations, lines, the stations' connective relations and fare zones. The basic design concepts have been widely adopted for other such maps around the world and for maps of other sorts of transport networks and even conceptual schematics.\nA regularly updated version of the map is available from the official Transport for London website. In 2006, the Tube map was voted one of Britain's top 10 design icons which included Concorde, Mini, Supermarine Spitfire, K2 telephone box, World Wide Web and the AEC Routemaster bus. Since 2004, Art on the Underground has been commissioning artists to create covers for the pocket Tube map.\nHistory.\nEarly maps.\nAs London's early transport system was operated by a variety of independent companies, there were no complete maps of the network, just for the individual companies' routes. The maps were not typically schematic and were simply the line overlaid on a regular city map. There was no integration of the companies' services or any co-operation in advertising.\nIn 1907, \"The Evening News\" commissioned a pocket map, The Evening News London \"Tube Map\". It was the first map to show all of the lines with equal weight being given to each line, and it was the first map to use a different colour for each line.\nAnother early combined map was published in 1908 by the Underground Electric Railways Company of London (UERL) in conjunction with four other underground railway companies that used the \"Underground\" brand as part of a common advertising factor.\nThe map showed eight routes\u00a0\u2013 four operated by the UERL and one from each of the other four companies:\nA geographical map presented restrictions since for sufficient clarity of detail in the crowded central area of the map required the extremities of the District and Metropolitan lines to be omitted and so a full network diagram was not provided. The problem of truncation remained for nearly half a century. Although all of the western branches of the District and Piccadilly lines were included for the first time in 1933 with Harry Beck's first proper Tube map, the portion of the Metropolitan line beyond Rickmansworth did not appear until 1938, and the eastern end of the District line did not appear until the mid-1950s.\nThe route map continued to be developed and was issued in various formats and artistic styles until 1920, when, for the first time, the geographic background detail was omitted in a map designed by MacDonald Gill. That freed the design to enable greater flexibility in the positioning of lines and stations. The routes became more stylised but the arrangement remained, largely, geographic in nature. The 1932 edition was the last geographic map to be published before Beck's diagrammatic map was introduced.\nBeck's maps.\nThe first diagrammatic map of London's rapid transit network was designed by Harry Beck in 1931. He was a London Underground employee who realised that because the railway ran mostly underground, the physical locations of the stations were largely irrelevant to the traveller wanting to know how to get from one station to another; only the topology of the route mattered. That approach is similar to that of electrical circuit diagrams although they were not the inspiration for Beck's map. His colleagues pointed out the similarities, however, and he once produced a joke map with the stations replaced by electrical circuit symbols and names, with terminology such as \"Bakerlite\" for the Bakerloo line.\nTo that end, Beck devised a simplified map with stations, straight-line segments connecting them, and the River Thames; and lines running only vertically, horizontally, or on 45\u00b0 diagonals. To make the map clearer and to emphasise connections, Beck differentiated between ordinary stations, marked with tick marks, and interchange stations, marked with diamonds. London Underground was initially sceptical of his proposal since it was an uncommissioned spare-time project and was tentatively introduced to the public in a small pamphlet in 1933. However, it immediately became popular, and the Underground has used topological maps to illustrate the network ever since.\nDespite the complexity of making the map, Beck was paid just ten guineas () for the artwork and design of the card edition, and another five guineas () for the poster. After its initial success, he continued to design the Tube map until 1960, a single (and unpopular) 1939 edition by Hans Schleger being the only exception. Meanwhile, as well as accommodating new lines and stations, Beck continually altered the design, such as changing the interchange symbol from a diamond to a circle and altering the line colours of the Central line from orange to red and of the Bakerloo line from red to brown. Beck's final design, in 1960, bears a strong resemblance to the current map. Beck lived in Finchley, North London, and one of his maps is still preserved on the southbound platform at Finchley Central station, on the Northern line.\nIn 1997, Beck's importance was posthumously recognised, and as of 2022, this statement is printed on every Tube map: \"This diagram is an evolution of the original design conceived in 1931 by Harry Beck\".\nAfter Beck.\nBy 1960, Beck had fallen out with the Underground's publicity officer, Harold Hutchison, who was not a designer himself but drafted his own version of the Tube map that year. It removed the smoothed corners of Beck's design and created some highly cramped areas (most notably around Liverpool Street station), and the lines were generally less straight. However, Hutchison also introduced interchange symbols (circles for Underground-only, squares for connections with British Rail main line services) that were black and allowed multiple lines through them, as opposed to Beck, who used one circle for each line at an interchange, coloured according to the corresponding line.\nIn 1964, the design of the map was taken over by Paul Garbutt, who, like Beck, had produced a map in his spare time because of his dislike of the Hutchison design. Garbutt's map restored curves and bends to the diagram but retained Hutchison's black interchange circles, although squares were replaced with circles with a dot inside. Garbutt continued to produce Underground maps for at least another 20 years. Tube maps stopped bearing their designer's name in 1986, when the elements of the map then had a very strong resemblance to today's map.\nWhile the standard Tube map avoided representing most mainline services, a new variant of the map issued in 1973, the \"London's Railways\" map, was the first to depict Tube and above-ground mainline rail services in a diagrammatic style that closely matched Beck's designs. That version was created by Tim Demuth of the London Transport publicity office and was jointly sponsored by British Rail and London Transport. Demuth's map did not replace the standard Tube map but continued to be published as a supplementary resource, later known as the \"London Connections\" map.\nRecent years.\nSome alterations have been made to the map over the years. More recent designs have incorporated changes to the network, such as the Docklands Light Railway and the extension to the Jubilee line. The map has also been expanded to include routes brought under Transport for London control such as TfL Rail and to note the Tube stops that connect with National Rail services, links to airports and River Services. In some cases, stations within short walking distance are now shown, often with the distance between them, such as Fenchurch Street's distance from Tower Hill (an evolution of the pedestrian route between Bank and Monument stations, which was once prominently marked on the map). Further, step-free access notations are also incorporated in the current map. In addition, the fare zones have been added to help passengers judge the cost of a journey. \nOne of the major changes to be made to the revision of the Tube map put out in September 2009 was the removal of the River Thames. The river had been omitted from official maps on several previous occasions (for example, according to David Leboff and Tim Demuth's book, in 1907, 1908 and 1919), and from 1921 it was absent for several years on pocket maps designed by MacDonald Gill. The Thames-free 2009 version was the first time that the river did not appear on the Tube map since the Stingemore pocket map of 1926. The latest removal resulted in widespread international media attention, and general disapproval from most Londoners as well as from the then Mayor of London, Boris Johnson. Based on the reaction, the following edition of the diagram in December 2009 reinstated both the river and fare zones.\nIn more recent years, TfL has expanded its rail services, notably with the expansion of the London Overground network, which has taken over a number of National Rail lines and brought them into the TfL network, each of them being converted lines being added to the Tube map. Further additions have been made such as the London Cable Car and the boundaries of fare zones. Some commentators have suggested that Beck's design should be replaced with a new design that can incorporate the new lines more comfortably.\nPocket map covers.\nSince 2004, Art on the Underground has commissioned various British and international artists to create a cover for the pocket map. These free maps are one of the largest public art commissions in the UK, with millions of copies printed. Over 40 different designs have been produced, from a wide variety of British and international artists such as Rachel Whiteread, Yayoi Kusama, Tracey Emin and Daniel Buren.\nTechnical aspects.\nThe designers of the map have tackled a variety of problems in showing information as clearly as possible and have sometimes adopted different solutions.\nThe font for the map, including station names, is Johnston, which uses perfect circles for the letter 'O'. That is historic and the generic font for all TfL uses from station facades to bus destination blinds.\nLine colours.\nThe table below shows the changing use of colours since Beck's first map. The current colours are taken from Transport for London's colour standards guide, which defines the precise colours from the Pantone palette and also a colour naming scheme that is particular to TfL. Earlier maps were limited by the number of colours available that could be clearly distinguished in print. Improvements in colour printing technology have reduced that problem and the map has coped with the identification of new lines without great difficulty.\nPecked lines have at various times indicated construction, limited service, or sections closed for renovation.\nStation marks.\nFrom the start, interchange stations were given a special mark to indicate their importance, but its shape has changed over the years. In addition, since 1960, marks were used to identify stations that offered connections with British Rail (now National Rail). The following shapes have been used:\nSince 1970 the map has used a reversed (red on white) British Rail \"double arrow\" beside the station name to indicate main line interchanges. Where the main line station has a different name from the Underground station that it connects with, since 1977 this has been shown in a box. The distance between the Tube station and the main line station is now shown.\nContemporary maps have marked stations offering step-free access with a blue circle containing a wheelchair symbol in white.\nStations with links to airports (Heathrow Terminals 2 &amp; 3, Terminal 4, and Terminal 5 for Heathrow Airport and the DLR station at City Airport) are shown with a black aeroplane symbol.\nSince 2000, stations with a nearby interchange to river bus piers on the Thames have been marked with a small boat symbol to promote London River Services.\nWhen Eurostar services used Waterloo International, the Eurostar logo was shown next to Waterloo station. In November 2007, the terminus was transferred to St Pancras International.\nLines or services.\nThe Tube map aims to make the complicated network of services easy to understand, but it is not possible to have complete information about the services that operate on each line.\nLimited-service routes have sometimes been identified with hatched lines, with some complications added to the map to show where peak-only services ran through to branches such as that to Chesham on the Metropolitan line. The number of routes with a limited service has declined in recent years, as patronage has recovered from its early-1980s low. As there are now fewer restrictions to show, most of the remaining ones are now indicated in the accompanying text, rather than by special line markings.\nOfficial versions.\nThe Tube map exists to help passengers navigate the London rapid transit network, and whether it should play a wider role in helping people navigate London itself has been questioned. The question has been raised as to whether mainline railways should be shown on the map, particularly those in Inner London. The Underground has largely resisted adding additional services to the standard Tube map and instead produces separate maps with different information, including:\nMaps are produced in different sizes, the most common being Quad Royal (40 \u00d7 50\u00a0inches) poster size and Journey Planner pocket size. The maps showing all the National Rail routes provide useful additional information at the expense of considerably increased complexity, as they contain almost 700 stations.\nNon-London Underground lines on standard map.\nSome non-Underground lines have appeared on the standard tube map:\nWhen Transport for London expanded its London Overground service to include the East London line in 2010, the East London line, extended to Croydon, changed from a solid orange line to a double orange stripe. According to 2007 proposals, the addition of the South London line to London Overground was supposed to cause the southern loop to be added to future Tube maps in late 2010, and, as of May 2013, it is up and running.\nLondon Underground lines on geographically-accurate maps.\nLike many other rapid transit maps, because the Tube map ignores geography, it may not accurately depict the relative orientation and distance between stations.\nTransport for London formerly published several bus maps that depicted the approximate paths of tube routes relative to major streets and London bus routes. The maps also show locations of certain cultural attractions and geographic landmarks.\nInternet mapping services such as Google Maps offer a \"Transit Layer\" showing actual routes superimposed on the standard street map. A map shows Underground, London Overground, Elizabeth line, DLR lines and National Rail stations within Zone 1\u20132.\nSpin-offs and imitations.\nThe 'look' of the London Underground map (including 45\u00b0 angles, evenly-spaced 'stations' and some geographic distortion) has been emulated by many other underground railway systems around the world. While London Underground have been protective of their copyright they have also allowed their concepts to be shared with other transport operators (Amsterdam's GVB even pays tribute on its map).\nThe success of the Tube map as a piece of information design has led to many imitations of its format. What is probably the earliest example is the Sydney Suburban and City Underground railway map of 1939. It follows Beck's styling cues, and in size, design and layout, it is nearly a clone of the London map of the late 1930s, right down to the use of the Underground roundel.\nIn 2002, Transport for London launched a series of London Buses \"spider diagrams\" to display at bus stops around the city, conveying bus route information in a schematic style similar to Beck's design, with straight lines and 45\u00b0 angles depicting geographically distorted bus routes, coloured lines and numbers to differentiate services, and graphical markers to show bus stops. Tube and rail lines are not included, but interchanges are denoted with appropriate symbols by bus stop names, such as the Tube roundel. Unlike the traditional Tube map, the bus maps display services appropriate to specific transport hubs rather than a full network. Each map also contains a central rectangle of a simple geographically accurate street map to display the positions of bus stops; outside the rectangle, the only geographic feature to appear on the bus maps is the River Thames. The maps are also available for electronic download, with map collections ordered by London borough councils. The bus maps were designed for TfL by the cartographic design company T-Kartor group.\nAn isochrone map of the network was made available in 2007.\nIn 2009, British Waterways produced a map of London's waterways in a Tube-style diagrammatic map, depicting the River Thames, the various and subterranean rivers in the city.\nAttempts to create alternative versions to the official Tube map have continued. In June 2011, the British designer Mark Noad unveiled his vision for a more 'geographically accurate' London Underground map. The map is an attempt to see if it is possible to create a geographically accurate representation of the Underground system and still retain some of the clarity of Beck's original diagram. It uses similar principles, fixed-line angles (30\u00b0 and 60\u00b0, instead of 45\u00b0) and shortens the extremities of the lines to make it more compact. In 2013, Dr Max Roberts, a psychology lecturer at the University of Essex with a particular interest in usability, information design and schematic mapping, issued his own version of the Tube map. His design, based on a series of concentric circles, emphasised the concept of the newly completed orbital loop surrounding Central London with radial lines. A map created to illustrate Tube-related articles on Wikipedia in 2014 was praised for its clarity and for including future developments such as Crossrail.\nIn July 2015, a map of the network displaying walking calorie burn information for each leg was published by Metro newspaper.\nCultural references.\nThe design has become so widely known that it is now instantly recognisable as representing London. It has been featured on T-shirts, postcards and other memorabilia. In 2006, the design came second in a televised search for the most well-known British design icon. It is widely cited by academics and designers as a 'design classic', and those cultural associations make London Underground not usually permit the design to be used or altered for any other purpose. That has been officially sanctioned only on a few occasions:\nStylistic aspects of the London diagram, such as the line colours and styles and the station ticks or interchange symbols, are also frequently used in advertising.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30269", "revid": "1318675871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30269", "title": "The Hague", "text": "City and municipality in the Netherlands\nThe Hague (, short for ) is the capital city of the South Holland province of the Netherlands. With a population of over half a million, it is the third-largest city in the Netherlands. Situated on the west coast facing the North Sea, The Hague is the country's administrative centre and its seat of government, and has been described as the country's \"de facto\" capital since the time of the Dutch Republic, while Amsterdam is the official capital of the Netherlands.\nThe Hague is the core municipality of the Greater The Hague urban area containing over 800,000 residents, and is also part of the Rotterdam\u2013The Hague metropolitan area, which, with a population of approximately 2.6\u00a0million, is the largest metropolitan area of the Netherlands. The city is also part of the Randstad region, one of the largest conurbations in Europe.\nThe Hague is the seat of the Cabinet, the States General, the Supreme Court, and the Council of State of the Netherlands. King Willem-Alexander officially lives in the Huis ten Bosch and works at the Noordeinde Palace together with Queen M\u00e1xima. Most foreign embassies in the Netherlands are in the city. The Hague is also home to the headquarters of many Dutch companies, with Shell plc having major offices in the city as well. The Royal Library of the Netherlands is also located there. The Hague's coastal area includes the popular seaside resort Scheveningen.\nThe Hague is known as the global hub of international law and arbitration. The International Court of Justice, the main judicial arm of the United Nations, is based in the city, as are the International Criminal Court, the Permanent Court of Arbitration, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Europol, and approximately 200 other international governmental organizations. The name \"The Hague\" is commonly used metonymically to refer to either of the international courts that reside in the city. The city has hosted several major international conferences, including the 2014 Nuclear Security Summit and the 2025 NATO Summit.\nEtymology.\nThe name (anglicised as \"The Hague\" and gallicised as ) derives from the Middle Dutch word , meaning \"hedge\", \"enclosure\", or \"hunting ground\". It first appeared in 1242. The fuller form , meaning \"the count's enclosure\", first appeared in 1347. The count in question was the Count of Holland (as is the case with nearby 's-Gravenzande).\nIn deference to common usage, the municipal government adopted the shorter name in 1990, reserving the long-form name for official documents. The post office specifies that letters should be addressed to , but a letter to will be delivered just as well. The railway stations use the name , as do signposts.\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nThe area was part of the Roman province of Germania Inferior and was close to the border of the empire, the Upper Germanic-Rhaetian Limes. In 1997, four Roman milestones were discovered at Wateringse Veld. The originals are in the \"Museon\" museum. The milestones indicate the distance from the nearest Roman city, Forum Hadriani (modern Voorburg), and can be dated to the reign of the emperors Antoninus Pius (138\u2013161; the column is dated 151), Caracalla (211\u2013217), Gordian III (238\u2013244), and Decius (249\u2013251).\nEarly history.\nLittle is known about the origin of The Hague. There are no contemporary documents describing it, and later sources are often of dubious reliability. What is certain is that The Hague was founded by the last counts of the House of Holland. Floris IV already owned two residences in the area, but presumably purchased a third court situated by the present-day Hofvijver in 1229, previously owned by a woman called Meilendis. Presumably, Floris IV intended to rebuild the court into a large castle, but he died in a tournament in 1234, before anything was built. His son and successor William II lived in the court, and after he was elected King of the Romans in 1248, he promptly returned to The Hague, and had builders turn the court into a \"royal palace\" (\"regale palacium\"), which would later be called the Binnenhof (\"Inner Court\"). He died in 1256 before this palace was completed, but parts of it were finished during the reign of his son Floris V, of which the Ridderzaal (\"Knights' Hall\"), still intact, is the most prominent. It is still used for political events, such as the annual speech from the throne by the Dutch monarch. From the 13th century onward, the counts of Holland used The Hague as their administrative center and residence when in Holland.\nThe village that originated around the Binnenhof was first mentioned as \"Die Haghe\" in a charter dating from 1242. It became the primary residence of the Counts of Holland in 1358 and thus became the seat of many government institutions. This status allowed the village to grow; by the Late Middle Ages, it had grown to the size of a city, although it did not receive city rights. In its early years, the village was in the , or rural district, of Monster, which was governed by the Lord of Monster. Seeking to exercise more direct control over the village, however, the Count split the village off and created a separate \"ambacht\" called Haagambacht, governed directly by the Counts of Holland. The territory of Haagambacht was considerably expanded during the reign of Floris V.\nWhen the House of Burgundy inherited the counties of Holland and Zeeland in 1432, they appointed a stadtholder to rule in their stead with the States of Holland and West Friesland as an advisory council. Although their seat was in The Hague, the city became subordinate to more important centres of government such as Brussels and Mechelen, from where the sovereigns ruled over the increasingly centralised Burgundian Netherlands.\nAt the beginning of the Eighty Years' War, the absence of city walls proved disastrous, as it allowed Spanish troops to easily occupy the town. In 1575, the States of Holland, temporarily based in Delft, even considered demolishing the city, but this proposal was abandoned after mediation by William the Silent. In 1588, The Hague became the permanent seat of the States of Holland as well as the States General of the Dutch Republic. For the administration to maintain control over city matters, The Hague never received official city status, although it did have many of the privileges normally granted only to cities. In modern administrative law, \"city rights\" have no place anymore.\nModern history.\nIn 1806, when the Kingdom of Holland was a puppet state of the First French Empire, the settlement was granted city rights by Louis Bonaparte. After the Napoleonic Wars, modern-day Belgium and the Netherlands were combined in the United Kingdom of the Netherlands to form a buffer against France. As a compromise, Brussels and Amsterdam alternated as capital every two years, with the government remaining in The Hague. After the separation of Belgium in 1830, Amsterdam remained the capital of the Netherlands, while the government was situated in The Hague. When the government started to play a more prominent role in Dutch society after 1850, The Hague quickly expanded. Many streets were specifically built for the large number of civil servants employed in the country's government and for the Dutchmen who were retiring from the administration of the Netherlands East Indies. The growing city amalgamated the rural municipality of Loosduinen partly in 1903 and completely in 1923.\nThe city sustained heavy damage during World War II. Many Jews were killed during the German occupation. Additionally, the Atlantic Wall was built through the city, causing a large quarter to be torn down by the Nazi occupants. On 3 March 1945, the Royal Air Force mistakenly bombed the Bezuidenhout quarter. The target was an installation of V-2 rockets in the nearby Haagse Bos park, but because of navigational errors, the bombs fell on a heavily populated and historic part of the city. The bombardment wreaked widespread destruction in the area and caused 511 fatalities.\nBecause of uncertainty about what to do after the destruction of the bombing, nobody attempted to plan a reconstruction of Bezuidenhout. In 1962, David Jokinen saw an opportunity to put an end to the situation where two main stations each served only part of the rail traffic. The Jokinen Plan included the intent to demolish the Staatsspoor Station, with Hollands Spoor becoming the central station. Jokinen's plan sparked fierce discussions. The plan was not implemented, in part because it was only presented when decision-making had finally reached an advanced stage. In the place of the Staatsspoor station now stands the Den Haag Centraal railway station.\nAfter the war, The Hague became at one time the largest building site in Europe. The city expanded massively to the southwest, and the destroyed areas were quickly rebuilt. The population peaked at 600,000 inhabitants around 1965. In the 1970s and 1980s, mostly white middle-class families moved to neighbouring towns such as Voorburg, Leidschendam, Rijswijk and (most of all) Zoetermeer. This led to the traditional pattern of an impoverished inner city and more prosperous suburbs. Attempts to include parts of these municipalities in the city of The Hague were highly controversial. In the 1990s, with the consent of the Dutch Parliament, The Hague annexed large areas from neighboring and non-adjacent towns to build new residential areas, which are still being developed today.\nGeography.\nThe Hague is the largest Dutch city on the North Sea in the Netherlands and forms the centre of the Greater The Hague urban area. Westland and Wateringen lie to the south, Rijswijk, Delft and the Rotterdam conurbation (known as \"Rijnmond\") to the southeast, Pijnacker-Nootdorp and Zoetermeer to the east, Leidschendam-Voorburg, Voorschoten and the Leiden conurbation to the northeast and Wassenaar to the north.\nThe conurbations around The Hague and Rotterdam are close enough to be seen as a single conurbation in some contexts. For example, they share the Rotterdam The Hague Airport and a light rail system called RandstadRail. This led to the creation of the Rotterdam-The Hague metropolitan area. This large conurbation centred on The Hague and Rotterdam is, in turn, part of the Randstad\u2014specifically a band of municipalities called the South Wing (Zuidvleugel). The Randstad, which also includes, among others, Amsterdam and Utrecht, has a population of 6,659,300. The Hague lies at the southwestern corner of the second-largest conurbation in the European Union.\nThe Hague is divided into eight official districts, which are, in turn, divided into neighbourhoods. Some of the most prosperous and some of the poorest neighbourhoods of the Netherlands can be found in The Hague. The wealthier areas such as Statenkwartier, Belgisch Park, Marlot, Benoordenhout and Archipelbuurt are generally in the northwestern part of the city, closer to the sea, whereas the southeastern neighbourhoods such as Transvaal, Moerwijk, and the Schilderswijk are significantly poorer, except the Vinex-locations of Leidschenveen-Ypenburg and Wateringse Veld. This division is reflected in the local accent: The more affluent citizens are usually called \"Hagenaars\" and speak so-called \"bekakt Haags\" (\"posh\"), this contrasts with the \"Hagenezen\", who speak \"plat Haags\" (\"vulgar\"); see Demographics below.\nThe districts are:\nClimate.\nThe Hague experiences a temperate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") similar to almost all of the Netherlands. Because of its location on the coast, it experiences milder winters and cooler summers than more inland locations. However, because of its location, it can also be extremely windy in the winter and humid in the summer. It also gets more sunshine.\nCityscape.\nCity life concentrates around the Hofvijver and the Binnenhof, where the States General of the Netherlands is located. Because of its history, the historical inner city of The Hague differs in various aspects from the nearby smaller cities of Leiden and Delft. It does not have a cramped inner city, bordered by canals and walls. Instead, it has some small streets in the town centre that may be dated from the late Middle Ages and several spacious streets boasting large and luxurious 18th-century residences built for diplomats and affluent Dutch families. It has a large church dating from the 15th century, a City Hall (built as such) from the 16th century, several large 17th-century palaces, a 17th-century Protestant church built in what was then a modern style, and many important 18th-century buildings.\nThe city is becoming more student-friendly with the introduction of a new campus in 2012 of Leiden University as well as Leiden University College The Hague, which was established in 2010. The Royal Conservatory of The Hague and the Royal Academy of Art are also located there, as well as The Hague University, a vocational university, and a branch of The Open University of the Netherlands. The city has many civil servants and diplomats. In fact, the number and variety of foreign residents (especially the expatriates) make the city quite culturally diverse, with many foreign pubs, shops and cultural events.\nThe Hague is the largest Dutch city on the North Sea and includes two distinct beach resorts. The main beach resort Scheveningen, in the northwestern part of the city, is a popular destination for tourists as well as for inhabitants. With 10\u00a0million visitors a year, it is the most popular beach town in the Benelux area. Kijkduin, in the southwest, is The Hague's other beach resort. It is significantly smaller and attracts mainly local residents.\nThe former Dutch colony of the East Indies, now Indonesia, has left its mark on The Hague. Since the 19th century, high-level civil servants from the Dutch East Indies often spent long-term leave and vacations in The Hague. Many streets are named after places in the Netherlands East Indies (as well as other former Dutch colonies such as Suriname), and there is a sizable \"Indo\" (i.e., mixed Dutch-Indonesian) community. Since the loss of these Dutch possessions in December 1949, \"Indo people\" also known as \"Indische people\" often refer to The Hague as \"the Widow of the Indies\".\nThe older parts of the town have many characteristically wide and long streets. Houses are generally low-rise (often not more than three floors). A large part of the southwestern city was planned by the progressive Dutch architect H.P. Berlage about 1910. This 'Plan Berlage' decided the spacious and homely streets for several decades. In World War II, a large portion of the western portion of The Hague was destroyed by the Germans. Afterward, modernist architect W.M. Dudok planned its renewal, putting apartment blocks for the middle class in open park-like settings.\nThe layout of the city is more spacious than other Dutch cities, and because of the incorporation of large and old nobility estates, the creation of various parks, and the use of green zones around natural streams, it is a much greener city than any other in the Netherlands. That is, excepting some medieval close-knitted streets in the centre. The Hague has a canal system around the old city center, which is mainly used for boat tours around the city. Most of the canals were drained in the late 19th century, and some were filled between 1910 and 1970, but many have been restored recently.\nThe tallest buildings of The Hague are both 146-meter-tall ministries of Justice and Security and the Interior and Kingdom Relations of the Netherlands, designed by Hans Kollhoff. Other significant skyscrapers include the Hoftoren, Het Strijkijzer and De Kroon.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 1 January 2021, The Hague counts 549,163 inhabitants, making it the third-largest city in the Netherlands. Between 1800 and 1960, the city saw considerable growth from 40,000 in 1800 to 200,000 in 1900 and eventually 600,000 in 1960. The growth following 1900 was partially caused by the Housing Act of 1901, which stimulated the expansion of cities such as The Hague. In the period between 1960 and 1980, The Hague saw a shrinkage from 600,000 to 440,000 inhabitants, caused mostly by spatial policy, demographic processes, and lack of space. After several annexations and housing constructions, The Hague has since grown again, celebrating its 500,000th inhabitant in 2011. The municipality expects the growth to continue to just over 600,000 inhabitants by 2030.\nThe demonym of The Hague officially is \"Hagenaar\", but the term \"Hagenees\" is informally used for someone who was born and raised in The Hague. The usage of these demonyms appears to be class-bound, with Hagenaar being the upper-class term and Hagenees being that of the lower-class.\nOrigin make-up.\n43% of the population of The Hague has two parents that were born in the Netherlands, while 15.6% have at least one parent who was born abroad in a Western country, and 34.4% have at least one parent that was born in a non-Western country.\nReligion.\nJust under half of The Hague's population identifies with a religious group. The two most popular religions are Christianity (29%) and Islam (14.1%). Religiosity is higher among people with a recent migration background from Indonesia, Turkey, Morocco, and Suriname. Islam is the most common religion among people with a Turkish or Moroccan migration background. Among people of Surinamese heritage, there is more religious diversity, with Hinduism being the most common. Of The Hague's native Dutch population, most religious people adhere to Christianity. Just under 40% of the population of The Hague regularly attends a house of worship.\nPolitics.\nMunicipal government.\nFollowing the 2022 municipal election, the municipal council of The Hague currently contains fourteen groups, most notably Heart for The Hague (HvDH; 11 seats), Democrats 66 (D66; 8 seats), the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD; 6 seats) and GroenLinks (5 seats).\nSince 2023, the municipal executive has comprised D66, GroenLinks, PvdD, PvdA, CDA, and DENK. The chairman of the college is Mayor Jan van Zanen (VVD), and the city has seven aldermen: Robert van Asten, Saskia Bruines (both D66), Mari\u00eblle Vavier, Arjen Kapteijns (both GroenLinks), Robert Barker (PvdD), Hilbert Bredemeijer (CDA), and Nur Ican (DENK). Each alderman is responsible for many particular policy areas and one of the city's eight districts.\nOn 1 October 2019, the National Department of Criminal Investigation (\"Rijksrecherche\") performed a raid on the homes and offices of then-aldermen Richard de Mos and Rachid Guernaoui, as part of an investigation of alleged administrative corruption, bribery, and violation of confidentiality. The offices of several municipal civil servants and the homes of three entrepreneurs were also searched for the investigation. The aldermen were suspected of receiving bribes in exchange for granting permits. In April 2023, De Mos and Guernaoui were acquitted of all charges.\nInternational politics.\nThe Hague is home to many different international judicial bodies, such as the International Court of Justice (ICJ), the International Criminal Court (ICC), and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT). It houses Scheveningen Prison, the ICC's detention center for those suspected of war crimes and other violations of international law. The Hague is the fourth major centre for the United Nations, after New York, Geneva and Vienna.\nThe foundation of The Hague as an \"international city of peace and justice\" started at the end of the 19th century, when the first global peace conference took place in The Hague on Tobias Asser's initiative, with a second one a few years later. A direct result of these meetings was the establishment of the world's first organisation for the settlement of international disputes, the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA). Shortly thereafter, the Scottish-American millionaire Andrew Carnegie made the necessary funds available to build the Peace Palace to house the PCA. After the establishment of the League of Nations, The Hague became the seat of the Permanent Court of International Justice, which was replaced (after World War II) by the UN's International Court of Justice. The establishments of the Iran\u2013United States Claims Tribunal (1981), the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (1993), and the International Criminal Court (2002) in the city further consolidated its role as a centre for international legal arbitration. Most recently, on 1 March 2009, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, a UN tribunal to investigate and prosecute suspects in the 2005 assassination of Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, opened in the former headquarters of the Dutch General Intelligence and Security Service in Leidschendam, a town within the greater area of The Hague.\nOther major international and European organisations based in The Hague include:\nMany academic institutions in the fields of international relations, international law, and international development are based in The Hague. The Hague Academic Coalition (HAC) is a consortium of those institutions.\nIts member institutions are:\nIn 1948, the Congress of Europe was held with 750 delegates from 26 European governments, providing them with the opportunity to discuss ideas about the development of European integration, which eventually culminated in the creation of the modern-day European Union.\nEconomy.\nThe Hague has a service-oriented economy. A professional life in the city is dominated by a large number of civil servants and diplomats working in the city; as of 2006[ [update]], 26% of the jobs in The Hague are those offered by the Dutch government or the international institutions. Large employers in this sector include the ministries of Defence, Justice, Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment, Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations and Transport, Public Works and Water Management.\nSeveral large international businesses have their headquarters in The Hague. Significant companies headquartered in The Hague include Aegon, APM Terminals, Damco, NIBC Bank, Chicago Bridge &amp; Iron Company and PostNL. The city is also host to the regional headquarters of Siemens, T-Mobile, AT&amp;T, Huawei, Kuwait Petroleum Corporation, McDermott International, Saudi Aramco, TotalEnergies and Worley. There has never been any large-scale industrial activity in The Hague, with the possible exception of the fishing activities of the harbour in Scheveningen. Many of the city's logistical and minor-industrial services are in the Binckhorst in the Laak district, which contains many sizeable warehouses.\nThe city is the second biggest Dutch tourist destination after Amsterdam. In 2012, The Hague welcomed 1.2\u00a0million tourists, half of whom came from abroad. Tourists spend an average of \u20ac2\u00a0billion a year in the local economy. 1 in 10 residents makes their living in the tourism sector.\nCulture.\nThe Hague originated around the 13th century Binnenhof, and this is still considered the cultural centre of the city. Nightlife centres around the three main squares in the city centre. The \"Plein\" (meaning \"Plaza\" or \"Town square\") is taken by several large sidewalk caf\u00e9s, where often politicians may be spotted. The \"Grote Markt\" (literally \"Big Market\") is completely strewn with chairs and tables, summer or winter. The Buitenhof (literally \"Outer Courtyard\", located just outside the Binnenhof) contains a six-screen Path\u00e9 cinema and a handful of bars and restaurants in the immediate vicinity. Adjacent to the Buitenhof is De Passage, the country's first covered shopping mall. Dating from the late 19th century, it contains many expensive and speciality shops. One of the country's largest music venues, Paard van Troje, can be found in the centre of The Hague. Another popular music venue in The Hague is Muziekcaf\u00e9 de Paap.\nThe Spuiplein is a modern fourth square in the city centre, opposite the Nieuwe Kerk. Besides the City Hall, this was also the location of the Anton Philipszaal, home to the Residentie Orchestra, and the Lucent Danstheater, home to the internationally celebrated modern dance company Nederlands Dans Theater. These buildings, designed by Rem Koolhaas in 1988, have been demolished to make space for a new theatre, Amare, which would house both institutes as well as the Royal Conservatory. Despite the efforts of the municipality, public support for the proposed theatre remains low. At the heart of the city centre, across the palace gardens, is the home of Summerschool Den Haag, an international school for dance with guest teachers such as Valentina Scaglia, Igone de Jongh, and Maia Makhateli. The Koninklijke Schouwburg, home to Het Nationale Theater, can also be found in the city centre \u2013 on the Korte Voorhout. New European Ensemble is a collective for contemporary music consisting on international musicians. The ensemble has its main base in the city.\nScheveningen forms a second cultural centre of The Hague, having its own Path\u00e9 cinema as well as the musical theatre Circustheater, although, especially in the summer, most nightlife concentrates around the sea-front boulevard with its bars, restaurants, and gambling halls. Several other attractions can be found in Scheveningen, such as the miniature park Madurodam, the Beelden aan Zee museum, and a Sea Life Centre.\nThe Hague is the residence of the Dutch monarch, and several (former) royal palaces can be found in the city. King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands and Queen M\u00e1xima of the Netherlands live in Huis ten Bosch in the Haagse Bos and work in the Noordeinde Palace in the city centre. Moreover, there are two former royal palaces in The Hague. The Kneuterdijk Palace, built in 1716, is now home to the Council of State of the Netherlands, and the Lange Voorhout Palace is now occupied by the Escher Museum, dedicated to Dutch graphical artist M. C. Escher.\nThe Hague has numerous museums, most notably the Mauritshuis, located next to the Binnenhof, which exhibits many paintings by old masters up to 1800, such as Johannes Vermeer, Rembrandt van Rijn and Paulus Potter. The art museum Kunstmuseum, housed in a striking building by architect HP Berlage, exhibits art from after 1800, including the world's large collection of paintings by Piet Mondrian. Other museums include the science museum Museon, the historic museum Haags Historisch Museum, the national postal museum Museum voor Communicatie, the Museum Bredius, the Louis Couperus Museum, the museum Beelden aan Zee in Scheveningen, Panorama Mesdag, and the Gevangenpoort, a former prison housed in a 15th-century gatehouse.\nSince early times, possibly as far back as the 16th century, the stork has been the symbol of The Hague. Several films have been (partially) shot in The Hague, including \"Mindhunters\" (2004), \"Hum Tum\" (2004), \"Ocean's Twelve\" (2004), \"Black Book\" (2006) and \"Sonny Boy\" (2011). Parts of the second season of the Netflix series \"Sense8\" were filmed in The Hague. Notable actors and filmmakers from The Hague include Martin Koolhoven, Georgina Verbaan, Carel Struycken, Frederique van der Wal, Marwan Kenzari, Anna Drijver, Ren\u00e9e Soutendijk and Paul Verhoeven, who grew up in the city from an early age.\nSports.\nThe city's major football club is ADO Den Haag, which competes in the Eerste Divisie, the second-highest tier of football in the Netherlands. ADO Den Haag has won the KNVB Cup twice and won the League twice in the era before professional football. They play their matches at the 15,000-seat ADO Den Haag Stadium. Amateur team HVV is also based in the city. Before the professional era, the club won 10 national titles and one KNVB Cup, and they remain fourth in the all-time list of national title winners. HBS Craeyenhout is another amateur club in the city, which won three national titles before the establishment of the Eredivisie. On 13 May 2021, football club ADO Den Haag was relegated from the Eredivisie as they lost their final game of the season against Willem II. In effect, ADO Den Haag no longer holds a position in the top division of professional Dutch football.\nSince 2020, the basketball club The Hague Royals has played in the professional Dutch Basketball League (DBL). Home games are played at the Sportcampus Zuiderpark.\nThe local rugby union team is Haagsche Rugby Club (a.k.a. HRC). The ice hockey team is HYS The Hague and the local American football team is Den Haag Raiders '99.\nDarts is another sport played in The Hague; its popularity was increased by Raymond van Barneveld winning several World Championships.\nThe half-marathon race CPC Loop Den Haag is held annually in The Hague. In 1994, The Hague held the FEI World Equestrian Games.\nAnnual events.\nKoningsdag, or \"King's Day\", is held annually on 27 April. It is traditionally celebrated with fairs and flea markets throughout the city. On this day, the colour orange predominates at a funfair (which sells orange cotton candy) and scores of informal street markets. The day is a \"vrijmarkt\" (literally \"free market\"), which means no licence is needed for street vending; children traditionally use this day to sell old, unwanted toys. Since King's Day is a national holiday and thus a day off, many people also go out and party on the evening before King's Day. This evening is called King's Night, or \"Koningnacht\" in The Hague. The \"t\" is left out because \"nacht\" is pronounced as \"nach\" in The Hague. Outdoor concerts throughout the city centre of The Hague draw tens of thousands of visitors every year.\nEvery third Tuesday in September is , or \"Prince's Day\", the opening of the Dutch parliament. On a festive day, children in The Hague are free from school so they may watch the procession of the Golden Coach. The King is driven in the coach from Noordeinde Palace to the Ridderzaal in the Binnenhof. Here, the King reads the Speech from the Throne, written jointly by the Ministers and Secretaries of State. This \"troonrede\" outlines the government's plans for the coming year. As the procession returns to the Noordeinde Palace, the road is lined with members of the Dutch Royal Armed Forces, and in the afternoon, the Royal Family appears on the palace balcony to address an adoring and often frenzied public (\"balkonsc\u00e8ne\").\nVlaggetjesdag (), literally \"Flag Day\", is the annual celebration of the arrival of the year's first herring (Hollandse Nieuwe) in Scheveningen. Hundreds of thousands of people gather in Scheveningen for the festivities, and the fishing boats are decorated specially for the occasion. In addition to the omnipresent herring, this day also features several activities unrelated to fish. In Scheveningen, the first barrel of herring is traditionally sold at an auction on the Thursday preceding the official Vlaggetjesdag, and the proceeds go to charity. Vlaggetjesdag was made official in 1947, although the festive tradition around the beginning of herring season is much older: in the 18th century, the villages along the coast, including Scheveningen, were forbidden to gut the caught herring. Since herring was most appropriate for smoking around September, most fishing boats caught flatfish or round-bodied fish during part of the summer, to avoid a surplus of fresh herring. In July or August, The Hague hosts a series of weekly firework displays by the sea front in Scheveningen, as part of an international fireworks festival and competition.\nTong Tong Fair, formerly \"Pasar Malam Besar\", is the largest festival in the world for Indo culture. Established in 1959, it is one of the oldest festivals and the fourth-largest grand fair in the Netherlands. It is also the annual event with the highest number of paying visitors to The Hague, having consistently attracted more than 100,000 visitors since 1993. The Milan Festival is Europe's biggest Hindustani open-air event, annually held in Zuiderpark. The Hague also hosts several annual music festivals; on the last Sunday in June, the city hosts Parkpop, the largest free open-air pop concert in Europe. Crossing Border Festival, State-X and The Hague Jazz festival are among other music festivals in The Hague.\nCrossing Border Festival is an annual festival in November, focusing on music and literature. The first edition took place in 1993.\nMovies That Matter is an international film and debate festival about peace and justice that takes place every year at the end of March; nine days filled with screenings of fiction films and documentaries, daily talk-shows, music performances, and exhibitions. The first such event took place in 2006.\nMoreover, the Hague International Model United Nations, annually held in January, is a five-day conference held at the World Forum, gathering over 4,000 students from over 200 secondary schools across the globe. It is the oldest and largest high school United Nations simulation in the world. \"Den Haag Sculptuur\" is an open-air exhibition of sculptures; the tenth such event, in 2007, celebrated the 400 years of the relationship between the Netherlands and Australia. Since 2009, the city of The Hague has also annually presented an LGBTQ+ emancipation award, called the John Blankenstein Award. The exact date of the ceremony varies each year.\nTransport.\nAir.\nThe Hague shares an airport with Rotterdam. It can be reached from Central Station by RandstadRail Line E, with an Airport Shuttle to and from Meijersplein Station. However, with several direct trains per hour from the railway stations Hollands Spoor and Centraal, Amsterdam Airport Schiphol is more frequently used by people travelling to and from The Hague by air.\nRail.\nThere are two main railway stations in The Hague: Hollands Spoor and Centraal Station, apart from each other. Because the two stations were built and run by two different railway companies in the 19th century, services have traditionally been split between the two: east\u2013west lines terminate at Centraal Station, whereas north\u2013south lines run through Hollands Spoor. However, Centraal Station now offers direct services to most major Dutch cities, such as Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and Utrecht.\nOther destinations include Leiden, Haarlem, Zwolle, Groningen, Leeuwarden, Amersfoort, Enschede, Breda, Tilburg and Eindhoven. International travellers for Antwerp and Brussels have to change trains at Rotterdam.\nUrban transport.\nPublic transport in The Hague consists of a tramway network and a sizeable number of bus routes, operated by HTM Personenvervoer. Plans for a subway were shelved in the early 1970s. However, in 2004, a tunnel was built under the city centre with two underground tram stations (Spui and Grote Markt); it is shared by RandstadRail lines 3 and 4 and tram routes 2 and 6.\nRandstadRail connects The Hague to nearby cities, Zoetermeer, Rotterdam, and Leidschendam-Voorburg. It consists of four light rail lines (3, 4, and 19 to Zoetermeer, Rijswijk, Delft, and Leidschendam-Voorburg) and one subway line (E to Rotterdam).\nRoad.\nMajor motorways connecting to The Hague include the A12, running to Utrecht and the German border. The A12 runs directly into the heart of the city in a cutting. Built in the 1970s, this section of the motorway (the \"Utrechtsebaan\") is now heavily overburdened. Plans were made in the late 1990s for a second artery road into the city (the \"Rotterdamsebaan\", previously called the \"Trekvliettrac\u00e9\"), which was completed in 2021. Other connecting motorways are the A4, which connects the city with Amsterdam, and the A13, which runs to Rotterdam and connects to motorways towards the Belgian border. There is also the A44 that connects the city to Leiden, Haarlem and Amsterdam. In the 1970s, plans for building another motorway to Leiden existed. This \"Leidsebaan\" was supposed to start in the city centre and then follow the railway line from The Hague to Amsterdam. Some works had been executed but had been removed by the 1980s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30270", "revid": "420133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30270", "title": "Tom and Jerry (disambiguation)", "text": "Tom and Jerry is an American animated media franchise and series of comedy short films.\nTom and Jerry may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30271", "revid": "1076997", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30271", "title": "Tim Powers", "text": "American science fiction and fantasy author (born 1952)\nTimothy Thomas Powers (born February 29, 1952) is an American science fiction and fantasy author. His first major novel was \"The Drawing of the Dark\" (1979), but the novel that earned him wide praise was \"The Anubis Gates\" (1983), which won the Philip K. Dick Award, and has since been published in many other languages. His other written work include \"Dinner at Deviant's Palace\" (1985), \"Last Call\" (1992), \"Expiration Date\" (1996), \"Earthquake Weather\" (1997), \"Declare\" (2000), and \"Three Days to Never\" (2006). Powers has won the World Fantasy Award twice for his critically acclaimed novels \"Last Call\" and \"Declare\". His 1987 novel \"On Stranger Tides\" served as inspiration for the \"Monkey Island\" franchise of video games and was partly adapted into the .\nSeveral of Powers' novels depict historical events being influenced by occult or supernatural factors. Regarding his 2001 novel \"Declare\", Powers stated, \"I made it an ironclad rule that I could not change or disregard any of the recorded facts, nor rearrange any days of the calendar \u2013 and then I tried to figure out what momentous but unrecorded fact could explain them all.\"\nLife and career.\nPowers was born in Buffalo, New York, but has lived in California since 1959. Powers has described himself as a practicing Catholic. He studied English Literature at Cal State Fullerton, and earned his B.A. in 1976. It was there that he first met James Blaylock and K. W. Jeter, both of whom remained close friends and occasional collaborators; the trio have half-seriously referred to themselves as \"steampunks\" in contrast to the prevailing cyberpunk genre of the 1980s. Powers and Blaylock invented the poet William Ashbless while they were at Cal State Fullerton.\nAnother friend Powers first met during this period was noted science fiction writer Philip K. Dick; the character named \"David\" in Dick's novel \"VALIS\" is based on Powers. When \"Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?\" was retitled \"Blade Runner\" to tie-in with the movie based on the novel, Dick dedicated it to Tim and Serena Powers.\nPowers' first major novel was \"The Drawing of the Dark\" (1979), but the novel that earned him wide praise was \"The Anubis Gates\", which won the Philip K. Dick Award, and has since been published in many other languages.\nPowers also teaches part-time in his role as Writer in Residence for the Orange County High School of the Arts and California School of the Arts in San Gabriel Valley in the Creative Writing Conservatory, as well as Chapman University, where Blaylock taught. He also taught part-time at the University of Redlands.\nPowers and his wife, Serena Batsford Powers, currently live in Muscoy, California. He has frequently served as a mentor author as part of the Clarion science fiction/fantasy writer's workshop.\n*\"Last Call\" (1992): Locus Fantasy and World Fantasy Awards winner, 1993\n*\"Expiration Date\" (1996): World Fantasy Award nominee, 1996; 1996 Nebula Award nominee \n* \"Earthquake Weather\" (1997): BSFA Award nominee, 1997; Locus Fantasy Award winner, 1998\n* \"Alternate Routes\" (August 2018)\n* \"Forced Perspectives\" (March 2020)\n* \"Stolen Skies\" (January 2022)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30272", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30272", "title": "T S Eliot", "text": ""}
{"id": "30273", "revid": "50925392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30273", "title": "T. S. Eliot", "text": "Poet, essayist and playwright (1888\u20131965)\nThomas Stearns Eliot (26 September 1888\u00a0\u2013 4 January 1965) was a poet, essayist and playwright. He was a leading figure in English-language Modernist poetry where he reinvigorated the art through his use of language, writing style, and verse structure. He is also noted for his critical essays, which often re-evaluated long-held cultural beliefs.\nBorn in St. Louis, Missouri, United States, to a prominent Boston Brahmin family, he moved to England in 1914 at the age of 25 and went on to settle, work, and marry there. He became a British subject in 1927 at the age of 39 and renounced his American citizenship.\nEliot first attracted widespread attention for \"The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock\" (1915), which, at the time of its publication, was considered outlandish. It was followed by \"The Waste Land\" (1922), \"The Hollow Men\" (1925), \"Ash Wednesday\" (1930), and \"Four Quartets\" (1943). He wrote seven plays, including \"Murder in the Cathedral\" (1935) and \"The Cocktail Party\" (1949). He was awarded the 1948 Nobel Prize in Literature \"for his outstanding, pioneer contribution to present-day poetry\".\nLife.\nEarly life and education.\nThe Eliots were a Boston Brahmin family with roots in England and New England. Eliot's paternal grandfather, William Greenleaf Eliot, had moved to St. Louis, Missouri, to establish a Unitarian Christian church there. His father, Henry Ware Eliot, was a successful businessman, president and treasurer of the Hydraulic-Press Brick Company in St. Louis. His mother, Charlotte Champe Stearns, who wrote poetry, was a social worker, then a new profession in the US. Eliot was the last of six surviving children. \nKnown to family and friends as Tom, he was the namesake of his maternal grandfather, Thomas Stearns. Eliot lived in St. Louis for the first 16 years of his life at the house on Locust Street where he was born. After going away to school in 1905, he returned to St. Louis only for holidays and visits. Despite moving away from the city, Eliot wrote to a friend that \"Missouri and the Mississippi have made a deeper impression on me than any other part of the world.\"\nEliot was drawn to literature in childhood. Struggling from a congenital double inguinal hernia, he could not participate in many physical activities. Often isolated, his love for literature developed. Once he learned to read, the young boy immediately became obsessed with books, favouring tales of savage life, the Wild West, or Mark Twain's \"Tom Sawyer\". In his memoir about Eliot, his friend Robert Sencourt comments that the young Eliot \"would often curl up in the window-seat behind an enormous book, setting the drug of dreams against the pain of living.\" Eliot credited his hometown with fuelling his literary vision: \"It is self-evident that St. Louis affected me more deeply than any other environment has ever done. I feel that there is something in having passed one's childhood beside the big river, which is incommunicable to those people who have not. I consider myself fortunate to have been born here, rather than in Boston, or New York, or London.\"\nFrom 1898 to 1905, Eliot attended Smith Academy, the boys college preparatory division of Washington University, where his studies included Ancient Greek, Latin, French, and German. He began to write poetry when he was 14, under the influence of Edward Fitzgerald's translation of the \"Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam.\" He said the results were gloomy and despairing and he destroyed them. His first published poem, \"A Fable For Feasters\", was written as a school exercise and was published in the \"Smith Academy Record\" in February 1905. Also published there in April 1905 was his oldest surviving poem in manuscript, an untitled lyric, later revised and reprinted as \"Song\" in \"The Harvard Advocate\". He published three short stories in 1905, \"Birds of Prey\", \"A Tale of a Whale\" and \"The Man Who Was King\". The last mentioned story reflected his exploration of the Igorot Village while visiting the 1904 St. Louis World's Fair. His interest in indigenous peoples thus predated his anthropological studies at Harvard University.\nFollowing graduation from Smith Academy, Eliot attended Milton Academy in Massachusetts for a preparatory year, where he met Scofield Thayer, who later published \"The Waste Land\". He studied at Harvard College from 1906 to 1909, earning a Bachelor of Arts in an elective programme similar to comparative literature in 1909 and a Master of Arts in English literature the following year. Because of his year at Milton Academy, Eliot was allowed to earn his Bachelor of Arts after three years instead of the usual four. Frank Kermode writes that the most important moment of Eliot's undergraduate career was in 1908 when he discovered Arthur Symons's \"The Symbolist Movement in Literature\". This introduced him to Jules Laforgue, Arthur Rimbaud and Paul Verlaine. Without Verlaine, Eliot wrote, he might never have heard of Tristan Corbi\u00e8re and his book \"Les amours jaunes\", a work that affected the course of Eliot's life. \"The Harvard Advocate\" published some of his poems and he became lifelong friends with Conrad Aiken.\nAfter working as a philosophy assistant at Harvard from 1909 to 1910, Eliot moved to Paris where, from 1910 to 1911, he studied philosophy at the University of Paris. He attended lectures by Henri Bergson and read poetry with Alain-Fournier. From 1911 to 1914, he was back at Harvard studying Indian philosophy and Sanskrit. While a member of the Harvard Graduate School, Eliot fell in love with Emily Hale. Eliot was awarded a scholarship to Merton College, Oxford, in 1914. He first visited Marburg in the German Empire, where he planned to take a summer programme, but when the First World War broke out he went to the University of Oxford instead. At the time so many American students attended Merton that the Junior Common Room proposed a motion \"that this society abhors the Americanization of Oxford\". It was defeated by two votes after Eliot reminded the students how much they owed American culture.\nEliot wrote to Conrad Aiken on New Year's Eve 1914: \"I hate university towns and university people, who are the same everywhere, with pregnant wives, sprawling children, many books and hideous pictures on the walls [...] Oxford is very pretty, but I don't like to be dead.\" Leaving Oxford, Eliot spent much of his time in London. This city had a monumental and life-altering effect on Eliot for several reasons, the most significant of which was his introduction to the influential American poet Ezra Pound. A connection through Aiken resulted in an arranged meeting and on 22 September 1914, Eliot paid a visit to Pound's flat. Pound instantly deemed Eliot \"worth watching\" and was crucial to Eliot's fledgling career as a poet, as he is credited with promoting Eliot through social events and literary gatherings. Thus, according to biographer John Worthen, during his time in England Eliot \"was seeing as little of Oxford as possible\". He was instead spending long periods of time in London, in the company of Pound and \"some of the modern artists whom the war has so far spared [...] It was Pound who helped most, introducing him everywhere.\" In the end, Eliot did not settle at Merton and left after a year. In 1915 he taught English at Birkbeck College, University of London.\nIn 1916 he completed a doctoral dissertation for Harvard on \"Knowledge and Experience in the Philosophy of F. H. Bradley\", but failed to return for the \"viva voce\" examination.\nMarriage.\nBefore leaving the US, Eliot had told Emily Hale that he was in love with her. He exchanged letters with her from Oxford during 1914 and 1915, but they did not meet again until 1927. In a letter to Aiken late in December 1914, Eliot, aged 26, wrote: \"I am very dependent upon women (I mean female society).\" Less than four months later, Thayer introduced Eliot to Vivienne Haigh-Wood, a Cambridge governess. They were married at Hampstead Register Office on 26 June 1915.\nAfter a short visit, alone, to his family in the United States, Eliot returned to London and took several teaching jobs, such as lecturing at Birkbeck, University of London. The philosopher Bertrand Russell took an interest in Vivienne while the newlyweds stayed in his flat. Some scholars have suggested that she and Russell had an affair, but the allegations were never confirmed.\nThe marriage seems to have been markedly unhappy, in part because of Vivienne's health problems. In a letter addressed to Ezra Pound, she covers an extensive list of her symptoms, which included a recurrent high temperature, fatigue, insomnia, migraines, and colitis. This, coupled with apparent mental instability, meant that she was often sent away by Eliot and her doctors for extended periods in the hope of improving her health. As time went on, he became increasingly detached from her.\nAccording to witnesses, both Eliots were frequent complainers of illness, physical and mental, while Eliot would drink excessively and Vivienne is said to have developed a liking for opium and ether, drugs prescribed for medical issues. It is claimed that the couple's wearying behaviour caused some visitors to vow never to spend another evening in the company of both together.\nThe couple separated in 1932 and formally separated in 1933, and in 1938 Vivienne's brother, Maurice, had her committed to a mental hospital, against her will, where she remained until her death of heart disease in 1947. When told via a phone call from the asylum that Vivienne had died unexpectedly during the night, Eliot is said to have buried his face in his hands and cried out 'Oh God, oh God.'\nTheir relationship became the subject of a 1984 play, \"Tom &amp; Viv\", which in 1994 was adapted as a film.\nIn a private paper written in his sixties, Eliot confessed: \"I came to persuade myself that I was in love with Vivienne simply because I wanted to burn my boats and commit myself to staying in England. And she persuaded herself (also under the influence of [Ezra] Pound) that she would save the poet by keeping him in England. To her, the marriage brought no happiness. To me, it brought the state of mind out of which came \"The Waste Land\".\"\nTeaching, banking, and publishing.\nAfter leaving Merton, Eliot worked as a schoolteacher, most notably at Highgate School in London, where he taught French and Latin: his students included John Betjeman. He subsequently taught at the Royal Grammar School, High Wycombe in Buckinghamshire. To earn extra money, he wrote book reviews and lectured at evening extension courses at University College London and Oxford. In 1917 he took a position at Lloyds Bank in London, working on foreign accounts. On a trip to Paris in August 1920 with the artist Wyndham Lewis, he met the writer James Joyce. Eliot said he found Joyce arrogant, and Joyce doubted Eliot's ability as a poet at the time, but the two writers soon became friends, with Eliot visiting Joyce whenever he was in Paris. Eliot and Wyndham Lewis also maintained a close friendship, leading to Lewis's later making his well-known portrait painting of Eliot in 1938.\nCharles Whibley recommended Eliot to Geoffrey Faber. In 1925 Eliot left Lloyds to become a director in the publishing firm Faber and Gwyer (later Faber &amp; Faber), where he remained for the rest of his career. At Faber &amp; Faber, he was responsible for publishing distinguished English poets, including W. H. Auden, Stephen Spender, Charles Madge and Ted Hughes.\nConversion to Anglicanism and British citizenship.\nOn 29 June 1927 Eliot converted from Unitarianism to Anglicanism, and in November that year he took British citizenship, thereby renouncing his United States citizenship in the event he had not officially done so previously. He became a churchwarden of his parish church, St Stephen's, Gloucester Road, London, and a life member of the Society of King Charles the Martyr. He specifically identified as Anglo-Catholic, proclaiming himself \"classicist in literature, royalist in politics, and anglo-catholic [\"sic\"] in religion\".\nAbout 30 years later Eliot commented on his religious views that he combined \"a Catholic cast of mind, a Calvinist heritage, and a Puritanical temperament\". He also had wider spiritual interests, commenting that \"I see the path of progress for modern man in his occupation with his own self, with his inner being\" and citing Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Rudolf Steiner as exemplars of such a direction.\nOne of Eliot's biographers, Peter Ackroyd, commented that \"the purposes of [Eliot's conversion] were two-fold. One: the Church of England offered Eliot some hope for himself, and I think Eliot needed some resting place. But secondly, it attached Eliot to the English community and English culture.\"\nSeparation and remarriage.\nBy 1932, Eliot had been contemplating a separation from his wife for some time. When Harvard offered him the Charles Eliot Norton professorship for the 1932\u20131933 academic year, he accepted and left Vivienne in England. Upon his return, he arranged for a formal separation from her, avoiding all but one meeting with her between his leaving for America in 1932 and her death in 1947. Vivienne was committed to the Northumberland House mental hospital in Woodberry Down, Manor House, London, in 1938, and remained there until she died. Although Eliot was still legally her husband, he never visited her. From 1933 to 1946 Eliot had a close emotional relationship with Emily Hale. Eliot later destroyed Hale's letters to him, but Hale donated Eliot's to Princeton University Library where they were sealed, following Eliot's and Hale's wishes, for 50 years after both had died, until 2020. When Eliot heard of the donation he deposited his own account of their relationship with Harvard University to be opened whenever the Princeton letters were.\nFrom 1938 to 1957 Eliot's public companion was Mary Trevelyan of London University, who wanted to marry him and left a detailed memoir.\nFrom 1946 to 1957, Eliot shared a flat at 19 Carlyle Mansions, Chelsea, with his friend John Davy Hayward, who collected and managed Eliot's papers, styling himself \"Keeper of the Eliot Archive\". Hayward also collected Eliot's pre-Prufrock verse, commercially published after Eliot's death as \"Poems Written in Early Youth\". When Eliot and Hayward separated their household in 1957, Hayward retained his collection of Eliot's papers, which he bequeathed to King's College, Cambridge, in 1965.\nOn 10 January 1957, at the age of 68, Eliot married Esm\u00e9 Valerie Fletcher, who was 30. In contrast to his first marriage, Eliot knew Fletcher well, as she had been his secretary at Faber &amp; Faber since August 1949. They kept their wedding secret; the ceremony was held in St Barnabas Church, Kensington, London, at 6:15\u00a0am with virtually no one in attendance other than his wife's parents. In the early 1960s, by then in failing health, Eliot worked as an editor for the Wesleyan University Press, seeking new poets in Europe for publication. After Eliot's death, Valerie dedicated her time to preserving his legacy, by editing and annotating \"The Letters of T. S. Eliot\" and a facsimile of the draft of \"The Waste Land\". Valerie Eliot died on 9 November 2012 at her home in London.\nEliot had no children with either of his wives.\nDeath and honours.\nEliot died of emphysema at his home in Kensington in London, on 4 January 1965, and was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium. In accordance with his wishes, his ashes were taken to St Michael and All Angels' Church, East Coker, the village in Somerset from which his Eliot ancestors had emigrated to America. A wall plaque in the church commemorates him with a quotation from his poem \"East Coker\": \"In my beginning is my end. In my end is my beginning.\"\nIn 1967, on the second anniversary of his death, Eliot was commemorated by the placement of a large stone in the floor of Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey. The stone, cut by the designer Reynolds Stone, is inscribed with his life dates, his Order of Merit, and a quotation from his poem \"Little Gidding\", \"the communication / of the dead is tongued with fire beyond / the language of the living.\"\nIn 1986 a blue plaque was placed on the building - No. 3 Kensington Court Gardens - where he lived and died.\nPoetry.\nFor a poet of his stature, Eliot produced relatively few poems. He was aware of this even early in his career; he wrote to J. H. Woods, one of his former Harvard professors, \"My reputation in London is built upon one small volume of verse, and is kept up by printing two or three more poems in a year. The only thing that matters is that these should be perfect in their kind, so that each should be an event.\"\nTypically, Eliot first published his poems individually in periodicals or in small books or pamphlets and then collected them in books. His first collection was \"Prufrock and Other Observations\" (1917). In 1920, he published more poems in \"Ara Vos Prec\" (London) and \"Poems: 1920\" (New York). These had the same poems (in a different order) except that \"Ode\" in the British edition was replaced with \"Hysteria\" in the American edition. In 1925, he collected \"The Waste Land\" and the poems in \"Prufrock\" and \"Poems\" into one volume and added \"The Hollow Men\" to form \"Poems: 1909\u20131925\". From then on, he updated this work as \"Collected Poems\". Exceptions are \"Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats\" (1939), a collection of light verse; \"Poems Written in Early Youth\", posthumously published in 1967 and consisting mainly of poems published between 1907 and 1910 in \"The Harvard Advocate\", and \"Inventions of the March Hare: Poems 1909\u20131917\", material Eliot never intended to have published, which appeared posthumously in 1996.\nDuring an interview in 1959, Eliot said of his nationality and its role in his work: \"I'd say that my poetry has obviously more in common with my distinguished contemporaries in America than with anything written in my generation in England. That I'm sure of. ... It wouldn't be what it is, and I imagine it wouldn't be so good; putting it as modestly as I can, it wouldn't be what it is if I'd been born in England, and it wouldn't be what it is if I'd stayed in America. It's a combination of things. But in its sources, in its emotional springs, it comes from America.\"\nCleo McNelly Kearns notes in her biography that Eliot was deeply influenced by Indic traditions, notably the Upanishads. From the Sanskrit ending of \"The Waste Land\" to the \"What Krishna meant\" section of \"Four Quartets\" shows how much Indic religions and more specifically Hinduism made up his philosophical basic for his thought process. It must also be acknowledged, as Chinmoy Guha showed in his book \"Where the Dreams Cross: T S Eliot and French Poetry\" (Macmillan, 2011) that he was deeply influenced by French poets from Baudelaire to Paul Val\u00e9ry. He himself wrote in his 1940 essay on W. B. Yeats: \"The kind of poetry that I needed to teach me the use of my own voice did not exist in English at all; it was only to be found in French.\" (\"Yeats\", \"On Poetry and Poets\", 1948).\n\"The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock\".\nIn 1915 Ezra Pound, overseas editor of \"Poetry\" magazine, recommended to Harriet Monroe, the magazine's founder, that she should publish \"The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock\". Although the character Prufrock seems to be middle-aged, Eliot wrote most of the poem when he was only twenty-two. Its now-famous opening lines, comparing the evening sky to \"a patient etherised upon a table\", were considered shocking and offensive, especially at a time when Georgian Poetry was hailed for its derivations of the 19th-century Romantic poets.\nThe poem's structure was heavily influenced by Eliot's extensive reading of Dante Alighieri and refers to a number of literary works, including William Shakespeare's play \"Hamlet\" and those of the French Symbolists. Its reception in London can be gauged from an unsigned review in \"The Times Literary Supplement\" on 21 June 1917. \"The fact that these things occurred to the mind of Mr. Eliot is surely of the very smallest importance to anyone, even to himself. They certainly have no relation to \"poetry\".\"\n\"The Waste Land\".\nIn October 1922 Eliot published \"The Waste Land\" in \"The Criterion\". His dedication to \"il miglior fabbro\" ('the better craftsman') refers to Pound's significant hand in editing and reshaping the poem from a longer manuscript to the shortened version that appears in publication.\nIt was composed during a period of personal difficulty for Eliot\u2014his marriage was failing, and both he and Vivienne were suffering from nervous disorders. Before the poem's publication as a book in December 1922, Eliot distanced himself from its vision of despair. On 15 November 1922 he wrote to Richard Aldington saying, \"As for \"The Waste Land\", that is a thing of the past so far as I am concerned and I am now feeling toward a new form and style.\" \nThe poem is often read as a representation of the disillusionment of the post-war generation. Dismissing this view, Eliot commented in 1931, \"When I wrote a poem called \"The Waste Land\", some of the more approving critics said that I had expressed 'the disillusion of a generation', which is nonsense. I may have expressed for them their own illusion of being disillusioned, but that did not form part of my intention.\"\nThe poem is known for its disjointed nature due to its usage of allusion and quotation and its abrupt changes of speaker, location, and time. This structural complexity is one of the reasons that the poem has become a touchstone of modern literature, a poetic counterpart to a novel published in the same year, James Joyce's \"Ulysses\".\nAmong its best-known phrases are \"April is the cruellest month\", \"I will show you fear in a handful of dust\", and \"These fragments I have shored against my ruins\".\n\"The Hollow Men\".\n\"The Hollow Men\" appeared in 1925. For the critic Edmund Wilson, it marked \"The nadir of the phase of despair and desolation given such effective expression in 'The Waste Land'.\" It is Eliot's major poem of the late 1920s. Similar to Eliot's other works, its themes are overlapping and fragmentary. Post-war Europe under the Treaty of Versailles (which Eliot despised), the difficulty of hope and religious conversion, Eliot's failed marriage.\nAllen Tate perceived a shift in Eliot's method, writing, \"The mythologies disappear altogether in 'The Hollow Men'.\" This is a striking claim for a poem as indebted to Dante as anything else in Eliot's early work, to say little of the modern English mythology\u2014the \"Old Guy Fawkes\" of the Gunpowder Plot\u2014or the colonial and agrarian mythos of Joseph Conrad and James George Frazer, which, at least for reasons of textual history, echo in \"The Waste Land\". The \"continuous parallel between contemporaneity and antiquity\" that is so characteristic of his mythical method remained in fine form. \"The Hollow Men\" contains some of Eliot's most famous lines, notably its conclusion: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"This is the way the world ends\"\"Not with a bang but a whimper.\"\n\"Ash-Wednesday\".\n\"Ash-Wednesday\" is the first long poem written by Eliot after his 1927 conversion to Anglicanism. Published in 1930, it deals with the struggle that ensues when a person who has lacked faith acquires it. Sometimes referred to as Eliot's \"conversion poem\", it is richly but ambiguously allusive, and deals with the aspiration to move from spiritual barrenness to hope for human salvation. Eliot's style of writing in \"Ash-Wednesday\" showed a marked shift from the poetry he had written prior to his 1927 conversion, and his post-conversion style continued in a similar vein. His style became less ironic, and the poems were no longer populated by multiple characters in dialogue. Eliot's subject matter also became more focused on his spiritual concerns and his Christian faith.\nMany critics were particularly enthusiastic about \"Ash-Wednesday\". Edwin Muir maintained that it is one of the most moving poems Eliot wrote, and perhaps the \"most perfect\", though it was not well received by everyone. The poem's groundwork of orthodox Christianity discomfited many of the more secular \"literati\".\n\"Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats\".\nIn 1939 Eliot published a book of light verse, \"Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats\". (\"Old Possum\" was Ezra Pound's friendly nickname for Eliot.) The first edition had an illustration of the author on the cover. In 1954, the composer Alan Rawsthorne set six of the poems for speaker and orchestra in a work titled \"Practical Cats\". After Eliot's death, the book was the basis of the musical \"Cats\" by Andrew Lloyd Webber, first produced in the West End in 1981 and opening on Broadway the following year.\n\"Four Quartets\".\nEliot regarded \"Four Quartets\" as his masterpiece, and it is the work that most of all led him to being awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. It consists of four long poems, each first published separately: \"Burnt Norton\" (1936), \"East Coker\" (1940), \"The Dry Salvages\" (1941) and \"Little Gidding\" (1942). Each has five sections. Although they resist easy characterisation, each poem includes meditations on the nature of time in some important respect\u2014theological, historical, physical\u2014and its relation to the human condition. Each poem is associated with one of the four classical elements, respectively: air, earth, water, and fire.\n\"Burnt Norton\" is a meditative poem that begins with the narrator trying to focus on the present moment while walking through a garden, focusing on images and sounds such as the bird, the roses, clouds and an empty pool. The meditation leads the narrator to reach \"the still point\" in which there is no attempt to get anywhere or to experience place and/or time, instead experiencing \"a grace of sense\". In the final section, the narrator contemplates the arts (\"words\" and \"music\") as they relate to time. The narrator focuses particularly on the poet's art of manipulating \"Words [which] strain, / Crack and sometimes break, under the burden [of time], under the tension, slip, slide, perish, decay with imprecision, [and] will not stay in place, / Will not stay still.\" By comparison, the narrator concludes that \"Love is itself unmoving, / Only the cause and end of movement, / Timeless, and undesiring.\"\n\"East Coker\" continues the examination of time and meaning, focusing in a famous passage on the nature of language and poetry. Out of darkness, Eliot offers a solution: \"I said to my soul, be still, and wait without hope.\"\n\"The Dry Salvages\" treats the element of water, via images of river and sea. It strives to contain opposites: \"The past and future / Are conquered, and reconciled.\"\n\"Little Gidding\" (the element of fire) is the most anthologised of the \"Quartets\". Eliot's experiences as an air raid warden in the Blitz power the poem, and he imagines meeting Dante during the German bombing. The beginning of the \"Quartets\" (\"Houses / Are removed, destroyed\") had become a violent everyday experience; this creates an animation, where for the first time he talks of love as the driving force behind all experience. From this background, the \"Quartets\" end with an affirmation of Julian of Norwich: \"All shall be well and / All manner of thing shall be well.\"\nThe \"Four Quartets\" draws upon Christian theology, art, symbolism and language of such figures as Dante, and the mystics John of the Cross and Julian of Norwich.\nPlays.\nWith the important exception of \"Four Quartets\", Eliot directed much of his creative energies after \"Ash Wednesday\" to writing plays in verse, mostly comedies or plays with redemptive endings. He was long a critic and admirer of Elizabethan and Jacobean verse drama; witness his allusions to John Webster, Thomas Middleton, Shakespeare and Thomas Kyd in \"The Waste Land\". In a 1933 lecture he said \"Every poet would like, I fancy, to be able to think that he had some direct social utility . . . . He would like to be something of a popular entertainer and be able to think his own thoughts behind a tragic or a comic mask. He would like to convey the pleasures of poetry, not only to a larger audience but to larger groups of people collectively; and the theatre is the best place in which to do it.\"\nAfter \"The Waste Land\" (1922), he wrote that he was \"now feeling toward a new form and style\". One project he had in mind was writing a play in verse, using some of the rhythms of early jazz. The play featured \"Sweeney\", a character who had appeared in a number of his poems. Although Eliot did not finish the play, he did publish two scenes from the piece. These scenes, titled \"Fragment of a Prologue\" (1926) and \"Fragment of an Agon\" (1927), were published together in 1932 as \"Sweeney Agonistes\". Although Eliot noted that this was not intended to be a one-act play, it is sometimes performed as one.\nA pageant play by Eliot called \"The Rock\" was performed in 1934 for the benefit of churches in the Diocese of London. Much of it was a collaborative effort; Eliot accepted credit only for the authorship of one scene and the choruses. George Bell, the Bishop of Chichester, had been instrumental in connecting Eliot with the producer E. Martin Browne for the production of \"The Rock\", and later commissioned Eliot to write another play for the Canterbury Festival in 1935. This one, \"Murder in the Cathedral\", concerning the martyrdom of Thomas Becket, was more under Eliot's control. Eliot's biographer Peter Ackroyd comments that \"for [Eliot], \"Murder in the Cathedral\" and succeeding verse plays offered a double advantage; it allowed him to practice poetry but it also offered a convenient home for his religious sensibility.\" After this, he worked on more \"commercial\" plays for more general audiences: \"The Family Reunion\" (1939), \"The Cocktail Party\" (1949), \"The Confidential Clerk\", (1953) and \"The Elder Statesman\" (1958) (the latter three were produced by Henry Sherek and directed by Browne). The Broadway production in New York of \"The Cocktail Party\" received the 1950 Tony Award for Best Play. Eliot wrote \"The Cocktail Party\" while he was a visiting scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study.\nRegarding his method of playwriting, Eliot explained, \"If I set out to write a play, I start by an act of choice. I settle upon a particular emotional situation, out of which characters and a plot will emerge. And then lines of poetry may come into being: not from the original impulse but from a secondary stimulation of the unconscious mind.\"\nLiterary criticism.\nEliot also made significant contributions to the field of literary criticism, and strongly influenced the school of New Criticism. He was somewhat self-deprecating and minimising of his work and once said his criticism was merely a \"by-product\" of his \"private poetry-workshop\". But the critic William Empson once said, \"I do not know for certain how much of my own mind [Eliot] invented, let alone how much of it is a reaction against him or indeed a consequence of misreading him. He is a very penetrating influence, perhaps not unlike the east wind.\"\nIn his critical essay \"Tradition and the Individual Talent\", Eliot argues that art must be understood not in a vacuum, but in the context of previous pieces of art. \"In a peculiar sense [an artist or poet] ... must inevitably be judged by the standards of the past.\" This essay was an important influence over the New Criticism by introducing the idea that the value of a work of art must be viewed in the context of the artist's previous works, a \"simultaneous order\" of works (i.e., \"tradition\"). Eliot himself employed this concept on many of his works, especially on his long-poem \"The Waste Land\".\nAlso important to New Criticism was the idea\u2014as articulated in Eliot's essay \"Hamlet and His Problems\"\u2014of an \"objective correlative\", which posits a connection among the words of the text and events, states of mind, and experiences. This notion concedes that a poem means what it says, but suggests that there can be a non-subjective judgement based on different readers' different\u2014but perhaps corollary\u2014interpretations of a work.\nMore generally, New Critics took a cue from Eliot in regard to his \"'classical' ideals and his religious thought; his attention to the poetry and drama of the early seventeenth century; his deprecation of the Romantics, especially Percy Shelley; his proposition that good poems constitute 'not a turning loose of emotion but an escape from emotion'; and his insistence that 'poets... at present must be difficult'.\"\nEliot's essays were a major factor in the revival of interest in the metaphysical poets. Eliot particularly praised the metaphysical poets' ability to show experience as both psychological and sensual, while at the same time infusing this portrayal with\u2014in Eliot's view\u2014wit and uniqueness. Eliot's essay \"The Metaphysical Poets\", along with giving new significance and attention to metaphysical poetry, introduced his now well-known definition of \"unified sensibility\", which is considered by some to mean the same thing as the term \"metaphysical\".\nHis 1922 poem \"The Waste Land\" also can be better understood in light of his work as a critic. He had argued that a poet must write \"programmatic criticism\", that is, a poet should write to advance his own interests rather than to advance \"historical scholarship\". Viewed from Eliot's critical lens, \"The Waste Land\" likely shows his personal despair about the First World War rather than an objective historical understanding of it.\nLate in his career, Eliot focused much of his creative energy on writing for the theatre; some of his earlier critical writing, in essays such as \"Poetry and Drama\", \"Hamlet and his Problems\", and \"The Possibility of a Poetic Drama\", focused on the aesthetics of writing drama in verse.\nCritical reception.\nResponses to his poetry.\nThe writer Ronald Bush noted that Eliot's early poems like \"The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock\", \"Portrait of a Lady\", \"La Figlia Che Piange\", \"Preludes\", and \"Rhapsody on a Windy Night\" had \"[an] effect [that] was both unique and compelling, and their assurance staggered [Eliot's] contemporaries who were privileged to read them in manuscript. [Conrad] Aiken, for example, marveled at 'how sharp and complete and sui generis the whole thing was, from the outset. The wholeness is there, from the very beginning.'\"\nThe initial critical response to Eliot's \"The Waste Land\" was mixed. Bush noted that the piece was at first correctly perceived as a work of jazz-like syncopation\u2014and, like 1920s jazz, essentially iconoclastic.\" Some critics, like Edmund Wilson, Conrad Aiken, and Gilbert Seldes, thought it was the best poetry being written in the English language while others thought it was esoteric and wilfully difficult. Edmund Wilson, being one of the critics who praised Eliot, called him \"one of our only authentic poets\". Wilson also pointed out some of Eliot's weaknesses as a poet. In regard to \"The Waste Land\", Wilson admits its flaws (\"its lack of structural unity\"), but concluded, \"I doubt whether there is a single other poem of equal length by a contemporary American which displays so high and so varied a mastery of English verse.\"\nCharles Powell was critical in his assessment of Eliot, calling his poems incomprehensible. And the writers of \"Time\" magazine were similarly baffled by a challenging poem like \"The Waste Land\". John Crowe Ransom wrote negative criticisms of Eliot's work but also had positive things to say. For instance, though Ransom negatively criticised \"The Waste Land\" for its \"extreme disconnection\", Ransom was not completely condemnatory of Eliot's work and admitted that Eliot was a talented poet.\nAddressing some of the common criticisms directed against \"The Waste Land\" at the time, Gilbert Seldes stated, \"It seems at first sight remarkably disconnected and confused... [however] a closer view of the poem does more than illuminate the difficulties; it reveals the hidden form of the work, [and] indicates how each thing falls into place.\"\nEliot's reputation as a poet, as well as his influence in the academy, peaked following the publication of \"The Four Quartets\". In an essay on Eliot published in 1989, the writer Cynthia Ozick refers to this peak of influence (from the 1940s through the early 1960s) as \"the Age of Eliot\" when Eliot \"seemed pure zenith, a colossus, nothing less than a permanent luminary, fixed in the firmament like the sun and the moon\". But during this post-war period, others, like Ronald Bush, observed that this time also marked the beginning of the decline in Eliot's literary influence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As Eliot's conservative religious and political convictions began to seem less congenial in the postwar world, other readers reacted with suspicion to his assertions of authority, obvious in \"Four Quartets\" and implicit in the earlier poetry. The result, fueled by intermittent rediscovery of Eliot's occasional anti-Semitic rhetoric, has been a progressive downward revision of his once towering reputation.\nBush also notes that Eliot's reputation \"slipped\" significantly further after his death. He writes, \"Sometimes regarded as too academic (William Carlos Williams's view), Eliot was also frequently criticized for a deadening neoclassicism (as he himself\u2014perhaps just as unfairly\u2014had criticized Milton). However, the multifarious tributes from practicing poets of many schools published during his centenary in 1988 was a strong indication of the intimidating continued presence of his poetic voice.\"\nLiterary scholars, such as Harold Bloom and Stephen Greenblatt, acknowledge Eliot's poetry as central to the literary English canon. For instance, the editors of \"The Norton Anthology of English Literature\" write, \"There is no disagreement on [Eliot's] importance as one of the great renovators of the English poetry dialect, whose influence on a whole generation of poets, critics, and intellectuals generally was enormous. [However] his range as a poet [was] limited, and his interest in the great middle ground of human experience (as distinct from the extremes of saint and sinner) [was] deficient.\" Despite this criticism, these scholars also acknowledge \"[Eliot's] poetic cunning, his fine craftsmanship, his original accent, his historical and representative importance as \"the\" poet of the modern symbolist-Metaphysical tradition\".\nAntisemitism.\nThe depiction of Jews in some of Eliot's poems has led several critics to accuse him of antisemitism, most forcefully Anthony Julius in his book \"T. S. Eliot, Anti-Semitism, and Literary Form\" (1996). In \"Gerontion\", Eliot writes, in the voice of the poem's elderly narrator, \"And the jew squats on the window sill, the owner [of my building] / Spawned in some estaminet of Antwerp.\" Another example appears in the poem, \"Burbank with a Baedeker: Bleistein with a Cigar\" in which Eliot wrote, \"The rats are underneath the piles. / The jew is underneath the lot. / Money in furs.\" Julius writes: \"The anti-Semitism is unmistakable. It reaches out like a clear signal to the reader.\" Julius' viewpoint has been supported by Harold Bloom, Christopher Ricks, George Steiner, Tom Paulin and James Fenton.\nIn lectures delivered at the University of Virginia in 1933 (published in 1934 under the title \"After Strange Gods: A Primer of Modern Heresy\"), Eliot wrote of societal tradition and coherence, \"What is still more important [than cultural homogeneity] is unity of religious background, and reasons of race and religion combine to make any large number of free-thinking Jews undesirable.\" Eliot never re-published this book/lecture. In his 1934 pageant play \"The Rock\", Eliot distances himself from Fascist movements of the 1930s by caricaturing Sir Oswald Mosley's Blackshirts, who \"firmly refuse/ To descend to palaver with anthropoid Jews\". The \"new evangels\" of totalitarianism are presented as antithetic to the spirit of Christianity.\nIn \"In Defence of T. S. Eliot\" (2001) and \"T. S. Eliot\" (2006), Craig Raine defended Eliot from the charge of anti-Semitism. Paul Dean was not convinced by Raine's argument but nevertheless concluded, \"Ultimately, as both Raine and, to do him justice, Julius insist, however much Eliot may have been compromised as a person, as we all are in our several ways, his greatness as a poet remains.\" The critic Terry Eagleton also questioned the entire basis for Raine's book, writing, \"Why do critics feel a need to defend the authors they write on, like doting parents deaf to all criticism of their obnoxious children? Eliot's well-earned reputation [as a poet] is established beyond all doubt, and making him out to be as unflawed as the Archangel Gabriel does him no favours.\"\nInfluence.\nEliot influenced many poets, novelists, and songwriters, including Se\u00e1n \u00d3 R\u00edord\u00e1in, M\u00e1irt\u00edn \u00d3 D\u00edre\u00e1in, Virginia Woolf, Ezra Pound, Bob Dylan, Hart Crane, William Gaddis, Allen Tate, Andrew Lloyd Webber, Trevor Nunn, Ted Hughes, Geoffrey Hill, Seamus Heaney, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Russell Kirk, George Seferis (who in 1936 published a modern Greek translation of \"The Waste Land\") and James Joyce. Eliot was a strong influence on 20th-century Caribbean poetry written in English, including the epic \"Omeros\" (1990) by the Nobel laureate Derek Walcott, and \"Islands\" (1969) by Barbadian Kamau Brathwaite.\nHonours and awards.\nBelow is a partial list of honours and awards received by Eliot or bestowed or created in his honour.\nNational or state honours.\nThese honours are displayed in order of precedence based on Eliot's nationality and rules of protocol, not awarding date.\nWorks.\nSource: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "30274", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30274", "title": "Tommy Lee", "text": "American drummer (born 1962)\nThomas Lee (born Thomas Lee Bass; Greek: \u03a4\u03cc\u03bc\u03b1\u03c2 \u039b\u03b9 \u039c\u03c0\u03b1\u03c2, October 3, 1962) is an American musician and co-founder and drummer of heavy metal band M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce. He also founded rap metal band Methods of Mayhem and has pursued solo musical projects.\nEarly life.\nLee was born Thomas Lee Bass on October 3, 1962, in\u00a0Athens, Greece, to father David Lee Thomas Bass, an American U.S. Army sergeant, and mother Vassiliki \"Voula\" Papadimitriou (Greek:\u00a0\u0392\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03bb\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae \u03a0\u03b1\u03c0\u03b1\u03b4\u03b7\u03bc\u03b7\u03c4\u03c1\u03af\u03bf\u03c5), a\u00a0contestant on the 1957 Miss Greece beauty contest. He has a younger sister, Athena, who is also a drummer. When Lee was approximately two years old, his father moved the family back to the United States, settling in California.\nLee received his first drum sticks when he was four years old, and his first proper drum kit when he was a teenager. Lee attended Royal Oak High School where he met Vince Neil and was part of the marching band. He dropped out of high school to pursue a career in music, starting with the L.A. club band Suite 19. As a teenager, he listened to Led Zeppelin, Van Halen, Cheap Trick, Kiss, AC/DC and Sweet. His main drumming influences are John Bonham, Tommy Aldridge, Alex Van Halen and Terry Bozzio. \nMusic career.\nIn the late 1970s Lee's band, Suite 19, was a regular on the Sunset Strip club circuit in Los Angeles along with other up-and-coming acts such as Van Halen and Quiet Riot. He became acquainted with bassist Nikki Sixx, whose bands Sister and later London played the same circuit. Sixx was forming a theatrical band that borrowed heavily from Sister's fusion of occult imagery with a theatrical heavy metal performance, and became a fan of Lee's drumming. It was during this time period that Lee dropped his surname and earned the nickname \"T-bone\" due to his height and his lean physique. When London finally broke up in 1981, Lee and Sixx decided to form a new group together. Shortly afterward, guitarist Mick Mars joined the band. Seeking a charismatic frontman, Lee mentioned to the others a singer, Vince Neil, whom he had known casually in high school; Neil soon joined the group, and M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce was formed.\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce.\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce quickly built a strong fanbase, and released its debut album \"Too Fast for Love\" in 1981 on its own independent label (Leath\u00fcr Records). Elektra Records decided to sign the band shortly thereafter, reissuing the debut in 1982. The band then began a string of hit releases throughout the decade\u20141983's \"Shout at the Devil\", 1985's \"Theatre of Pain\", 1987's \"Girls, Girls, Girls\", and 1989's \"Dr. Feelgood\"\u2014establishing the quartet as one of the biggest hard rock/metal bands of the 1980s.\nLee used several memorable gimmicks during his drum solos at concerts, such as having his entire kit revolving and spinning, or having the entire kit float above the crowd while he continued to play. He was noted for mooning the crowd at nearly every show. The band was known for its decadent behavior both on and offstage, often consuming excessive amounts of drugs, such as cocaine, heroin, pills and alcohol. The duo of Lee and Sixx are called the \"Terror Twins\".\nIn 2004, Lee reunited with the original M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce line-up to release the double-disc anthology album entitled \"Red, White &amp; Cr\u00fce\", which went quadruple-platinum and launched a monumental reunion tour to support it, \"The Red, White &amp; Cr\u00fce Tour 2005: Better Live Than Dead\", the band's first tour in six years. M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce finished the year at #8 on the Top Concert Money Earners list. It played 81 shows and grossed US$ million according to \"Billboard\" Boxscore.\nSolo career.\nLee came back once with M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce to go on the \"Cr\u00fce's Greatest Hits\" tour in 1999. With the popularity of rap metal, he formed a band called Methods of Mayhem. The band released a self-titled album the same year and toured in support of it. Although Lee distanced himself from M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce after splitting, he agreed to take part in the band's 2001 autobiography, \"\". In addition to M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce and Methods of Mayhem, Lee has made guest appearances on albums by other artists, such as Stuart Hamm, Nine Inch Nails and Rob Zombie. He also contributed a song, \"Planet Boom\" (originally on M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's Quaternary EP) to the soundtrack of then-wife Pamela Anderson's 1996 movie, \"Barb Wire\", and produced an album for the pre-Goldfinger project from John Feldmann and Simon Williams, the Electric Love Hogs.\nLee parted ways with Methods of Mayhem partner TiLo and began recording with members of Incubus. He then released his first solo album. The album, 2002's \"Never a Dull Moment\", has tones of rap metal and electronica. The song \"Blue\" features guest vocalist Rodleen Getsic (the credits read: \"Rolleen\"). In August 2002, Tommy Lee and his solo band joined Ozzfest, mainstage. In 2006, he formed a new band called Rock Star Supernova with Jason Newsted (ex-Flotsam &amp; Jetsam, Voivod, Metallica) and Gilby Clarke (ex-Guns N' Roses).\nThe 2006 of \"Rock Star\" selected Lukas Rossi as the lead singer for Supernova. Dilana, Magni \u00c1sgeirsson, and Toby Rand with his own band Juke Kartel were the three runners up and accepted an offer to go on tour with Supernova. The self-titled debut album \"Rock Star Supernova\" was released on November 21, 2006.\nLee released his autobiography, \"Tommyland\" and his second solo album, \"\" in 2005. The CD featured as a soundtrack to the book and includes the singles, \"Tryin to be Me\", \"Good Times\" which was the theme song to his reality TV series \"Tommy Lee Goes to College\" and \"Hello, Again\" which features Andrew McMahon from Something Corporate and Jack's Mannequin. Lee was also a guest DJ at WXRK \"K-Rock\" in New York during the Fourth of July Monster Metal Meltdown in 2005.\nHe also recorded drum tracks for the alternative rock band Jack's Mannequin, which has released the album \"Everything in Transit\".\nIn November 2007, it was announced by Nikki Sixx that Lee was no longer a member of M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce. The drummer reportedly quit after the rest of the band sued his manager, Carl Stubner, for forcing Tommy to take part in reality TV shows, thus forcing the cancellation of a lengthy leg of Cr\u00fce tour dates in 2006. Lee had already quit once in September 2007 before returning to the band. Vince Neil denied the claims that Tommy Lee resigned from the band, and said that M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce would be going into the studio in January to start recording its new album. In the end, Lee did end up recording the new album, \"Saints of Los Angeles\", and toured with the band in 2008 on its Cr\u00fce Fest tour.\nTommy Lee's more recent artistic endeavors include touring as an electronic dance music DJ with his Methods of Mayhem DJ/production partner, DJ Aero (birth name: Chester Deitz). As DJs, they are also known as Electro Mayhem, and clocked over 60 club dates as DJs throughout North America in 2007 alone, with stops in the Bahamas and Central America. Lee and Aero debuted as DJs on the mainstage at Ultra Music Festival during Winter Music Conference (WMC) in 2004. Lee and Aero began DJing together in 2000. In 2009, Lee appeared in select cities with Sharam, one half of Grammy-winning Deep Dish, accompanying Sharam live on the piano during his house DJ sets. Lee and DJ Aero also accompanied Deadmau5 in his 2011 Meowington Hax tour. He played keyboards with Deftones at a benefit show for now deceased bassist Chi Cheng in 2009.\nIn 2014, Lee performed on the Smashing Pumpkins' \"Monuments to an Elegy\" album. That same year, he rejoined his M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce bandmates for the group's farewell tour. As part of a legal agreement between the four band members, each signed a contract which would prevent any of them from ever touring under the M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce moniker again unless all members were involved.\nIn 2022, Lee had a phone conversation with Foo Fighters drummer Taylor Hawkins just hours before the latter's death. It was reported that Lee was one of the last people to speak to Hawkins while he was still alive. Lee later appeared with Nikki Sixx in a tribute concert for Hawkins at Kia Forum in Inglewood, California on September 27, 2022.\nFilm and television appearances.\nIn 2004, Lee starred in a reality show on NBC titled \"Tommy Lee Goes to College\". Lee was also one of the producers of the show. In spring 2008, Lee began filming another reality TV show with rapper Ludacris for Planet Green (Discovery Channel's 24-hour eco-friendly network) titled \"Battleground Earth\". In 2019, Lee guest starred on Season 7, Episode 14 of \"The Goldbergs\" as Professor Lee.\nThroughout October 2020, Lee played the Devil in four episodes of \"Halloween in Hell\", a fictionalized musical horror podcast. The series also starred Iann Dior, 24kGoldn, Dana Dentata, Phem, and Machine Gun Kelly.\nIn 2022, Lee starred in the action horror thriller \"The Retaliators\" as a strip club DJ.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships.\nLee has been married four times.\nHis first wife was Elaine Starchuk, whom he married in 1984, divorcing a year later.\nOn May 10, 1986, Lee married for the second time, this time to actress Heather Locklear. The couple divorced in 1993. Their relationship was later chronicled in the M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce biographical film \"The Dirt\" which was released in March 2019 on Netflix.\nBefore meeting actress and \"Playboy\" Playmate Pamela Anderson, Lee was engaged to model Bobbie Brown. On February 19, 1995, just four days after meeting her, Lee married Anderson. They have two sons together: Brandon Thomas Lee (born June 5, 1996) and Dylan Jagger Lee (born December 29, 1997). The couple divorced in 1998, and were involved in a custody battle over their sons until both were granted joint custody in 2002. Although divorced, the couple reunited briefly upon Lee's release from jail but eventually split again in 2001.\nFrom 2002 until 2003, Lee was engaged to dancer Mayte Garcia, ex-wife of Prince. Garcia sang on Lee's album \"Never a Dull Moment\" and toured with him.\nIn 2008, it was announced that Lee and his ex-wife Anderson were back together and living with each other and their children, but they split for good soon afterward.\nFrom 2014 until 2017, Lee was engaged to Greek-German singer Sofia Toufa.\nLee announced on February 14, 2018, that he had proposed to his girlfriend, social media celebrity Brittany Furlan. They were married a year later on February 14, 2019.\nSex tape.\nLee and Anderson had videotaped their sexual activities while on a houseboat on Lake Mead, Arizona. The video was stolen in 1995, released on the internet in 1997, and became a prime example of viral pornography. According to \"The Dirt\", Lee claims that he was having work done at his house, and a person (who, according to the book, was a former porn star by the name of Rand Gauthier) working at the house found the tape and sold it. During the video, Lee infamously blew the boat's horn. Anderson sued the video distribution company, Internet Entertainment Group. The Lees never received a financial settlement agreement with IEG. Pamela Anderson dropped the case to concentrate on her mental health and her children. Thereafter, the company began making the tape available to subscribers to its websites again tripling the normal traffic on the website.\nA fictionalized miniseries, \"Pam &amp; Tommy\", debuted on Hulu in February 2022 chronicling the theft and distribution of the stolen tape. Sebastian Stan portrayed Lee and Lily James was cast as Anderson.\nLegal troubles.\nIn 1998, Lee served six months in county jail after pleading no contest to kicking Pamela Anderson while she was holding their son Dylan. During an altercation over Anderson's refusal to call and ask her parents not to come over to the family's house, Lee assaulted his wife, leaving her with \"bruises, a torn fingernail and fear for the safety of her two sons, Dylan and Brandon.\" In May 2000, Lee served five days in jail for violating his probation by drinking alcohol.\nLee faced a 1998 lawsuit when he allegedly exposed a right-facing Nazi swastika tattoo on his arm to public scrutiny (the tattoo was actually a left-facing swastika). In 1996, Lee had pleaded no contest to criminal charges of battery against a Jewish photographer after Lee attacked the man outside the famous Viper Room, in L.A. When the photographer sued Lee, the swastika tattoo (which has since been removed) was said to be visible, and Lee's lawyer argued it would inflame the jury and create unfair prejudice against Lee. Shortly after claiming that the introduction of the tattoo into the court record would produce prejudice, Lee denied its existence. Lee's attorney reported the swastika was a \"stupid tattoo obtained several years ago.\"\nIn October 1997, Lee, along with Nikki Sixx, was arrested in North Carolina after instigating a riot during the 1997 concert at Greensboro Coliseum. M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce bassist Nikki Sixx allegedly made racist comments to a black security guard, suggesting that the crowd attack him. Sixx and Lee were said to have poured beer over the guard's head.\nOn June 16, 2001, 4-year-old Daniel Karven-Veres drowned in Lee's swimming pool while attending a birthday party for Lee's 5-year-old son, Brandon. Daniel's parents, James Veres and Ursula Karven, sued Lee for negligence. Lee was cleared by a jury in April 2003.\nIn September 2007, Lee was kicked out of the MTV Video Music Awards ceremony after engaging in a fight with Kid Rock. Kid Rock was cited for assault on Lee and pleaded guilty.\nActivism.\nLee is a supporter of animal rights and PETA. In 2010, Lee sent a letter to Terry Prather, the president of SeaWorld, protesting the treatment of Tilikum the orca. Lee believed the animal should be set free and claimed that SeaWorld would not comply, as Tilikum is their primary sperm donor. Lee wrote that he was appalled by SeaWorld's \"sick and twisted\" methods for obtaining Tilikum's sperm. Lee concluded that he wished to avoid further tragedies of trainers being killed, as these tragedies had resulted from the whales' aversion to captivity.\nIn 2013, Lee sent a letter to the then-Alberta Premier Alison Redford requesting that she end the Calgary Stampede's chuckwagon races that have resulted in the deaths of 50 horses since 1986 (the horses were euthanized after suffering injuries). Lee, in his capacity as a member of PETA, wrote, \"There was a time when cowboys respected their horses instead of riding them to death just to show off for a crowd\"; the ministry responded that Lee's letter was worthwhile.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30275", "revid": "41779355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30275", "title": "Night of the Living Dead", "text": "1968 American horror film\nNight of the Living Dead is a 1968 American independent zombie horror film directed, photographed, and edited by George A. Romero, written by Romero and John Russo, and produced by Russell W. Streiner and Karl Hardman. The film's ensemble cast \u2014 which includes Duane Jones, Judith O'Dea, Marilyn Eastman, Karl Hardman, Judith Ridley, and Keith Wayne \u2014 star as a group of people trapped in a farmhouse in rural Pennsylvania, under assault by flesh-eating reanimated corpses. Although the monsters that appear in the film are referred to as \"ghouls\", they are credited with popularizing the modern portrayal of zombies in popular culture.\nHaving gained experience creating television commercials, industrial films, and \"Mister Rogers' Neighborhood\" segments through their production company The Latent Image, Romero, Russo, and Streiner decided to make a horror film to capitalize on interest in the genre. Their script primarily drew inspiration from Richard Matheson's 1954 novel \"I Am Legend\". Principal photography took place between July 1967 and January 1968, mainly on location in Evans City, Pennsylvania, with Romero using guerrilla filmmaking techniques he had honed in his commercial and industrial work to complete the film on a budget of approximately US$. Unable to procure a proper set, the crew rented a condemned farmhouse to destroy during the course of filming.\n\"Night of the Living Dead\" premiered in Pittsburgh on October 1, 1968. It grossed US$ domestically and US$ internationally, earning more than 250 times its budget and making it one of the most profitable film productions of all time. Released shortly before the adoption of the Motion Picture Association of America rating system, the film's explicit violence and gore were considered groundbreaking, leading to controversy and negative reviews. It eventually garnered a cult following and critical acclaim, and has appeared on lists of the greatest and most influential films by such outlets as \"Empire\", \"The New York Times\" and \"Total Film\". Frequently identified as a touchstone in the development of the horror genre, retrospective scholarly analysis has focused on its reflection of the social and cultural changes in the United States during the 1960s, with particular attention towards the casting of Jones, an African-American, in the leading role. In 1999, the film was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.\n\"Night of the Living Dead\" created a successful franchise that includes five sequels released between 1978 and 2009, all directed by Romero. Due to an error when titling the original film, it entered the public domain upon release, resulting in numerous adaptations, remakes, and a lasting legacy in the horror genre. An official remake, written by Romero and directed by Tom Savini, was released in 1990.\nPlot.\nSiblings Barbra and Johnny drive to a cemetery in rural Pennsylvania one night to visit their father's grave, where a pale man in a tattered suit kills Johnny and attacks Barbra. Fleeing to a nearby farmhouse, she finds the resident's corpse lying half-eaten on the stairs. The man from the cemetery has followed Barbra to the house, and as a growing horde of sinister figures like the man surround the house, a stranger, Ben, arrives and initially mistakes Barbra for the homeowner. After driving back several of the figures, he attempts to gather supplies so they can flee, but instead boards the windows and doors after more of the attackers break in. He and Barbra share stories of how they arrived, which escalates into a fight after she attempts to leave the house to retrieve Johnny, refusing to accept that he is dead. Barbra, traumatized by the events, enters a near-catatonic state whilst Ben discovers a lever-action rifle whilst searching upstairs.\nBarbra is startled to discover other people already taking shelter in the home's cellar: an angry married couple, Harry and Helen Cooper, and their young daughter Karen, who fled there after ghouls overturned their car and bit Karen on the arm, leaving her seriously ill. A teenage couple, Tom and Judy, had taken shelter in the farmhouse after hearing an emergency broadcast when at the lake. Tom comes upstairs to help Ben secure the farmhouse, while Harry protests that it is unsafe aboveground. Tension rises in the group as more of the monsters arrive to besiege the farmhouse.\nThrough radio and television reports, the survivors learn that cannibalistic corpses, referred to as \"ghouls\", are reanimating and committing mass murder across the East Coast of the United States and that posses of armed men are patrolling the countryside to exterminate the living dead. Reports confirm that the ghouls can die again from heavy blows to the head, bullets to the brain, or being burned. Various rescue centers offer refuge and safety, and scientists theorize that radiation from an exploding space probe returning from Venus caused the reanimations.\nBen proposes a plan to obtain medical supplies for Karen and transport the group to a rescue center after refueling his truck at a pump on the farm. Ben, Tom, and Judy drive there together, holding the ghouls off with torches and Molotov cocktails. However, spilled gas catches fire and causes the truck to explode, killing Tom and Judy. Ben returns, but when Harry refuses to unlock the door, Ben breaks it down.\nThe remaining survivors debate possible options, until the 3\u00a0a.m. news broadcast airs. As they watch the update, the power fails and the ghouls break through the doors and windows of the unlit home. In the chaos, Harry takes Ben's rifle but is disarmed and shot. Wounded, he staggers down into the cellar, discovers Karen has died, and dies beside her. Barbra awakens from her delirious state and fends off a ghoul attacking Helen, who flees to the cellar.\nKaren has become a ghoul, feeds on her father's remains, and stabs her mother to death with a masonry trowel. Barbra tries to help Ben keep the ghouls out, but freezes upon seeing the reanimated Johnny, who drags her into the horde. As the horde pours into the farmhouse, Ben retreats to the cellar, where he shoots the reanimated Harry and Helen.\nIn the morning, an armed posse arrives to dispatch the remaining ghouls. Awakened by their gunfire, Ben emerges from the cellar, but, mistaking him for a ghoul, the posse shoots him. His body is thrown onto a bonfire and burned with the other corpses.\nCast.\nThe low-budget film featured no well-known actors, but it propelled several cast members' careers. Two independent film companies from Pittsburgh\u2014Hardman Associates and director George A. Romero's The Latent Image\u2014combined to form Image Ten, a production company chartered only to create \"Night of the Living Dead\". The cast consisted of members of Image Ten, actors previously cast in their commercials, acquaintances of Romero, and Pittsburgh stage actors.\nProduction.\nDevelopment and pre-production.\nGeorge Romero embarked upon his career in the film industry while attending Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. He directed and produced television commercials and industrial films for The Latent Image, a company he co-founded with his friend Russell Streiner. The Latent Image started small, but after producing a high-budget Calgon commercial spoofing \"Fantastic Voyage\" (1966), Romero felt that the company had the experience and equipment to produce a feature film. They wanted to capitalize on the film industry's \"thirst for the bizarre\", according to Romero. He, Streiner, and John A. Russo contacted Karl Hardman and Marilyn Eastman, president, and vice president respectively, of a Pittsburgh-based industrial film firm called Hardman Associates, Inc. The Latent Image pitched their idea for a then-untitled horror film.&lt;ref name=\"Hardman/Eastmaninterview\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThese discussions led to the creation of Image Ten, a production company chartered to produce a single feature film. The initial budget was $6,000; each member of the production company invested $600 for a share of the profits. Ten more investors contributed another $6,000, but this was still insufficient. Production stopped multiple times during filming while Romero used early footage to persuade additional investors. Image Ten eventually raised approximately $114,000 for the budget ($ today).\nWriting.\nThe script was co-written by Russo and Romero. They abandoned an early horror comedy concept about adolescent aliens, after realizing they would not have the budget to create a convincing spaceship. Russo proposed a more constrained narrative where a young man runs away from home and discovers aliens harvesting human corpses for food in a cemetery. Romero combined this idea with an unpublished short story about flesh-eating ghouls, and they began filming with an incomplete script. According to Russo, the screenplay written prior to filming only covered events up to the emergence of the Cooper family. Russo completed the script while filming and Romero later expanded the final pages of his short story into the sequels \"Dawn of the Dead\" (1978) and \"Day of the Dead\" (1985).\nRomero drew inspiration from Richard Matheson's \"I Am Legend\" (1954), a horror novel about a plague that ravages a futuristic Los Angeles. The infected in \"I Am Legend\" become vampire-like creatures and prey on the uninfected. Matheson described Romero's interpretation as \"kind of cornball\", and more theft than homage. In an interview, Romero contrasted \"Night of the Living Dead\" with \"I Am Legend\". He explained that Matheson wrote about the aftermath of a complete global upheaval; Romero wanted to explore how people would respond to that kind of disaster as it developed.\nMuch of the dialogue was altered, rewritten, or improvised by the cast. Lead actress Judith O'Dea told an interviewer, \"I don't know if there was an actual working script! We would go over what basically had to be done, then just did it the way we each felt it \"should\" be done\". One example offered by O'Dea concerns a scene where Barbra tells Ben about Johnny's death. O'Dea said that the script vaguely had Barbra talk about riding in the car with Johnny before they were attacked. She described Barbra's dialogue for the scene as entirely improv. Eastman modified the scenes written for Helen and Harry Cooper in the cellar. Karl Hardman attributed Ben's lines to lead actor Duane Jones. Ben was an uneducated truck driver in the script until Jones began to rewrite his character.\nThe lead role was initially written for a white actor, but upon casting black actor Duane Jones, Romero intentionally did not alter the script to reflect this. The film appeared in theaters at a time when very few black actors played leading roles. The rare exceptions, like the consciously black heroes played by Sidney Poitier, were written as subservient to make those characters palatable to white audiences. Asked in 2013 if he took inspiration from the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. in the same year that the movie was made, Romero responded in the negative, noting that he only heard about the shooting when he was on his way to find distribution for the finished film.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography.\nThe small budget dictated much of the production process. Scenes were filmed near Evans City, Pennsylvania, north of Pittsburgh in rural Butler County; the opening sequence was shot at the Evans City Cemetery on Franklin Road, south of the borough. Lacking the money to build or purchase a house for the main set, the filmmakers rented a nearby farmhouse scheduled for demolition. Though it lacked running water, some crew members slept there during the shooting, taking baths in a nearby creek. The building's neglected cellar was not a viable location for filming, so the few basement scenes were shot beneath The Latent Image offices. The basement door shown in the film was cut into a wall by the production team and led nowhere.\nProps and special effects were simple and limited by the budget. The blood, for example, was Bosco Chocolate Syrup drizzled over cast members' bodies. The human flesh consumed by ghouls consisted of meat and offal donated by an investor's butcher shop. Zombie makeup varied during the film. Initially, makeup was limited to white skin with blackened eyes. As filming progressed, mortician's wax simulated wounds and decaying flesh. Filming took place between July 1967 and January 1968 under various titles. Work began under the generic working title \"Monster Flick\", was changed to \"Night of Anubis\" after Romero's short story that provided the basis for the script, and was completed as \"Night of the Flesh Eaters\", a title not used in the final release due to a potential conflict with a similarly named film. The small budget led Romero to shoot on 35 mm black-and-white film. The completed film ultimately benefited from the decision, as film historian Joseph Maddrey describes the black-and-white filming as \"guerrilla-style\", resembling \"the unflinching authority of a wartime newsreel\". He found the exploitation film to resemble a documentary on social instability.\nDirecting.\n\"Night of the Living Dead\" was the first feature-length film directed by George A. Romero. His initial work involved filming advertisements, industrial films, and shorts for Pittsburgh public broadcaster WQED's children's series \"Mister Rogers' Neighborhood\". Romero's decision to direct \"Night of the Living Dead\" launched his career as a horror director. He took the helm of the sequels as well as \"Season of the Witch\" (1972), \"The Crazies\" (1973), \"Martin\" (1978), \"Creepshow\" (1982) and \"The Dark Half\" (1993). Critics saw the influence of the horror and science-fiction films of the 1950s in Romero's directorial style. Stephen Paul Miller, for instance, witnessed \"a revival of fifties schlock shock ... and the army general's television discussion of military operations in the film echoes the often inevitable calling-in of the army in fifties horror films\". Miller admits that \"\"Night of the Living Dead\" takes greater relish in mocking these military operations through the general's pompous demeanor\" and the government's inability to source the zombie epidemic or protect the citizenry. Romero described the film's intended mood as a downward arc from near hopelessness to complete tragedy. Film historian Carl Royer praised the film's sophistication\u2014especially considering Romero's limited experience\u2014and noted the use of chiaroscuro (film noir style) lighting to create a mood of increasing alienation.\n\"Night\" was visually influenced by Golden Age horror comics. The EC Comics books that Romero read as a child were graphic stories set in modern America. They often featured brutal deaths and reanimated corpses seeking revenge on the living. Romero said that he tried to bring into the film the \"real hard shadows and weird angles and beautiful lighting that a comic book artist can create.\" He later collaborated with horror writer Stephen King and former EC Comics artists on the homage \"Creepshow\".\nWhile some critics dismissed Romero's film because of the graphic scenes, writer R. H. W. Dillard claimed that the \"open-eyed detailing\" of taboo heightened the film's success. He asked, \"What girl has not, at one time or another, wished to kill her mother? And Karen, in the film, offers a particularly vivid opportunity to commit the forbidden deed vicariously.\" Romero featured social taboos as key themes, especially cannibalism. Film historian Robin Wood interprets the flesh-eating scenes of \"Night of the Living Dead\" as a late-1960s critique of American capitalism. Wood argues that the zombies' consumption of people represents the logical endpoint of human interactions under capitalism.\nPost-production.\nMembers of Image Ten were involved in filming and post-production, participating in loading camera magazines, gaffing, constructing props, recording sounds and editing. Production stills were shot and printed by Karl Hardman, assisted by a \"production line\" of other cast members. Upon completion of post-production, Image Ten found it difficult to secure a distributor willing to show the film with the gruesome scenes intact. Columbia rejected the film for its lack of color, and American International Pictures declined after requests to soften it and re-shoot the final scene were rejected by producers. The Walter Reade Organization agreed to show the film uncensored but changed the title from \"Night of the Flesh Eaters\" to \"Night of the Living Dead\" because of an existing film with a similar title. While changing the title, the copyright notice was accidentally deleted from the early releases of the film.\nSoundtrack.\nThe film's music consisted of existing pieces that were mixed or modified for the film. Much of the soundtrack had been used by previous films. Romero selected tracks from the Hi-Q music library, and Hardman cut them to match the scenes and augmented them with electronic effects. Probably the most recognizable production music to be used were from the Hi-Q reel D-24 (1956), which included several tracks composed by Spencer Moore titled \"Eerie - Heavy Echo\" and include the opening and closing music in the film. Previous uses of some of the \"Eerie - Heavy Echo\" tracks in film and television include the \"Gumby\" episode \"The Magic Show\" (1956), the low-budget science fiction film \"Teenagers from Outer Space\" (1959), and the civil defence film \"Fallout: When and How to Protect Yourself Against It\" (1959).\nA soundtrack album featuring music and dialogue cues from the film was compiled and released on LP by Var\u00e8se Sarabande in 1982. In 2010, Jim Cirronella, a producer and writer for the \"Night of the Living Dead\" documentary \"Autopsy of the Dead\", put together the collection \"They Won't Stay Dead! (Music from the Soundtrack of Night of the Living Dead)\" containing the complete collection of Hi-Q music used in the film, plus a recording of the music box used in one of the scenes in the film. However, the collection did not contain the electronic effects created by Hardman. In 2020, Waxwork Records issued a 50th Anniversary edition of the original soundtrack, produced in cooperation with the surviving members of Image Ten, that contained a fully remastered version of the complete soundtrack, including material thought to be lost.\nRelease.\nPremiere controversy.\n\"Night of the Living Dead\" premiered on October 1, 1968, at the Fulton Theater in Pittsburgh. Nationally, it was a Saturday afternoon matin\u00e9e\u2014typical for horror films at the time\u2014and attracted the usual horror film audience of mainly pre-teens and adolescents. The MPAA film rating system was not in place until the following month, so children were able to purchase tickets. Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" chided theater owners and parents who allowed children access to a film they were entirely unprepared for. Ebert noted that the children in the audience initially displayed typical reactions to '60s horror films, including shouting when ghouls appeared on the screen. He said that the atmosphere in the theater shifted to grim silence as the protagonists each began to fail, die, and be consumed\u2014either by fire or the undead. The deaths of Ben, Barbra, and the supporting cast showed audiences an uncomfortable, nihilistic outlook that was unusual for the genre. According to Ebert:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The kids in the audience were stunned. There was almost complete silence. The movie had stopped being delightfully scary about halfway through, and had become unexpectedly terrifying. There was a little girl across the aisle from me, maybe nine years old, who was sitting very still in her seat and crying ... It's hard to remember what sort of effect this movie might have had on you when you were six or seven. But try to remember. At that age, kids take the events on the screen seriously, and they identify fiercely with the hero. When the hero is killed, that's not an unhappy ending but a tragic one: Nobody got out alive. It's just over, that's all.\nA review in \"Variety\" denounced the movie as a moral failing of the film's makers, the horror genre, and regional cinema. The reviewer claimed that the \"unrelieved orgy of sadism\" was effectively pornography due to its extreme violence. These early denouncements would not limit the film's commercial success or later critical recognition.\nCritical reception.\nIn 1969, George Abagnalo published the film's first positive critical review in the fourth issue of Warhol's \"Interview\" magazine. That issue also contained an interview of director George A. Romero by Abagnalo along with William Terry Ork. The review and interview are known as the first acknowledgements of the importance of the film.\nFive years after the film's premiere, Paul McCullough of \"Take One\" observed that \"Night of the Living Dead\" was the \"most profitable horror film ever ... produced outside the walls of a major studio\". In the decade after its release, the film grossed over $15\u00a0million at the U.S. box office. It was translated into over 25 languages. \"The Wall Street Journal\" reported that it was the top-grossing film in Europe in 1968. In a 1971 \"Newsweek\" article, Paul D. Zimmerman noted that the film had \"become a bona fide cult movie for a burgeoning band of blood-lusting cinema buffs\".\nDecades after its release, the film enjoys a reputation as a classic and still receives positive reviews. In 2008, the film was ranked by \"Empire\" magazine No. 397 of \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\". \"The New York Times\" also placed the film on their \"Best 1000 Movies Ever\" list. In January 2010, \"Total Film\" included the film on its list of \"The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time\". \"Rolling Stone\" named \"Night of the Living Dead\" one of \"The 100 Maverick Movies in the Last 100 Years\". \"Reader's Digest\" found it to be the 12th scariest movie of all time. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 84 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.9/10. The website's consensus reads: \"George A. Romero's debut set the template for the zombie film, and features tight editing, realistic gore, and a sly political undercurrent.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 89 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating .\n\"Night of the Living Dead\" was awarded two distinguished honors decades after its debut. The Library of Congress added the film to the National Film Registry in 1999 with other films deemed \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\". In 2001, the film was ranked No. 93 by the American Film Institute on their \"AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills\" list, a list of America's most heart-pounding movies. The zombies in the picture were also a candidate for AFI's \"AFI's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes &amp; Villains\", in the villains category, but failed to make the official list. The Chicago Film Critics Association named it the 5th scariest film ever made. The film also ranked No. 9 on Bravo's \"The 100 Scariest Movie Moments\". Rotten Tomatoes lists the film on its 100 Best Zombie Movies, Ranked by Tomatometer.\n\"New Yorker\" critic Pauline Kael called the film \"one of the most gruesomely terrifying movies ever made \u2013 and when you leave the theatre you may wish you could forget the whole horrible experience.\u00a0... The film's grainy, banal seriousness works for it \u2013 gives it a crude realism\". A \"Film Daily\" critic commented, \"This is a pearl of a horror picture that exhibits all the earmarks of a sleeper.\" While Roger Ebert criticized the matin\u00e9e screening, he admitted that he \"admires the movie itself\". Critic Rex Reed wrote, \"If you want to see what turns a B movie into a classic ... don't miss \"Night of the Living Dead\". It is unthinkable for anyone seriously interested in horror movies not to see it.\"\nCopyright status and home media.\nIn the United States, \"Night of the Living Dead\" was mistakenly released into the public domain because the original distributor failed to replace the copyright notice when changing the film's name. Image Ten displayed a notice on the title frames of the film beneath the original title, \"Night of the Flesh Eaters\", but the Walter Reade Organization removed it when changing the title. At that time, United States copyright law held that public dissemination required copyright notice to maintain a copyright. Four years after the film's release, its creators discovered that the original prints distributed to theaters had no copyright protection, which they were upset about for several years until they won a case regarding the film's copyright in federal court in 1983. Russell Streiner noted in an interview that he supported the Berne Convention Implementation Act and the Copyright Term Extension Act because they allowed copyright notices to be automatic, stating; \"We have to keep pursuing it, because it's rightfully our property, and there's no other argument to be made.\"\nBecause \"Night of the Living Dead\" was not copyrighted, it has received hundreds of home video releases on VHS, Betamax, DVD, Blu-ray, and other formats. Over two hundred distinct versions of the film have been released on tapes alone. Numerous versions of the film have appeared on DVD, Blu-ray, and LaserDisc with varying quality. The original film is available to view or download for free on many websites. It was the Internet Archive's third most-viewed film, with over 3.5\u00a0million views.\nThe film received a VHS release in 1993 through Tempe Video. The next year, a THX certified 25th anniversary Laserdisc was released by Elite Entertainment. It features special features, including commentary, trailers, gallery files, and more. In 1999, Russo's revised version of the film, \"Night of the Living Dead: 30th Anniversary Edition\", was released on VHS and DVD by Anchor Bay Entertainment. In 2002, Elite Entertainment released a special edition DVD featuring the original cut. Dimension Extreme released a restored print of the film on DVD. This was followed by a 4K restoration Blu-ray released by The Criterion Collection on February 13, 2018, sourced from the original camera negative owned by the Museum of Modern Art and acquired by Janus Films. This release also features a workprint edit of the film under the title of \"Night of Anubis\", in addition to various bonus materials. In February 2020, Netflix took down \"Night of the Living Dead \" from its streaming service in Germany following a legal request in 2017 because \"a version of the film is banned in that country.\"\nRevisions.\nThere are numerous revised versions of the film with content added, deleted, rearranged, or more heavily modified. From its initial release into the public domain, \"Night of the Living Dead\" was widely screened from inferior prints in grindhouse theaters, a trend that continued among the bottom-tier home video companies. The first major revisions of \"Night of the Living Dead\" involved colorization by home video distributors. Hal Roach Studios released a colorized version in 1986 that featured ghouls with pale green skin. Another colorized version appeared in 1997 from Anchor Bay Entertainment with grey-skinned zombies. In 2009, Legend Films co-produced a colorized 3D version of the film with PassmoreLab, a company that converts 2-D film into 3-D format. The film was theatrically released on October 14, 2010. According to Legend Films founder Barry Sandrew, \"Night of the Living Dead\" is the first entirely live action 2-D film to be converted to 3-D.\nIn 1999, co-writer Russo released a modified version called \"Night of the Living Dead: 30th Anniversary Edition\". He wrote and directed additional scenes and recorded a revised soundtrack composed by Scott Vladimir Licina, who also played the role of Reverend John Hicks. Bill Hinzman, in addition to serving as cinematographer for the new scenes, also reprised his role as Zombie No. 1, who gets an extended backstory of a convicted child murderer who was executed and rose again as a zombie on his burial day. In an interview with \"Fangoria\" magazine, Russo explained that he wanted to \"give the movie a more modern pace\". Russo took liberties with the original script. The additions are neither clearly identified nor even listed. \"Entertainment Weekly\" reported \"no bad blood\" between Russo and Romero. The magazine quoted Romero as saying, \"I didn't want to touch \"Night of the Living Dead\"\". Critics disliked the revised film, notably Harry Knowles of \"Ain't It Cool News\", who promised to permanently ban anyone from his publication who offered positive criticism of the film.\nA collaborative animated project known as \"Night of the Living Dead: Reanimated\" was screened at several film festivals and was released onto DVD on July 27, 2010, by Wild Eye Releasing. This project aims to \"reanimate\" the 1968 film by replacing Romero's celluloid images with animation done in a wide variety of styles by artists from around the world, laid over the original audio from Romero's version. \"Night of the Living Dead: Reanimated\" was nominated in the category of Best Independent Production (film, documentary or short) for the 8th Annual Rondo Hatton Classic Horror Awards.\nStarting in 2015, and working from the original camera negatives and audio track elements, a 4K digital restoration of \"Night of the Living Dead\" was undertaken by the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) and The Film Foundation. The fully restored version was shown in November 2016 as part of \"To Save and Project: The 14th MoMA International Festival of Film Preservation\". This same restoration was released on Blu-ray by The Criterion Collection on February 13, 2018, and on Ultra HD Blu-ray on October 4, 2022.\nRelated works.\nRomero's \"Dead\" films.\n\"Night of the Living Dead\" is the first of six \" ... of the Dead\" films directed by George Romero. Following the 1968 film, Romero released \"Dawn of the Dead\", \"Day of the Dead\", \"Land of the Dead\", \"Diary of the Dead\" and \"Survival of the Dead\". Each film traces the evolution of the living dead epidemic in the United States and humanity's desperate attempts to cope with it. As in \"Night of the Living Dead\", Romero peppered the other films in the series with critiques specific to the periods in which they were released. Romero died with several \"Dead\" projects unfinished, including the posthumously completed novel \"The Living Dead\" and the upcoming film \"The Twilight of the Dead\", intended as a conclusion to the franchise.\n\"Return of the Living Dead\" series.\nThe \"Return of the Living Dead\" series takes place in an alternate continuity where both the original film and the titular living dead exist. The series has a complicated relationship with Romero's \"Dead\" films. Co-writer John Russo wrote the novel \"Return of the Living Dead\" (1978) as a sequel to the original film and collaborated with \"Night\" alumni Russ Streiner and Rudy Ricci on a screenplay under the same title. In 1981, investment banker Tom Fox bought the rights to the story. Fox brought in Dan O'Bannon to direct and rewrite the script, changing nearly everything but the title. O'Bannon's \"The Return of the Living Dead\" arrived in theaters in 1985 alongside \"Day of the Dead\". Romero and his associates attempted to block Fox from marketing his film as a sequel and demanded the name be changed. In a previous court case, \"Dawn Associates v. Links\" (1978), they had prevented Illinois-based film distributor William Links from re-releasing an unrelated film under the title \"Return of the Living Dead\". Fox was forced to cease his advertising campaign but allowed to retain the title.\n\"Rise of the Living Dead\".\nGeorge Cameron Romero, the son of director George A. Romero, wrote a prequel to his father's classic, under the working titles \"Origins\" and \"Rise of the Living Dead\". George Cameron Romero said that he created \"Rise of the Living Dead\" as an homage to his father's work, a glimpse into the political turmoil of the mid-to-late 1960s, and a bookend piece to his father's original story. Despite raising funds for the film on Indiegogo in 2014, as of 2023 the film has yet to go into production. In April 2021, \"Heavy Metal\" magazine published the first issue of a graphic novel adaptation of the story titled \"The Rise\" from Romero's script and with art by Diego Yapur.\nRemakes and other related films.\nMany remakes have attempted to reimagine the original film's story, most notably the 1990 remake written by Romero and directed by special effects artist Tom Savini. Savini had planned to work on the 1968 film before being drafted into the Vietnam War, and, after the war, worked with Romero on the sequels. The remake was based on the original screenplay but included a revised plot that portrayed Barbra (Patricia Tallman) as a capable and active heroine. Film historian Barry Grant interprets the new Barbara as a reversal of the original film's portrayal of feminine passivity. He explores how the 1990 Barbra embodies\u2014arguably masculine\u2014virtuous professionalism, as depicted in the works of classic Hollywood director Howard Hawks, a major influence on Romero. Grant describes her as the film's only Hawksian professional. After changing from a mousy outfit that mirrors the original into the visually militaristic clothing she discovers in the farmhouse, Barbra is the lone character able to separate her emotions from the objective necessity to exterminate the living dead. According to Grant, Romero is able to offer one of the most important feminist outlooks in horror because the undead disrupt all traditional values including patriarchy.\nDue to its public domain status, many independent producers have created remakes of \"Night of the Living Dead\". The film has been remade more than any other movie. Independent remakes have used the film's titular \"living dead\" as an allegory for racial tension, terrorism, nuclear war, and beyond.\nIn other media.\nIn 1988, Savage Software released a text adventure on the TRS-80 Color Computer titled \"Night of the Living Dead\", based on the film, offering a $500 prize for the first person who could demonstrate having beat the game.\nAt the suggestion of Bill Hinzman (the actor who played the zombie that first attacks Barbra in the graveyard and kills her brother Johnny at the beginning of the original film), composers Todd Goodman and Stephen Catanzarite composed an opera \"Night of the Living Dead\" based on the film. The Microscopic Opera Company produced its world premiere, which was performed at the Kelly-Strayhorn Theater in Pittsburgh, in October 2013. The opera was awarded the American Prize for Theater Composition in 2014.\nA play called \"Night of the Living Dead Live!\" was published in 2017 and has been performed in major cities including Toronto, Leeds and Auckland. Another theatrical adaptation by Nick Birchill and Rosie Nikolich premiered at the Todmorden Hippodrome in 2025.\nLegacy.\nRomero revolutionized the horror film genre with \"Night of the Living Dead\"; according to Almar Haflidason of the BBC, the film represented \"a new dawn in horror film-making\". The film ushered in the splatter film subgenre. Earlier horror films had largely involved rubber masks, costumes, cardboard sets, and mysterious figures lurking in the shadows. They were set in locations far removed from rural and suburban America. Romero revealed the power behind exploitation and setting horror in ordinary, unexceptional locations and offered a template for making an effective film on a small budget. \"Night\" spawned countless imitators in cinema, television, and video gaming. According to author Barry Keith Grant, the slasher films of the 1970s and 1980s such as John Carpenter's \"Halloween\" (1978), Sean S. Cunningham's \"Friday the 13th\" (1980), and Wes Craven's \"A Nightmare on Elm Street\" (1984) are indebted to Romero's use of gore in a familiar setting.\nThe film is regarded as one of the launching pads for the modern zombie movie, and effectively redefined the \"zombie\". Before the film's release, the term \"zombie\" described a concept from Haitian folklore whereby a bokor could reanimate a corpse into an insensate slave. Early zombie films like \"White Zombie\" (1932) combined this with racial and postcolonial anxieties. Romero never used the word \"zombie\" in the 1968 film or its script\u2014using instead, \"ghoul\"\u2014because he said that his flesh-eaters were something new. The term \"zombie\" was retroactively applied to \"Night\" after its cannibalistic undead became the dominant zombie concept in the United States, to such an extent that zombie has become a byword for concepts that failed to \"die\".\nAccording to professor of religious studies Kim Paffenroth, Romero's antagonists broke with earlier traditions of \"voodoo zombies\" by having no human villain in control of the zombie and thus no potential to ever restore the monsters' humanity. Compared to the vampires and Haitian zombies that served as inspiration, Romero's antagonists derive more horror from abjection, the disgust that arises from an inability to separate clean from corrupt. While the vampire myth offers a potential escape from mundane life, the zombie offers an infinite decay more abject than conventional death. Cultural critic Steven Shaviro has remarked that\u2014unlike with other movie characters\u2014audiences cannot identify with the zombies because there is no identity left within their bodies, and that they instead provide audiences a combination of disgust and fascinated attraction.\nCritical analysis.\nSince its release, many critics and film historians have interpreted \"Night of the Living Dead\" as a subversive film that critiques 1960s American society, international Cold War politics and domestic racism. Film historian Robin Wood organized \"The American Nightmare\"\u2014a sixty-film retrospective combining screenings and director interviews to frame horror in terms of oppression and repression\u2014for the 1979 Toronto International Film Festival. His essay from the program notes, \"An Introduction to the American Horror Film\", was highly influential, especially in film criticism where horror as a genre had not previously been considered a topic for serious analysis. Wood interprets notable horror films including \"Night\" through a psychoanalytic framework. He discusses how traits deemed unacceptable are repressed on the personal level or when not repressed, oppressed on the societal level. He identifies repressed taboos and othered groups as the psychological basis for horror monsters. Wood and later critics used this framework to discuss \"Night\" as a commentary on repressed sexuality, the marginalized groups of 1960s America, and the disruption to societal norms resulting from the civil rights movement and the Vietnam War.\nElliot Stein of \"The Village Voice\" sees the film as an ardent critique of American involvement in the Vietnam War, arguing that it \"was not set in Transylvania, but Pennsylvania \u2013 this was Middle America at war, and the zombie carnage seemed a grotesque echo of the conflict then raging in Vietnam\". Film historian Sumiko Higashi concurs, arguing that \"Night of the Living Dead\" draws from the visual vocabulary the media used to report on the war, noting especially that the photographs of the napalm girl and the execution of Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n L\u00e9m would be fresh in the minds of the film's creators and audience. She points to aspects of the Vietnam War paralleled in the film: grainy black-and-white newsreels, search and destroy operations, helicopters, and graphic carnage. In 1968, the news was still broadcast in black and white, and the graphic photographs that appear during the closing credits resemble the contemporary Vietnam War photojournalism.\nCritics have compared the shooting of the film's black protagonist to the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. Stein explains, \"In this first-ever subversive horror movie, the resourceful black hero survives the zombies only to be surprised by a redneck posse\". In 2018, on the film's 50th anniversary, Mark Lager of \"CineAction\" noted a clear parallel between the killing and destruction of Ben's body by white police and the violence directed at African Americans during the civil rights movement. Lager described it as a more honest exploration of 1960s America than anything produced by Hollywood.\n\"Night\" shows influence from Alfred Hitchcock's \"The Birds\". In both films, a small group takes refuge in an isolated house and attempts to fend off an inexplicable attack. Film historian Robin Wood comments that the zombies and birds both function as projections of the familial tensions. The living dead appear during a familial dispute at the cemetery, and the danger escalates as familial resent builds in the farmhouse. Professor of Film Studies Carter Soles argues that the films offer different perspectives on an \"environmental apocalypse\". Hitchcock's birds were a force of nature, but Romero's zombies were a direct product of human actions. Soles argues that this reflects changing cultural attitudes, especially after the 1962 environmental science book \"Silent Spring\" made Americans aware of harm done by the pesticide DDT.\nFilm historian Gregory Waller identifies broad-ranging critiques of American institutions including the nuclear family, private homes, media, government, and \"the entire mechanism of civil defense\". Film historian Linda Badley explains that the film was so horrifying because the monsters were not creatures from outer space or some exotic environment, but rather that \"They're us.\" In the 2009 documentary film \"Nightmares in Red, White and Blue\", the zombies in the film are compared to the \"silent majority\" of the U.S. in the late 1960s.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30276", "revid": "45475783", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30276", "title": "The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui", "text": "1941 play by Bertolt Brecht\nThe Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui (), subtitled \"A parable play\", is a 1941 play by the German playwright Bertolt Brecht. It chronicles the rise of Arturo Ui, a fictional 1930s Chicago mobster, and his attempts to control the cauliflower racket by ruthlessly disposing of the competition. The play is a satirical allegory of the rise of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party in Germany prior to World War II.\nHistory and description.\nFearing persecution and blacklisted from publication and production, Brecht\u00a0\u2013 who in his poetry referred to Adolf Hitler as \"der Anstreicher\" (\"the housepainter\")\u00a0\u2013 left Germany in February 1933, shortly after the appointment of Hitler as Chancellor by President Paul von Hindenburg on the instigation of former Chancellor Franz von Papen. After moving around\u00a0\u2013 Prague, Z\u00fcrich, Paris\u00a0\u2013 Brecht ended up in Denmark for six years. While there, c.\u00a01934, he worked on the antecedent to \"The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui\", a satire on Hitler called \"Ui\", written in the style of a Renaissance historian. The result was a story about \"Giacomo Ui\", a machine politician in Padua, a work which Brecht never completed. It was later published with his collected short stories.\nBrecht left Denmark in 1939, moving first to Stockholm, and then, the next year, to Helsinki, Finland. He wrote the current play there in only three weeks in 1941, during the time he was waiting for a visa to enter the United States. The play was not produced on the stage until 1958, and not until 1961 in English. In spite of this, Brecht did not originally envision a version of the play in Germany, intending it all along for the American stage.\nThe play is consciously a highly satirical allegory of Hitler's rise to power in Germany and the advent of the National Socialist state. All the characters and groups in the play had direct counterparts in real life, with Ui representing Hitler, his henchman Ernesto Roma representing Ernst R\u00f6hm, the head of the Nazi brownshirts; Dogsborough representing General von Hindenburg, a hero of World War I and the President of the Weimar Republic (his name is a pun on the German \"Hund\" and \"Burg\"); Emanuele Giri representing Hermann G\u00f6ring, a World War I flying ace who was Hitler's second in command; Giuseppe Givola representing the master propagandist Joseph Goebbels; the Cauliflower Trust representing the Prussian Junkers; the fate of the town of Cicero standing for the \"Anschluss\", when Austria was annexed by Nazi Germany; and so on. In addition, every scene in the play is based, albeit sometimes very loosely, on a real event, for example the warehouse fire which represents the Reichstag fire, and the Dock Aid Scandal which represents the (Eastern Aid) scandal. The play is similar in some respects to the film \"The Great Dictator\" (1940), which also featured an absurd parody of Hitler (\"Adenoid Hynkel\") by Charlie Chaplin, Brecht's favorite film actor.\nDramatically \"Arturo Ui\" is in keeping with Brecht's \"epic\" style of theatre. It opens with a prologue in the form of a direct address to the audience by an otherwise unidentified \"Actor\", who outlines all the major characters and explains the basis of the upcoming plot. This allows the audience to better focus on the message rather being concerned about what might happen next in the plot.\nBrecht describes in the play's stage directions the use of signs or projections, which are seen first on the stage curtain, and later appear after certain scenes, presenting the audience with relevant information about Hitler's rise to power, in order to clarify the parallels between the play and actual events.\nThe play has frequent references to Shakespeare. To highlight Ui's evil and villainous rise to power, he is explicitly compared to Shakespeare's Richard III. Like Macbeth, Ui experiences a visitation from the ghost of one of his victims. Finally, Hitler's practiced prowess at public speaking is referenced when Ui receives lessons from an actor in walking, sitting and orating, which includes his reciting Mark Antony's famous speech from \"Julius Caesar\".\nCharacters and settings.\nEquivalents for places and things cited in the text are:\n\"Source:\"\nAlternative titles.\nThere are fewer alternative copies of the script than is usual with Brecht's works, since \"most of the revisions, such as they were, [had] been made directly on the first typescript\", but he did refer to the play by a number of alternative names, among them \"The Rise of Arturo Ui\", \"The Gangster Play We Know\" and \"That Well-Known Racket\". At one point he referred to it as \"Arturo Ui\", labelled it a \"Dramatic Poem\" and ascribed authorship to K. Keuner (\"Mr. Nobody\").\nProduction history.\n\"The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui\" was intended by Brecht to be first performed in the United States, but he was unable to get a production mounted. Brecht brought the play to the attention of director Erwin Piscator in New York, suggesting Oskar Homolka to play Ui. Piscator and Brecht's frequent musical collaborator, Hanns Eisler, got H. R. Hay to translate the work, which was completed by September 1941, and submitted to Louis Shaffer, the director of Labor Stage, who turned it down as \"not advisable to produce\", presumably because the United States was still, at the time, a neutral country.\nThe play lingered in the drawer until 1953, after Brecht had founded the Berliner Ensemble in East Germany, and had produced there his major works. He showed the play around to a larger circle of people than had seen it previously, and this eventually led to the Berliner Ensemble's production\u00a0\u2013 except that Brecht insisted that scenes from his \"Fear and Misery of the Third Reich\", a series of realistic short pieces about life in Nazi Germany that was written around 1935\u00a0\u2013 needed to be produced first. His fear was that the German audience was still too close to their previous psychic connection to Hitler.\nWhen Brecht died in 1956, the Berliner Ensemble still had not produced \"Fear and Misery in the Third Reich\"\u00a0\u2013 which at various times was also called \"99%\" and \"The Private Life of the Master Race\"\u00a0\u2013 but Brecht had prepared it for publication, which came out in 1957. That same year, scenes from the work were staged by five young directors of the Ensemble. One of them, Peter Palitzsch, directed the world premiere of \"The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui\" in Stuttgart, West Germany, in 1958. The Ensemble itself first produced the play four months later, with Palitzsch and Manfred Wekwerth co-directing, and Ekkehard Schall as Arturo Ui. This production, \"staged in fairground style, with ruthless verve and brassy vulgarity\" was presented also in Berlin, London and at the Paris International Theatre Festival. A later production by the Berliner Ensemble, directed by Heiner M\u00fcller has run in repertory since June 1995, with Martin Wuttke in the title role.\n\"The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui\" was presented twice on Broadway. The first production, billed \"Arturo Ui\", was in 1963, with Christopher Plummer in the lead role and Madeleine Sherwood. Michael Constantine, Elisha Cook, Lionel Stander, Sandy Baron, Oliver Clark and James Coco in the cast. It was directed by Tony Richardson and ran for five previews and eight performances. The second Broadway production of the play took place in 1968\u201369 by the Guthrie Theater Company. It starred Robin Gammell as Ui, and was directed by Edward Payson Call. It ran for ten performances.\nThe play has been presented three times Off-Broadway. In 1991 it was produced by the Classic Stage Company, with John Turturro as Arturo Ui, directed by Carey Perloff. \nIn 2002, it played at the National Actors Theatre, with Ui played by Al Pacino, co-starring Steve Buscemi as Givola, Billy Crudup as Flake, Charles Durning as Dogsborough, Paul Giamatti as Dullfeet, John Goodman as Giri, Chazz Palminteri as Roma, Lothaire Bluteau as Fish, Jacqueline McKenzie as Dockdaisy, Linda Emond as Betty Dullfeet, and Tony Randall (who also produced) as the actor, with an ensemble that included Sterling K. Brown, Ajay Naidu, Dominic Chianese, Robert Stanton, John Ventimiglia, and William Sadler. It was directed by Simon McBurney. The Classic Stage Company tackled it again in 2018, directed by John Doyle with Ra\u00fal Esparza in the title role and Eddie Cooper and Elizabeth A. Davis in the supporting cast. In 1986, the play was produced in Canada at the Stratford Festival, running for 46 performances with Maurice Godin in the lead role.\nMost recently in 2017, Bruce Norris' adapted version of the play was performed at the Donmar Warehouse in London, with Lenny Henry starring as Arturo Ui, and directed by Simon Evans. \nThe role of Ui has been played by such other notable actors as Peter Falk, Griff Rhys Jones, Leonard Rossiter, Antony Sher, Nicol Williamson, Henry Goodman Hugo Weaving, and Jean Vilar. Simon Callow discussed his interpretation of the role in his autobiography, \"Being an Actor\", while Plummer explains why he felt he failed in the role on Broadway in his autobiography, \"In Spite of Me\".\nA production by the Sydney Old Tote Theatre Company was filmed for Australian television in 1972 with John Bell in the title role and Helen Morse as Dockdaisy.\nIn spring 2026, the Royal Shakespeare Company will present a new version by Stephen Sharkey and directed by Se\u00e1n Linnen at the Swan Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon starring Mark Gatiss in the title role.\nCritical response.\nAt the time of the first stage production, in Stuttgart, Siegfried Melchinger, a West German critic, called it a \"brilliant miscarriage\", and complained that the play omitted the German people, echoing the complaint of the East German critic Lothar Kusche, who had read the play in manuscript. Brecht's answer was, in part\n\"Ui\" is a \"parable play\", written with the aim of destroying the dangerous respect commonly felt for great killers. The circle described has been deliberately restricted; it is confined to the plane of state, industrialists, Junkers and petty bourgeois. This is enough to achieve the desired objective. The play does not pretend to give a complete account of the historical situation in the 1930s.\nIn his 1992 study, \"Hitler: The F\u00fchrer and the People\", J. P. Stern, a professor of German literature, rejects both \"Arturo Ui\" and Chaplin's \"The Great Dictator\", writing: \"[T]he true nature of [Hitler] is trivialized and obscured rather than illuminated by the antics of Charles Chaplin and the deeply unfunny comedy of Bertolt Brecht.\"\nThe play was listed in 1999 as No. 54 on \"Le Monde\"'s 100 Books of the Century.\nIn popular culture.\nLines from the play are quoted at the end of \"Cross of Iron\", a 1977 drama war film directed by Sam Peckinpah: \"Do not rejoice in his defeat, you men. For though the world has stood up and stopped the bastard, the bitch that bore him is in heat again\".\nIn the final episode of the first season of \"Being Human\", the vampire Herrick quotes the play shortly before the werewolf George kills him: \"The world was almost won by such an ape! The nations put him where his kind belong. But don't rejoice too soon at your escape \u2013 The womb he crawled from is still going strong.\" This mocks the heroes' hopes of stopping his plans for world domination and asserts that the villains' rise to power is inevitable.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "30277", "revid": "49637825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30277", "title": "The Threepenny Opera", "text": "1928 German play with music\nThe Threepenny Opera ( ) is a 1928 German \"play with music\" by Bertolt Brecht, adapted from a translation by Elisabeth Hauptmann of John Gay's 18th-century English ballad opera, \"The Beggar's Opera\", and four ballads by Fran\u00e7ois Villon, with music by Kurt Weill. Although there is debate as to how much contribution Hauptmann might have made to the libretto, Brecht is usually listed as sole author and Hauptmann as the sole translator, which was probably an unfair oversimplification typical of the time.\nThe work offers a socialist critique of the capitalist world. It opened on 31 August 1928 at Berlin's Theater am Schiffbauerdamm.\nWith influences from jazz and German dance music, songs from \"The Threepenny Opera\" have been widely covered and become standards, most notably \"\" (\"The Ballad of Mack the Knife\") and \"\" (\"Pirate Jenny\").\n\"The Threepenny Opera\" has been performed in the United Kingdom, the United States, France, Russia, Italy, and Hungary. It has also been adapted to film and radio. The German-language version from 1928 entered the public domain in the United States in 2024.\nBackground.\nOrigins.\nIn the winter of 1927\u201328, Elisabeth Hauptmann, Brecht's lover at the time, received a copy of Gay's play from friends in England and, fascinated by the female characters and its critique of the condition of the London poor, began translating it into German. Brecht at first took little interest in her translation project, but in April 1928 he attempted to interest the impresario Ernst Josef Aufricht in a play he was writing called \"Fleischhacker\", which he had, in fact, already promised to another producer. Aufricht was seeking a production to launch his new theatre company at the Theater am Schiffbauerdamm in Berlin, but was not impressed by the sound of \"Fleischhacker\". Brecht immediately proposed a translation of \"The Beggar's Opera\" instead, claiming that he himself had been translating it . He delivered Hauptmann's translation to Aufricht, who immediately signed a contract for it. Brecht proposed Weill to write the music, and spent the next four months writing the libretto. \nBrecht used four songs by the French poet Fran\u00e7ois Villon. Rather than translate the French himself, he used the translations by &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;K. L. Ammer (Karl Anton Klammer), the same source he had been using since his earliest plays.\nThe first act of both works begins with the same melody (\"Peachum's Morning Chorale\"/\"An Old Woman Clothed In Gray\"), but that is the only material Weill borrowed from the melodies Johann Christoph Pepusch arranged for \"The Beggar's Opera\". The title \"Die Dreigroschenoper\" was determined only a week before the opening; it had been previously announced as simply \"The Beggar's Opera\" (in English), with the subtitle \"Die Luden-Oper\" (\"The Pimp's Opera\").\nWriting in 1929, Weill made the political and artistic intents of the work clear:\nWith the \"Dreigroschenoper\" we reach a public which either did not know us at all or thought us incapable of captivating listeners ... Opera was founded as an aristocratic form of art ... If the framework of opera is unable to withstand the impact of the age, then this framework must be destroyed ... In the \"Dreigroschenoper\", reconstruction was possible insofar as here we had a chance of starting from scratch.\nWeill claimed at the time that \"music cannot further the action of the play or create its background\", but achieves its proper value when it interrupts the action at the right moments.\"\nMusic.\nWeill's score shows the influence of jazz and German dance music of the time. The orchestration involves a small ensemble with a good deal of doubling-up on instruments (in the original performances, for example, some 7 players covered a total of 23 instrumental parts, though modern performances typically use a few more players).\nPremieres.\nGermany.\n\"The Threepenny Opera\" was first performed at the Theater am Schiffbauerdamm in 1928 on a set designed by Caspar Neher. Despite an initially poor reception, it became a great success, playing 400 times in the next two years. The performance was a springboard for one of the best known interpreters of Brecht and Weill's work, Lotte Lenya, who was married to Weill. The production became a great favourite of Berlin's \"smart set\" \u2014 Count Harry Kessler recorded in his diary meeting at the performance an ambassador and a director of the Dresdner Bank (and their wives), and concluded \"One simply has to have been there.\"\nCritics did not fail to notice that Brecht had included the four Villon songs translated by Ammer. Brecht responded by saying that he had \"a fundamental laxity in questions of literary property.\"\nBy 1933, when Weill and Brecht were forced to leave Germany by the Nazi seizure of power, the play had been translated into 18 languages and performed more than 10,000 times on European stages.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, the first fully staged performance was given on 9 February 1956, under Berthold Goldschmidt, although there had been a concert performance in 1933, and a semi-staged performance on 28 July 1938. In between, on 8 February 1935 Edward Clark conducted the first British broadcast of the work. It received scathing reviews from Ernest Newman and other critics. But the most savage criticism came from Weill himself, who described it privately as \"the worst performance imaginable \u2026 the whole thing was completely misunderstood\". But his criticisms seem to have been for the concept of the piece as a Germanised version of \"The Beggar's Opera\", rather than for Clark's conducting of it, of which Weill made no mention.\nUnited States.\nAmerica was introduced to the work by the film version of G. W. Pabst, which opened in New York in 1931.\nThe first American production, adapted into English by Gifford Cochran and Jerrold Krimsky and staged by Francesco von Mendelssohn, featured Robert Chisholm as Macheath. It opened on Broadway at the Empire Theatre, on April 13, 1933, and closed after 12 performances. Mixed reviews praised the music but slammed the production, with the critic Gilbert Gabriel calling it \"a dreary enigma\".\nFrance.\nA French version produced by Gaston Baty and written by Ninon Steinhof and Andr\u00e9 Mauprey was presented in October 1930 at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Montparnasse in Paris. It was rendered as '; (', or \"four pennies\" being the idiomatically equivalent French expression for \"Threepenny\").\nRussia.\nIn 1930 the work premiered in Moscow at the Kamerny Theatre, directed by Alexander Tairov. It was the only one of Brecht's works to be performed in Russia during his lifetime. \"Izvestia\" disapproved: \"It is high time that our theatres ceased playing homage to petit-bourgeois bad taste and instead turned to more relevant themes.\"\nItaly.\nThe first Italian production, titled \"L'opera da tre soldi\" and directed by Giorgio Strehler, premiered at the Piccolo Teatro in Milan on 27 February 1956 in the presence of Bertolt Brecht. The cast included: Tino Carraro (Mackie), Mario Carotenuto (Peachum), Marina Bonfigli (Polly), Milly (Jenny), Enzo Tarascio (Chief of Police). The conductor was Bruno Maderna. Set designs were by Luciano Damiani and Teo Otto; costume design by Ezio Frigerio.\nHungary.\nThe first Hungarian performance of the play was at the Comedy Theatre of Budapest (V\u00edgsz\u00ednh\u00e1z), on 6 September 1930. It was titled \"A koldus oper\u00e1ja\", which is a reference to Gay's original opera. The play was translated by Jen\u0151 Heltai, who mixed Weill and Pepusch' s music, and also Brecht and Gay's texts. The director was Ern\u0151 Szabolcs. The cast included P\u00e1l J\u00e1vor (Mackie), Franciska Gaal (Polly), Ger\u0151 M\u00e1ly (Peachum) and Ella Gombasz\u00f6gi (Mrs. Peachum).\nSynopsis.\nOverview.\nSet in Victorian London, the play focuses on Macheath, an amoral antihero who leads a criminal gang, committing robbery, arson, rape and murder.\nMacheath (\"Mackie,\" or \"Mack the Knife\") marries Polly Peachum. This displeases her father, who controls the beggars of London, and he endeavours to have Macheath hanged. His attempts are hindered by the fact that the Chief of Police, Tiger Brown, is Macheath's old army comrade. Still, Peachum exerts his influence and eventually gets Macheath arrested and sentenced to hang. Macheath escapes this fate via a \"deus ex machina\" moments before the execution when, in an unrestrained parody of a happy ending, a messenger from the Queen arrives to pardon Macheath and grant him the title of baron. The details of the original 1928 text have often been substantially modified in later productions.\nA draft narration by Brecht for a concert performance begins: \"You are about to hear an opera for beggars. Since this opera was intended to be as splendid as only beggars can imagine, and yet cheap enough for beggars to be able to watch, it is called the \"Threepenny Opera\".\"\nPrologue.\nA street singer entertains the crowd with the illustrated murder ballad or B\u00e4nkelsang, titled \"Die Moritat von Mackie Messer\" (\"Ballad of Mack the Knife\"). As the song concludes, a well-dressed man leaves the crowd and crosses the stage. This is Macheath, alias \"Mack the Knife\".\nAct 1.\nThe story begins in the shop of Jonathan Jeremiah Peachum, the boss of London's beggars, who outfits and trains the beggars in return for a slice of their takings from begging. In the first scene, the extent of Peachum's iniquity is immediately exposed. Filch, a new beggar, is obliged to bribe his way into the profession and agree to pay over to Peachum 50 percent of whatever he made; the previous day he had been severely beaten up for begging within the area of jurisdiction of Peachum's protection racket.\nAfter finishing with the new man, Peachum becomes aware that his grown daughter Polly did not return home the previous night. Peachum, who sees his daughter as his own private property, concludes that she has become involved with Macheath. This does not suit Peachum at all, and he becomes determined to thwart this relationship and destroy Macheath.\nThe scene shifts to an empty stable where Macheath himself is preparing to marry Polly once his gang has stolen and brought all the necessary food and furnishings. No vows are exchanged, but Polly is satisfied, and everyone sits down to a banquet. Since none of the gang members can provide fitting entertainment, Polly gets up and sings \"Seer\u00e4uberjenny\", a revenge fantasy in which she is a scullery maid turning pirate queen to order the execution of her bosses and customers. The gang becomes nervous when the Chief of Police, Tiger Brown, arrives, but it's all part of the act; Brown had served with Mack in England's colonial wars and had intervened on numerous occasions to prevent the arrest of Macheath over the years. The old friends duet in the \"Kanonen-Song\" (\"Cannon Song\" or \"Army Song\"). In the next scene, Polly returns home and defiantly announces that she has married Macheath by singing the \"Barbarasong\" (\"Barbara Song\"). She stands fast against her parents' anger, but she inadvertently reveals Brown's connections to Macheath which her parents subsequently use to their advantage.\nAct 2.\nPolly warns Macheath that her father will try to have him arrested. He is finally convinced that Peachum has enough influence to do it and makes arrangements to leave London, explaining the details of his bandit \"business\" to Polly so she can manage it in his absence. Before he leaves town, he stops at his favorite brothel, where he sees his ex-lover, Jenny. They sing the \"Zuh\u00e4lterballade\" (\"Pimp's Ballad\", one of the Villon songs translated by Ammer) about their days together, but Macheath doesn't know Mrs Peachum has bribed Jenny to turn him in. Despite Brown's apologies, there's nothing he can do, and Macheath is dragged away to jail. After he sings the \"Ballade vom angenehmen Leben\" (\"Ballad of the Pleasant Life\"), another Villon/Ammer song, another girlfriend, Lucy (Brown's daughter) and Polly show up at the same time, setting the stage for a nasty argument that builds to the \"Eifersuchtsduett\" (\"Jealousy Duet\"). After Polly leaves, Lucy engineers Macheath's escape. When Mr Peachum finds out, he confronts Brown and threatens him, telling him that he will unleash all of his beggars during Queen Victoria's coronation parade, ruining the ceremony and costing Brown his job.\nAct 3.\nJenny comes to the Peachums' shop to demand her money for the betrayal of Macheath, which Mrs Peachum refuses to pay. Jenny reveals that Macheath is at Suky Tawdry's house. When Brown arrives, determined to arrest Peachum and the beggars, he is horrified to learn that the beggars are already in position on the parade route and only Mr Peachum can stop them. To placate Peachum, Brown's only option is to arrest Macheath and have him executed. In the next scene, Macheath is back in jail and desperately trying to raise a sufficient bribe to get out again, even as the gallows are being assembled.\nSoon it becomes clear that neither Polly nor the gang members can, or are willing to, raise any money, and Macheath prepares to die. He laments his fate and poses the 'Marxist' questions: \"What's picking a lock compared to buying shares? What's breaking into a bank compared to founding one? What's murdering a man compared to employing one?\" (These questions did not appear in the original version of the work, but first appeared in the musical \"Happy End\", another Brecht/Weill/Hauptmann collaboration, in 1929 \u2013 they may in fact have been written not by Brecht, but by Hauptmann).\nMacheath asks everyone for forgiveness (\"Grave Inscription\"). Then a sudden and intentionally comical reversal: Peachum announces that in this opera mercy will prevail over justice and that a messenger on horseback will arrive (\"Walk to the Gallows\"); Brown arrives as that messenger and announces that Macheath has been pardoned by the queen and granted a title, a castle and a pension. The cast then sings the Finale, which ends with a plea that wrongdoing not be punished too harshly as life is harsh enough.\nMusical numbers.\nPrelude.\n11. Ouverture\n12. Die Moritat von Mackie Messer (\"The Ballad of Mack the Knife\" \u2013 Street singer)\nAct 1.\n13. Morgenchoral des Peachum (Peachum's Morning Choral \u2013 Peachum, Mrs Peachum)\n14. Anstatt-dass-Song (The \"Instead of\" Song \u2013 Peachum, Mrs Peachum)\n15. Hochzeits-Lied (Wedding Song \u2013 Four Gangsters)\n16. Seer\u00e4uberjenny (Pirate Jenny \u2013 Polly)\n17. Kanonen-Song (Cannon Song \u2013 Macheath, Brown)\n18. Liebeslied (Love Song \u2013 Polly, Macheath)\n19. Barbarasong (Barbara Song \u2013 Polly)\n10. I. Dreigroschenfinale (First Threepenny Finale \u2013 Polly, Peachum, Mrs Peachum)\nAct 2.\n11.a Melodram (Melodrama \u2013 Macheath)\n11a. Polly's Lied (Polly's Song \u2013 Polly)\n12.a Ballade von der sexuellen H\u00f6rigkeit (Ballad of Sexual Dependency \u2013 Mrs Peachum)\n13.a Zuh\u00e4lterballade (Pimp's Ballad or Tango Ballad \u2013 Jenny, Macheath)\n14.a Ballade vom angenehmen Leben (Ballad of the Pleasant Life \u2013 Macheath)\n15.a Eifersuchtsduett (Jealousy Duet \u2013 Lucy, Polly)\n15b. Arie der Lucy (Aria of Lucy \u2013 Lucy)\n16.a II. Dreigroschenfinale (Second Threepenny Finale \u2013 Macheath, Mrs Peachum, Chorus)\nAct 3.\n17.a Lied von der Unzul\u00e4nglichkeit menschlichen Strebens (Song of the Insufficiency of Human Struggling \u2013 Peachum)\n17a. Reminiszenz (Reminiscence)\n18.a Salomonsong (Solomon Song \u2013 Jenny)\n19.a Ruf aus der Gruft (Call from the Grave \u2013 Macheath)\n20.a Grabschrift (Grave Inscription \u2013 Macheath)\n20a. Gang zum Galgen (Walk to the Gallows \u2013 Peachum)\n21.a III. Dreigroschenfinale (Third Threepenny Finale \u2013 Brown, Mrs Peachum, Peachum, Macheath, Polly, Chorus)\nReception.\nOpera or musical theatre?\nThe ambivalent nature of \"The Threepenny Opera\", derived from an 18th-century ballad opera but conceived in terms of 20th-century musical theatre, has led to discussion as to how it can best be characterised. According to critic and musicologist Hans Keller, the work is \"the weightiest possible lowbrow opera for highbrows and the most full-blooded highbrow musical for lowbrows\".\nThe Weill authority Stephen Hinton notes that \"generic ambiguity is a key to the work's enduring success\", and points out the work's deliberate hybrid status: For Weill [\"The Threepenny Opera\"] was not just 'the most consistent reaction to [Richard] Wagner'; it also marked a positive step towards an operatic reform. By explicitly and implicitly shunning the more earnest traditions of the opera house, Weill created a mixed form which incorporated spoken theatre and popular musical idioms. Parody of operatic convention \u2013 of Romantic lyricism and happy endings \u2013 constitutes a central device.\n\"Mack the Knife\".\nThe work's opening and closing lament, \"Die Moritat von Mackie Messer,\" was written just before the Berlin premiere, when actor Harald Paulsen (Macheath) threatened to quit if his character did not receive an introduction; this creative emergency resulted in what would become the work's most popular song, later translated into English by Marc Blitzstein as \"Mack the Knife\", and now a jazz standard that Louis Armstrong, Bobby Darin, Ella Fitzgerald, Sonny Rollins, Frank Sinatra, Peggy Lee, Michael Bubl\u00e9, Robbie Williams and countless others have performed. In 2015, the Library of Congress added the recordings of \"Mack the Knife\" by Louis Armstrong and Bobby Darin to the National Recording Registry. It has been named one of the hundred most popular songs of the twentieth century.\nIn 1986, American fast-food chain McDonald's launched an advertising campaign featuring a new mascot \"Mac Tonight\" loosely based on the lyrics \"Mack the Knife\" featuring a parody of the song. The advert, which was associated with a 10% increase in later diners in some Californian restaurants at the time, led to a lawsuit by Bobby Darin's son, Dodd Mitchell Darin. The lawsuit concerned the parody created by McDonald's stated that it was in violation of copyright law. The case was settled outside of court without requiring a court hearing. Following this the mascot was mostly dropped from McDonalds marketing.\n\"Pirate Jenny\".\n\"Pirate Jenny\" is another well-known song from the work, which has since been recorded by Nina Simone, Judy Collins, Tania Tsanaklidou, and Marc Almond, among others. In addition, Steeleye Span recorded it under the alternative title \"The Black Freighter\". Recently, the drag queen Sasha Velour has made an adaptation by the same name for an installment of One Dollar Drags, an anthology of short films.\n\"The Second Threepenny Finale\".\nUnder the title \"What Keeps Mankind Alive?\", this number has been recorded by the Pet Shop Boys on the B-side of their 1993 single \"Can You Forgive Her?\", and on two albums. Tom Waits covered it on two albums, and William S. Burroughs performed it in a 1994 documentary.\nRevivals.\nGermany.\nAfter World War II, the first stage performance in Berlin was a rough production of \"The Threepenny Opera\" at the Theater am Schiffbauerdamm. Wolf Von Eckardt described the 1945 performance where audience members climbed over ruins and passed through a tunnel to reach the open-air auditorium deprived of its ceiling. In addition to the smell of dead bodies trapped beneath the rubble, Eckardt recollects the actors themselves were \"haggard, starved, [and] in genuine rags. Many of the actors ... had only just been released from concentration camp. They sang not well, but free.\" Barrie Kosky produced the work again at the Theater am Schiffbauerdamm in 2021. The production travelled to the Ruhrfestspiele in 2022, the Internationaal Theater Amsterdam, Teatro Argentina, Rome, the Edinburgh International Festival in 2023, to the 2024 Adelaide Festival and the Brooklyn Academy of Music in 2025.\nFrance.\nThe Pabst film \"The Threepenny Opera\" was shown in its French version in 1931. In 1937 there was a production by Ernst Josef Aufricht at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'\u00c9toile which failed, though Brecht himself had attended rehearsals. The work was not revived in France until after World War II.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn London, West End and Off-West End revivals include:\nIn 2014, the Robert David MacDonald and Jeremy Sams translation (previously used in 1994 at the Donmar Warehouse) toured the UK, presented by the Graeae Theatre Company with Nottingham Playhouse, New Wolsey Theatre Ipswich, Birmingham Repertory Theatre and West Yorkshire Playhouse.\nUnited States.\nIn 1946, four performances of the work were given at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, and Northwestern University gave six performances in 1948 in Evanston, Illinois. In 1952, Leonard Bernstein conducted a concert performance of the work at the Brandeis University Creative Arts Festival in the Adolph Ullman Amphitheatre, Waltham, Massachusetts, to an audience of nearly 5,000. Marc Blitzstein, who translated the work, narrated.\nAt least five Broadway and Off-Broadway revivals have been mounted in New York City.\nRegional productions include:\nFilm adaptations.\nGerman director G. W. Pabst made a 1931 German- and French-language version simultaneously, a common practice in the early days of sound films.\nAnother version, \"Die Dreigroschenoper\", was directed by Wolfgang Staudte in West Germany in 1963, starring Curd J\u00fcrgens as Macheath, Hildegard Knef as Jenny, Gert Fr\u00f6be as Peachum, and Sammy Davis Jr. as Moritat singer.\nIn 1989 an American version (renamed \"Mack the Knife\") was released, directed by Menahem Golan, with Raul Julia as Macheath, Richard Harris as Peachum, Julie Walters as Mrs Peachum, Bill Nighy as Tiger Brown, Julia Migenes as Jenny, and Roger Daltrey as the Street Singer.\nRadio adaptations.\nIn October 1978, BBC Radio 3 broadcast a complete radio production of the Ralph Manheim/John Willett translation directed by Ian Cotterell and Elaine Padmore to celebrate the 50th anniversary of \"The Threepenny Opera\" 's publication. The cast included Paul Bentley as Macheath, Sarah Badel as Polly (with her songs being sung by Elaine Padmore), Johanna Peters as Mrs Peachum, Harold Kasket as Mr. Peachum, Jan Waters as Lucy, Julia McKenzie as Jenny, Peter Pratt as Tiger Brown, Roderick Horn as the Ballad Singer and John Hollis as The Narrator.\nIn 2009, BBC Radio 3 in collaboration with the BBC Philharmonic broadcast a complete radio production of the Michael Feingold translation directed by Nadia Molinari with the music performed by the BBC Philharmonic. The cast included Joseph Millson as Macheath, Elen Rhys as Polly/Whore, Ruth Alexander-Rubin as Mrs Peachum/Whore, Zubin Varla as Mr. Peachum/Rev. Kimball, Rosalie Craig as Lucy/Whore, Ute Gfrerer as Jenny, Conrad Nelson as Tiger Brown and HK Gruber (who also conducted the orchestra) as the Ballad Singer.\nRecordings.\nRecordings are in German, unless otherwise specified.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30278", "revid": "29695403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30278", "title": "Terence Hill", "text": "Italian actor, director, producer (born 1939)\nTerence Hill (born Mario Girotti; 29 March 1939) is an Italian actor, film director, screenwriter and film producer. He began his career as a child actor and gained international fame for starring roles in action and comedy films, many with his long-time film partner and friend Bud Spencer. During the height of his popularity, Hill was among Italy's highest-paid actors.\nHis most widely seen films include comic and standard spaghetti Westerns, some based on popular novels by German author Karl May about the Wild West. Of these, the most famous are \"Lo chiamavano Trinit\u00e0\" (\"They Call Me Trinity\", 1970); ...\"continuavano a chiamarlo Trinit\u00e0\" (\"Trinity Is Still My Name\", 1971), the highest grossing Italian film at that time; and \"Il mio nome \u00e8 Nessuno\" (\"My Name Is Nobody\", 1973), co-starring Henry Fonda. Hill also went on to a successful television career in Italy, most notably playing the title character in the long-running Rai 1 series \"Don Matteo\" from 2000 until 2022.\nEarly life.\nHill was born on 29 March 1939 in Venice, Italy. Hill's mother, Hildegard Girotti (\"n\u00e9e\" Thieme), was from Dresden, Germany; his father, Girolamo Girotti, was Italian, and a chemist by occupation. During his childhood, Hill lived in the small town of Lommatzsch, Saxony. As a child, he experienced the bombing of Dresden, which was traumatic for him. He was there up to the End of World War II in Europe.\nCareer.\nChild actor.\nHe was discovered at the age of 12 by Italian filmmaker Dino Risi at a swimming meet, and he became a child actor, appearing in Risi's \"Vacation with a Gangster\" (1951) as Gianni, the orphan gang leader. \"They were looking for a boy gang leader and they found me\", he later said.\nHe had small roles in \"Voice of Silence\" (1953) with Jean Marais, \"Too Young for Love\" (1953), and \"It Happened in the Park\" (1953). He was in \"Golden Vein\" (1954) with M\u00e4rta Tor\u00e9n and Richard Basehart, \"The Abandoned\" (1955) and \"Folgore Division\" (1955).\nLeading man.\nGirotti had his first lead in \"Guaglione\" (1956). He could also be seen in \"Mamma sconosciuta\" (1956), \"I vagabondi delle stelle\" (1956), \"La grande strada azzurra\" (1956) with Yves Montand and Alida Valli, and \"Lazzarella\" (1957).\nGirotti did \"Anna of Brooklyn\" (1958) with Gina Lollobrigida, \"The Sword and the Cross\" (1958) with Yvonne de Carlo (playing Lazarus of Bethany), and a TV version of \"The Picture of Dorian Gray\" (1958).\nHe had support parts in \"Il padrone delle ferriere\" (1959) with Virna Lisi, \"Juke box - Urli d'amore\" (1959), and \"Hannibal\" (1959) with Victor Mature and Carlo Pedersoli, who would later become known as Bud Spencer. Girotti had the lead roles in \"Spavaldi e innamorati\" (1959) and \"Cerasella\" (1959), a teen comedy.\nIt was back to support roles with \"Carthage in Flames\" (1960), \"Un militare e mezzo\" (1960), and \"The Story of Joseph and His Brethren\" (1961) with Geoffrey Horne and Robert Morley, directed by Irving Rapper.\nGirotti had support parts in \"The Wonders of Aladdin\" (1961) with Donald O'Connor and directed by Henry Levin and Mario Bava, \"Pecado de amor\" (1961), \"Seven Seas to Calais\" (1962) with Rod Taylor, and \"The Shortest Day\" (1963).\nGirotti secured a substantial supporting role in Luchino Visconti's film epic \"The Leopard\" (1963) alongside Burt Lancaster and Alain Delon, in which he unsuccessfully tries to court the daughter of Lancaster's character. During this time he studied classical literature for three years at an Italian university.\nGermany.\nIn 1964, he returned to Germany and there appeared in a series of Heimatfilme, adventure and Western films, based on novels by German author Karl May. These included \"Last of the Renegades\" (1964) with Lex Barker; three films with Stewart Granger, \"Amongst Vultures\" (1964), \"The Oil Prince\" (1965) and \"Old Surehand\" (1965); \"Shots in 3/4 Time\" (1965); \"Duel at Sundown\" (1965) with Peter Van Eyck; \"Call of the Forest\" (1965), an Austrian movie; \"Die Nibelungen, Teil 1 - Siegfried\" (1965) and \"Die Nibelungen, Teil 2 - Kriemhilds Rache\" (1967).\nIn 1967, he returned to Italy to make \"Io non protesto, io amo\" (1967), co starring Caterina Caselli.\nPartnership with Bud Spencer.\nGirotti then appeared alongside Bud Spencer (then known as Carlo Pedersoli) in Giuseppe Colizzi's spaghetti Western \"God Forgives... I Don't!\" (1967). (Although Girotti appeared in the same movie as Pedersoli in \"Hannibal\" in 1959, they did not meet during filming.) At the time, cast and crew in Westerns frequently adopted American names to give the film a better chance of selling in non-Italian speaking countries; Girotti changed his name to \"Terence Hill\". He picked the name from a list of 20 he was given, the story about using his wife's name was a publicity idea. The film was a huge hit \u2013 the most popular film of the year in Italy \u2013 and established him as a star.\nHill followed it with a \"musicarello\", \"The Crazy Kids of the War\" (1967) with Rita Pavone, then did a Western, \"Django, Prepare a Coffin\" (1968) for director Ferdinando Baldi, a sequel to \"Django\" (1966) with Hill playing the role done by Franco Nero in the original; it co-starred Horst Frank and George Eastman (and would be featured, much later, at the 64th Venice Film Festival, in 2007).\nHill was a leading man in a musical Western \"Crazy Westerners\" (1968), again with Rita Pavone, then was reunited with Spencer in \"Ace High\" (1968), a sequel to \"God Forgives\" with a cast including several American actors such as Eli Wallach. Hill did \"The Tough and the Mighty\" (1968), a biopic of Graziano Mesina, then a second sequel to \"God Forgives\", \"Boot Hill\" (1969), co-starring Spencer and Woody Strode.\nHill did \"The Wind's Fierce\" (1970) then had a huge hit with Spencer with the comedy Western \"They Call Me Trinity\" (1971). Hill did a swashbuckler, \"Blackie the Pirate\" (1971), in which Spencer had a small role; they reteamed properly for a \"Trinity\" sequel, \"Trinity Is Still My Name\" (1972). It was even more popular than the original and had a successful release in the USA.\nHill did a modern-day crime drama \"The Hassled Hooker\" (1972) and a comedy Western without Spencer, \"Man of the East\" (1972). He and Spencer did \"... All the Way, Boys!\" (1972), their first non-Western though it was still a comic adventure film.\nInternational films.\nHill has stated in interviews that \"My Name Is Nobody\" (1973), in which he co-starred with Henry Fonda, is his personal favorite of all his films. The film was based on an idea by Sergio Leone.\nHill again starred with Spencer in \"Watch Out, We're Mad\" (1974) and \"Two Missionaries\" (1974) then without him in the spaghetti Western \"A Genius, Two Partners and a Dupe\" (1975). He moved from Italy to live in the US and settled in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, in the Berkshires.\nDino De Laurentiis cast Hill in his first English-language film, \"Mr. Billion\" (1977), directed by Jonathan Kaplan for 20th Century Fox, co-starring Valerie Perrine and Jackie Gleason. It was a box office flop.\nAfter returning to Italy for \"Crime Busters\" (1977) with Spencer, Hill then made another English-language movie, \"March or Die\" (1977), an $8 million French Foreign Legion tale for Lew Grade, co starring Gene Hackman and Catherine Deneuve. It was a box office disappointment.\nDespite his fluency in Italian and English, Hill was usually dubbed by other actors in both languages. In the Italian versions of his films, various actors provided his voice until the late 1960s, where he was primarily dubbed by Sergio Graziani; he was voiced by Pino Locchi from 1970 to 1983, and by Michele Gammino from 1983 to 1996. For English dubs, Lloyd Battista dubbed him in six films, including the \"Cat Stevens and Hutch Bessy\" trilogy, while Roger Browne dubbed him in most of his early 1970s films (\"They Call Me Trinity\" to \"A Genius, Two Partners and a Dupe\"); from \"Mr. Billion\" onward, Hill dubbed his own English voice.\nHill and Spencer starred in \"Odds and Evens\" (1978), \"I'm for the Hippopotamus\" (1979), \"Who Finds a Friend Finds a Treasure\" (1981), and \"Go for It\" (1983). Without Spencer, Hill made \"Org\" (1979), which he also produced, and \"Super Fuzz\" (1980).\nDirector.\nHill did \"The World of Don Camillo\" (1984), which he also produced and directed. He teamed with Spencer for \"Double Trouble\" (1984), and \"Miami Supercops\" (1985), then did \"They Call Me Renegade\" (1987), based on a story by Hill.\nTelevision.\nHill turned director for \"Lucky Luke\" (1991) in which he starred and that was shot in the United States; it led to a TV series of the same name.\nHe reunited with Spencer one last time for \"Troublemakers\" (1994) which Hill also directed. He did \"Virtual Weapon\" (1997) with Marvelous Marvin Hagler.\nIn 2000, he landed the leading role in the Italian television series \"Don Matteo\" (2000\u2013ongoing), about an inspirational parish priest who assists the Carabinieri in solving crimes local to his community. This role earned Hill an international \"Outstanding Actor of the Year\" award at the 42nd Monte Carlo Television Festival, alongside ones for the series, and for producer Alessandro Jacchia at that festival. Hill left Don Matteo in 2022 after thirteen seasons, last appearing in 2024.\nDuring the series' run he appeared in TV movies \"L'uomo che sognava con le aquile\" (2009), \"Riding the Dark\" (2009), \"Doc West\" (2009), and \"Triggerman\" (2009); he co-directed the last two.\nIn the summer of 2010, Hill filmed another Italian television series for the Italian state television channel Rai Uno, this time entitled \"Un passo dal cielo\" (\"One Step from Heaven\"), playing a local chief of the state foresters in the region of Alto Adige, with a second season filmed in 2012.\nHill directed the 2018 film \"My Name Is Thomas\", which he also appeared in. The same year, the co-op beat 'em up videogame \"\" was released.\nPersonal life.\nHill is married to Lori Hill (\"n\u00e9e\" Zwicklbauer) and they have two sons. Ross was killed in a car accident in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, U.S., in 1990, while Hill was preparing to film \"Lucky Luke\" (1991) on the Bonanza Creek Ranch near Santa Fe, New Mexico.\nHe holds American citizenship, and in November 2022, he also attained a German citizenship by descent from the German consulate-general in Los Angeles without requiring a naturalization test.\nAwards.\nOn 8 October 2016 Hill received the Tabernas de cine Award at Fort Bravo in Almer\u00eda.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30279", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30279", "title": "Techno-democracy", "text": ""}
{"id": "30280", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30280", "title": "The Hound of the Baskervilles", "text": "1902 crime detective novel by Arthur Conan Doyle\nThe Hound of the Baskervilles is the third of the four crime novels by British writer Arthur Conan Doyle featuring the detective Sherlock Holmes. Originally serialised in \"The Strand Magazine\" from August 1901 to April 1902, it is set largely in Dartmoor, Devon, in England's West Country and follows Holmes and Watson investigating the legend of a fearsome, diabolical hound of supernatural origin. This was the first appearance of Holmes since his apparent death in \"The Final Problem\", and the success of \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" led to the character's eventual revival.\nOne of the most famous stories ever written, in 2003, the book was listed as number 128 of 200 on the BBC's The Big Read poll of the UK's \"best-loved novel\". In 1999, a poll of \"Sherlockians\" ranked it as the best of the four Holmes novels.\nPlot.\nIn London, 1889, Dr. James Mortimer asks for the aid of Sherlock Holmes, beginning by reading him a legend that has run in the Baskerville family since the time of the English Civil War, when Sir Hugo Baskerville kidnapped a farmer's daughter. When the girl escaped, Hugo pursued her, swearing a curse upon himself in his mad rage. Hugo's companions later found the girl dead of fear, and Hugo killed by a demonic hound. The dog is said to have haunted Dartmoor ever since, causing the premature death of many Baskervilles.\nMortimer explains that his friend, the philanthropic baronet Sir Charles Baskerville, took the legend very seriously. Sir Charles, who had a weak heart, had retired to Baskerville Hall in 1887, after amassing a fortune in South Africa. When the baronet's body was later found in a yew alley, with an expression of horror on his face, the death was attributed to cardiac arrest; however, Mortimer had secretly noticed large canine paw prints near the body. Sir Charles had been the eldest of three Baskerville brothers, and Sir Henry, the Canadian son of the deceased second brother, is Sir Charles' heir. The rather immoral third brother, Rodger, died of yellow fever in South America in 1876. Mortimer, the executor of Sir Charles's will, fears it might not be wise to bring Sir Henry to Dartmoor, in view of the possible supernatural dangers. \nThough Holmes dismisses the legend as a fairy-tale, he meets with Sir Henry when the new baronet arrives in London. It transpires that strange things are already happening to Sir Henry; one of his old boots has been stolen, he has received an anonymous letter warning him against the moor, and someone has been following him in a hansom. Mortimer reveals that Sir Henry's inheritance is about \n\u00a3740,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023); in view of these high stakes, Holmes asks Watson to act as Sir Henry's bodyguard, and to investigate things in Dartmoor.\nUpon arriving in Dartmoor, Watson, Mortimer and Sir Henry learn that Selden, a convicted murderer, has escaped from Princetown Prison and is loose on the moor. At Baskerville Hall, they are introduced to John and Eliza Barrymore, the married butler and housekeeper. Watson sends detailed accounts of his investigations to Holmes, particularly focusing on the neighbourhood residents. The Stapleton siblings stand out; Jack is over-friendly, drops hints about the hound, and warns Watson against attempting to cross the dangerous Grimpen Mire. His sister Beryl, without his knowledge, repeatedly tries to get Sir Henry to flee back to London. Another neighbour, Mr. Frankland, is a perpetual busybody and troublemaker, including threatening to bring a lawsuit against Dr. Mortimer for excavating nearby barrows. Sir Henry falls in love with Beryl Stapleton, though her brother strongly objects to the romance.\nBarrymore repeatedly sends candlelight signals to someone on the moor. Following Barrymore one night, Watson and Sir Henry discover that Selden is Mrs. Barrymore's younger brother, and that she and her husband have been leaving food out for him. During an unsuccessful attempt to catch Selden, Watson sees a strange man standing on a tor. \nWatson and Sir Henry learn from Barrymore that Frankland's estranged daughter Laura had once written to Sir Charles. After a failed attempt to interrogate Laura, Watson investigates the man on the tor and learns that it is Holmes, who has been investigating in secret to hide his direct involvement. Holmes reveals that Jack Stapleton is the murderer, and Beryl is actually his wife, abused and forced into posing as his sister; however, Holmes does not have enough proof to convince the authorities.\nHolmes and Watson hear a man fleeing from a baying hound, and later find that Selden has fallen from a cliff and died. Barrymore had given Selden Sir Henry's discarded clothes, and Stapleton's hound, having been set on the trail with Sir Henry's stolen boot, had confused the scent. Later, after dining at Baskerville Hall, Holmes reveals to Watson that the portrait of Sir Hugo Baskerville bears a remarkable resemblance to Stapleton.\nHolmes decides to use an unwitting Sir Henry as bait; he orders him to visit Stapleton that evening, and then walk across the moor on foot. Holmes and Watson then pretend to leave for London, but instead hide near Stapleton's house with Inspector Lestrade of Scotland Yard. Despite thick fog, they manage to kill the hound when Stapleton unleashes it after Sir Henry. They go to Stapleton's house to arrest him, but find he has bound his wife to a column and fled into the mire, presumably drowning. Holmes remarks that he considers Stapleton one of his most cunning adversaries.\nSir Henry and Dr. Mortimer depart on a sea voyage, to repair the baronet's shattered nerves. After they leave, Holmes explains to Watson that Jack Stapleton was really Rodger Baskerville II, the secret son of Sir Charles' youngest brother. A physical and spiritual throwback to Sir Hugo Baskerville, Rodger II had bought a savage black hound and painted it with phosphorus to make it look diabolical; either by fright or direct attack, he hoped the dog would remove all the other heirs so that he could inherit the Baskerville fortune. He had promised Laura marriage, and convinced her to lure Sir Charles out of his house on the night of the murder. Unable to save Sir Charles, Beryl had sent the anonymous letter to Sir Henry to thwart her husband's further schemes.\nOrigins and background.\nSir Arthur Conan Doyle wrote this story shortly after returning to his home, Undershaw in Surrey, from South Africa, where he had worked as a volunteer physician at the Langman Field Hospital in Bloemfontein during the Second Boer War. He had not written about Sherlock Holmes in eight years, having killed off the character in the 1893 story \"The Final Problem\". Although \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" is set before the latter events, two years later Doyle brought Holmes back for good, explaining in \"The Adventure of the Empty House\" that Holmes had faked his own death. As a result, the character of Holmes occupies a liminal space between being alive and dead, which further adds to the gothic elements of the novel.\nDoyle was assisted with the legend of the hound and local colour by a \"Daily Express\" journalist named Bertram Fletcher Robinson (1870\u20131907), with whom he explored Dartmoor in June 1901; Robinson received a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 royalty payment that amounted to over 500 pounds by the end of 1901 ().\nDoyle may also have been inspired by his own earlier story (written and published in 1898) of a terrifying giant wolf, \"The King of the Foxes\".\nInspiration.\nThe author\u2019s ideas came from the legend of Squire Richard Cabell of Brook Hall, in the parish of Buckfastleigh, Devon, which was the fundamental inspiration for the Baskerville tale of a hellish hound and a cursed country squire. Cabell's tomb survives in the town of Buckfastleigh.\nCabell lived for hunting, and was what in those days was described as a \"monstrously evil man\". He gained this reputation, among other things, for immorality and having sold his soul to the Devil. There was also a rumour that he had murdered his wife, Elizabeth Fowell, a daughter of Sir Edmund Fowell, 1st Baronet (1593\u20131674), of Fowelscombe. On 5 July 1677, he died and was buried in the sepulchre. The night of his interment saw a phantom pack of hounds come baying across the moor to howl at his tomb. From that night on, he could be found leading the phantom pack across the moor, usually on the anniversary of his death. If the pack were not out hunting, they could be found ranging around his grave howling and shrieking. To try to lay the soul to rest, the villagers built a large building around the tomb, and to be doubly sure a huge slab was placed over the top.\nMoreover, Devon's folklore includes tales of a fearsome supernatural dog known as the Yeth hound that Doyle may have heard.\nWeller (2002) believes that Baskerville Hall is based on one of three possible houses on or near Dartmoor: Fowelscombe in the parish of Ugborough, the seat of the Fowell Baronets; Hayford Hall, near Buckfastleigh (also owned by John King (d.1861) of Fowelscombe) and Brook Hall, in the parish of Buckfastleigh, about two miles east of Hayford, the actual home of Richard Cabell. It has also been claimed that Baskerville Hall is based on a property in Clyro, Wales, built in 1839 by one Thomas Baskerville Mynors Baskerville. The house was formerly named Clyro Court and was renamed Baskerville Hall towards the end of the 19th century. Arthur Conan Doyle was apparently a family friend who often stayed there and may have been aware of a local legend of the hound of the Baskervilles.\nStill other tales claim that Doyle was inspired by a holiday in North Norfolk, where the tale of Black Shuck is well known. The Gothic-revival style Cromer Hall, where Doyle stayed, also closely resembles Doyle's vivid descriptions of Baskerville Hall. Another suggestion is that Archibald Primrose, 5th Earl of Rosebery, whose home was Dalmeny House, told Arthur Conan Doyle that a hound barked mournfully during the night of the death of his wife Hannah, in accordance with a Dalmeny legend that hearing a hound portended a dynastic tragedy.\nJames Lynam Molloy, a friend of Doyle's, and author of \"Love's Old Sweet Song\", married Florence Baskerville, daughter of Henry Baskerville of Crowsley Park, Oxfordshire. The gates to the park had statues of hell hounds, spears through their mouths. Above the lintel there was another statue of a hell hound.\nTechnique.\nThe novel incorporates five plots: the ostensible 'curse' story, the two red-herring subplots concerning Selden and the other stranger living on the moor, the actual events occurring to Baskerville as narrated by Watson, and the hidden plot to be discovered by Holmes. The structure of the novel starting and ending in the familiar setting in London is used to \u2018delimit the uncanny world associated with the Gothic landscape of the moors', with varying degrees of success. Doyle wrote that the novel was originally conceived as a straight 'Victorian creeper' in the style of Le Fanu, with the idea of introducing Holmes as the \"deus ex machina\" arising only later.\nPublication.\n\"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" was first serialised in \"The Strand Magazine\" in 1901. It was well-suited for this type of publication, as individual chapters end in cliffhangers. It was printed in the United Kingdom as a novel in March 1902 by George Newnes Ltd. It was published in the same year in the United States by McClure, Philips &amp; Co.\nOriginal manuscript.\nIn 1902, Doyle's original manuscript of the book was broken up into individual leaves as part of a promotional campaign by Doyle's American publisher \u2013 they were used in window displays by individual booksellers. Out of an estimated 185\u2013190\u00a0leaves, only\u00a037 are known to still exist, including all the leaves from Chapter\u00a011, held by the New York Public Library. Other leaves are owned by university libraries in the United States and by private collectors. Four of the known survivors are in unknown locations, including one that was stolen.\nA newly rediscovered example was sold at auction in 2012 for US$158,500. Another one was sold in 2021 for $423,000. The existence of the 37th leaf became publicly known in 2018; it was put up for auction in 2022, but did not sell.\nAdaptations.\n\"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" has been adapted in various forms of media.\nFilm and television adaptations.\nOver 20\u00a0film and television versions of \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" have been made.\nAudio.\nEdith Meiser adapted the novel as six episodes of the radio series \"The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes\". The episodes aired in February and March\u00a01932, with Richard Gordon as Sherlock Holmes and Leigh Lovell as Dr.\u00a0Watson. Another dramatisation of the story aired in November and December\u00a01936, with Gordon as Holmes and Harry West as Watson.\nThe story was also adapted by Meiser as six episodes of \"The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes\" with Basil Rathbone as Holmes and Nigel Bruce as Watson. The episodes aired in January and February\u00a01941.\nA dramatisation of the novel by Felix Felton aired on the BBC Light Programme in 1958 as part of the 1952\u20131969 radio series, with Carleton Hobbs as Sherlock Holmes and Norman Shelley as Dr.\u00a0Watson. A different production of \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\", also adapted by Felton and starring Hobbs and Shelley with a different supporting cast, aired in 1961 on the BBC Home Service.\nThe novel was adapted as an episode of \"CBS Radio Mystery Theater\". The episode, which aired in 1977, starred Kevin McCarthy as Holmes and Lloyd Battista as Watson.\n\"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" has been adapted for radio for the BBC by Bert Coules on two occasions. The first starred Roger Rees as Holmes, Crawford Logan as Watson and Matt Zimmerman as Sir Henry and was broadcast in 1988 on BBC Radio 4. Following its good reception, Coules proposed further radio adaptations, which eventually led to the 1989\u20131998 radio series of dramatisations of the entire canon, starring Clive Merrison as Holmes and Michael Williams as Watson. The second adaptation of \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\", featuring this pairing, was broadcast in 1998, and also featured Judi Dench as Mrs.\u00a0Hudson and Donald Sinden as Sir\u00a0Charles Baskerville.\nClive Nolan and Oliver Wakeman adapted \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" as a progressive rock album in 2002, with narration by Robert Powell.\n\"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" was adapted as three episodes of the American radio series \"The Classic Adventures of Sherlock Holmes\", with John Patrick Lowrie as Holmes and Lawrence Albert as Watson. The episodes first aired in March\u00a02008.\nIn 2011, Big Finish Productions released their adaptation of the book as part of their second series of Holmes dramas. Holmes was played by Nicholas Briggs, and Watson was played by Richard Earl.\nIn 2014, L.A. Theatre Works released their production, starring Seamus Dever as Holmes, Geoffrey Arend as Watson, James Marsters as Sir\u00a0Henry, Sarah Drew as Beryl Stapleton, Wilson Bethel as Stapleton, Henri Lubatti as Dr.\u00a0Mortimer, Christopher Neame as Sir\u00a0Charles and Frankland, Moira Quirk as Mrs.\u00a0Hudson &amp; Mrs.\u00a0Barrymore, and Darren Richardson as Barrymore.\nIn 2017, Bleak December released an abridged full-cast production for Cadabra Records with Sir Derek Jacobi as Holmes.\nIn 2020, Lions Den Theatre released a new adaptation of the novel written and directed by Keith Morrison on the company's YouTube channel. An early version of the play was performed in various locations around Nova Scotia in 2018.\nIn 2021, Audible released a dramatisation by George Mann and Cavan Scott, starring Colin Salmon as Holmes and Stephen Fry as Watson.\nIn 2022, \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" was adapted and conducted as a \"concert drama\" by Neil Brand, with the music directed by Timothy Brock, and performed by the BBC Symphony Orchestra. Mark Gatiss and Sanjeev Bhaskar played Holmes and Watson, respectively. The production was recorded at the Barbican Hall on 20 December, and was broadcast on BBC Radio 3 on 22 January 2023. A filmed recording of the reading was broadcast for BBC Four on 25 December 2023.\nIn 2025, the podcast Sherlock &amp; Co. adapted the story in a ten-episode adventure called \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\", starring Harry Attwell as Sherlock Holmes, Paul Waggott as Dr. John Watson and Marta da Silva as Mariana \"Mrs. Hudson\" Ametxazurra. Omari Douglas voices Dr. J Mortimer.\nStage.\nProlific playwright Tim Kelly adapted the story for the stage in 1976. One production was at Boston's Theater Loft in 1982.\nIn 2007, Peepolykus Theatre Company premiered a new adaptation of \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" at West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds. Adapted by John Nicholson and Steven Canny, the production involves only three actors and was praised by critics for its physical comedy. Following a UK tour, it transferred to the Duchess Theatre in London's West End. \"The Daily Telegraph\" described it as a \u2018wonderfully delightful spoof\u2019, while \"The Sunday Times\" praised its \u2018mad hilarity that will make you feel quite sane\u2019. This adaptation continues to be presented by both amateur and professional companies around the world.\nStage performances have also been performed in the UK in dramatisations by Joan Knight, Claire Malcolmson, Harry Meacher, and Roger Sansom, among others. Meacher's version has been produced three times, each time with himself the actor playing Holmes.\nKen Ludwig authored an adaptation entitled \"\" which premiered as a co-production at Arena Stage (Washington, D.C.) in January\u00a02015 and McCarter Theatre Center in March 2015.\nIn 2021, an adaption for the stage by Steven Canny and John Nicholson for Peepolykus, directed by Tim Jackson &amp; Lotte Wakeman toured the UK produced by Original Theatre Company and Bolton's Octagon Theatre. It was a continuation the adaptation that was directed by Lotte Wakeman for English Theatre, Frankfurt, Jermyn St Theatre and Octagon, Bolton.\nIn 2022, to commemorate the book's 120th anniversary, a new staging was produced in the form of a live radio play reading, adapted by Martin Parsons, and starring Colin Baker and Terry Molloy as Holmes and Watson. The tour has continued on and off into 2025.\nVideo games.\n\"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" is utilised in the final case in \"\" in which the protagonist teams up with Herlock Sholmes (Sherlock Holmes in the original Japanese version) to investigate mysteries based on various entries in the Holmes chronology. In particular, the manuscript of \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" is a key part of the case.\n\"Sherlock Holmes and the Hound of the Baskervilles\" is a casual game by Frogwares. It departs from the original plot by introducing clear supernatural elements. Despite its non-canonical plot, it received good reviews.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30281", "revid": "1313252914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30281", "title": "Tien Gow", "text": "Chinese gambling games\nTien Gow or Tin Kau () is the name of Chinese gambling games played with either a pair of dice or a set of 32 Chinese dominoes. In these games, Heaven is the top rank of the civil suit, while Nine is the top rank of the military suit. The civil suit was originally called the Chinese (\u83ef) suit while the military suit was called the barbarian (\u5937) suit (see Wen and wu and Hua\u2013Yi distinction) but this was changed during the Qing dynasty to avoid offending the ruling Manchus. The highly idiosyncratic and culture-specific suit-system of these games is likely the conceptual origin of suits, an idea that later is used for playing cards. Play is counter-clockwise.\nDice game.\nThrowing Heaven and Nine (\u63b7\u5929\u4e5d), or \"Kwat-P'ai\" (\u9aa8\u724c) as reported by Ng Kwai-shang in 1886, is a game of chance where players try to beat each other with a higher combination from a pair of Chinese dice with red 1 and 4 pips. Of the 21 possible combinations, 11 are ranked in a \"civil\" suit and 10 are ranked in a \"military\" suit.\nThe ranks from highest to lowest are:\nAfter the wager is set, the banker throws the dice into a bowl which sets the suit. The banker automatically wins if they throw the highest rank within the suit (Heaven or Nine) but loses if they throw the lowest rank (Red Mallet Six or Final Three).\nFor any other combination, the other players each throw the dice and try to beat the banker's throw within the same suit. If they throw the wrong suit, then they get to throw again until they \"follow suit\". Those that throw lower than the banker will have to pay them. According to R.C. Bell, if there is a tie, no money is exchanged.\nThe opponents keep throwing until one manages to beat the banker and gets paid. The player to the right of the banker becomes the next banker and starts the following round after new stakes are set.\nDomino games.\nIn the domino games, there are two copies of each Civil tile. They have been available in playing card format since the beginning of the 17th century.\nTurning Heaven and Nine.\nTurning Heaven and Nine (\u626d\u5929\u4e5d) is a simple two player trick-taking game of chance. The 32 dominoes are mixed then stacked, face-down, in eight piles of four tiles each. The first player takes a domino from the top of a pile and turns it over while the second player takes the one below it and reveals it for comparison.\nIf the second player draws a higher-ordered tile of the same suit, they take both tiles and lead the next trick. Otherwise, the first player takes both tiles; this mechanic is analogous to the card game War but with an added requirement to follow suit. The game continues in this manner until all tiles have been turned over. Each player counts the total red pips in their captured tiles with the loser having to pay the difference to the winner.\nPlaying Heaven and Nine.\nPlaying Heaven and Nine (\u6253\u5929\u4e5d) is a multi-trick game for 4 players. All tiles are distributed by the banker so each player gets eight. The banker leads the first trick with a single, double, triple, or quadruple trick and the others must play out with an equal number of tiles. Players that are unable to beat the trick discard their tiles face down (this is characteristic of some trumpless trick-taking games like Madiao and Ganjifa). The winner leads the next trick. The player who takes the last trick or multi-trick becomes the next banker. Players who have not won any of the first seven tricks automatically lose the last trick regardless of the strength of their final tile.\nIn double tricks, there are two additional suits, mixed and supreme:\nAs the supreme suit consists of a single pair, it is unbeatable if led but considered a discard if not led.\nIn triple and quadruple tricks these are the only valid combinations: Heavens and Nines; Earths and Eights; Mankinds and Sevens; Harmonies and Fives\nTriple tricks have a rule that a triplet consisting of two civil and one military tiles can only be beaten by a triplet consisting of the same suit compositions. Likewise, a triplet consisting of two military and one civil tiles can only be beaten by the same.\nThere are complex rules to the game play and scoring. There is an accumulating multiplier to the winning and loss as the game proceeds. There are bonuses for winning the last trick with certain methods and for different types of slams. It can be adapted to be played with a standard 52-card deck.\nThe earliest surviving rules were written by Pan Zhiheng around 1610. In this version (\u9b25\u5929\u4e5d), triple and quadruple tricks were not allowed and Heavens can beat Nines and the Supreme pair. There were also versions for two or three players in which some of the tiles remain undistributed. His rules are more similar to the ones used in northern China during the early 20th century than the Cantonese rules that are dominant in the present. They are also very similar to another game simply called dominoes (\u9aa8\u724c) played in many parts of China.\nBagchen is a Tibetan variation played with a double set of dominoes. Daaluu (\u0414\u0430\u0430\u043b\u0443\u0443) is a variation in Mongolia that also uses a double set and plays similarly to Khorol.\nHistory.\nIn his article \"Chinese Origin of Playing Cards\" published in 1895, Sir William Henry Wilkinson pointed out that the game of Tien Gow was invented long before Song dynasty, but was standardized in 1120: \n[Quote from page 66. Note this publication predated the modern pinyin transliteration system]\n&lt;br&gt;\nIt is perfectly clear, indeed, that all that was done or asked for in 1120 was an imperial decision as to which of several forms or interpretations of the game now known as T'ien-kiu (\"Heavens and Nines\") was to be considered orthodox. The game and the cards must have been in existence long before. The passage from the \"Cheng-tz\u00e2-t'ung\" [\u300a\u6b63\u5b57\u901a\u300b] runs thus (s.v. p'ai [\u724c]):\nAlso ya p'ai now the instruments of the game. A common legend states that in the second year of the Hs\u00fcan-ho [\u5ba3\u548c\u4e8c\u5e74], in the Sung dynasty [i.q. 1120 AD], a certain official memorialized the throne, praying that the ya p'ai (ivory cards [\u7259\u724c]) be fixed as a pack of 32, comprising 127 pips [sic, it should be 227, but Chinese printers are careless], in order to accord with the expanse of the stars and constellations. The combination 'heaven' [6/6, 6/6] consisted of two pieces, containing 24 pips, figures of the 24 solar periods; 'earth' [1/1, 1/1] also composed two pieces, but contained 4 pips, the 4 points of the compass - east, west, south, and north; 'man' [4/4, 4/4] two pieces, containing 16 pips, the virtues of humanity, benevolence, propriety, and wisdom, four-fold; 'harmony' [2/3, 1/3] two pieces of 8 pips, figuring the breath of harmony, which pervades the eight divisions of the year. The other combinations had each their names. There were four players having eight cards apiece for their hand, and the cards won or lost according as the number of the pips was less or in more the winner being rewarded with counters. In-the time of Kao-tsung [\u9ad8\u5b97 1127-1163] pattern packs were issued by imperial edict. They were known throughout the empire as Ku p'ai, 'bone p'ai;' [\u9aa8\u724c] but it does not follow that this class of games, po-sai [\u535a\u585e], Ko-wu [\u683c\u4e94], and the rest originated in the reign of Hs\u00fcan-ho.\nMing author Xie Zhaozhe (1567\u20131624) also records the legend of dominoes having been presented to Emperor Huizong but in the year 1112. The Ming sources may be early by half a century as Li Qingzhao (1084 \u2013 c. 1155) made no mention of dominoes in her compendium of games. The oldest confirmed written mention of dominoes in China comes from the \"Former Events in Wulin\" (i.e. the capital Hangzhou) as recorded by Zhou Mi (1232\u20131298), who listed dominoes as items sold by peddlers during the reign of Emperor Xiaozong (r. 1162\u20131189).\nRelation to Pai Gow.\nThe partition game of Pai Gow borrows most of its tile ranking from the pairings in Playing Heaven and Nine. However, the suits have been merged into a single sequence:\nBelow these are unlisted pairs that use modular arithmetic like in Tau Gnau or baccarat.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30282", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30282", "title": "Time signature", "text": "Specification of beats in a musical bar/measure\n&lt;score&gt; \n&lt;/score&gt; An example of a time signature. The time signature indicates that there are three quarter notes (crotchets) per measure (bar).\nA time signature (also known as meter signature, metre signature, and measure signature) is an indication in music notation that specifies how many note values of a particular type fit into each measure (bar). The time signature indicates the meter of a musical movement at the bar level.\nIn a music score the time signature appears as two stacked numerals, such as (spoken as \"four\u2013four time\"), or a time symbol, such as (spoken as \"common time\"). It immediately follows the key signature (or if there is no key signature, the clef symbol). A mid-score time signature, usually immediately following a barline, indicates a change of meter.\nMost time signatures are either simple (the note values are grouped in pairs, like , , and ), or compound (grouped in threes, like , , and ). Less common signatures indicate complex, mixed, additive, and irrational meters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;score&gt; \n \\override Score.SpacingSpanner.strict-note-spacing = ##t\n \\set Score.proportionalNotationDuration = #(ly:make-moment 1/1)\n \\key c \\major \n \\relative c' { \n \\numericTimeSignature \\time 4/4 s1\n \\defaultTimeSignature \\time 4/4 s1\n \\numericTimeSignature \\time 2/2 s1\n \\defaultTimeSignature \\time 2/2 s1\n \\time 2/4 s2\n \\time 3/4 s2.\n \\time 6/8 s2.\n&lt;/score&gt; Basic time signatures: , also known as \"common time\" ; , \"alla breve\", also known as \"cut time\" or \"cut-common time\" (); ; ; and \nTime signature notation.\nMost time signatures consist of two numerals, one stacked above the other:\nFor instance, means two quarter-notes (crotchets) per bar, while means four eighth-notes (quavers) per bar. The most common time signatures are , , and .\nSymbolic signatures.\nBy convention, two special symbols are sometimes used for and :\nThese symbols derive from mensural time signatures, described below.\nFrequently used time signatures.\nSimple versus compound.\nSimple meters are those whose upper number is 2, 3, or 4, sometimes described as duple meter, triple meter, and quadruple meter respectively.\nIn compound meter, the note values specified by the bottom number are grouped into threes, and the upper number is a multiple of 3, such as 6, 9, or 12. The lower number is most commonly an 8 (an eighth-note or quaver): as in or .\nOther upper numbers correspond to irregular meters.\nBeat and subdivision.\nMusical passages commonly feature a recurring pulse, or beat, usually in the range of 60\u2013140 beats per minute. Depending on the tempo of the music, this beat may correspond to the note value specified by the time signature, or to a grouping of such note values. Most commonly, in simple time signatures, the beat is the same as the note value of the signature, but in compound signatures, the beat is usually a dotted note value corresponding to three of the signature's note values. Either way, the next lower note value shorter than the beat is called the subdivision.\nOn occasion a bar may seem like one singular beat. For example, a fast waltz, notated in time, may be described as being \"one in a bar\". Conversely, at slow tempos, the beat might even be a smaller note value than the one enumerated by the time signature. \nMathematically the time signatures of, e.g., and are interchangeable. In a sense \"all\" simple triple time signatures, such as , , , etc.\u2014and all compound duple times, such as , and so on, are equivalent. A piece in can be easily rewritten in , simply by halving the length of the notes.\n&lt;score&gt;\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\new voice \\relative c' {\n \\clef percussion\n \\time 3/4\n \\tempo 4 = 100 \n \\time 3/8\n \\tempo 8 = 100 \n \\new voice \\relative c\" {\n \\override NoteHead.style = #'cross\n \u00bb\n&lt;/score&gt;\nOther time signature rewritings are possible: most commonly a simple time-signature with triplets translates into a compound meter.\n&lt;score&gt;\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\new voice \\relative c' {\n \\clef percussion\n \\time 12/8\n \\tempo 4. = 66 \n \\numericTimeSignature\n \\time 4/4\n \\tempo 4 = 66 \n \\new voice \\relative c\" {\n \\override NoteHead.style = #'cross\n \u00bb\n&lt;/score&gt;\nThe choice of time signature in these cases is largely a matter of tradition. Particular time signatures are traditionally associated with different music styles\u2014it would seem strange to notate a conventional rock song in or , rather than .\nExamples.\nIn the examples below, bold denotes the primary stress of the measure, and \"italics\" denote a secondary stress. Syllables such as \"and\" are frequently used for pulsing in between numbers.\n\"Simple\": is a simple triple meter time signature that represents three quarter notes (crotchets), usually perceived as three beats. In this case the subdivision would be the eighth note (quaver). It is felt as\n one and \"two\" and \"three\" and ...\n\"Compound\": Most often, is felt as two beats, each being a dotted quarter note (crotchet), and each containing subdivisions of three eighth notes (quavers). It is felt as\n one two three \"four\" five six ...\nThe table below shows the characteristics of the most frequently used time signatures.\nTempo giusto.\nWhile changing the bottom number and keeping the top number fixed only formally changes notation, without changing meaning \u2013 , , , and are all three beats to a meter, just noted with eighth notes, quarter notes, half notes, or whole notes \u2013 these conventionally imply different performance and different tempi. Conventionally, larger numbers in the bottom correspond to faster tempi and smaller numbers correspond to slower tempi. This convention is known as \"tempo giusto\", and means that the tempo of each note remains in a narrower, \"normal\" range. For illustration, a quarter note might correspond to 60\u2013120 bpm (quintuplet 75\u2013150, triplet 90\u2013180 and septuplet 105\u2013210), a half note to 30\u201360 bpm (triplet 45\u201390), a whole note to 15\u201330 bpm, and an eighth note to 120\u2013240 bpm; these are not strict, but show an example of \"normal\" ranges.\nThis convention dates to the Baroque era, when tempo changes were indicated by changing time signature during the piece, rather than by using a single time signature and changing tempo marking.\nComplex time signatures.\nSignatures that do not fit the usual simple or compound categories are called \"complex\", \"asymmetric\", \"irregular\", \"unusual\", or \"odd\"\u2014though these are broad terms, and usually a more specific description is any meter which combines both simple and compound beats.\nIrregular meters are common in some non-Western music, and in ancient Greek music such as the Delphic Hymns to Apollo, but the corresponding time signatures rarely appeared in formal written Western music until the 19th century. Early anomalous examples appeared in Spain between 1516 and 1520, plus a small section in Handel's opera Orlando (1733).\nThe third movement of Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin's Piano Sonata No. 1 (1828) is an early, but by no means the earliest, example of time in solo piano music. Anton Reicha's Fugue No. 20 from his \"Thirty-six Fugues\", published in 1803, is also for piano and is in . The waltz-like second movement of Tchaikovsky's \"Path\u00e9tique\" Symphony (shown below), often described as a \"limping waltz\", is a notable example of time in orchestral music.\n &lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n \\relative c {\n \\set Score.tempoHideNote = ##t \\tempo 4 = 144\n \\set Staff.midiInstrument = #\"cello\"\n \\clef bass\n \\key d \\major\n \\time 5/4\n g) \\tuplet 3/2 { a8(\\&lt; g a } b4 cis)\\!\n d( b) cis2.\\&gt;\n a4(\\mf b) \\tuplet 3/2 { cis8(\\&lt; b cis } d4 e)\\!\n \\clef tenor\n fis(\\f d) e2. \\break\n g4( fis) \\tuplet 3/2 { e8( fis e } d4 cis)\n fis8-. [ r16 g( ] fis8) [ r16 eis( ] fis2.)\n b'8)\\ff\\&gt; [a( g) fis-. ] e-. [ es-.( d-. cis-. b-. bes-.) ]\n a4\\mf\n&lt;/score&gt;\nExamples from 20th-century classical music include:\nIn the Western popular music tradition, unusual time signatures occur as well, with progressive rock in particular making frequent use of them. The use of shifting meters in The Beatles' \"Strawberry Fields Forever\" and the use of quintuple meter in their \"Within You, Without You\" are well-known examples, as is Radiohead's \"Paranoid Android\" (includes ).\nPaul Desmond's jazz composition \"Take Five\", in time, was one of a number of irregular-meter compositions that The Dave Brubeck Quartet played. They played other compositions in (\"Eleven Four\"), (\"Unsquare Dance\"), and (\"Blue Rondo \u00e0 la Turk\"), expressed as . \"Blue Rondo \u00e0 la Turk\" is an example of a signature that, despite appearing merely compound triple, is actually more complex. Brubeck's title refers to the characteristic \"aksak\" meter of the Turkish \"kar\u015f\u0131lama\" dance.\nHowever, such time signatures are only unusual in most Western music. Traditional music of the Balkans uses such meters extensively. Bulgarian dances, for example, include forms with 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 22, 25 and other numbers of beats per measure. These rhythms are notated as \"additive rhythms\" based on simple units, usually 2, 3 and 4 beats, though the notation fails to describe the metric \"time bending\" taking place, or compound meters. See Additive meters below.\nSome video samples are shown below.\nMixed meters.\nWhile time signatures usually express a regular pattern of beat stresses continuing through a piece (or at least a section), sometimes composers change time signatures often enough to result in music with an extremely irregular rhythm. The time signature may switch so much that a piece may not be best described as being in one meter, but rather as having a switching mixed meter. In this case, the time signatures are an aid to the performers and not \"necessarily\" an indication of meter. The Promenade from Modest Mussorgsky's \"Pictures at an Exhibition\" (1874) is a good example. The opening measures are shown below:\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt;\n { \\new PianoStaff \u00ab\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\new voice \\relative c\" {\n \\set Score.tempoHideNote = ##t \\tempo 4 = 112\n \\clef treble \\key bes \\major \n \\time 5/4 \n g4--_\\f^\\markup { \\bold {Allegro giusto, nel modo russico; senza allegrezza, ma poco sostenuto. } } f-- bes-- c8--( f d4--)\n \\time 6/4\n c8--( f d4--) bes-- c-- g-- f--\n \\time 5/4\n &lt;bes, d g&gt;4 &lt;bes d bes'&gt; \\stemDown &lt;c a'&gt; \\stemNeutral &lt;f a d&gt;\n \\time 6/4\n \\stemDown &lt;c a'&gt; \\stemNeutral &lt;f bes d&gt; &lt;d g bes&gt; &lt;e g c&gt; &lt;g, c g'&gt; \n \\new Voice \\relative c\" {\n \\time 5/4\n s1 s4\n \\time 6/4\n s1.\n \\time 5/4\n s2. \\stemUp c8^( f d4)\n \\time 6/4\n \\stemUp c8^( f d4) s1\n \u00bb\n \\new Staff \u00ab\n \\clef bass \\key bes \\major \n \\relative c {\n \\time 5/4\n R1*5/4\n \\time 6/4\n R1*6/4\n \\time 5/4\n &lt;g g'&gt;4 &lt;g g'&gt; &lt;f f'&gt; &lt;d d'&gt;\n \\time 6/4\n &lt;f f'&gt; &lt;bes bes'&gt; &lt;g g'&gt; &lt;c, c'&gt; &lt;e e'&gt; &lt;f f'&gt;\n \u00bb\n&lt;/score&gt;\nIgor Stravinsky's \"The Rite of Spring\" (1913) is famous for its \"savage\" rhythms. Five measures from \"Sacrificial Dance\" are shown below:\n&lt;score sound=\"1\"&gt; { \\new PianoStaff \u00ab \\new Staff \\relative c\" { \\set Staff.midiInstrument = #\"violin\" \\clef treble \\tempo 8 = 126 \\override DynamicLineSpanner.staff-padding = #4 \\time 3/16 r16 &lt;d c a fis d&gt;-! r16\\fermata | \\time 2/16 r &lt;d c a fis d&gt;-! \\time 3/16 r &lt;d c a fis d&gt;8-! | r16 &lt;d c a fis d&gt;8-! | \\time 2/8 &lt;d c a fis&gt;16-! &lt;e c bes g&gt;-&gt;-![ &lt;cis b aes f&gt;-! &lt;c a fis ees&gt;-!] } \\new Staff \\relative c { \\set Staff.midiInstrument = #\"violin\" \\clef bass \\time 3/16 d,16-! &lt;bes\" ees,&gt;^\\f-! r\\fermata | \\time 2/16 &lt;d, d,&gt;-! &lt;bes\" ees,&gt;-! | \\time 3/16 d16-! &lt;ees cis&gt;8-! | r16 &lt;ees cis&gt;8-! | \\time 2/8 d16^\\sf-! &lt;ees cis&gt;-!-&gt;[ &lt;d c&gt;-! &lt;d c&gt;-!] } \u00bb } &lt;/score&gt;\nIn such cases, a convention that some composers follow (e.g., Olivier Messiaen, in his \"La Nativit\u00e9 du Seigneur\" and \"Quatuor pour la fin du temps\") is to simply omit the time signature. Charles Ives's \"Concord Sonata\" has measure bars for select passages, but the majority of the work is unbarred.\nSome pieces have no time signature, as there is no discernible meter. This is sometimes known as free time. Sometimes one is provided (usually ) so that the performer finds the piece easier to read, and simply has \"free time\" written as a direction. Sometimes the word \"FREE\" is written downwards on the staff to indicate the piece is in free time. Erik Satie wrote many compositions that are ostensibly in free time but actually follow an unstated and unchanging simple time signature. Later composers used this device more effectively, writing music almost devoid of a discernibly regular pulse.\nIf two time signatures alternate repeatedly, sometimes the two signatures are placed together at the beginning of the piece or section, as shown below:\nAdditive meters.\nTo indicate more complex patterns of stresses, such as additive rhythms, more complex time signatures can be used. Additive meters have a pattern of beats that subdivide into smaller, irregular groups. Such meters are sometimes called \"imperfect\", in contrast to \"perfect meters\", in which the bar is first divided into equal units.\nFor example, the time signature means that there are 8 quaver beats in the bar, divided as the first of a group of three eighth notes (quavers) that are stressed, then the first of a group of two, then first of a group of three again. The stress pattern is usually counted as\n : one two three \"one\" two \"one\" two three ...\nThis kind of time signature is commonly used to notate folk and non-Western types of music. In classical music, B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k and Olivier Messiaen have used such time signatures in their works. The first movement of Maurice Ravel's Piano Trio in A Minor is written in , in which the beats are likewise subdivided into 3+2+3 to reflect Basque dance rhythms.\nRomanian musicologist Constantin Br\u0103iloiu had a special interest in compound time signatures, developed while studying the traditional music of certain regions in his country. While investigating the origins of such unusual meters, he learned that they were even more characteristic of the traditional music of neighboring peoples (e.g., the Bulgarians). He suggested that such timings can be regarded as compounds of simple two-beat and three-beat meters, where an accent falls on every first beat, even though, for example in Bulgarian music, beat lengths of 1, 2, 3, 4 are used in the metric description. In addition, when focused only on stressed beats, simple time signatures can count as beats in a slower, compound time. However, there are two different-length beats in this resulting compound time, a one half-again longer than the short beat (or conversely, the short beat is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 the value of the long). This type of meter is called \"aksak\" (the Turkish word for \"limping\"), \"impeded\", \"jolting\", or \"shaking\", and is described as an \"irregular bichronic rhythm\". A certain amount of confusion for Western musicians is inevitable, since a measure they would likely regard as , for example, is a three-beat measure in \"aksak\", with one long and two short beats (with subdivisions of 2+2+3, 2+3+2, or 3+2+2).\nFolk music may make use of metric time bends, so that the proportions of the performed metric beat time lengths differ from the exact proportions indicated by the metric. Depending on playing style of the same meter, the time bend can vary from non-existent to considerable; in the latter case, some musicologists may want to assign a different meter. For example, the Bulgarian tune \"Eleno Mome\" is written in one of three forms: (1) 7 \n 2+2+1+2, (2) 13 \n 4+4+2+3, or (3) 12 \n 3+4+2+3, but an actual performance (e.g., \"Eleno Mome\") may be closer to 4+4+2+3. The Macedonian 3+2+2+3+2 meter is even more complicated, with heavier time bends, and use of quadruples on the threes. The metric beat time proportions may vary with the speed that the tune is played. The Swedish Boda Polska (Polska from the parish Boda) has a typical elongated second beat.\nIn Western classical music, metric time bend is used in the performance of the Viennese waltz. Most Western music uses metric ratios of 2:1, 3:1, or 4:1 (two-, three- or four-beat time signatures)\u2014in other words, integer ratios that make all beats equal in time length. So, relative to that, 3:2 and 4:3 ratios correspond to very distinctive metric rhythm profiles. Complex accentuation occurs in Western music, but as syncopation rather than as part of the metric accentuation.\nBr\u0103iloiu borrowed a term from Turkish medieval music theory: \"aksak\". Such compound time signatures fall under the \"aksak rhythm\" category that he introduced along with a couple more that should describe the rhythm figures in traditional music. The term Br\u0103iloiu revived had moderate success worldwide, but in Eastern Europe it is still frequently used. However, aksak rhythm figures occur not only in a few European countries, but on all continents, featuring various combinations of the two and three sequences. The longest are in Bulgaria. The shortest aksak rhythm figures follow the five-beat timing, comprising a two and a three (or three and two).\nSome video samples are shown below.\nA method to create meters of lengths of any length has been published in the Journal of Anaphoria Music Theory and Xenharmonikon 16 using both those based on the Horograms of Erv Wilson and Viggo Brun's algorithm written by Kraig Grady.\nIrrational meters.\n&lt;score&gt;\n\\time 4/3\n\\time 4/2\nc\" d\" e\" f\"\n&lt;/score&gt; Example of an irrational time signature: here there are four (4) third notes (3) per measure. A \"third note\" would be one third of a whole note, and thus is a triplet half-note. The second measure of presents the same notes, so the time signature serves to indicate the precise speed relationship between the notes in the two measures.\nIrrational time signatures (rarely, \"non-dyadic time signatures\") are used for so-called \"irrational bar lengths\", that have a denominator that is not a power of two (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, etc.). These are based on beats expressed in terms of fractions of full beats in the prevailing tempo\u2014for example or . For example, where implies a bar construction of four quarter-parts of a whole note (i.e., four quarter notes), implies a bar construction of four third-parts of it. These signatures are of utility only when juxtaposed with other signatures with varying denominators; a piece written entirely in could be more legibly written out in .\n&lt;score&gt;\n\\time 4/2\nc\"2 d\" e\" f\" The same example written using metric modulation instead of irrational time signatures. Three half notes in the first measure (making up a dotted whole note) are equal in duration to two half notes in the second (making up a whole note).\n&lt;score&gt;\n\\time 4/2\nc\"2 d\" e\" f\" The same example written using a change in time signature.\nAccording to Brian Ferneyhough, metric modulation is \"a somewhat distant analogy\" to his own use of \"irrational time signatures\" as a sort of rhythmic dissonance. It is disputed whether the use of these signatures makes metric relationships clearer or more obscure to the musician; it is always possible to write a passage using non-irrational signatures by specifying a relationship between some note length in the previous bar and some other in the succeeding one. Sometimes, successive metric relationships between bars are so convoluted that the pure use of irrational signatures would quickly render the notation extremely hard to penetrate.\nHistorically, this device has been prefigured wherever composers wrote tuplets. For example, a bar of 3 triplet quarter notes could be written as a bar of . Henry Cowell's piano piece \"Fabric\" (1920) employs separate divisions of the bar (1 to 9) for the three contrapuntal parts, using a scheme of shaped noteheads to visually clarify the differences, but the pioneering of these signatures is largely due to Brian Ferneyhough, who says that he finds that \"such 'irrational' measures serve as a useful buffer between local changes of event density and actual changes of base tempo\". Thomas Ad\u00e8s has also used them extensively\u2014for example in \"Traced Overhead\" (1996), the second movement of which contains, among more conventional meters, bars in such signatures as and .\nNotationally, rather than using Cowell's elaborate series of notehead shapes, the same convention has been invoked as when normal tuplets are written; for example, one beat in is written as a normal quarter note, four quarter notes complete the bar, but the whole bar lasts only &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20445 of a reference whole note, and a beat &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20445 of one (or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20445 of a normal quarter note). This is notated in exactly the same way that one would write if one were writing the first four quarter notes of five quintuplet quarter notes.\nSome video samples are shown below.\nThese video samples show two time signatures combined to make a polymeter, since , in isolation, is identical to .\nVariants.\nSome composers have used fractional beats: for example, the time signature (equivalent to ) appears in Carlos Ch\u00e1vez's Piano Sonata No. 3 (1928) IV, m. 1. Both and appear in the fifth movement of Percy Grainger's Lincolnshire Posy.\nMusic educator Carl Orff proposed replacing the lower number of the time signature with an actual note image, as shown at right. This system eliminates the need for compound time signatures, which are confusing to beginners. While this notation has not been adopted by music publishers generally (except in Orff's own compositions), it is used extensively in music education textbooks. Similarly, American composers George Crumb and Joseph Schwantner, among others, have used this system in many of their works. \u00c9mile Jaques-Dalcroze proposed this in his 1920 collection, \"Le Rythme, la musique et l'\u00e9ducation\".\nAnother possibility is to extend the barline where a time change is to take place above the top instrument's line in a score and to write the time signature there, and there only, saving the ink and effort that would have been spent writing it in each instrument's staff. Henryk G\u00f3recki's \"Beatus Vir\" is an example of this. Alternatively, music in a large score sometimes has time signatures written as very long, thin numbers covering the whole height of the score rather than replicating it on each staff; this is an aid to the conductor, who can see signature changes more easily.\nEarly music usage.\nMensural time signatures.\nIn the mensural notation of the 14th, 15th and 16th centuries there are no bar lines, and the four basic \"mensuration signs\" , , , indicate the normal ratio of duration between different note values. Unlike modern notation, the subdivisions could be either 2:1 or 3:1. The relation between the \"breve\" and the \"semibreve\" was called tempus, and could be perfect (triple 3:1 indicated by circle) or imperfect (duple 2:1, with broken circle), while the relation between the \"semibreve\" and the \"minim\" was called prolatio and could be major (3:1 or compound, indicated by dot) or minor (2:1 or simple meter).\nModern transcriptions often reduce note values 4:1, such that\nIn mensural notation actual note values depend not only on the prevailing mensuration, but on rules for imperfection and alteration, with ambiguous cases using a dot of separation, similar in appearance but not always in effect to the modern dot of augmentation.\nProportions.\nBesides showing the organization of beats with musical meter, the mensuration signs discussed above have a second function, which is showing tempo relationships between one section to another, which modern notation can only specify with tuplets or metric modulations. This is a fraught subject, because the usage has varied with both time and place: Charles Hamm was even able to establish a rough chronology of works based on three distinct usages of mensural signs over the career of Guillaume Dufay (1397(?) \u2013 1474). By the end of the sixteenth century Thomas Morley was able to satirize the confusion in an imagined dialogue:\nit was a world to hear them wrangle, every one defending his own for the best. \"What? You keep not time in your proportions.\" \"You sing them false. What proportion is this?\" \"Sesquipaltry.\" \"Nay, you sing you know not what; it would seem you came lately from a barber's shop where you had 'Gregory Walker' or a Curranta played in the new Proportions by them lately found out, called 'Sesquiblinda' and 'Sesquihearkenafter'.\"\nIn general though, a slash or the numeral 2 shows a doubling of tempo, and paired numbers (either side by side or one atop another) show ratios instead of beats per measure over note value: in early music contexts for example is unrelated to 'third-notes'.\nA few common signs are shown:\nIn particular, when the sign was encountered, the tactus (beat) changed from the usual whole note (semibreve) to the double whole note (breve), a circumstance called \"alla breve\". This term has been sustained to the present day, and though now it means the beat is a half note (minim), in contradiction to the literal meaning of the phrase, it still indicates that the \"tactus\" has changed from a short to a doubled value.\nCertain composers delighted in creating mensuration canons, \"puzzle\" compositions that were intentionally difficult to decipher.\nIrregular bar.\nIrregular bars are a change in time signature normally for only one bar. Such a bar is most often a bar of , or in a composition, or a bar of in a composition, or a bar of in a composition.\nIf a song is entirely in , a change to will make the song feel like it has skipped a beat. The opposite is true for , where it feels like the song adds a beat. If a song changes to is will make it feel like that bar is half as long as all the others.\nSome popular examples include \"Golden Brown\" by The Stranglers ( in a composition), \"I Love Rock 'n' Roll\" originally by The Arrows ( in a composition), \"Hey Ya!\" by Outkast ( in a composition), and \"Wuthering Heights\" by Kate Bush (different kinds of irregular bars in a composition).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30283", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30283", "title": "Tristan Bernard", "text": "French playwright (1866\u20131947)\nTristan Bernard (7 September 1866 \u2013 7 December 1947) was a French playwright, novelist, journalist and lawyer.\nLife.\nHe studied law, and after his military service, he started his career as the manager of an aluminium smelter. In the 1890s, he managed the \"V\u00e9lodrome de la Seine\" at Levallois-Perret and the V\u00e9lodrome Buffalo, events that were an integral part of Parisian life, being regularly attended by personalities such as Toulouse-Lautrec. He reputedly introduced the bell to signify the last lap of a race.\nHe identified as an anarchist.\nDuring the Occupation Bernard was arrested in the South of France in September 1943 because he was Jewish, and sent to the Drancy camp. Thanks to the efforts of his friends Sacha Guitry and Arletty he was released a few weeks later.\nFamous for his wit, Bernard was also a crossword creator.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30284", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30284", "title": "Statistical hypothesis test", "text": "Method of statistical inference\nA statistical hypothesis test is a method of statistical inference used to decide whether the data provide sufficient evidence to reject a particular hypothesis. A statistical hypothesis test typically involves a calculation of a test statistic. Then a decision is made, either by comparing the test statistic to a critical value or equivalently by evaluating a \"p\"-value computed from the test statistic. Roughly 100 specialized statistical tests are in use and noteworthy.\nHistory.\nWhile hypothesis testing was popularized early in the 20th century, early forms were used in the 1700s. The first use is credited to John Arbuthnot (1710), followed by Pierre-Simon Laplace (1770s), in analyzing the human sex ratio at birth; see .\nChoice of null hypothesis.\nPaul Meehl has argued that the epistemological importance of the choice of null hypothesis has gone largely unacknowledged. When the null hypothesis is predicted by theory, a more precise experiment will be a more severe test of the underlying theory. When the null hypothesis defaults to \"no difference\" or \"no effect\", a more precise experiment is a less severe test of the theory that motivated performing the experiment. An examination of the origins of the latter practice may therefore be useful:\n1778: Pierre Laplace compares the birthrates of boys and girls in multiple European cities. He states: \"it is natural to conclude that these possibilities are very nearly in the same ratio\". Thus, the null hypothesis in this case that the birthrates of boys and girls should be equal given \"conventional wisdom\".\n1900: Karl Pearson develops the chi squared test to determine \"whether a given form of frequency curve will effectively describe the samples drawn from a given population.\" Thus the null hypothesis is that a population is described by some distribution predicted by theory. He uses as an example the numbers of five and sixes in the Weldon dice throw data.\n1904: Karl Pearson develops the concept of \"contingency\" in order to determine whether outcomes are independent of a given categorical factor. Here the null hypothesis is by default that two things are unrelated (e.g. scar formation and death rates from smallpox). The null hypothesis in this case is no longer predicted by theory or conventional wisdom, but is instead the principle of indifference that led Fisher and others to dismiss the use of \"inverse probabilities\".\nModern origins and early controversy.\nModern significance testing is largely the product of Karl Pearson (\"p\"-value, Pearson's chi-squared test), William Sealy Gosset (Student's t-distribution), and Ronald Fisher (\"null hypothesis\", analysis of variance, \"significance test\"), while hypothesis testing was developed by Jerzy Neyman and Egon Pearson (son of Karl). Ronald Fisher began his life in statistics as a Bayesian (Zabell 1992), but Fisher soon grew disenchanted with the subjectivity involved (namely use of the principle of indifference when determining prior probabilities), and sought to provide a more \"objective\" approach to inductive inference.\nFisher emphasized rigorous experimental design and methods to extract a result from few samples assuming Gaussian distributions. Neyman (who teamed with the younger Pearson) emphasized mathematical rigor and methods to obtain more results from many samples and a wider range of distributions. Modern hypothesis testing is an inconsistent hybrid of the Fisher vs Neyman/Pearson formulation, methods and terminology developed in the early 20th century.\nFisher popularized the \"significance test\". He required a null-hypothesis (corresponding to a population frequency distribution) and a sample. His (now familiar) calculations determined whether to reject the null-hypothesis or not. Significance testing did not utilize an alternative hypothesis so there was no concept of a Type II error (false negative).\nThe \"p\"-value was devised as an informal, but objective, index meant to help a researcher determine (based on other knowledge) whether to modify future experiments or strengthen one's faith in the null hypothesis. Hypothesis testing (and Type I/II errors) was devised by Neyman and Pearson as a more objective alternative to Fisher's \"p\"-value, also meant to determine researcher behaviour, but without requiring any inductive inference by the researcher.\nNeyman &amp; Pearson considered a different problem to Fisher (which they called \"hypothesis testing\"). They initially considered two simple hypotheses (both with frequency distributions). They calculated two probabilities and typically selected the hypothesis associated with the higher probability (the hypothesis more likely to have generated the sample). Their method always selected a hypothesis. It also allowed the calculation of both types of error probabilities.\nFisher and Neyman/Pearson clashed bitterly. Neyman/Pearson considered their formulation to be an improved generalization of significance testing (the defining paper was abstract; Mathematicians have generalized and refined the theory for decades). Fisher thought that it was not applicable to scientific research because often, during the course of the experiment, it is discovered that the initial assumptions about the null hypothesis are questionable due to unexpected sources of error. He believed that the use of rigid reject/accept decisions based on models formulated before data is collected was incompatible with this common scenario faced by scientists and attempts to apply this method to scientific research would lead to mass confusion.\nThe dispute between Fisher and Neyman\u2013Pearson was waged on philosophical grounds, characterized by a philosopher as a dispute over the proper role of models in statistical inference.\nEvents intervened: Neyman accepted a position in the University of California, Berkeley in 1938, breaking his partnership with Pearson and separating the disputants (who had occupied the same building). World War II provided an intermission in the debate. The dispute between Fisher and Neyman terminated (unresolved after 27 years) with Fisher's death in 1962. Neyman wrote a well-regarded eulogy. Some of Neyman's later publications reported \"p\"-values and significance levels.\nNull hypothesis significance testing (NHST).\nThe modern version of hypothesis testing is generally called the null hypothesis significance testing (NHST) and is a hybrid of the Fisher approach with the Neyman-Pearson approach. In 2000, Raymond S. Nickerson wrote an article stating that NHST was (at the time) \"arguably the most widely used method of analysis of data collected in psychological experiments and has been so for about 70 years\" and that it was at the same time \"very controversial\".\nThis fusion resulted from confusion by writers of statistical textbooks (as predicted by Fisher) beginning in the 1940s (but signal detection, for example, still uses the Neyman/Pearson formulation). Great conceptual differences and many caveats in addition to those mentioned above were ignored. Neyman and Pearson provided the stronger terminology, the more rigorous mathematics and the more consistent philosophy, but the subject taught today in introductory statistics has more similarities with Fisher's method than theirs.\nSometime around 1940, authors of statistical text books began combining the two approaches by using the \"p\"-value in place of the test statistic (or data) to test against the Neyman\u2013Pearson \"significance level\".\nPhilosophy.\nHypothesis testing and philosophy intersect. Inferential statistics, which includes hypothesis testing, is applied probability. Both probability and its application are intertwined with philosophy. Philosopher David Hume wrote, \"All knowledge degenerates into probability.\" Competing practical definitions of probability reflect philosophical differences. The most common application of hypothesis testing is in the scientific interpretation of experimental data, which is naturally studied by the philosophy of science.\nFisher and Neyman opposed the subjectivity of probability. Their views contributed to the objective definitions. The core of their historical disagreement was philosophical.\nMany of the philosophical criticisms of hypothesis testing are discussed by statisticians in other contexts, particularly correlation does not imply causation and the design of experiments.\nHypothesis testing is of continuing interest to philosophers.&lt;ref name=\"doi10.1093/bjps/axl003\"&gt;\n&lt;/ref&gt;\nEducation.\nStatistics is increasingly being taught in schools with hypothesis testing being one of the elements taught. Many conclusions reported in the popular press (political opinion polls to medical studies) are based on statistics. Some writers have stated that statistical analysis of this kind allows for thinking clearly about problems involving mass data, as well as the effective reporting of trends and inferences from said data, but caution that writers for a broad public should have a solid understanding of the field in order to use the terms and concepts correctly. An introductory college statistics class places much emphasis on hypothesis testing \u2013 perhaps half of the course. Such fields as literature and divinity now include findings based on statistical analysis (see the Bible Analyzer). An introductory statistics class teaches hypothesis testing as a cookbook process. Hypothesis testing is also taught at the postgraduate level. Statisticians learn how to create good statistical test procedures (like \"z\", Student's \"t\", \"F\" and chi-squared). Statistical hypothesis testing is considered a mature area within statistics, but a limited amount of development continues.\nAn academic study states that the cookbook method of teaching introductory statistics leaves no time for history, philosophy or controversy. Hypothesis testing has been taught as received unified method. Surveys showed that graduates of the class were filled with philosophical misconceptions (on all aspects of statistical inference) that persisted among instructors. While the problem was addressed more than a decade ago, and calls for educational reform continue, students still graduate from statistics classes holding fundamental misconceptions about hypothesis testing. Ideas for improving the teaching of hypothesis testing include encouraging students to search for statistical errors in published papers, teaching the history of statistics and emphasizing the controversy in a generally dry subject.\nRaymond S. Nickerson commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPerforming a frequentist hypothesis test in practice.\nThe typical steps involved in performing a frequentist hypothesis test in practice are:\nPractical example.\nThe difference in the two processes applied to the radioactive suitcase example (below):\nThe former report is adequate, the latter gives a more detailed explanation of the data and the reason why the suitcase is being checked.\nNot rejecting the null hypothesis does not mean the null hypothesis is \"accepted\" per se (though Neyman and Pearson used that word in their original writings; see the Interpretation section).\nThe processes described here are perfectly adequate for computation. They seriously neglect the design of experiments considerations.\nIt is particularly critical that appropriate sample sizes be estimated before conducting the experiment.\nThe phrase \"test of significance\" was coined by statistician Ronald Fisher.\nInterpretation.\nWhen the null hypothesis is true and statistical assumptions are met, the probability that the p-value will be less than or equal to the significance level formula_1 is at most formula_1. This ensures that the hypothesis test maintains its specified false positive rate (provided that statistical assumptions are met).\nThe \"p\"-value is the probability that a test statistic which is at least as extreme as the one obtained would occur under the null hypothesis. At a significance level of 0.05, a fair coin would be expected to (incorrectly) reject the null hypothesis (that it is fair) in 1 out of 20 tests on average. The \"p\"-value does not provide the probability that either the null hypothesis or its opposite is correct (a common source of confusion).\nIf the \"p\"-value is less than the chosen significance threshold (equivalently, if the observed test statistic is in the critical region), then we say the null hypothesis is rejected at the chosen level of significance. If the \"p\"-value is \"not\" less than the chosen significance threshold (equivalently, if the observed test statistic is outside the critical region), then the null hypothesis is not rejected at the chosen level of significance.\nIn the \"lady tasting tea\" example (below), Fisher required the lady to properly categorize all of the cups of tea to justify the conclusion that the result was unlikely to result from chance. His test revealed that if the lady was effectively guessing at random (the null hypothesis), there was a 1.4% chance that the observed results (perfectly ordered tea) would occur.\nUse and importance.\nStatistics are helpful in analyzing most collections of data. This is equally true of hypothesis testing which can justify conclusions even when no scientific theory exists. In the Lady tasting tea example, it was \"obvious\" that no difference existed between (milk poured into tea) and (tea poured into milk). The data contradicted the \"obvious\".\nReal world applications of hypothesis testing include:\nStatistical hypothesis testing plays an important role in the whole of statistics and in statistical inference. For example, Lehmann (1992) in a review of the fundamental paper by Neyman and Pearson (1933) says: \"Nevertheless, despite their shortcomings, the new paradigm formulated in the 1933 paper, and the many developments carried out within its framework continue to play a central role in both the theory and practice of statistics and can be expected to do so in the foreseeable future\".\nSignificance testing has been the favored statistical tool in some experimental social sciences (over 90% of articles in the \"Journal of Applied Psychology\" during the early 1990s). Other fields have favored the estimation of parameters (e.g. effect size). Significance testing is used as a substitute for the traditional comparison of predicted value and experimental result at the core of the scientific method. When theory is only capable of predicting the sign of a relationship, a directional (one-sided) hypothesis test can be configured so that only a statistically significant result supports theory. This form of theory appraisal is the most heavily criticized application of hypothesis testing.\nCautions.\n\"If the government required statistical procedures to carry warning labels like those on drugs, most inference methods would have long labels indeed.\" This caution applies to hypothesis tests and alternatives to them.\nThe successful hypothesis test is associated with a probability and a type-I error rate. The conclusion \"might\" be wrong.\nThe conclusion of the test is only as solid as the sample upon which it is based. The design of the experiment is critical. A number of unexpected effects have been observed including:\nA statistical analysis of misleading data produces misleading conclusions. The issue of data quality can be more subtle. In forecasting for example, there is no agreement on a measure of forecast accuracy. In the absence of a consensus measurement, no decision based on measurements will be without controversy.\nPublication bias: Statistically nonsignificant results may be less likely to be published, which can bias the literature.\nMultiple testing: When multiple true null hypothesis tests are conducted at once without adjustment, the overall probability of Type I error is higher than the nominal alpha level.\nThose making critical decisions based on the results of a hypothesis test are prudent to look at the details rather than the conclusion alone. In the physical sciences most results are fully accepted only when independently confirmed. The general advice concerning statistics is, \"Figures never lie, but liars figure\" (anonymous).\nDefinition of terms.\nThe following definitions are mainly based on the exposition in the book by Lehmann and Romano:\nA statistical hypothesis test compares a test statistic (\"z\" or \"t\" for examples) to a threshold. The test statistic (the formula found in the table below) is based on optimality. For a fixed level of Type I error rate, use of these statistics minimizes Type II error rates (equivalent to maximizing power). The following terms describe tests in terms of such optimality:\nNonparametric bootstrap hypothesis testing.\nBootstrap-based resampling methods can be used for null hypothesis testing. A bootstrap creates numerous simulated samples by randomly resampling (with replacement) the original, combined sample data, assuming the null hypothesis is correct. The bootstrap is very versatile as it is distribution-free and it does not rely on restrictive parametric assumptions, but rather on empirical approximate methods with asymptotic guarantees. Traditional parametric hypothesis tests are more computationally efficient but make stronger structural assumptions. In situations where computing the probability of the test statistic under the null hypothesis is hard or impossible (due to perhaps inconvenience or lack of knowledge of the underlying distribution), the bootstrap offers a viable method for statistical inference.\nExamples.\nHuman sex ratio.\nThe earliest use of statistical hypothesis testing is generally credited to the question of whether male and female births are equally likely (null hypothesis), which was addressed in the 1700s by John Arbuthnot (1710), and later by Pierre-Simon Laplace (1770s).\nArbuthnot examined birth records in London for each of the 82 years from 1629 to 1710, and applied the sign test, a simple non-parametric test. In every year, the number of males born in London exceeded the number of females. Considering more male or more female births as equally likely, the probability of the observed outcome is 0.582, or about 1 in 4,836,000,000,000,000,000,000,000; in modern terms, this is the \"p\"-value. Arbuthnot concluded that this is too small to be due to chance and must instead be due to divine providence: \"From whence it follows, that it is Art, not Chance, that governs.\" In modern terms, he rejected the null hypothesis of equally likely male and female births at the \"p\"\u00a0=\u00a01/282 significance level.\nLaplace considered the statistics of almost half a million births. The statistics showed an excess of boys compared to girls. He concluded by calculation of a \"p\"-value that the excess was a real, but unexplained, effect.\nLady tasting tea.\nIn a famous example of hypothesis testing, known as the \"Lady tasting tea\", Dr. Muriel Bristol, a colleague of Fisher, claimed to be able to tell whether the tea or the milk was added first to a cup. Fisher proposed to give her eight cups, four of each variety, in random order. One could then ask what the probability was for her getting the number she got correct, but just by chance. The null hypothesis was that the Lady had no such ability. The test statistic was a simple count of the number of successes in selecting the 4 cups. The critical region was the single case of 4 successes of 4 possible based on a conventional probability criterion (&lt;\u00a05%). A pattern of 4 successes corresponds to 1 out of 70 possible combinations (p\u2248\u00a01.4%). Fisher asserted that no alternative hypothesis was (ever) required. The lady correctly identified every cup, which would be considered a statistically significant result.\nCourtroom trial.\nA statistical test procedure is comparable to a criminal trial; a defendant is considered not guilty as long as his or her guilt is not proven. The prosecutor tries to prove the guilt of the defendant. Only when there is enough evidence for the prosecution is the defendant convicted.\nIn the start of the procedure, there are two hypotheses formula_3: \"the defendant is not guilty\", and formula_4: \"the defendant is guilty\". The first one, formula_3, is called the \"null hypothesis\". The second one, formula_4, is called the \"alternative hypothesis\". It is the alternative hypothesis that one hopes to support.\nThe hypothesis of innocence is rejected only when an error is very unlikely, because one does not want to convict an innocent defendant. Such an error is called \"error of the first kind\" (i.e., the conviction of an innocent person), and the occurrence of this error is controlled to be rare. As a consequence of this asymmetric behaviour, an \"error of the second kind\" (acquitting a person who committed the crime), is more common.\nA criminal trial can be regarded as either or both of two decision processes: guilty vs not guilty or evidence vs a threshold (\"beyond a reasonable doubt\"). In one view, the defendant is judged; in the other view the performance of the prosecution (which bears the burden of proof) is judged. A hypothesis test can be regarded as either a judgment of a hypothesis or as a judgment of evidence.\nClairvoyant card game.\nA person (the subject) is tested for clairvoyance. They are shown the back face of a randomly chosen playing card 25 times and asked which of the four suits it belongs to. The number of hits, or correct answers, is called \"X\".\nAs we try to find evidence of their clairvoyance, for the time being the null hypothesis is that the person is not clairvoyant. The alternative is: the person is (more or less) clairvoyant.\nIf the null hypothesis is valid, the only thing the test person can do is guess. For every card, the probability (relative frequency) of any single suit appearing is 1/4. If the alternative is valid, the test subject will predict the suit correctly with probability greater than 1/4. We will call the probability of guessing correctly \"p\". The hypotheses, then, are:\nand\nWhen the test subject correctly predicts all 25 cards, we will consider them clairvoyant, and reject the null hypothesis. Thus also with 24 or 23 hits. With only 5 or 6 hits, on the other hand, there is no cause to consider them so. But what about 12 hits, or 17 hits? What is the critical number, \"c\", of hits, at which point we consider the subject to be clairvoyant? How do we determine the critical value \"c\"? With the choice \"c\"=25 (i.e. we only accept clairvoyance when all cards are predicted correctly) we're more critical than with \"c\"=10. In the first case almost no test subjects will be recognized to be clairvoyant, in the second case, a certain number will pass the test. In practice, one decides how critical one will be. That is, one decides how often one accepts an error of the first kind \u2013 a false positive, or Type I error. With \"c\" = 25 the probability of such an error is:\nand hence, very small. The probability of a false positive is the probability of randomly guessing correctly all 25 times.\nBeing less critical, with \"c\" = 10, gives:\nThus, \"c\" = 10 yields a much greater probability of false positive.\nBefore the test is actually performed, the maximum acceptable probability of a Type I error (\"\u03b1\") is determined. Typically, values in the range of 1% to 5% are selected. (If the maximum acceptable error rate is zero, an infinite number of correct guesses is required.) Depending on this Type 1 error rate, the critical value \"c\" is calculated. For example, if we select an error rate of 1%, \"c\" is calculated thus:\nFrom all the numbers c, with this property, we choose the smallest, in order to minimize the probability of a Type II error, a false negative. For the above example, we select: formula_9.\nVariations and sub-classes.\nStatistical hypothesis testing is a key technique of both frequentist inference and Bayesian inference, although the two types of inference have notable differences. Statistical hypothesis tests define a procedure that controls (fixes) the probability of incorrectly \"deciding\" that a default position (null hypothesis) is incorrect. The procedure is based on how likely it would be for a set of observations to occur if the null hypothesis were true. This probability of making an incorrect decision is \"not\" the probability that the null hypothesis is true, nor whether any specific alternative hypothesis is true. This contrasts with other possible techniques of decision theory in which the null and alternative hypothesis are treated on a more equal basis.\nOne na\u00efve Bayesian approach to hypothesis testing is to base decisions on the posterior probability, but this fails when comparing point and continuous hypotheses. Other approaches to decision making, such as Bayesian decision theory, attempt to balance the consequences of incorrect decisions across all possibilities, rather than concentrating on a single null hypothesis. A number of other approaches to reaching a decision based on data are available via decision theory and optimal decisions, some of which have desirable properties. Hypothesis testing, though, is a dominant approach to data analysis in many fields of science. Extensions to the theory of hypothesis testing include the study of the power of tests, i.e. the probability of correctly rejecting the null hypothesis given that it is false. Such considerations can be used for the purpose of sample size determination prior to the collection of data.\nNeyman\u2013Pearson hypothesis testing.\nAn example of Neyman\u2013Pearson hypothesis testing (or null hypothesis statistical significance testing) can be made by a change to the radioactive suitcase example. If the \"suitcase\" is actually a shielded container for the transportation of radioactive material, then a test might be used to select among three hypotheses: no radioactive source present, one present, two (all) present. The test could be required for safety, with actions required in each case. The Neyman\u2013Pearson lemma of hypothesis testing says that a good criterion for the selection of hypotheses is the ratio of their probabilities (a likelihood ratio). A simple method of solution is to select the hypothesis with the highest probability for the Geiger counts observed. The typical result matches intuition: few counts imply no source, many counts imply two sources and intermediate counts imply one source. Notice also that usually there are problems for proving a negative. Null hypotheses should be at least falsifiable.\nNeyman\u2013Pearson theory can accommodate both prior probabilities and the costs of actions resulting from decisions. The former allows each test to consider the results of earlier tests (unlike Fisher's significance tests). The latter allows the consideration of economic issues (for example) as well as probabilities. A likelihood ratio remains a good criterion for selecting among hypotheses.\nThe two forms of hypothesis testing are based on different problem formulations. The original test is analogous to a true/false question; the Neyman\u2013Pearson test is more like multiple choice. In the view of Tukey the former produces a conclusion on the basis of only strong evidence while the latter produces a decision on the basis of available evidence. While the two tests seem quite different both mathematically and philosophically, later developments lead to the opposite claim. Consider many tiny radioactive sources. The hypotheses become 0,1,2,3... grains of radioactive sand. There is little distinction between none or some radiation (Fisher) and 0 grains of radioactive sand versus all of the alternatives (Neyman\u2013Pearson). The major Neyman\u2013Pearson paper of 1933 also considered composite hypotheses (ones whose distribution includes an unknown parameter). An example proved the optimality of the (Student's) \"t\"-test, \"there can be no better test for the hypothesis under consideration\" (p 321). Neyman\u2013Pearson theory was proving the optimality of Fisherian methods from its inception.\nFisher's significance testing has proven a popular flexible statistical tool in application with little mathematical growth potential. Neyman\u2013Pearson hypothesis testing is claimed as a pillar of mathematical statistics, creating a new paradigm for the field. It also stimulated new applications in statistical process control, detection theory, decision theory and game theory. Both formulations have been successful, but the successes have been of a different character.\nThe dispute over formulations is unresolved. Science primarily uses Fisher's (slightly modified) formulation as taught in introductory statistics. Statisticians study Neyman\u2013Pearson theory in graduate school. Mathematicians are proud of uniting the formulations. Philosophers consider them separately. Learned opinions deem the formulations variously competitive (Fisher vs Neyman), incompatible or complementary. The dispute has become more complex since Bayesian inference has achieved respectability.\nThe terminology is inconsistent. Hypothesis testing can mean any mixture of two formulations that both changed with time. Any discussion of significance testing vs hypothesis testing is doubly vulnerable to confusion.\nFisher thought that hypothesis testing was a useful strategy for performing industrial quality control, however, he strongly disagreed that hypothesis testing could be useful for scientists.\nHypothesis testing provides a means of finding test statistics used in significance testing. The concept of power is useful in explaining the consequences of adjusting the significance level and is heavily used in sample size determination. The two methods remain philosophically distinct. They usually (but \"not always\") produce the same mathematical answer. The preferred answer is context dependent. While the existing merger of Fisher and Neyman\u2013Pearson theories has been heavily criticized, modifying the merger to achieve Bayesian goals has been considered.\nCriticism.\nMuch of the criticisms of statistical hypothesis testing can be summarized by the following issues:\nCritics and supporters are largely in factual agreement regarding the characteristics of null hypothesis significance testing (NHST): While it can provide critical information, it is \"inadequate as the sole tool for statistical analysis\". \"Successfully rejecting the null hypothesis may offer no support for the research hypothesis.\" The continuing controversy concerns the selection of the best statistical practices for the near-term future given the existing practices. However, adequate research design can minimize this issue. Critics would prefer to ban NHST completely, forcing a complete departure from those practices, while supporters suggest a less absolute change.\nControversy over significance testing, and its effects on publication bias in particular, has produced several results. The American Psychological Association has strengthened its statistical reporting requirements after review, medical journal publishers have recognized the obligation to publish some results that are not statistically significant to combat publication bias, and a journal (\"Journal of Articles in Support of the Null Hypothesis\") has been created to publish such results exclusively. Textbooks have added some cautions, and increased coverage of the tools necessary to estimate the size of the sample required to produce significant results. Few major organizations have abandoned use of significance tests although some have discussed doing so. For instance, in 2023, the editors of the Journal of Physiology \"strongly recommend the use of estimation methods for those publishing in The Journal\" (meaning the magnitude of the effect size (to allow readers to judge whether a finding has practical, physiological, or clinical relevance) and confidence intervals to convey the precision of that estimate), saying \"Ultimately, it is the physiological importance of the data that those publishing in The Journal of Physiology should be most concerned with, rather than the statistical significance.\"\nP-values are random variables. Therefore, the decision of a statistical test is a random variable; to understand its stability, approaches including the following have been proposed:\nAlternatives.\nA unifying position of critics is that statistics should not lead to an accept-reject conclusion or decision, but to an estimated value with an interval estimate; this data-analysis philosophy is broadly referred to as estimation statistics. Estimation statistics can be accomplished with either frequentist or Bayesian methods.\nCritics of significance testing have advocated basing inference less on p-values and more on confidence intervals for effect sizes for importance, prediction intervals for confidence, replications and extensions for replicability, meta-analyses for generality :. But none of these suggested alternatives inherently produces a decision. Lehmann said that hypothesis testing theory can be presented in terms of conclusions/decisions, probabilities, or confidence intervals: \"The distinction between the ... approaches is largely one of reporting and interpretation.\"\nBayesian inference is one proposed alternative to significance testing. (Nickerson cited 10 sources suggesting it, including Rozeboom (1960)). For example, Bayesian parameter estimation can provide rich information about the data from which researchers can draw inferences, while using uncertain priors that exert only minimal influence on the results when enough data is available. Psychologist John K. Kruschke has suggested Bayesian estimation as an alternative for the \"t\"-test and has also contrasted Bayesian estimation for assessing null values with Bayesian model comparison for hypothesis testing. Two competing models/hypotheses can be compared using Bayes factors. Bayesian methods could be criticized for requiring information that is seldom available in the cases where significance testing is most heavily used. Neither the prior probabilities nor the probability distribution of the test statistic under the alternative hypothesis are often available in the social sciences.\nAdvocates of a Bayesian approach sometimes claim that the goal of a researcher is most often to objectively assess the probability that a hypothesis is true based on the data they have collected. Neither Fisher's significance testing, nor Neyman\u2013Pearson hypothesis testing can provide this information, and do not claim to. The probability a hypothesis is true can only be derived from use of Bayes' Theorem, which was unsatisfactory to both the Fisher and Neyman\u2013Pearson camps due to the explicit use of subjectivity in the form of the prior probability. Fisher's strategy is to sidestep this with the \"p\"-value (an objective \"index\" based on the data alone) followed by \"inductive inference\", while Neyman\u2013Pearson devised their approach of \"inductive behaviour\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30288", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30288", "title": "Tensor/Alternate", "text": ""}
{"id": "30292", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30292", "title": "The Hobbit", "text": "1937 book by J. R. R. Tolkien\nThe Hobbit, or There and Back Again is a children's fantasy novel by the English author J. R. R. Tolkien. It was published in 1937 to wide critical acclaim, being nominated for the Carnegie Medal and awarded a prize from the \"New York Herald Tribune\" for best juvenile fiction. It is recognized as a classic in children's literature and is one of the best-selling books of all time, with over 100 million copies sold.\n\"The Hobbit\" is set in Middle-earth and follows home-loving Bilbo Baggins, the titular hobbit who joins the wizard Gandalf and the thirteen dwarves of Thorin's Company on a quest to reclaim the dwarves' home and treasure from the dragon Smaug. Bilbo's journey takes him from his peaceful rural surroundings into more sinister territory.\nThe story is told in the form of a picaresque or episodic quest; several chapters introduce a new type of monster or threat as Bilbo progresses through the landscape. Bilbo gains a new level of maturity, competence, and wisdom by accepting the disreputable, romantic, fey and adventurous sides of his nature and applying his wits and common sense. The story reaches its climax in the Battle of Five Armies, where many of the characters and creatures from earlier chapters re-emerge to engage in conflict. Personal growth and forms of heroism are central themes of the story, along with motifs of warfare. These themes have led critics to view Tolkien's own experiences during the First World War as instrumental in shaping the story. His scholarly knowledge of Germanic philology and interest in mythology and fairy tales are often noted as influences, but more recent fiction including adventure stories and the works of William Morris also played a part.\nThe publisher was encouraged by the book's critical and financial success and, therefore, requested a sequel. As Tolkien's work progressed on its successor, \"The Lord of the Rings\", he made retrospective accommodations for it in \"The Hobbit\". These few but significant changes were integrated into the second edition. Further editions followed with minor emendations, including those reflecting Tolkien's changing concept of the world into which Bilbo stumbled. The work has never been out of print. Its ongoing legacy encompasses many adaptations for stage, screen, radio, board games and video games. Several of these adaptations have received critical recognition on their own merits.\nNarrative.\nCharacters.\nBilbo Baggins, the protagonist, is a respectable, reserved and well-to-do hobbit\u2014a race resembling short humans with furry, leathery feet who live in underground houses and are mainly farmers and gardeners. Gandalf, an itinerant wizard, introduces Bilbo to a company of thirteen dwarves. Thorin Oakenshield is the proud, pompous head of the company of dwarves and heir to the destroyed dwarvish kingdom under the Lonely Mountain. Smaug is a dragon who long ago pillaged the dwarvish kingdom of Thorin's grandfather and sleeps upon the vast treasure.\nThe plot involves a host of other characters of varying importance, such as the twelve other dwarves of the company; two types of elves: both puckish and more serious warrior types; Men; man-eating trolls; boulder-throwing giants; evil cave-dwelling goblins; forest-dwelling giant spiders who can speak; immense and heroic eagles who also speak; evil wolves, or Wargs, who are allied with the goblins; Elrond the sage; Gollum, a strange creature inhabiting an underground lake; Beorn, a man who can assume bear form; and Bard the Bowman, a grim but honourable archer of Lake-town.\nPlot.\nGandalf tricks Bilbo Baggins into hosting a party for Thorin Oakenshield and his band of twelve dwarves (Dwalin, Balin, Kili, Fili, Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Bifur, Bofur and Bombur), who go over their plans to reclaim their ancient home, Lonely Mountain, and its vast treasure from the dragon Smaug. Gandalf unveils Thror's map showing a secret door into the Mountain and proposes that dumbfounded Bilbo should serve as the expedition's \"burglar\". The dwarves ridicule the idea, but Bilbo, indignant, sets off with them.\nThe group travels into the wild. Gandalf saves the company from trolls and leads them to Rivendell, where Elrond reveals more secrets from the map. When they attempt to cross the Misty Mountains, they are caught by goblins and driven deep underground. Although Gandalf kills the goblin king and rescues them, Bilbo gets separated from the others as they flee the goblins. Lost in the goblin tunnels, he stumbles across a mysterious ring and then encounters Gollum, who engages him in a game, each posing a riddle until one of them cannot solve it. If Bilbo wins, Gollum will show him the way out of the tunnels, but if he fails, his life will be forfeit. With the help of the ring, which confers invisibility when worn, Bilbo escapes and rejoins the dwarves, improving his reputation with them. The goblins and Wargs give chase, but the company are saved by eagles. They rest in the house of the skin-changer Beorn.\nThe company enters the dark forest of Mirkwood without Gandalf, who has other responsibilities. In Mirkwood, Bilbo first saves the dwarves from giant spiders and then from the dungeons of the Wood-elves. Nearing the Lonely Mountain, the travellers are welcomed by the human inhabitants of Lake-town, who hope the dwarves will fulfil prophecies of Smaug's demise. The expedition reaches the mountain and finds the secret door. The dwarves send a reluctant Bilbo inside to scout the dragon's lair. He steals a great cup and, while conversing with Smaug, spots a gap in the ancient dragon's armour. The enraged dragon, deducing that Lake-town has aided the intruders, flies off to destroy the town. A thrush overhears Bilbo's report of Smaug's vulnerability and tells a Lake-town resident named Bard. Smaug wreaks havoc on the town, until Bard shoots an arrow into the chink in Smaug's armour, killing the dragon.\nWhen the dwarves take possession of the mountain, Bilbo finds the Arkenstone, the most-treasured heirloom of Thorin's family, and hides it away. The Wood-elves and Lake-men request compensation for Lake-town's destruction and settlement of old claims on the treasure. When Thorin refuses to give them anything, they besiege the mountain. However, Thorin manages to send a message to his kinfolk in the Iron Hills and reinforces his position. Bilbo slips out and gives the Arkenstone to the besiegers, hoping to head off a war. When they offer the jewel to Thorin in exchange for treasure, Bilbo reveals how they obtained it. Thorin, furious at what he sees as betrayal, banishes Bilbo, and battle seems inevitable when Dain, Thorin's second cousin, arrives with an army of dwarf warriors.\nGandalf reappears to warn all of an approaching army of goblins and Wargs. The dwarves, men and elves band together, but only with the timely arrival of the eagles and Beorn, who fights in his bear form and kills the goblin general, do they win the climactic Battle of Five Armies. Thorin is fatally wounded and reconciles with Bilbo before he dies.\nBilbo accepts only a small portion of his share of the treasure, having no want or need for more, but still returns home a very wealthy hobbit roughly a year and a month after he first left. Years later, he writes the story of his adventures.\nConcept and creation.\nBackground.\nIn the early 1930s Tolkien was pursuing an academic career at the University of Oxford as Rawlinson and Bosworth Professor of Anglo-Saxon, with a fellowship at Pembroke College. Several of his poems had been published in magazines and small collections, including \"Goblin Feet\" and \"The Cat and the Fiddle: A Nursery Rhyme Undone and its Scandalous Secret Unlocked\", a reworking of \"Hey Diddle Diddle\", an English nursery rhyme. His creative endeavours at this time also included letters from Father Christmas to his children\u2014illustrated manuscripts that featured warring gnomes and goblins, and a helpful polar bear\u2014alongside the creation of elven languages and an attendant mythology, including \"The Book of Lost Tales\", which he had been creating since 1917. These works were all published posthumously.\nIn a 1955 letter to W. H. Auden, Tolkien recollects that he began \"The Hobbit\" one day early in the 1930s. While he was marking School Certificate papers, he found a blank page. Suddenly inspired, he wrote the words, \"In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit.\" By late 1932 he had finished the story and then lent the manuscript to several friends, including C.\u00a0S. Lewis and a student of Tolkien's named Elaine Griffiths. In 1936, when Griffiths was visited in Oxford by Susan Dagnall, a staff member of the publisher George Allen &amp; Unwin, she is reported to have either lent Dagnall the book or suggested that she should borrow it from Tolkien. In any event, Dagnall was impressed by it, and showed the book to Stanley Unwin, who then asked his 10-year-old son Rayner to review it. Rayner's favourable comments settled Allen &amp; Unwin's decision to publish Tolkien's book.\nSetting.\nThe setting of \"The Hobbit\", as described on its original dust jacket, is an \"ancient time between the age of Faerie and the dominion of men\" in an unnamed fantasy world. The world is shown on the endpaper map as \"Western Lands\" westward and \"Wilderland\" as the east. Originally this world was self-contained, but as Tolkien began work on \"The Lord of the Rings\", he decided these stories could fit into the legendarium he had been working on privately for decades. \"The Hobbit\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\" became the end of the \"Third Age\" of Middle Earth within Arda. Eventually those tales of the earlier periods became published as \"The Silmarillion\" and other posthumous works.\nIllustration and design.\nTolkien's correspondence and publisher's records show that he was involved in the design and illustration of the entire book. All elements were the subject of considerable correspondence and fussing over by Tolkien. Rayner Unwin, in his publishing memoir, comments: \"In 1937 alone Tolkien wrote 26 letters to George Allen &amp; Unwin... detailed, fluent, often pungent, but infinitely polite and exasperatingly precise... I doubt any author today, however famous, would get such scrupulous attention.\"\nEven the maps, of which Tolkien originally proposed five, were considered and debated. He wished \"Thror's Map\" to be tipped in (that is, glued in after the book has been bound) at first mention in the text, and with the \"moon letter\" runes on the reverse so they could be seen when held up to the light. In the end the cost, as well as the shading of the maps, which would be difficult to reproduce, resulted in the final design of two maps as endpapers, \"Thror's map\", and the \"Map of Wilderland\" (see Rhovanion), both printed in black and red on the paper's cream background.\nOriginally Allen &amp; Unwin planned to illustrate the book only with the endpaper maps, but Tolkien's first tendered sketches so charmed the publisher's staff that they opted to include them without raising the book's price despite the extra cost. Thus encouraged, Tolkien supplied a second batch of illustrations. The publisher accepted all of these as well, giving the first edition ten black-and-white illustrations plus the two endpaper maps. The illustrated scenes were: \"The Hill: Hobbiton-across-the-Water\", \"The Trolls\", \"The Mountain Path\", \"The Misty Mountains looking West from the Eyrie towards Goblin Gate\", \"Beorn's Hall\", \"Mirkwood\", \"The Elvenking's Gate\", \"Lake Town\", \"The Front Gate\" and \"The Hall at Bag-End\". All but one of the illustrations were a full page, and one, the Mirkwood illustration, required a separate plate.\nSatisfied with his skills, the publishers asked Tolkien to design a dust jacket. This project, too, became the subject of many iterations and much correspondence, with Tolkien always writing disparagingly of his own ability to draw. The runic inscription around the edges of the illustration are a phonetic transliteration of English, giving the title of the book and details of the author and publisher. The original jacket design contained several shades of various colours, but Tolkien redrew it several times using fewer colours each time. His final design consisted of four colours. The publishers, mindful of the cost, removed the red from the sun to end up with only black, blue, and green ink on white stock.\nThe publisher's production staff designed a binding, but Tolkien objected to several elements. Through several iterations, the final design ended up as mostly the author's. The spine shows runes: two \"\u00fe\" (Thrain and Thror) runes and one \"d\" (door). The front and back covers were mirror images of each other, with an elongated dragon characteristic of Tolkien's style stamped along the lower edge, and with a sketch of the Misty Mountains stamped along the upper edge.\nOnce illustrations were approved for the book, Tolkien proposed colour plates as well. The publisher would not relent on this, so Tolkien pinned his hopes on the American edition to be published about six months later. Houghton Mifflin rewarded these hopes with the replacement of the frontispiece (\"The Hill: Hobbiton-across-the Water\") in colour and the addition of new colour plates: \"Rivendell\", \"Bilbo Woke Up with the Early Sun in His Eyes\", \"Bilbo comes to the Huts of the Raft-elves\" and \"Conversation with Smaug\", which features a dwarvish curse written in Tolkien's invented script Tengwar, and signed with two \"\u00fe\" (\"Th\") runes. The additional illustrations proved so appealing that George Allen &amp; Unwin adopted the colour plates as well for their second printing, with exception of \"Bilbo Woke Up with the Early Sun in His Eyes\".\nDifferent editions have been illustrated in diverse ways. Many follow the original scheme at least loosely, but many others are illustrated by other artists, especially the many translated editions. Some cheaper editions, particularly paperback, are not illustrated except with the maps. \"The Children's Book Club\" edition of 1942 includes the black-and-white pictures but no maps, an anomaly. Douglas Anderson's \"The Annotated Hobbit\" is illustrated with many black-and-white drawings taken from translations of the story into some 25 languages.\nTolkien's use of runes, both as decorative devices and as magical signs within the story, has been cited as a major cause for the popularization of runes within \"New Age\" and esoteric literature, stemming from Tolkien's popularity with the elements of counter-culture in the 1970s.\nGenre.\n\"The Hobbit\" takes cues from narrative models of children's literature, as shown by its omniscient narrator and characters that young children can relate to, such as the small, food-obsessed, and morally ambiguous Bilbo. The text emphasizes the relationship between time and narrative progress and it openly distinguishes \"safe\" from \"dangerous\" in its geography. Both are key elements of works intended for children, as is the \"home-away-home\" (or \"there and back again\") plot structure typical of the Bildungsroman. While Tolkien later claimed to dislike the aspect of the narrative voice addressing the reader directly, the narrative voice contributes significantly to the success of the novel. The scholar Lois R. Kuznets comments that the \"obtrusive narrator\" is part of a standard \"rhetoric of childhood\"; C. W. Sullivan III adds that Tolkien may have taken the idea of an intrusive narrator from the medieval texts \"Beowulf\" and \"Sir Gawain and the Green Knight\". Emer O'Sullivan, in her \"Comparative Children's Literature\", notes \"The Hobbit\" as one of a handful of children's books that have been accepted into mainstream literature, alongside Jostein Gaarder's \"Sophie's World\" (1991) and J. K. Rowling's \"Harry Potter\" series (1997\u20132007).\nTolkien intended \"The Hobbit\" as a \"fairy-story\" and wrote it in a tone suited to addressing children; he said later that the book was not specifically written for children, but had rather been created out of his interest in mythology and legend. Many of the initial reviews refer to the work as a fairy story. However, according to Jack Zipes writing in \"The Oxford Companion to Fairy Tales\", Bilbo is an atypical character for a fairy tale. The work is much longer than Tolkien's ideal proposed in his essay \"On Fairy-Stories\". Many fairy tale motifs, such as the repetition of similar events seen in the dwarves' arrival at Bilbo's and Beorn's homes, and folklore themes, such as trolls turning to stone, are to be found in the story.\nThe book is popularly called (and often marketed as) a fantasy novel, but like \"Peter Pan and Wendy\" by J. M. Barrie and \"The Princess and the Goblin\" by George MacDonald, both of which influenced Tolkien and contain fantasy elements, it is primarily identified as being children's literature. The two genres are not mutually exclusive, so some definitions of high fantasy include works for children by authors such as L. Frank Baum and Lloyd Alexander alongside the works of Gene Wolfe and Jonathan Swift, which are more often considered adult literature. \"The Hobbit\" has been called \"the most popular of all twentieth-century fantasies written for children\". Jane Chance, however, considers the book to be a children's novel only in the sense that it appeals to the child in an adult reader. Sullivan credits the first publication of \"The Hobbit\" as an important step in the development of high fantasy, and further credits the 1960s paperback debuts of \"The Hobbit\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\" as essential to the creation of a mass market for fiction of this kind as well as the fantasy genre's current status.\nStyle.\nTolkien's prose is unpretentious and straightforward, taking as given the existence of his imaginary world and describing its details in a matter-of-fact way, while often introducing the new and fantastic in an almost casual manner. This down-to-earth style, also found in later fantasy such as Richard Adams' \"Watership Down\" and Peter Beagle's \"The Last Unicorn\", accepts readers into the fictional world, rather than cajoling or attempting to convince them of its reality. While \"The Hobbit\" is written in a simple, friendly language, each of its characters has a unique voice. The narrator, who occasionally interrupts the narrative flow with asides (a device common to both children's and Anglo-Saxon literature), has his own linguistic style separate from those of the main characters.\nThe basic form of the story is that of a quest, told in episodes. For the most part of the book, each chapter introduces a different denizen of the Wilderland, some helpful and friendly towards the protagonists, and others threatening or dangerous. However the general tone is kept light-hearted, being interspersed with songs and humour. One example of the use of song to maintain tone is when Thorin and Company are kidnapped by goblins, who, when marching them into the underworld, sing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis onomatopoeic singing undercuts the dangerous scene with a sense of humour. Tolkien achieves balance of humour and danger through other means as well, as seen in the foolishness and Cockney dialect of the trolls and in the drunkenness of the elven captors. The general form\u2014that of a journey into strange lands, told in a light-hearted mood and interspersed with songs\u2014may be following the model of \"The Icelandic Journals\" by William Morris, an important literary influence on Tolkien.\nInfluences.\nNorse mythology.\nTolkien's works show many influences from Norse mythology, reflecting his lifelong passion for those stories and his academic interest in Germanic philology. \"The Hobbit\" is no exception to this; the work shows influences from northern European literature, myths and languages, especially from the \"Poetic Edda\" and the \"Prose Edda\". Examples include the names of the dwarves, Fili, Kili, Oin, Gloin, Bifur, Bofur, Bombur, Dori, Nori, Dwalin, Balin, Dain, Nain and Thorin Oakenshield, along with Gandalf which was a dwarf-name in the Norse. But while their names are Norse, the characters of the dwarves are based on fairy tales such as \"Snow White\" and \"Snow-White and Rose-Red\" as collected by the Brothers Grimm, while the latter tale may have influenced the character of Beorn.\nTolkien's use of descriptive names such as \"Misty Mountains\" and \"Bag End\" echoes the names used in Old Norse sagas. The names of the dwarf-friendly ravens, such as Ro\u00e4c, are derived from the Old Norse words for \"raven\" and \"rook\", but their peaceful characters are unlike the typical carrion birds from Old Norse and Old English literature. Tolkien is not simply skimming historical sources for effect: the juxtaposition of old and new styles of expression is seen by the Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey as one of the major themes explored in \"The Hobbit\". Maps figure in both saga literature and \"The Hobbit\".\nOld English literature.\nThemes from Old English literature, especially from \"Beowulf\", shape the ancient world which Bilbo stepped into. Tolkien, a scholar of \"Beowulf\", counted the epic among his \"most valued sources\" for \"The Hobbit\". Tolkien was one of the first critics to treat \"Beowulf\" as a literary work with value beyond the merely historical, with his 1936 lecture \"\". Tolkien borrowed several elements from \"Beowulf\", including a monstrous, intelligent dragon. Certain descriptions in \"The Hobbit\" seem to have been lifted straight out of \"Beowulf\" with some minor rewording, such as when the dragon stretches its neck out to sniff for intruders. Likewise, Tolkien's descriptions of the lair as accessed through a secret passage mirror those in \"Beowulf\". Other specific plot elements and features in \"The Hobbit\" that show similarities to \"Beowulf\" include the title of \"thief\", as Bilbo is called by Gollum and later by Smaug, and Smaug's personality, which leads to the destruction of Lake-town. Tolkien refines parts of \"Beowulf\"'s plot that he appears to have found less than satisfactorily described, such as details about the cup-thief and the dragon's intellect and personality.\nNamed swords of renown, adorned with runes, similarly have Old English connections. In using his elf-sword, Bilbo finally takes his first independent heroic action. By his naming the sword \"Sting\" we see Bilbo's acceptance of the kinds of cultural and linguistic practices found in \"Beowulf\", signifying his entrance into the ancient world in which he found himself. This progression culminates in Bilbo stealing a cup from the dragon's hoard, rousing him to wrath\u2014an incident directly mirroring \"Beowulf\" and an action entirely determined by traditional narrative patterns. As Tolkien wrote, \"The episode of the theft arose naturally (and almost inevitably) from the circumstances. It is difficult to think of any other way of conducting the story at this point. I fancy the author of \"Beowulf\" would say much the same.\" The name of the wizard Radagast is taken from the name of the Slavic deity Radogost.\nMedieval and mythological sources.\nThe representation of the dwarves in \"The Hobbit\" was influenced by his own selective reading of medieval texts regarding the Jewish people and their history. The dwarves' characteristics of being dispossessed of their ancient homeland at the Lonely Mountain, and living among other groups whilst retaining their own culture are all derived from the medieval image of Jews, whilst their warlike nature stems from accounts in the Hebrew Bible. The Dwarvish calendar invented for \"The Hobbit\" reflects the Jewish calendar which begins in late autumn. And although Tolkien denied that he used allegory, the dwarves taking Bilbo out of his complacent existence has been seen as an eloquent metaphor for the \"impoverishment of Western society without Jews.\"\nThe scholar of literature James L. Hodge describes the story as picaresque, a genre of fiction in which a hero relies on his wits to survive a series of risky episodes. Hodge further likens Bilbo's admittedly unheroic business of burglary to the trickster role of some pagan gods and mythical figures: Hermes steals cattle from Apollo, Prometheus and Coyote steal fire, Odin steals the mead of poetry, and so on. Hodge quotes the psychiatrist Carl Jung as saying that the figure of the trickster occurs in every age, whether in sacred rites or picaresque stories. Jaume Albero Poveda similarly calls the \"comical episodes\" like the riddle game between Bilbo and Gollum \"typical of the picaresque novel\".\n19th century fiction.\nTolkien wished to imitate the prose and poetry romances of the 19th-century Arts and Crafts polymath William Morris in style and approach. The Desolation of Smaug, portraying dragons as detrimental to landscape, is a motif explicitly borrowed from Morris. The Tolkien scholar Marjorie Burns writes that Bilbo's character and adventures match many details of Morris's expedition in Iceland. She comments, for instance, that the humorous drawings of Morris riding through the wilds of Iceland by his friend the artist Edward Burne-Jones can serve well as models for Bilbo on his adventures.\nTolkien wrote of being impressed as a boy by Samuel Rutherford Crockett's historical novel \"The Black Douglas\" and of basing the Necromancer\u2014Sauron\u2014on its villain, Gilles de Retz. Incidents in both \"The Hobbit\" and \"Lord of the Rings\" are similar in narrative and style to the novel, and its overall style and imagery have been suggested as having had an influence on Tolkien.\nThe Tolkien scholar Mark T. Hooker has catalogued a lengthy series of parallels between \"The Hobbit\" and Jules Verne's 1864 \"Journey to the Center of the Earth\". These include, among other things, a hidden runic message and a celestial alignment that direct the adventurers to the goals of their quests.\nTolkien's portrayal of goblins in \"The Hobbit\" was particularly influenced by George MacDonald's \"The Princess and the Goblin\". However, MacDonald's influence on Tolkien was more profound than the shaping of individual characters and episodes; his works helped Tolkien form his whole thinking on the role of fantasy within his Christian faith.\nCritical analysis.\nThemes.\nThe evolution and maturation of the protagonist, Bilbo Baggins, is central to the story. This journey of maturation, where Bilbo gains a clear sense of identity and confidence in the outside world, may be seen in psychological terms as a Bildungsroman rather than a traditional quest. The Jungian concept of individuation is also reflected through this theme of growing maturity and capability, with the author contrasting Bilbo's personal growth against the arrested development of the dwarves. Thus, while Gandalf exerts a parental influence over Bilbo early on, it is Bilbo who gradually takes over leadership of the party, a fact the dwarves could not bear to acknowledge. The analogue of the \"underworld\" and the hero returning from it with a boon (such as the ring, or Elvish blades) that benefits his society is seen to fit the mythic archetypes regarding initiation and male coming-of-age as described by Joseph Campbell. \nChance compares the development and growth of Bilbo against other characters to the concepts of just kingship versus sinful kingship derived from the \"Ancrene Wisse\" (which Tolkien had written on in 1929), and a Christian understanding of \"Beowulf\". Shippey comments that Bilbo is nothing like a king, and that Chance's talk of \"types\" just muddies the waters, though he agrees with her that there are \"self-images of Tolkien\" throughout his fiction; and she is right, too, in seeing Middle-earth as a balance between creativity and scholarship, \"Germanic past and Christian present\".\nThe overcoming of greed and selfishness has been seen as the central moral of the story. Whilst greed is a recurring theme in the novel, with many of the episodes stemming from one or more of the characters' simple desire for food (be it trolls eating dwarves or dwarves eating Wood-elf fare) or a desire for beautiful objects, such as gold and jewels, it is only by the Arkenstone's influence upon Thorin that greed, and its attendant vices \"coveting\" and \"malignancy\", come fully to the fore in the story and provide the moral crux of the tale. Bilbo steals the Arkenstone\u2014a most ancient relic of the dwarves\u2014and attempts to ransom it to Thorin for peace. However, Thorin turns on the Hobbit as a traitor, disregarding all the promises and \"at your services\" he had previously bestowed. In the end Bilbo gives up the precious stone and most of his share of the treasure to help those in greater need. Tolkien also explores the motif of jewels that inspire intense greed that corrupts those who covet them in the \"Silmarillion\", and there are connections between the words \"Arkenstone\" and \"Silmaril\" in Tolkien's invented etymologies.\n\"The Hobbit\" employs themes of animism. An important concept in anthropology and child development, animism is the idea that all things\u2014including inanimate objects and natural events, such as storms or purses, as well as living things like animals and plants\u2014possess human-like intelligence. John D. Rateliff calls this the \"Doctor Dolittle Theme\" in \"The History of The Hobbit\", and cites the multitude of talking animals as indicative of this theme. These sapient beings include ravens, a thrush, spiders and the dragon Smaug, alongside the anthropomorphic goblins and elves. Patrick Curry notes that animism is also found in Tolkien's other works, and mentions the \"roots of mountains\" and \"feet of trees\" in \"The Hobbit\" as a linguistic shifting in level from the inanimate to animate. Tolkien saw the idea of animism as closely linked to the emergence of human language and myth: \"...The first men to talk of 'trees and stars' saw things very differently. To them, the world was alive with mythological beings... To them the whole of creation was 'myth-woven and elf-patterned'.\"\nInterpretation.\nAs in plot and setting, Tolkien brings his literary theories to bear in forming characters and their interactions. He portrays Bilbo as a modern anachronism exploring an essentially antique world. Bilbo is able to negotiate and interact within this antique world because language and tradition make connections between the two worlds. For example, Gollum's riddles are taken from old historical sources, while those of Bilbo come from modern nursery books. It is the form of the riddle game, familiar to both, which allows Gollum and Bilbo to engage each other, rather than the content of the riddles themselves. This idea of a superficial contrast between characters' individual linguistic style, tone and sphere of interest, leading to an understanding of the deeper unity between the ancient and modern, is a recurring theme in \"The Hobbit\".\nSmaug is the main antagonist. In many ways the Smaug episode reflects and references the dragon of \"Beowulf\", and Tolkien uses the episode to put into practice some of the ground-breaking literary theories he had developed about the Old English poem in its portrayal of the dragon as having bestial intelligence. Tolkien greatly prefers this motif over the later medieval trend of using the dragon as a symbolic or allegorical figure, such as in the legend of Saint George and the Dragon. Smaug the dragon with his golden hoard may be seen as an example of the traditional relationship between evil and metallurgy as collated in the depiction of Pand\u00e6monium with its \"Belched fire and rolling smoke\" in John Milton's \"Paradise Lost\". Of all the characters, Smaug's speech is the most modern, using idioms such as \"Don't let your imagination run away with you!\"\nJust as Tolkien's literary theories have been seen to influence the tale, so have Tolkien's experiences. \"The Hobbit\" may be read as Tolkien's parable of World War I with the hero being plucked from his rural home and thrown into a far-off war where traditional types of heroism are shown to be futile. The tale as such explores the theme of heroism. As Janet Brennan Croft notes, Tolkien's literary reaction to war at this time differed from most post-war writers by eschewing irony as a method for distancing events and instead using mythology to mediate his experiences. Similarities to the works of other writers who faced the First World War are seen in \"The Hobbit\", including portraying warfare as anti-pastoral: in \"The Desolation of Smaug\", both the area under the influence of Smaug before his demise and the setting for the Battle of Five Armies later are described as barren, damaged landscapes. \"The Hobbit\" makes a warning against repeating the tragedies of the First World War, and Tolkien's attitude as a veteran may well be summed up by Bilbo's comment: \"Victory after all, I suppose! Well, it seems a very gloomy business.\"\nReception.\nOn its publication in October 1937, \"The Hobbit\" was met with almost unanimously favourable reviews from publications both in Britain and America, including \"The Times\", \"Catholic World\", and \"New York Post\". C. S. Lewis, friend of Tolkien (and later author of \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" between 1949 and 1954), writing in \"The Times\" reports:\nThe truth is that in this book a number of good things, never before united, have come together: a fund of humour, an understanding of children, and a happy fusion of the scholar's with the poet's grasp of mythology... The professor has the air of inventing nothing. He has studied trolls and dragons at first hand and describes them with that fidelity that is worth oceans of glib \"originality.\"\nLewis compares the book to \"Alice in Wonderland\" in that both children and adults may find different things to enjoy in it, and places it alongside \"Flatland\", \"Phantastes\", and \"The Wind in the Willows\". W. H. Auden, in his review of the sequel \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", calls \"The Hobbit\" \"one of the best children's stories of this century\".\n\"The Hobbit\" was nominated for the Carnegie Medal, and awarded a prize from the \"New York Herald Tribune\" for best juvenile fiction of 1938. More recently, the book has been recognized as \"Most Important 20th-Century Novel (for Older Readers)\" in the \"Children's Books of the Century\" poll in \"Books for Keeps\". In 2012 it was ranked number 14 on a list of the top 100 children's novels published by \"School Library Journal\".\nPublication of the sequel \"The Lord of the Rings\" altered many critics' reception of the work. Instead of approaching \"The Hobbit\" as a children's book in its own right, critics such as Randel Helms picked up on the idea of \"The Hobbit\" as being a \"prelude\", relegating the story to a dry-run for the later work. Countering a presentist interpretation are those who say this approach misses out on much of the original's value as a children's book and as a work of high fantasy in its own right, and that it disregards the book's influence on these genres. Commentators such as Paul Kocher, John D. Rateliff and C. W. Sullivan encourage readers to treat the works separately, both because \"The Hobbit\" was conceived, published, and received independently of the later work, and to avoid dashing readers' expectations of tone and style.\nPublication.\nGeorge Allen &amp; Unwin published the first edition of \"The Hobbit\" on 21 September 1937 with a print run of 1,500 copies, which sold out by December because of enthusiastic reviews. This first printing was illustrated in black and white by Tolkien, who designed the dust jacket as well. Houghton Mifflin of Boston and New York reset type for an American edition, to be released early in 1938, in which four of the illustrations would be colour plates. Allen &amp; Unwin decided to incorporate the colour illustrations into their second printing, released at the end of 1937. Despite the book's popularity, paper rationing due to World War II and not ending until 1949 meant that the Allen &amp; Unwin edition of the book was often unavailable during this period.\nSubsequent editions in English were published in 1951, 1966, 1978, and 1995. Numerous English-language editions of \"The Hobbit\" have been produced by several publishers, making it one of the best-selling books of all time with over 100 million copies sold by 2012. In addition, \"The Hobbit\" has been translated into over sixty languages, with more than one published version for some languages.\nRevisions.\nIn December 1937 \"The Hobbit\"'s publisher, Stanley Unwin, asked Tolkien for a sequel. In response Tolkien provided drafts for \"The Silmarillion\", but the editors rejected them, believing that the public wanted \"more about hobbits\". Tolkien subsequently began work on \"The New Hobbit\", which would eventually become \"The Lord of the Rings\", a course that would not only change the context of the original story, but lead to substantial changes to the character of Gollum.\nIn the first edition of \"The Hobbit\", Gollum willingly bets his magic ring on the outcome of the riddle-game, and he and Bilbo part amicably. In the second edition edits, to reflect the new concept of the One Ring and its corrupting abilities, Tolkien made Gollum more aggressive towards Bilbo and distraught at losing the ring. The encounter ends with Gollum's curse, \"Thief! Thief, Thief, Baggins! We hates it, we hates it, we hates it forever!\" This presages Gollum's portrayal in \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nTolkien sent this revised version of the chapter \"Riddles in the Dark\" to Unwin as an example of the kinds of changes needed to bring the book into conformity with \"The Lord of the Rings\", but he heard nothing back for years. When he was sent galley proofs of a new edition, Tolkien was surprised to find that the sample text had been incorporated. In \"The Lord of the Rings\", the original version of the riddle game is explained as a lie made up by Bilbo under the harmful influence of the Ring, whereas the revised version contains the \"true\" account. The revised text became the second edition, published in 1951 in both the UK and the US.\nTolkien began a new version in 1960, attempting to adjust the tone of \"The Hobbit\" to its sequel. He abandoned the new revision at chapter three after he received criticism that it \"just wasn't \"The Hobbit\"\", implying it had lost much of its light-hearted tone and quick pace.\nAfter an unauthorized paperback edition of \"The Lord of the Rings\" appeared from Ace Books in 1965, Houghton Mifflin and Ballantine Books asked Tolkien to refresh the text of \"The Hobbit\" to renew the US copyright. This text became the 1966 third edition. Tolkien took the opportunity to align the narrative more closely to \"The Lord of the Rings\" and to cosmological developments from his still unpublished \"Quenta Silmarillion\" as it stood at that time. These were mostly small edits; for example, changing the phrase \"elves that are now called Gnomes\" from the first, and second editions, on page 63, to \"High Elves of the West, my kin\" in the third edition. Tolkien had used \"gnome\" in his earlier writing to refer to the second kindred of the High Elves\u2014the Noldor (or \"Deep Elves\")\u2014thinking that \"gnome\", derived from the Greek \"gnosis\" (knowledge), was a good name for the wisest of the elves. However, because of the term's association with garden gnomes, Tolkien abandoned the term. This edition also introduced a new version of the history of Erebor. In the original story, Erebor was founded by Thorin's grandfather Thror, and the Arkenstone discovered by his father Thrain. However, to correct a note on the map saying that Thrain had been King Under the Mountain, Tolkien introduced a distant ancestor Thrain I in the third edition text, who both founded the kingdom and discovered the Arkenstone.\nPosthumous critical editions.\nSince Tolkien's death, two critical editions of \"The Hobbit\" have been published, providing commentary on the creation, emendation and development of the text. In his 1988 \"The Annotated Hobbit\", Douglas Anderson provides the text of the published book alongside commentary and illustrations. Later editions added the text of \"The Quest of Erebor\". Anderson's commentary makes note of the sources Tolkien brought together in preparing the text, and chronicles the changes Tolkien made to the published editions. The text is accompanied by illustrations from foreign language editions, among them works by Tove Jansson.\nWith \"The History of The Hobbit\", published in two parts in 2007, John D. Rateliff provides the full text of the earliest and intermediary drafts of the book, alongside commentary that shows relationships to Tolkien's scholarly and creative works, both contemporary and later. In addition, Rateliff provides the abandoned 1960s retelling of the first three chapters, which sought to harmonise \"The Hobbit\" with \"The Lord of the Rings\", and previously unpublished illustrations by Tolkien. The book separates commentary from Tolkien's text, allowing the reader to read the original drafts as self-contained stories.\nCommercial success and collectors' market.\nWhile reliable figures are difficult to obtain, estimated global sales of \"The Hobbit\" run between 35 and 100 million copies since 1937. In the UK \"The Hobbit\" has not retreated from the top 5,000 bestselling books measured by Nielsen BookScan since 1998, when the index began, achieving a three-year sales peak rising from 33,084 (2000) to 142,541 (2001), 126,771 (2002) and 61,229 (2003), ranking it at the 3rd position in Nielsen's \"Evergreen\" book list. The enduring popularity of \"The Hobbit\" makes early printings of the book attractive collector's items. The first printing of the first English-language edition can sell for between \u00a36,000 and \u00a320,000 at auction, while the price for a signed first edition has reached over \u00a360,000.\nLegacy.\n\"The Lord of the Rings\".\n\"The Hobbit\"'s sequel \"The Lord of the Rings\" is often claimed to be its greatest legacy. The plots share the same basic structure in the same sequence: the stories are both quests starting at Bag End, the home of Bilbo Baggins; Bilbo hosts a party that sets the novel's main plot into motion; Gandalf sends the protagonist into a quest eastward; Elrond offers a haven and advice; the adventurers escape dangerous creatures underground (Goblin Town/Moria); they engage another group of elves (Mirkwood/Lothl\u00f3rien); they traverse a desolate region (Desolation of Smaug/the Dead Marshes); they are received and nourished by a small settlement of men (Esgaroth/Ithilien); they fight in a massive battle (The Battle of Five Armies/Battle of Pelennor Fields); their journey climaxes within an infamous mountain peak (Lonely Mountain/Mount Doom); a descendant of kings is restored to his ancestral throne (Bard/Aragorn); and the questing party returns home to find it in a deteriorated condition (having possessions auctioned off/the Scouring of the Shire). Scholars including Paul H. Kocher and Randel Helms have documented the similarities.\n\"The Lord of the Rings\" contains several more supporting scenes, and has a more sophisticated plot structure, following the paths of multiple characters. Tolkien wrote the later story in much less humorous tones and infused it with more complex moral and philosophical themes. The differences between the two stories can cause difficulties when readers, expecting them to be similar, find that they are not. Many of the thematic and stylistic differences arose because Tolkien wrote \"The Hobbit\" as a story for children, and \"The Lord of the Rings\" for the same audience, who had subsequently grown up since its publication. Further, Tolkien's concept of Middle-earth was to continually change and slowly evolve throughout his life and writings.\nIn education.\nThe style and themes of the book have been seen to help stretch young readers' literacy skills, preparing them to approach the works of Charles Dickens and William Shakespeare. Further, it may exercise the reading skills of advanced younger readers better than much modern fiction for teenagers. Educationalists have seen \"The Hobbit\" as a means to encourage literacy among 11- to 14-year-old boys in particular.\nAdaptations.\n\"The Hobbit\" has been adapted many times for a variety of media, starting with a March 1953 stage production by St. Margaret's School, Edinburgh. The first motion picture adaptation of \"The Hobbit\" was Gene Deitch's 1966 short film of cartoon stills.\nIn 1968, BBC Radio 4 broadcast an 8-part radio drama version by Michael Kilgarriff. \nIn 1974, Nicol Williamson recorded an abridged version of the book on 4 long-playing records for the Argo Records label, voicing all the characters. \nIn 1977, Rankin/Bass made an animated film based on the book. In 1978, Romeo Muller won a Peabody Award for his teleplay, though critics described it as \"execrable\" and \"confusing\". A children's opera composed by Dean Burry appeared in 2004 in Toronto.\nBetween 2012 and 2014, Peter Jackson's three-part live-action film version appeared on cinema screens.\nSeveral computer and video games have been based on the story, including a 1982 game by Beam Software.\nDuring the COVID-19 lockdown, Andy Serkis read the whole of \"The Hobbit\" to raise money for charity. He then recorded the work again as an audiobook, with cover art by Alan Lee.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n "}
{"id": "30294", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30294", "title": "The Lord of the Rings/One Ring", "text": ""}
{"id": "30296", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30296", "title": "Tax Freedom Day", "text": "First day of the year on which a nation as a whole has earned enough income to pay its taxes\nTax Freedom Day is a concept developed and trademarked by American businessman Dallas Hostetler, which aims to calculate the first day of the year on which a nation as a whole has theoretically earned enough income to pay its taxes. Every dollar that is officially considered income by the government is counted, and every payment to the government that is officially considered a tax is counted. Taxes at all levels of government \u2013 local, state and federal \u2013 are included.\nHistory and methodology.\nThe concept of Tax Freedom Day was developed in 1948 by Florida businessman Dallas Hostetler, who trademarked the phrase \"Tax Freedom Day\" and calculated it each year for the next two decades. In 1971, Hostetler retired and transferred the trademark to the Tax Foundation.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the \"Tax Freedom Day\" is annually calculated by the Tax Foundation, a Washington, D.C.\u2013based think tank. Their results are as follows:\nAround the world.\nMany other companies and organizations in countries throughout the world now produce their own \"Tax Freedom Day\" analysis. According to the Tax Foundation, Tax Freedom Day reports are currently being published in eight countries. Due to the different ways that nations collect and categorize public finance data, however, Tax Freedom Days are not necessarily directly comparable from one country to another.\nEuropean Union.\nA 2010 study published in L'Anglophone, a Brussels newspaper, compared the tax burdens of \"Average Joes\" in each of the 27 EU member states and projected the Tax Freedom Day for workers earning a typical wage. Income taxes, social security contributions (by the employee and the employer) and projected VAT contributions were included in the calculations.\nRegarding the discrepancy between their calculation of August 3 as the typical Belgian worker's Tax Freedom Day and that of PriceWaterhouseCoopers (PWC), L'Anglophone's authors wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[PWC's] figures count revenue from all taxes (including those on corporate profits, petrol, cigarettes, &amp;c.) and thus present a more complete picture of the country\u2019s total tax burden,\" adding that it is \"an average applied to all Belgians \u2013 not all Belgian workers; in 2008, less than half of Belgium\u2019s population (4.99 million working out of 10.67 million citizens) was legally working. Consequently, a huge share of Belgium\u2019s tax burden is borne by the working population.\nCriticism.\nIn the book \"\", philosopher Joseph Heath criticizes the idea that tax-paying is inherently different from consumption:\nIt would make just as much sense to declare an annual \"mortgage freedom day\", in order to let mortgage owners know what day they \"stop working for the bank and start working for themselves\". ...But who cares? Homeowners are not really \"working for the bank\"; they're merely financing their own consumption. After all, they're the ones living in the house, not the bank manager.\nMathematical.\nFor Canada, the Fraser Institute also includes a \"Personal Tax Freedom Day Calculator\" that estimates a customized Tax Freedom Day based on additional variables such as age of household head, sex of household head, marital status and number of children. However, the Fraser Institute's figures have been disputed. For example, a 2005 study by Osgoode Hall Law Professor Neil Brooks argued that the Fraser Institute's Tax Freedom Day analysis includes flawed accounting, including the exclusion of several important forms of income and overstating tax figures, moving the date nearly two months later.\nIn America, while Tax Freedom Day presents an \"average American\" tax burden, it is not a tax burden typical for an American. That is, the tax burdens of most Americans are substantially overstated by Tax Freedom Day. The larger tax bills associated with higher incomes increases the average tax burden above that of most Americans.\nThe Tax Foundation defends its methodology by pointing out that Tax Freedom Day is the U.S. economy's overall average tax burden\u2014not the tax burden of the \"average\" American, which is how it is often misinterpreted by members of the media. Tax Foundation materials do not use the phrase \"tax burden of the average American\", although members of the media often make this mistake.\nAnother criticism is that the calculation includes capital gains taxes but not capital gains income, thus overstating the tax burden. For example, in the late 1990s the US Tax Freedom Day moved later, reaching its latest date ever in 2000, but this was largely due to capital gains taxes on the bull market of that era rather than an increase in tax rates. In other words, variations in capital gains income and their associated taxes cause changes in the amount of taxes, but not in the income used in the calculation of Tax Freedom Day.\nThe Tax Foundation argues that the Tax Freedom Day calculation does not include capital gains as income because it uses income and tax data directly from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). BEA has never counted capital gains as income since they don't represent current production available to pay taxes, and so the Tax Foundation excludes them as well. Additionally, the Tax Foundation argues that the exclusion of capital gains income is irrelevant in most years since including capital gains would only shift Tax Freedom Day by 1 percent in either direction in most years. A 1 percent change would represent 3.65 days. From 1968 to 2019 the date has never left the 21-day range of April 13 to May 3.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30297", "revid": "8087765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30297", "title": "Tax", "text": "Compulsory contribution to state revenue\nA tax is a mandatory financial charge or levy imposed on an individual or legal entity by a governmental organization to support government spending and public expenditures collectively or to regulate and reduce negative externalities. Tax compliance refers to policy actions and individual behavior aimed at ensuring that taxpayers are paying the right amount of tax at the right time and securing the correct tax allowances and tax relief. The first known taxation occurred in Ancient Egypt around 3000\u20132800 BC. Taxes consist of direct or indirect taxes and may be paid in money or as labor equivalent.\nAll countries have a tax system in place to pay for public, common societal, or agreed national needs and for the functions of government. Some countries levy a flat percentage rate of taxation on personal annual income, but most scale taxes are progressive based on brackets of yearly income amounts. Most countries charge a tax on an individual's income and corporate income. Countries or sub-units often also impose wealth taxes, inheritance taxes, gift taxes, property taxes, sales taxes, use taxes, environmental taxes, payroll taxes, duties, or tariffs. It is also possible to levy a tax on tax, as with a gross receipts tax.\nIn economic terms (circular flow of income), taxation transfers wealth from households or businesses to the government. This affects economic growth and welfare, which can be increased (known as fiscal multiplier) or decreased (known as excess burden of taxation). Consequently, taxation is a highly debated topic by some, as although taxation is deemed necessary by consensus for society to function and grow in an orderly and equitable manner through the government provision of public goods and public services, others such as libertarians are anti-taxation and denounce taxation broadly or in its entirety, classifying taxation as theft or extortion through coercion along with the use of force. Within market economies, taxation is considered the most viable option to operate the government (instead of widespread state ownership of the means of production), as taxation enables the government to generate revenue without heavily interfering with the market and private businesses; taxation preserves the efficiency and productivity of the private sector by allowing individuals and companies to make their own economic decisions, engage in flexible production, competition, and innovation as a result of market forces.\nCertain countries (usually small in size or population, which results in a smaller infrastructure and social expenditure) function as tax havens by imposing minimal taxes on the personal income of individuals and corporate income. These tax havens attract capital from abroad (particularly from larger economies) while resulting in loss of tax revenues within other non-haven countries (through base erosion and profit shifting).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOverview.\nLegal and economic definitions of taxes differ, such that multiple transfers to governments are not considered taxes by economists. For example, some transfers to the public sector are comparable to prices. Examples include tuition at public universities and fees for utilities provided by local governments. Governments also obtain resources by \"creating\" money and coins (for example, by printing bills and by minting coins), through voluntary gifts (for example, contributions to public universities and museums), by imposing penalties (such as traffic fines), by borrowing and confiscating criminal proceeds. From the view of economists, a tax is a non-penal, yet compulsory transfer of resources from the private to the public sector, levied on a basis of predetermined criteria and without reference to specific benefits received.\nIn modern taxation systems, governments levy taxes in money, but in-kind and \"corv\u00e9e\" taxation are characteristic of traditional or pre-capitalist states and their functional equivalents. The method of taxation and the government expenditure of taxes raised is often highly debated in politics and economics. \nTax collection is performed by a government agency such as the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in the United States, His Majesty's Revenue and Customs (HMRC) in the United Kingdom, the Canada Revenue Agency or the Australian Taxation Office. Certain taxes are also collected by subnational authorities, for example council tax, Local Body Tax, or rates. When taxes are not fully paid, the state may impose civil penalties (such as fines or forfeiture) or criminal penalties (such as incarceration) on the non-paying entity or individual.\nPurposes and effects.\nThe levying of taxes aims to raise revenue to fund governing, to alter prices in order to affect demand, or to regulate some form of cost or benefit. States and their functional equivalents throughout history have used the money provided by taxation to carry out multiple functions. Some of these include expenditures on economic infrastructure (roads, public transportation, sanitation, legal systems, public security, public education, public health systems, public utilities), military, scientific research &amp; development, culture and the arts, public works, distribution, data collection and dissemination, public insurance, and the operation of government itself. A government's ability to raise taxes is called its fiscal capacity.\nWhen expenditures exceed tax revenue, a government accumulates government debt. A portion of taxes may be used to service past debts. \nGovernments also use taxes to fund welfare, pensions, subsidies, and other public services not already mentioned above.\nAccording to the proponents of the chartalist theory of money creation, taxes are not needed for government revenue, as long as the government in question is able to issue fiat money. According to this view, the purpose of taxation is to maintain the stability of the currency, express public policy regarding the distribution of wealth, subsidizing certain industries or population groups or isolating the costs of certain benefits, such as highways or social security.\nTypes.\nThe Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) publishes an analysis of the tax systems of member countries. As part of such analysis, OECD has developed a definition and system of classification of internal taxes, generally followed below. In addition, a number of countries impose taxes (tariffs) on the import of goods.\nTaxes on income, profits and capital gains.\nIncome tax.\nMany jurisdictions tax the income of individuals and of business entities, including corporations. Generally, the authorities impose a tax on net profits from a business, on net gains, and on other income. Computation of income subject to tax may be determined under accounting principles used in the jurisdiction, which tax-law principles in the jurisdiction may modify or replace. The incidence of taxation varies by system, and some systems may be viewed as progressive or regressive. Rates of tax may vary or be constant (flat) by income level. Multiple systems allow individuals certain personal allowances and other non-business reductions to taxable income, although business deductions tend to be favored over personal deductions.\nTax-collection agencies often collect personal income tax on a pay-as-you-earn basis, with corrections made after the end of the tax year. These corrections take one of two forms:\nIncome-tax systems often make deductions available that reduce the total tax liability by reducing total taxable income. They may allow losses from one type of income to count against another \u2013 for example, a loss on the stock market may be deducted against taxes paid on wages. Other tax systems may isolate the loss, such that business losses can only be deducted against business income tax by carrying forward the loss to later tax years.\nNegative income tax.\nIn economics, a negative income tax (abbreviated NIT) is a progressive income tax system where people earning below a certain amount receive supplemental payment from the government instead of paying taxes to the government.\nCapital gains.\nMost jurisdictions imposing an income tax treat capital gains as part of income subject to tax. Capital gain is generally a gain on sale of capital assets\u2014that is, those assets not held for sale in the ordinary course of business. Capital assets include personal assets in a number of jurisdictions. Some jurisdictions provide preferential rates of tax or only partial taxation for capital gains. Some jurisdictions impose different rates or levels of capital-gains taxation based on the length of time the asset was held. Because tax rates are often much lower for capital gains than for ordinary income, there is widespread controversy and dispute about the proper definition of capital.\nCorporate.\nCorporate tax refers to income tax, capital tax, net-worth tax, or other taxes imposed on corporations. Rates of tax and the taxable base for corporations may differ from those for individuals or for other taxable persons.\nSocial-security contributions.\nMany countries provide publicly funded retirement or healthcare systems. In connection with these systems, the country typically requires employers or employees to make compulsory payments. These payments are often computed by reference to wages or earnings from self-employment. Tax rates are generally fixed, but a different rate may be imposed on employers than on employees. Some systems provide an upper limit on earnings subject to the tax. A few systems provide that the tax is payable only on wages above a particular amount. Such upper or lower limits may apply for retirement but not for health-care components of the tax. Some have argued that such taxes on wages are a form of \"forced savings\" and not really a tax, while others point to redistribution through such systems between generations (from newer cohorts to older cohorts) and across income levels (from higher income levels to lower income-levels) which suggests that such programs are really taxed and spending programs.\nPayroll or workforce.\nUnemployment and similar taxes are often imposed on employers based on the total payroll. These taxes may be imposed in both the country and sub-country levels.\nWealth.\nA wealth tax is levied on the total value of personal assets, including: bank deposits, real estate, assets in insurance and pension plans, ownership of unincorporated businesses, financial securities, and personal trusts. Liabilities (primarily mortgages and other loans) are typically deducted, hence it is sometimes called a net wealth tax.\nProperty.\nRecurrent property taxes may be imposed on immovable property (real property) and on some classes of movable property. In addition, recurrent taxes may be imposed on the net wealth of individuals or corporations. Multiple jurisdictions impose inheritance tax on property at time of inheritance or gift tax at the time of gift transfer. Some jurisdictions impose taxes on financial or capital transactions.\nProperty taxes.\nA property tax (or millage tax) is an \" ad valorem\" tax levy on the value of a property that the owner of the property is required to pay to a government in which the property is situated. Multiple jurisdictions may tax the same property. There are three general varieties of property: land, improvements to land (immovable human-made things, e.g. buildings), and personal property (movable things). Real estate or realty is the combination of land and improvements to the land.\nProperty taxes are usually charged on a recurrent basis (e.g., yearly). A common type of property tax is an annual charge on the ownership of real estate, where the tax base is the estimated value of the property. For a period of over 150 years from 1695, the government of England levied a window tax, with the result that one can still see listed buildings with windows bricked up in order to save their owner's money. A similar tax on hearths existed in France and elsewhere, with similar results. The two most common types of event-driven property taxes are stamp duty, charged upon change of ownership, and inheritance tax, which multiple countries impose on the estates of the deceased.\nIn contrast with a tax on real estate (land and buildings), a land-value tax (LVT) is levied only on the unimproved value of the land (\"land\" in this instance may mean either the economic term, i.e., all-natural resources, or the natural resources associated with specific areas of the Earth's surface: \"lots\" or \"land parcels\"). Proponents of the land-value tax argue that it is economically justified, as it will not deter production, distort market mechanisms or otherwise create deadweight losses the way other taxes do.\nWhen real estate is held by a higher government unit or some other entity not subject to taxation by the local government, the taxing authority may receive a payment in lieu of taxes to compensate it for some or all of the foregone tax revenues.\nIn a number of jurisdictions (including multiple American states), there is a general tax levied periodically on residents who own personal property (personalty) within the jurisdiction. Vehicle and boat registration fees are subsets of this kind of tax. The tax is often designed with blanket coverage and large exceptions for things like food and clothing. Household goods are often exempt when kept or used within the household. Any otherwise non-exempt object can lose its exemption if regularly kept outside the household. Thus, tax collectors often monitor newspaper articles for stories about wealthy people who have lent art to museums for public display, because the artworks have then become subject to personal property tax. If an artwork had to be sent to another state for some touch-ups, it may have become subject to personal property tax in \"that\" state as well.\nInheritance.\nInheritance tax, also called estate tax, are taxes that arise for inheritance or inherited income. In United States tax law, there is a distinction between an estate tax and an inheritance tax: the former taxes the personal representatives of the deceased, while the latter taxes the beneficiaries of the estate. However, this distinction does not apply in other jurisdictions; for example, if using this terminology UK inheritance tax would be an estate tax. \nExpatriation.\nAn expatriation tax is a tax on individuals who renounce their citizenship or residence. The tax is often imposed based on a deemed disposition of all the individual's property. One example is the United States under the \"American Jobs Creation Act\", where any individual who has a net worth of $2 million or an average income-tax liability of $127,000 who renounces his or her citizenship and leaves the country is automatically assumed to have done so for tax avoidance reasons and is subject to a higher tax rate.\nRemittance.\nA remittance tax is an excise tax levied on international money transfers, typically paid by a sender to a recipient in a foreign country. Governments may do this to raise revenue, discourage immigration and illicit financing, or in some cases address capital flight by discouraging excess outflows. An example is in the One big beautiful Bill, there is a 1% remittance tax for transferring money oversees. Supporters of this tax say that this will reduce illegal immigration, raise revenue, and address illicit funds, while critics say this will disproportionately effect poor people and countries who rely on remittences and that it may either discourage sending money to their families or force them to cut back on spending domestically, which will impact the economy.\nTransfer.\nHistorically, in a number of countries, a contract needs to have a stamp affixed to make it valid. The charge for the stamp is either a fixed amount or a percentage of the value of the transaction. In most countries, the stamp has been abolished but stamp duty remains. Stamp duty is levied in the UK on the purchase of shares and securities, the issue of bearer instruments, and certain partnership transactions. Its modern derivatives, stamp duty reserve tax and stamp duty land tax, are respectively charged on transactions involving securities and land. Stamp duty has the effect of discouraging speculative purchases of assets by decreasing liquidity. In the United States, transfer tax is often charged by the state or local government and (in the case of real property transfers) can be tied to the recording of the deed or other transfer documents.\nWealth (net worth).\nSome countries' governments will require a declaration of the taxpayers' balance sheet (assets and liabilities), and from that exact a tax on net worth (assets minus liabilities), as a percentage of the net worth, or a percentage of the net worth exceeding a certain level. The tax may be levied on \"natural\" or \"legal persons.\"\nGoods and services.\nValue added.\nA value-added tax (VAT), also known as Goods and Services Tax (GST), Single Business Tax, or Turnover Tax in some countries, applies the equivalent of a sales tax to every operation that creates value. To give an example, sheet steel is imported by a machine manufacturer. That manufacturer will pay the VAT on the purchase price, remitting that amount to the government. The manufacturer will then transform the steel into a machine, selling the machine for a higher price to a wholesale distributor. The manufacturer will collect the VAT on the higher price but will remit to the government only the excess related to the \"value-added\" (the price over the cost of the sheet steel). The wholesale distributor will then continue the process, charging the retail distributor the VAT on the entire price to the retailer, but remitting only the amount related to the distribution mark-up to the government. The last VAT amount is paid by the eventual retail customer who cannot recover any of the previously paid VAT. For a VAT and sales tax of identical rates, the total tax paid is the same, but it is paid at differing points in the process.\nVAT is usually administrated by requiring the company to complete a VAT return, giving details of VAT it has been charged (referred to as input tax) and VAT it has charged to others (referred to as output tax). The difference between output tax and input tax is payable to the Local Tax Authority.\nMany tax authorities have introduced automated VAT which has increased accountability and auditability, by utilizing computer systems, thereby also enabling anti-cybercrime offices as well.\nSales.\nSales taxes are levied when a commodity is sold to its final consumer. Retail organizations contend that such taxes discourage retail sales. The question of whether they are generally progressive or regressive is a subject of much current debate. People with higher incomes spend a lower proportion of them, so a flat-rate sales tax will tend to be regressive. It is therefore common to exempt food, utilities, and other necessities from sales taxes, since poor people spend a higher proportion of their incomes on these commodities, so such exemptions make the tax more progressive. This is the classic \"You pay for what you spend\" tax, as only those who spend money on non-exempt (i.e. luxury) items pay the tax.\nA small number of U.S. states rely entirely on sales taxes for state revenue, as those states do not levy a state income tax. Such states tend to have a moderate to a large amount of tourism or inter-state travel that occurs within their borders, allowing the state to benefit from taxes from people the state would otherwise not tax. In this way, the state is able to reduce the tax burden on its citizens. The U.S. states that do not levy a state income tax are Alaska, Tennessee, Florida, Nevada, South Dakota, Texas, Washington state, and Wyoming. Additionally, New Hampshire and Tennessee levy state income taxes only on dividends and interest income. Of the above states, only Alaska and New Hampshire do not levy a state sales tax.\nIn the United States, there is a growing movement for the replacement of all federal payroll and income taxes (both corporate and personal) with a national retail sales tax and monthly tax rebate to households of citizens and legal resident aliens. The tax proposal is named FairTax. In Canada, the federal sales tax is called the Goods and Services Tax (GST) and now stands at 5%. The provinces of British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Prince Edward Island also have a provincial sales tax [PST]. The provinces of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Newfoundland &amp; Labrador, and Ontario have harmonized their provincial sales taxes with the GST\u2014Harmonized Sales Tax [HST], and thus is a full VAT. The province of Quebec collects the Quebec Sales Tax [QST] which is based on the GST with certain differences. Most businesses can claim back the GST, HST, and QST they pay, and so effectively it is the final consumer who pays the tax.\nExcises.\nAn excise duty is an indirect tax imposed upon goods during the process of their manufacture, production or distribution, and is usually proportionate to their quantity or value. Excise duties were first introduced into England in the year 1643, as part of a scheme of revenue and taxation devised by parliamentarian John Pym and approved by the Long Parliament. These duties consisted of charges on beer, ale, cider, cherry wine, and tobacco, to which list were afterward added paper, soap, candles, malt, hops, and sweets. The basic principle of excise duties was that they were taxes on the production, manufacture, or distribution of articles which could not be taxed through the customs house, and revenue derived from that source is called excise revenue proper. The fundamental conception of the term is that of a tax on articles produced or manufactured in a country. In the taxation of such articles of luxury as spirits, beer, tobacco, and cigars, it has been the practice to place a certain duty on the importation of these articles (a customs duty).\nExcises (or exemptions from them) are also used to modify consumption patterns of a certain area (social engineering). For example, a high excise is used to discourage alcohol consumption, relative to other goods. This may be combined with hypothecation if the proceeds are then used to pay for the costs of treating illness caused by alcohol use disorder. Similar taxes may exist on tobacco, pornography, marijuana etc., and they may be collectively referred to as \"sin taxes\". A carbon tax is a tax on the consumption of carbon-based non-renewable fuels, such as petrol, diesel-fuel, jet fuels, and natural gas. The object is to reduce the release of carbon into the atmosphere. In the United Kingdom, vehicle excise duty is an annual tax on vehicle ownership.\nTariff.\nAn import or export tariff (also called customs duty or impost) is a charge for the movement of goods through a political border. Tariffs discourage trade, and they may be used by governments to protect domestic industries. A proportion of tariff revenues is often hypothecated to pay the government to maintain a navy or border police. The classic ways of cheating a tariff are smuggling or declaring a false value of goods. Tax, tariff and trade rules in modern times are usually set together because of their common impact on industrial policy, investment policy, and agricultural policy. A trade bloc is a group of allied countries agreeing to minimize or eliminate tariffs against trade with each other, and possibly to impose protective tariffs on imports from outside the bloc. A customs union has a common external tariff, and the participating countries share the revenues from tariffs on goods entering the customs union.\nIn some societies, tariffs also could be imposed by local authorities on the movement of goods between regions (or via specific internal gateways). A notable example is the \"likin\", which became an important revenue source for local governments in the late Qing China.\nDescriptive labels.\nAd valorem and per unit.\nAn \"ad valorem\" tax is one where the tax base is the value of a good, service, or property. Sales taxes, tariffs, property taxes, inheritance taxes, and value-added taxes are different types of ad valorem tax. An ad valorem tax is typically imposed at the time of a transaction (sales tax or value-added tax (VAT)) but it may be imposed on an annual basis (property tax) or in connection with another significant event (inheritance tax or tariffs).\nIn contrast to ad valorem taxation is a \"per unit\" tax, where the tax base is the quantity of something, regardless of its price. An excise tax is an example.\nConsumption.\nConsumption tax refers to any tax on non-investment spending and can be implemented by means of a sales tax, consumer value-added tax, or by modifying an income tax to allow for unlimited deductions for investment or savings.\nEnvironmental.\nThis includes natural resources consumption tax, greenhouse gas tax (i.e. carbon tax), \"sulfuric tax\", and others. The stated purpose is to reduce the environmental impact by repricing. Economists describe environmental impacts as negative externalities. As early as 1920, Arthur Pigou suggested a tax to deal with externalities (see also the section on Increased economic welfare below). The proper implementation of environmental taxes has been the subject of a long-lasting debate.\nProportional, progressive, regressive, and lump sum.\nAn important feature of tax systems is the percentage of the tax burden as it relates to income or consumption. The terms progressive, regressive, and proportional are used to describe the way the rate progresses from low to high, from high to low, or proportionally. The terms describe a distribution effect, which can be applied to any type of tax system (income or consumption) that meets the definition.\nThe terms can also be used to apply meaning to the taxation of select consumption, such as a tax on luxury goods and the exemption of basic necessities may be described as having progressive effects as it increases a tax burden on high end consumption and decreases a tax burden on low end consumption.\nDirect and indirect.\nTaxes are sometimes referred to as \"direct taxes\" or \"indirect taxes\". The meaning of these terms can vary in different contexts, which can sometimes lead to confusion. An economic definition, by Atkinson, states that \"...direct taxes may be adjusted to the individual characteristics of the taxpayer, whereas indirect taxes are levied on transactions irrespective of the circumstances of buyer or seller.\" According to this definition, for example, income tax is \"direct\", and sales tax is \"indirect\". \nIn law, the terms may have different meanings. In U.S. constitutional law, for instance, direct taxes refer to poll taxes and property taxes, which are based on simple existence or ownership. Indirect taxes are imposed on events, rights, privileges, and activities. Thus, a tax on the sale of the property would be considered an indirect tax, whereas the tax on simply owning the property itself would be a direct tax.\nFees and effective.\nGovernments may charge user fees, tolls, or other types of assessments in exchange of particular goods, services, or use of property. These are generally not considered \"taxes\", as long as they are levied as payment for a direct benefit to the individual paying. Such fees include:\nSome scholars refer to certain economic effects as taxes, though they are not levies imposed by governments. These include:\nHistory.\nThe first known system of taxation was in Ancient Egypt around 3000\u20132800 BC, in the First Dynasty of the Old Kingdom of Egypt. The earliest and most widespread forms of taxation were the corv\u00e9e and the tithe. The corv\u00e9e was forced labor provided to the state by peasants too poor to pay other forms of taxation (\"labor\" in ancient Egyptian is a synonym for taxes). Records from the time document that the Pharaoh would conduct a biennial tour of the kingdom, collecting tithes from the people. Other records are granary receipts on limestone flakes and papyrus. Early taxation is also described in the Bible. In Genesis (chapter 47, verse 24 \u2013 the New International Version), it states \"But when the crop comes in, give a fifth of it to Pharaoh. The other four-fifths you may keep as seed for the fields and as food for yourselves and your households and your children\". Samgharitr is the name mentioned for the Tax collector in the Vedic texts. In Hattusa, the capital of the Hittite Empire, grains were collected as a tax from the surrounding lands, and stored in silos as a display of the king's wealth.\nIn the Persian Empire, a regulated and sustainable tax system was introduced by Darius I the Great in 500 BC; the Persian system of taxation was tailored to each Satrapy (the area ruled by a Satrap or provincial governor). At differing times, there were between 20 and 30 Satrapies in the Empire and each was assessed according to its supposed productivity. It was the responsibility of the Satrap to collect the due amount and to send it to the treasury, after deducting his expenses (the expenses and the power of deciding precisely how and from whom to raise the money in the province, offer maximum opportunity for rich pickings). The quantities demanded from the various provinces gave a vivid picture of their economic potential. For instance, Babylon was assessed for the highest amount and for a startling mixture of commodities; 1,000 silver talents and four months supply of food for the army. India, a province fabled for its gold, was to supply gold dust equal in value to the large amount of 4,680 silver talents. Egypt was known for the wealth of its crops; it was to be the granary of the Persian Empire (and, later, of the Roman Empire) and was required to provide 120,000 measures of grain in addition to 700 talents of silver. This tax was exclusively levied on Satrapies based on their lands, productive capacity and tribute levels.\nThe Rosetta Stone, a tax concession issued by Ptolemy V in 196 BC and written in three languages \"led to the most famous decipherment in history\u2014the cracking of hieroglyphics\".\nIn the Roman Republic, taxes were collected from individuals at the rate of between 1% and 3% of the assessed value of their total property. However, since it was extremely difficult to facilitate the collection of the tax, the government auctioned it every year. The winning tax farmers (called \"publicani\") paid the tax revenue to the government in advance and then kept the taxes collected from individuals. The \"publicani\" paid the tax revenue in coins, but collected the taxes using other exchange media, thus relieving the government of the work to carry out the currency conversion themselves. The revenue payment essentially worked as a loan to the government, which paid interest on it. Although this scheme was a profitable enterprise for the government as well as the \"publicani\", it was later replaced by a direct tax system by the emperor Augustus; after which, each province was obliged to pay 1% tax on wealth and a flat rate on each adult. This brought about regular census and shifted the tax system more towards taxing an individual's income rather than wealth.\nIslamic rulers imposed Zakat (a tax on Muslims) and Jizya (a poll tax on conquered non-Muslims). In India this practice began in the 11th century.\nTrends.\nNumerous records of government tax collection in Europe since at least the 17th century are still available today. But taxation levels are hard to compare to the size and flow of the economy since production numbers are not as readily available. Government expenditures and revenue in France during the 17th century went from about 24.30 million \"livres\" in 1600\u201310 to about 126.86 million \"livres\" in 1650\u201359 to about 117.99 million \"livres\" in 1700\u201310 when government debt had reached 1.6 billion \"livres\". In 1780\u201389, it reached 421.50 million \"livres\". Taxation as a percentage of production of final goods may have reached 15\u201320% during the 17th century in places such as France, the Netherlands, and Scandinavia. During the war-filled years of the eighteenth and early nineteenth century, tax rates in Europe increased dramatically as war became more expensive and governments became more centralized and adept at gathering taxes. This increase was greatest in England, Peter Mathias and Patrick O'Brien found that the tax burden increased by 85% over this period. Another study confirmed this number, finding that per capita tax revenues had grown almost sixfold over the eighteenth century, but that steady economic growth had made the real burden on each individual only double over this period before the industrial revolution. Effective tax rates were higher in Britain than France in the years before the French Revolution, twice in per capita income comparison, but they were mostly placed on international trade. In France, taxes were lower but the burden was mainly on landowners, individuals, and internal trade and thus created far more resentment.\nTaxation as a percentage of GDP 2016 was 45.9% in Denmark, 45.3% in France, 33.2% in the United Kingdom, 26% in the United States, and among all OECD members an average of 34.3%.\nForms.\nIn monetary economies prior to fiat banking, a critical form of taxation was seigniorage, the tax on the creation of money.\nOther obsolete forms of taxation include:\nSome principalities taxed windows, doors, or cabinets to reduce consumption of imported glass and hardware. Armoires, hutches, and wardrobes were employed to evade taxes on doors and cabinets. In some circumstances, taxes are also used to enforce public policy like congestion charge (to cut road traffic and encourage public transport) in London. In Tsarist Russia, taxes were clamped on beards. Today, one of the most-complicated taxation systems worldwide is in Germany. Three-quarters of the world's taxation literature refers to the German system. Under the German system, there are 118 laws, 185 forms, and 96,000 regulations, spending \u20ac3.7 billion to collect the income tax. In the United States, the IRS has about 1,177 forms and instructions, 28.4111 megabytes of Internal Revenue Code which contained 3.8 million words as of 1 February 2010, multiple tax regulations in the Code of Federal Regulations, and supplementary material in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Today, governments in more advanced economies (i.e. Europe and North America) tend to rely more on direct taxes, while developing economies (i.e. several African countries) rely more on indirect taxes.\nEconomic effects.\nIn economic terms, taxation transfers wealth from households or businesses to the government of a nation. Adam Smith writes in \"The Wealth of Nations\" that\n\"\u2026the economic incomes of private people are of three main types: rent, profit, and wages. Ordinary taxpayers will ultimately pay their taxes from at least one of these revenue sources. The government may intend that a particular tax should fall exclusively on rent, profit, or wages \u2013 and that another tax should fall on all three private income sources jointly. However, many taxes will inevitably fall on resources and persons very different from those intended \u2026 Good taxes meet four major criteria. They are (1) proportionate to incomes or abilities to pay (2) certain rather than arbitrary (3) payable at times and in ways convenient to the taxpayers and (4) cheap to administer and collect.\"\nThe side-effects of taxation (such as economic distortions) and theories about how best to tax are an important subject in microeconomics. Taxation is almost never a simple transfer of wealth. Economic theories of taxation approach the question of how to maximize economic welfare through taxation.\nA 2019 study looking at the impact of tax cuts for different income groups, it was tax cuts for low-income groups that had the greatest positive impact on employment growth. Tax cuts for the wealthiest top 10% had a small impact.\nIncidence.\nLaw establishes from whom a tax is collected. In a number of countries, taxes are imposed on businesses (such as corporate taxes or portions of payroll taxes). However, who ultimately pays the tax (the tax \"burden\") is determined by the marketplace as taxes become embedded into production costs. Economic theory suggests that the economic effect of tax does not necessarily fall at the point where it is legally levied. For instance, a tax on employment paid by employers will impact the employee, at least in the long run. The greatest share of the tax burden tends to fall on the most inelastic factor involved\u2014the part of the transaction which is affected least by a change in price. So, for instance, a tax on wages in a town will (at least in the long run) affect property-owners in that area.\nDepending on how quantities supplied and demanded to vary with price (the \"elasticities\" of supply and demand), a tax can be absorbed by the seller (in the form of lower pre-tax prices), or by the buyer (in the form of higher post-tax prices). If the elasticity of supply is low, more of the tax will be paid by the supplier. If the elasticity of demand is low, more will be paid by the customer; and, contrariwise for the cases where those elasticities are high. If the seller is a competitive firm, the tax burden is distributed over the factors of production depending on the elasticities thereof; this includes workers (in the form of lower wages), capital investors (in the form of loss to shareholders), landowners (in the form of lower rents), entrepreneurs (in the form of lower wages of superintendence) and customers (in the form of higher prices).\nTo show this relationship, suppose that the market price of a product is $1.00 and that a $0.50 tax is imposed on the product that, by law, is to be collected from the seller. If the product has an elastic demand, a greater portion of the tax will be absorbed by the seller. This is because goods with elastic demand cause a large decline in quantity demanded a small increase in price. Therefore, in order to stabilize sales, the seller absorbs more of the additional tax burden. For example, the seller might drop the price of the product to $0.70 so that, after adding in the tax, the buyer pays a total of $1.20, or $0.20 more than he did before the $0.50 tax was imposed. In this example, the buyer has paid $0.20 of the $0.50 tax (in the form of a post-tax price) and the seller has paid the remaining $0.30 (in the form of a lower pre-tax price).\nIncreased economic welfare.\nGovernment spending.\nThe purpose of taxation is to provide for government spending without inflation. The provision of public goods such as roads and other infrastructure, schools, a social safety net, public health systems, national defense, law enforcement, and a courts system increases the economic welfare of society if the benefit outweighs the costs involved.\nPigovian.\nThe existence of a tax can \"increase\" economic efficiency in some cases. If there is a negative externality associated with a good (meaning that it has negative effects not felt by the consumer) then a free market will trade too much of that good. By taxing the good, the government can raise revenue to address specific problems while increasing overall welfare.\nThe goal is to tax people when they are creating societal costs in addition to their personal costs. By taxing goods with negative externalities, the government attempts to increase economic efficiency while raising revenues.\nThis type of tax is called a Pigovian tax, after economist Arthur Pigou who wrote about it in his 1920 book \"The Economics of Welfare\".\nPigovian taxes might target the undesirable production of greenhouse gases which cause climate change (namely a carbon tax), polluting fuels (such as petrol), water or air pollution (namely an ecotax), goods which incur public healthcare costs (such as alcohol or tobacco), and excess demand of certain public goods (such as traffic congestion pricing). The idea is to aim taxes at people that cause an above-average amount of societal harm so the free market incorporates all costs as opposed to only personal costs, with the benefit of lowering the overall tax burden for people who cause less societal harm.\nReduced inequality.\nProgressive taxation generally reduces economic inequality, even when the tax revenue is not redistributed from higher-income individuals to lower-income individuals. However, in a highly specific condition, progressive taxation increases economic inequality when lower-income individuals consume goods and services produced by higher-income individuals, who in turn consume only from other higher-income individuals (trickle-up effect).\nReduced economic welfare.\nMost taxes (see below) have side effects that reduce economic welfare, either by mandating unproductive labor (compliance costs) or by creating distortions to economic incentives (deadweight loss and perverse incentives).\nCost of compliance.\nAlthough governments must spend money on tax collection activities, some of the costs, particularly for keeping records and filling out forms, are borne by businesses and by private individuals. These are collectively called costs of compliance. More complex tax systems tend to have higher compliance costs. This fact can be used as the basis for practical or moral arguments in favor of tax simplification (such as the FairTax or OneTax, and some flat tax proposals).\nDeadweight costs.\nIn the absence of negative externalities, the introduction of taxes into a market reduces economic efficiency by causing deadweight loss. In a competitive market, the price of a particular economic good adjusts to ensure that all trades which benefit both the buyer and the seller of a good occur. The introduction of a tax causes the price received by the seller to be less than the cost to the buyer by the amount of the tax. This causes fewer transactions to occur, which reduces economic welfare; the individuals or businesses involved are less well off than before the tax. The tax burden and the amount of deadweight cost is dependent on the elasticity of supply and demand for the good taxed.\nMost taxes\u2014including income tax and sales tax\u2014can have significant deadweight costs. The only way to avoid deadweight costs in an economy that is generally competitive is to refrain from taxes that change economic incentives. Such taxes include the land value tax, where the tax is on a good in completely inelastic supply. By taxing the value of unimproved land as opposed to what's built on it, a land value tax does not increase taxes on landowners for improving their land. This is opposed to traditional property taxes which reward land abandonment and disincentivize construction, maintenance, and repair. Another example of a tax with few deadweight costs is a lump sum tax such as a poll tax (head tax) which is paid by all adults regardless of their choices. Arguably a windfall profits tax which is entirely unanticipated can also fall into this category.\nDeadweight loss does not account for the effect taxes have in leveling the business playing field. Businesses that have more money are better suited to fend off competition. It is common that an industry with a small amount of large corporations has a high barrier of entry for new entrants coming into the marketplace. This is due to the fact that the larger the corporation, the better its position to negotiate with suppliers. Also, larger companies may be able to operate at low or even negative profits for extended periods of time, thus pushing out competition. More progressive taxation of profits, however, would reduce such barriers for new entrants, thereby increasing competition and ultimately benefiting consumers.\nPerverse incentives.\nComplexity of the tax code in developed economies offers perverse tax incentives. The more details of tax policy there are, the more opportunities for legal tax avoidance and illegal tax evasion. These not only result in lost revenue but involve additional costs: for instance, payments made for tax advice are essentially deadweight costs because they add no wealth to the economy. Perverse incentives also occur because of non-taxable 'hidden' transactions; for instance, a sale from one company to another might be liable for sales tax, but if the same goods were shipped from one branch of a corporation to another, no tax would be payable.\nTo address these issues, economists often suggest simple and transparent tax structures that avoid providing loopholes. Sales tax, for instance, can be replaced with a value added tax which disregards intermediate transactions.\nIn developing countries.\nFollowing Nicolas Kaldor's research, public finance in developing countries is strongly tied to state capacity and financial development. As state capacity develops, states not only increase the level of taxation but also the pattern of taxation. With larger tax bases and the diminishing importance of trading tax, income tax gains more importance.\nAccording to Tilly's argument, state capacity evolves as a response to the emergence of war. War is an incentive for states to raise taxes and strengthen states' capacity. Historically, a number of taxation breakthroughs took place during wartime. The introduction of income tax in Britain was due to the Napoleonic War in 1798. The US first introduced income tax during the Civil War. Taxation is constrained by the fiscal and legal capacities of a country. Fiscal and legal capacities also complement each other. A well-designed tax system can minimize efficiency loss and boost economic growth. With better compliance and better support to financial institutions and individual property, the government will be able to collect more tax. Although wealthier countries have higher tax revenue, economic growth does not always translate to higher tax revenue. For example, in India, increases in exemptions lead to the stagnation of income tax revenue at around 0.5% of GDP since 1986.\nResearchers for EPS PEAKS stated that the core purpose of taxation is revenue mobilization, providing resources for National Budgets, and forming an important part of macroeconomic management. They said economic theory has focused on the need to \"optimize\" the system through balancing efficiency and equity, understanding the impacts on production, and consumption as well as distribution, redistribution, and welfare.\nThey state that taxes and tax relief have also been used as a tool for behavioral change, to influence investment decisions, labor supply, consumption patterns, and positive and negative economic spillovers (externalities), and ultimately, the promotion of economic growth and development. The tax system and its administration also play an important role in state-building and governance, as a principal form of \"social contract\" between the state and citizens who can, as taxpayers, exert accountability on the state as a consequence.\nThe researchers wrote that domestic revenue forms an important part of a developing country's public financing as it is more stable and predictable than Overseas Development Assistance and necessary for a country to be self-sufficient. They found that domestic revenue flows are, on average, already much larger than ODA, with aid worth less than 10% of collected taxes in Africa as a whole.\nHowever, in a quarter of African countries Overseas Development Assistance does exceed tax collection, with these more likely to be non-resource-rich countries. This suggests countries making the most progress replacing aid with tax revenue tend to be those benefiting disproportionately from rising prices of energy and commodities.\nThe author found tax revenue as a percentage of GDP varying greatly around a global average of 19%. This data also indicates countries with higher GDP tend to have higher tax to GDP ratios, demonstrating that higher income is associated with more than proportionately higher tax revenue. On average, high-income countries have tax revenue as a percentage of GDP of around 22%, compared to 18% in middle-income countries and 14% in low-income countries.\nIn high-income countries, the highest tax-to-GDP ratio is in Denmark at 47% and the lowest is in Kuwait at 0.8%, reflecting low taxes from strong oil revenues. The long-term average performance of tax revenue as a share of GDP in low-income countries has been largely stagnant, although most have shown some improvement in more recent years. On average, resource-rich countries have made the most progress, rising from 10% in the mid-1990s to around 17% in 2008. Non-resource-rich countries made some progress, with average tax revenues increasing from 10% to 15% over the same period.\nMany low-income countries have a tax-to-GDP ratio of less than 15% which could be due to low tax potentials, such as a limited taxable economic activity, or low tax effort due to policy choice, non-compliance, or administrative constraints.\nSome low-income countries have relatively high tax-to-GDP ratios due to resource tax revenues (e.g. Angola) or relatively efficient tax administration (e.g. Kenya, Brazil) whereas some middle-income countries have lower tax-to-GDP ratios (e.g. Malaysia) which reflect a more tax-friendly policy choice.\nWhile overall tax revenues have remained broadly constant, the global trend shows trade taxes have been declining as a proportion of total revenues (IMF, 2011), with the share of revenue shifting away from border trade taxes towards domestically levied sales taxes on goods and services. Low-income countries tend to have a higher dependence on trade taxes, and a smaller proportion of income and consumption taxes when compared to high-income countries.\nOne indicator of the taxpaying experience was captured in the \"Doing Business\" survey, which compares the total tax rate, time spent complying with tax procedures, and the number of payments required through the year, across 176 countries. The \"easiest\" countries in which to pay taxes are located in the Middle East with the UAE ranking first, followed by Qatar and Saudi Arabia, most likely reflecting low tax regimes in those countries. Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa are among the \"hardest\" to pay with the Central African Republic, Republic of Congo, Guinea and Chad in the bottom 5, reflecting higher total tax rates and a greater administrative burden to comply.\nKey facts.\nThe below facts were compiled by EPS PEAKS researchers:\nSummary.\nAid interventions in revenue can support revenue mobilization for growth, improve tax system design and administrative effectiveness, and strengthen governance and compliance. The author of the Economics Topic Guide found that the best aid modalities for revenue depend on country circumstances, but should aim to align with government interests and facilitate effective planning and implementation of activities under evidence-based tax reform. Lastly, she found that identifying areas for further reform requires country-specific diagnostic assessment: broad areas for developing countries identified internationally (e.g. IMF) include, for example, property taxation for local revenues, strengthening expenditure management, and effective taxation of extractive industries and multinationals.\nViews.\nSupport.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Every tax, however, is, to the person who pays it, a badge, not of slavery, but of liberty.\n\u2013 Adam Smith (1776), \"Wealth of Nations\"\nAccording to most political philosophies, taxes are justified as they fund activities that are necessary and beneficial to society. Additionally, progressive taxation can be used to reduce economic inequality in a society. According to this view, taxation in modern nation-states benefit the majority of the population and social development. A common presentation of this view, paraphrasing various statements by Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. is \"Taxes are the price of civilization\".\nIt can also be argued that in a democracy, because the government is the party performing the act of imposing taxes, society as a whole decides how the tax system should be organized. The American Revolution's \"No taxation without representation\" slogan implied this view. For traditional conservatives, the payment of taxation is justified as part of the general obligations of citizens to obey the law and support established institutions. The conservative position is encapsulated in perhaps the most famous adage of public finance, \"An old tax is a good tax\". Conservatives advocate the \"fundamental conservative premise that no one should be excused from paying for government, lest they come to believe that government is costless to them with the certain consequence that they will demand more government 'services'.\" Social democrats generally favor higher levels of taxation to fund public provision of a wide range of services such as universal health care and education, as well as the provision of a range of welfare benefits. As argued by Anthony Crosland and others, the capacity to tax income from capital is a central element of the social democratic case for a mixed economy as against Marxist arguments for comprehensive public ownership of capital. American libertarians recommend a minimal level of taxation in order to maximize the protection of liberty. Direct democracy was found to lead to lower tax rates in some cases.\nCompulsory taxation of individuals, such as income tax, is often justified on grounds including territorial sovereignty, and the social contract. Defenders of business taxation argue that it is an efficient method of taxing income that ultimately flows to individuals, or that separate taxation of business is justified on the grounds that commercial activity necessarily involves the use of publicly established and maintained economic infrastructure, and that businesses are in effect charged for this use. Georgist economists argue that all of the economic rent collected from natural resources (land, mineral extraction, fishing quotas, etc.) is unearned income, and belongs to the community rather than any individual. They advocate a high tax (the \"Single Tax\") on land and other natural resources to return this unearned income to the state, but no other taxes.\nAgainst.\nBecause payment of tax is compulsory and enforced by the legal system, rather than voluntary like crowdfunding, some political philosophies view taxation as theft, extortion, slavery, as a violation of property rights, or tyranny, accusing the government of levying taxes via force and coercive means. Objectivists, anarcho-capitalists, and libertarians see taxation as government aggression through the lens of the non-aggression principle. The view that democracy legitimizes taxation is rejected by those who argue that the right to property is inalienable, and consequently cannot be abridged by the government. According to Ludwig von Mises, \"society as a whole\" should not make such decisions, due to methodological individualism. Some libertarian opponents of taxation claim that governmental protection, such as police and defense forces, might be replaced by market alternatives such as private defense agencies, arbitration agencies or voluntary contributions.\nMurray Rothbard argued in \"The Ethics of Liberty\" in 1982 that taxation is theft and that tax resistance is therefore legitimate: \"Just as no one is morally required to answer a robber truthfully when he asks if there are any valuables in one's house, so no one can be morally required to answer truthfully similar questions asked by the state, e.g., when filling out income tax returns.\"\nMany view government spending as an inefficient use of capital, and that the same projects that the government seeks to develop can be developed by private companies at much lower costs. This line of argument holds that government workers are not as personally invested in the efficiency of the projects, so the overspending happens at every step of the way. In the same regard, a number of public officials are not elected for their project management skills, so the projects can be mishandled. In the United States, President George W. Bush proposed in his 2009 budget \"to terminate or reduce 151 discretionary programs\" which were inefficient or ineffective.\nAdditionally, critics of taxation note that the process of taxation, not only unjustly takes money of citizens, it also unjustly takes considerable time away from citizens. For example, it is estimated by the American Action Forum that Americans spend 6.5 billion hours annually preparing their taxes. This is equivalent of roughly 741,501 years of life lost every year to complete tax forms and other related paperwork.\nSocialism.\nKarl Marx assumed that taxation would be unnecessary after the advent of communism and looked forward to the \"withering away of the state\". In socialist economies such as that of China, taxation played a minor role, since most government income was derived from the ownership of enterprises, and it was argued by some that monetary taxation was not necessary. While the morality of taxation is sometimes questioned, most arguments about taxation revolve around the degree and method of taxation and associated government spending, not taxation itself.\nChoice.\nTax choice is the theory that taxpayers should have more control with how their individual taxes are allocated. If taxpayers could choose which government organizations received their taxes, opportunity cost decisions would integrate their partial knowledge. For example, a taxpayer who allocated more of his taxes on public education would have less to allocate on public healthcare. Supporters argue that allowing taxpayers to demonstrate their preferences would help ensure that the government succeeds at efficiently producing the public goods that taxpayers truly value. This would end real estate speculation, business cycles, unemployment and distribute wealth much more evenly. Joseph Stiglitz's Henry George Theorem predicts its sufficiency because\u2014as George also noted\u2014public spending raises land value.\nGeoism.\nGeoists (Georgists and geolibertarians) state that taxation should primarily collect economic rent, in particular the value of land, for both reasons of economic efficiency as well as morality. The efficiency of using economic rent for taxation is (as economists agree) due to the fact that such taxation cannot be passed on and does not create any dead-weight loss, and that it removes the incentive to speculate on land. Its morality is based on the Geoist premise that private property is justified for products of labor but not for land and natural resources.\nEconomist and social reformer Henry George opposed sales taxes and protective tariffs for their negative impact on trade. He also believed in the right of each person to the fruits of their own labor and productive investment. Therefore, income from paid labor and proper capital should remain untaxed. For this reason multiple Geoists\u2014in particular those that call themselves geolibertarian\u2014share the view with libertarians that these types of taxation (but not all) are immoral and even theft. George stated there should be one single tax: the Land Value Tax, which is considered both efficient and moral. Demand for specific land is dependent on nature, but even more so on the presence of communities, trade, and government infrastructure, particularly in urban environments. Therefore, the economic rent of land is not the product of one particular individual and it may be claimed for public expenses. According to George, this would end real estate bubbles, business cycles, unemployment and distribute wealth much more evenly. Joseph Stiglitz's Henry George Theorem predicts its sufficiency for financing public goods because those raise land value.\nJohn Locke stated that whenever labor is mixed with natural resources, such as is the case with improved land, private property is justified under the proviso that there must be enough other natural resources of the same quality available to others. Geoists state that the Lockean proviso is violated wherever land value is greater than zero. Therefore, under the assumed principle of equal rights of all people to natural resources, the occupier of any such land must compensate the rest of society to the amount of that value. For this reason, geoists generally believe that such payment cannot be regarded as a true 'tax', but rather a compensation or fee. This means that while Geoists also regard taxation as an instrument of social justice, contrary to social democrats and social liberals they do not regard it as an instrument of redistribution but rather a 'predistribution' or simply a correct distribution of the commons.\nModern geoists note that land in the classical economic meaning of the word referred to all natural resources, and thus also includes resources such as mineral deposits, water bodies and the electromagnetic spectrum, to which privileged access also generates economic rent that must be compensated. Under the same reasoning most of them also consider pigouvian taxes as compensation for environmental damage or privilege as acceptable and even necessary.\nTheories.\nLaffer curve.\nIn economics, the Laffer curve is a theoretical representation of the relationship between government revenue raised by taxation and all possible rates of taxation. It is used to illustrate the concept of taxable income elasticity (that taxable income will change in response to changes in the rate of taxation). The curve is constructed by thought experiment. First, the amount of tax revenue raised at the extreme tax rates of 0% and 100% is considered. It is clear that a 0% tax rate raises no revenue, but the Laffer curve hypothesis is that a 100% tax rate will also generate no revenue because at such a rate there is no longer any incentive for a rational taxpayer to earn any income, thus the revenue raised will be 100% of nothing. If both a 0% rate and 100% rate of taxation generate no revenue, it follows from the extreme value theorem that there must exist at least one rate in between where tax revenue would be a maximum. The Laffer curve is typically represented as a graph that starts at 0% tax, zero revenue, rises to a maximum rate of revenue raised at an intermediate rate of taxation, and then falls again to zero revenue at a 100% tax rate.\nOne potential result of the Laffer curve is that increasing tax rates beyond a certain point will become counterproductive for raising further tax revenue. A hypothetical Laffer curve for any given economy can only be estimated and such estimates are sometimes controversial. The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics reports that estimates of revenue-maximizing tax rates have varied widely, with a mid-range of around 70%.\nOptimal.\nMost governments take revenue that exceeds that which can be provided by non-distortionary taxes or through taxes that give a double dividend. Optimal taxation theory is the branch of economics that considers how taxes can be structured to give the least deadweight costs, or to give the best outcomes in terms of social welfare. The Ramsey problem deals with minimizing deadweight costs. Because deadweight costs are related to the elasticity of supply and demand for a good, it follows that putting the highest tax rates on the goods for which there are most inelastic supply and demand will result in the least overall deadweight costs. Some economists sought to integrate optimal tax theory with the social welfare function, which is the economic expression of the idea that equality is valuable to a greater or lesser extent. If individuals experience diminishing returns from income, then the optimum distribution of income for society involves a progressive income tax. Mirrlees optimal income tax is a detailed theoretical model of the optimum progressive income tax along these lines. Over the last years the validity of the theory of optimal taxation was discussed by multiple political economists.\nIn a 2025 Gallup poll in the United States more citizens consider their taxes as too high compared to too low. \nRates.\nTaxes are most often levied as a percentage, called the \"tax rate\". An important distinction when talking about tax rates is to distinguish between the marginal rate and the effective tax rate. The effective rate is the total tax paid divided by the total amount the tax is paid on, while the marginal rate is the rate paid on the next dollar of income earned. For example, if income is taxed on a formula of 5% from $0 up to $50,000, 10% from $50,000 to $100,000, and 15% over $100,000, a taxpayer with income of $175,000 would pay a total of $18,750 in taxes.\nTax calculation\n(0.05*50,000)\u00a0+ (0.10*50,000)\u00a0+ (0.15*75,000) = 18,750\nThe \"effective rate\" would be 10.7%:\n18,750/175,000 = 0.107\n The \"marginal rate\" would be 15%.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30299", "revid": "50857190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30299", "title": "Transhumanism", "text": "Philosophical movement\nTranshumanism is a philosophical and intellectual movement that advocates the enhancement of the human condition by developing and making widely available new and future technologies that can greatly enhance longevity, cognition, and well-being.\nTranshumanist thinkers study the potential benefits and dangers of emerging technologies that could overcome fundamental human limitations, as well as the ethics of using such technologies. Some transhumanists speculate that human beings may eventually be able to transform themselves into beings of such vastly greater abilities as to merit the label of posthuman beings.\nAnother topic of transhumanist research is how to protect humanity against existential risks, including artificial general intelligence, asteroid impact, gray goo, pandemic, societal collapse, and nuclear warfare.\nThe biologist Julian Huxley popularised the term \"transhumanism\" in a 1957 essay. The contemporary meaning of the term was foreshadowed by one of the first professors of futurology, a man who changed his name to FM-2030. In the 1960s, he taught \"new concepts of the human\" at The New School when he began to identify people who adopt technologies, lifestyles, and worldviews \"transitional\" to posthumanity as \"transhuman\". The assertion laid the intellectual groundwork for the British philosopher Max More to begin articulating the principles of transhumanism as a futurist philosophy in 1990, organizing in California a school of thought that has since grown into the worldwide transhumanist movement.\nInfluenced by seminal works of science fiction, the transhumanist vision of a transformed future humanity has attracted many supporters and detractors from a wide range of perspectives, including philosophy and religion.\nHistory.\nPrecursors of transhumanism.\nAccording to Nick Bostrom, transcendentalist impulses have been expressed at least as far back as the quest for immortality in the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\", as well as in historical quests for the Fountain of Youth, the Elixir of Life, and other efforts to stave off aging and death.\nTranshumanists draw upon and claim continuity from intellectual and cultural traditions such as the ancient philosophy of Aristotle or the scientific tradition of Roger Bacon. In his \"Divine Comedy\", Dante coined the word \"trasumanar\" meaning \"to transcend human nature, to pass beyond human nature\" in the first canto of Paradiso.\nThe interweaving of transhumanist aspirations with the scientific imagination can be seen in the works of some precursors of Enlightenment such as Francis Bacon. One of the early precursors to transhumanist ideas is Ren\u00e9 Descartes's \"Discourse on Method\" (1637), in which Descartes envisions a new kind of medicine that can grant both physical immortality and stronger minds.\nIn his first edition of \"Political Justice\" (1793), William Godwin included arguments favoring the possibility of \"earthly immortality\" (what would now be called physical immortality). Godwin explored the themes of life extension and immortality in his gothic novel \"St.\u00a0Leon\", which became popular (and notorious) at the time of its publication in 1799, but is now mostly forgotten. \"St.\u00a0Leon\" may have inspired his daughter Mary Shelley's novel \"Frankenstein\".\nThere is debate about whether the philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche can be considered an influence on transhumanism, despite its exaltation of the \"\u00dcbermensch\" (overhuman), due to its emphasis on self-actualization rather than technological transformation. The transhumanist philosophies of More and Sorgner have been influenced strongly by Nietzschean thinking. By contrast, \"The Transhumanist Declaration\" \"advocates the well-being of all sentience (whether in artificial intellects, humans, posthumans, or non-human animals)\".\nThe late 19th- to early 20th-century movement known as Russian cosmism, by Russian philosopher N. F. Fyodorov, is noted for anticipating transhumanist ideas. In 1966, FM-2030 (formerly F. M. Esfandiary), a futurist who taught \"new concepts of the human\" at The New School, in New York City, began to identify people who adopt technologies, lifestyles and worldviews transitional to posthumanity as \"transhuman\".\nEarly transhumanist thinking.\nFundamental ideas of transhumanism were first advanced in 1923 by the British geneticist J. B. S. Haldane in his essay \"Daedalus: Science and the Future\", which predicted that great benefits would come from the application of advanced sciences to human biology\u2014and that every such advance would first appear to someone as blasphemy or perversion, \"indecent and unnatural\". In particular, he was interested in the development of the science of ectogenesis (creating and sustaining life in an artificial environment), eugenics, and the application of genetics to improve human characteristics such as health and intelligence.\nHis article inspired academic and popular interest. J. D. Bernal, a crystallographer at Cambridge, wrote \"The World, the Flesh and the Devil\" in 1929, in which he speculated on the prospects of space colonization and radical changes to human bodies and intelligence through bionic implants and cognitive enhancement. These ideas have been common transhumanist themes ever since.\nThe biologist Julian Huxley is generally regarded as the founder of transhumanism after using the term for the title of an influential 1957 article. But the term derives from a 1940 paper by the Canadian philosopher W. D. Lighthall. Huxley describes transhumanism in these terms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHuxley's definition differs, albeit not substantially, from the one commonly in use since the 1980s. The ideas raised by these thinkers were explored in the science fiction of the 1960s, notably in Arthur C. Clarke's \"2001: A Space Odyssey\", in which an alien artifact grants transcendent power to its wielder.\nJapanese Metabolist architects produced a manifesto in 1960 which outlined goals to \"encourage active metabolic development of our society\" through design and technology. In the Material and Man section of the manifesto, Noboru Kawazoe suggests that:After several decades, with the rapid progress of communication technology, every one will have a \"brain wave receiver\" in his ear, which conveys directly and exactly what other people think about him and vice versa. What I think will be known by all the people. There is no more individual consciousness, only the will of mankind as a whole.\nArtificial intelligence and the technological singularity.\nThe concept of the technological singularity, or the ultra-rapid advent of superhuman intelligence, was first proposed by the British cryptologist I. J. Good in 1965:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let an ultraintelligent machine be defined as a machine that can far surpass all the intellectual activities of any man however clever. Since the design of machines is one of these intellectual activities, an ultraintelligent machine could design even better machines; there would then unquestionably be an \"intelligence explosion,\" and the intelligence of man would be left far behind. Thus the first ultraintelligent machine is the last invention that man need ever make.\nComputer scientist Marvin Minsky wrote on relationships between human and artificial intelligence beginning in the 1960s. Over the succeeding decades, this field continued to generate influential thinkers, such as Hans Moravec and Ray Kurzweil, who oscillated between the technical arena and futuristic speculations in the transhumanist vein. The coalescence of an identifiable transhumanist movement began in the last decades of the 20th century. In 1972, Robert Ettinger, whose 1964 \"Prospect of Immortality\" founded the cryonics movement, contributed to the conceptualization of \"transhumanity\" with his 1972 \"Man into Superman.\" FM-2030 published the \"Upwingers Manifesto\" in 1973.\nGrowth of transhumanism.\nThe first self-described transhumanists met formally in the early 1980s at the University of California, Los Angeles, which became the main center of transhumanist thought. Here, FM-2030 lectured on his \"Third Way\" futurist ideology. At the EZTV Media venue, frequented by transhumanists and other futurists, Natasha Vita-More presented \"Breaking Away\", her 1980 experimental film with the theme of humans breaking away from their biological limitations and the Earth's gravity as they head into space. FM-2030 and Vita-More soon began holding gatherings for transhumanists in Los Angeles, which included students from FM-2030's courses and audiences from Vita-More's artistic productions. In 1982, Vita-More authored the \"Transhumanist Arts Statement\" and in 1988 she produced the cable TV show \"TransCentury Update \"on transhumanity, a program that reached over 100,000 viewers.\nIn 1986, Eric Drexler published \",\" which discussed the prospects for nanotechnology and molecular assemblers, and founded the Foresight Institute. As the first nonprofit organization to research, advocate for, and perform cryonics, the Southern California offices of the Alcor Life Extension Foundation became a center for futurists. In 1988, the first issue of \"Extropy Magazine\" was published by Max More and Tom Morrow. In 1990, More, a strategic philosopher, created his own particular transhumanist doctrine, which took the form of the \"Principles of Extropy,\" and laid the foundation of modern transhumanism by giving it a new definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Transhumanism is a class of philosophies that seek to guide us towards a posthuman condition. Transhumanism shares many elements of humanism, including a respect for reason and science, a commitment to progress, and a valuing of human (or transhuman) existence in this life. [...] Transhumanism differs from humanism in recognizing and anticipating the radical alterations in the nature and possibilities of our lives resulting from various sciences and technologies [...]\nIn 1992, More and Morrow founded the Extropy Institute, a catalyst for networking futurists and brainstorming new memeplexes by organizing a series of conferences and, more importantly, providing a mailing list, which exposed many to transhumanist views for the first time during the rise of cyberculture and the cyberdelic counterculture. In 1998, philosophers Nick Bostrom and David Pearce founded the World Transhumanist Association (WTA), an international non-governmental organization working toward the recognition of transhumanism as a legitimate subject of scientific inquiry and public policy. In 2002, the WTA modified and adopted \"The Transhumanist Declaration.\" \"The Transhumanist FAQ\", prepared by the WTA (later Humanity+), gave two formal definitions for transhumanism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;# The intellectual and cultural movement that affirms the possibility and desirability of fundamentally improving the human condition through applied reason, especially by developing and making widely available technologies to eliminate aging and to greatly enhance human intellectual, physical, and psychological capacities.\nIn possible contrast with other transhumanist organizations, WTA officials considered that social forces could undermine their futurist visions and needed to be addressed. A particular concern is equal access to human enhancement technologies across classes and borders. In 2006, a political struggle within the transhumanist movement between the libertarian right and the liberal left resulted in a more centre-leftward positioning of the WTA under its former executive director James Hughes. In 2006, the board of directors of the Extropy Institute ceased operations of the organization, saying that its mission was \"essentially completed\". This left the World Transhumanist Association as the leading international transhumanist organization. In 2008, as part of a rebranding effort, the WTA changed its name to \"Humanity+\". In 2012, the transhumanist Longevity Party had been initiated as an international union of people who promote the development of scientific and technological means to significant life extension that now has more than 30 national organisations throughout the world.\nThe Mormon Transhumanist Association was founded in 2006. By 2012, it had hundreds of members.\nThe first transhumanist elected member of a parliament was Giuseppe Vatinno, in 2012 in Italy.\nIn 2017, Penn State University Press, in cooperation with philosopher Stefan Lorenz Sorgner and sociologist James Hughes, established the \"Journal of Posthuman Studies\" as the first academic journal explicitly dedicated to the posthuman, with the goal of clarifying the notions of posthumanism and transhumanism, as well as comparing and contrasting both.\nTheory.\nIt is a matter of debate whether transhumanism is a branch of posthumanism and how this philosophical movement should be conceptualised with regard to transhumanism. Transhumanism is often referred to as a variant or activist form of posthumanism by its conservative, Christian and progressive critics.\nA common feature of transhumanism and philosophical posthumanism is the future vision of a new intelligent species, into which humanity will evolve and which eventually will supplement or supersede it. Transhumanism stresses the evolutionary perspective, including sometimes the creation of a highly intelligent animal species by way of cognitive enhancement (i.e. biological uplift), but clings to a \"posthuman future\" as the final goal of participant evolution.\nNevertheless, the idea of creating intelligent artificial beings (proposed, for example, by roboticist Hans Moravec) has influenced transhumanism. Moravec's ideas and transhumanism have also been characterised as a \"complacent\" or \"apocalyptic\" variant of posthumanism and contrasted with \"cultural posthumanism\" in humanities and the arts. While such a \"cultural posthumanism\" would offer resources for rethinking the relationships between humans and increasingly sophisticated machines, transhumanism and similar posthumanisms are, in this view, not abandoning obsolete concepts of the \"autonomous liberal subject\", but are expanding its \"prerogatives\" into the realm of the posthuman. Transhumanist self-characterisations as a continuation of humanism and Enlightenment thinking correspond with this view.\nSome secular humanists conceive transhumanism as an offspring of the humanist freethought movement and argue that transhumanists differ from the humanist mainstream by having a specific focus on technological approaches to resolving human concerns (i.e. technocentrism) and on the issue of mortality. Other progressives have argued that posthumanism, in its philosophical or activist forms, amounts to a shift away from concerns about social justice, from the reform of human institutions and from other Enlightenment preoccupations, toward narcissistic longings to transcend the human body in quest of more exquisite ways of being.\nThe philosophy of transhumanism is closely related to technoself studies, an interdisciplinary domain of scholarly research dealing with all aspects of human identity in a technological society and focusing on the changing nature of relationships between humans and technology.\nAims.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You awake one morning to find your brain has another lobe functioning. Invisible, this auxiliary lobe answers your questions with information beyond the realm of your own memory, suggests plausible courses of action, and asks questions that help bring out relevant facts. You quickly come to rely on the new lobe so much that you stop wondering how it works. You just use it. This is the dream of artificial intelligence.\u2014\u200a\nWhile many transhumanist theorists and advocates seek to apply reason, science and technology to reduce poverty, disease, disability, and malnutrition around the globe, transhumanism is distinctive in its particular focus on the applications of technologies to the improvement of human bodies at the individual level. Many transhumanists actively assess the potential for future technologies and innovative social systems to improve the quality of all life, while seeking to make the material reality of the human condition fulfill the promise of legal and political equality by eliminating congenital mental and physical barriers.\nTranshumanist philosophers argue that there not only exists a perfectionist ethical imperative for humans to strive for progress and improvement of the human condition, but that it is possible and desirable for humanity to enter a transhuman phase of existence in which humans enhance themselves beyond what is naturally human. In such a phase, natural evolution would be replaced with deliberate participatory or directed evolution.\nSome theorists such as Ray Kurzweil think that the pace of technological innovation is accelerating and that the next 50 years may yield not only radical technological advances, but possibly a technological singularity, which may fundamentally change the nature of human beings. Transhumanists who foresee this massive technological change generally maintain that it is desirable, but some are concerned about the dangers of extremely rapid technological change and propose options for ensuring that advanced technology is used responsibly. For example, Bostrom has written extensively on existential risks to humanity's future welfare, including ones that emerging technologies could create. In contrast, some proponents of transhumanism view it as essential to humanity's survival. For instance, Stephen Hawking points out that the \"external transmission\" phase of human evolution, where knowledge production and knowledge management is more important than transmission of information via evolution, may be the point at which human civilization becomes unstable and self-destructs, one of Hawking's explanations for the Fermi paradox. To counter this, Hawking emphasizes either self-design of the human genome or mechanical enhancement (e.g., brain-computer interface) to enhance human intelligence and reduce aggression, without which he implies human civilization may be too stupid collectively to survive an increasingly unstable system, resulting in societal collapse.\nWhile many people believe that all transhumanists are striving for immortality, that is not necessarily true. Hank Pellissier, managing director of the Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies (2011\u20132012), surveyed transhumanists. He found that, of the 818 respondents, 23.8% did not want immortality. Some of the reasons argued were boredom, Earth's overpopulation, and the desire \"to go to an afterlife\".\nEthics.\nTranshumanists engage in interdisciplinary approaches to understand and evaluate possibilities for overcoming biological limitations by drawing on futurology and various fields of ethics. Unlike many philosophers, social critics, and activists who morally value preservation of natural systems, transhumanists see the concept of the specifically natural as problematically nebulous at best and an obstacle to progress at worst. In keeping with this, many prominent transhumanist advocates, such as Dan Agin, call transhumanism's critics, on the political right and left jointly, \"bioconservatives\" or \"bioluddites\", the latter term alluding to the 19th-century anti-industrialisation social movement that opposed the replacement of human manual labourers by machines.\nA belief of counter-transhumanism is that transhumanism can cause unfair human enhancement in many areas of life, but specifically on the social plane. This can be compared to steroid use, where athletes who use steroids in sports have an advantage over those who do not. The same disparity may happen when people have certain neural implants that give them an advantage in the workplace and in education. Additionally, according to M.J. McNamee and S.D. Edwards, many fear that the improvements afforded by a specific, privileged section of society will lead to a division of the human species into two different species. The idea of two human species, one at a great physical and economic advantage over with the other, is troublesome at best. One may be incapable of breeding with the other, and may by consequence of lower physical health and ability, be considered of a lower moral standing than the other.\nNick Bostrom has said that transhumanism advocates for the wellbeing of all sentient beings, including non-human animals, extraterrestrials, and artificial forms of life. This view is reiterated by David Pearce, who advocates the use of biotechnology to eradicate suffering in all sentient beings.\nCurrents.\nThere is a variety of opinions within transhumanist thought. Many of the leading transhumanist thinkers hold views that are under constant revision and development. Some distinctive currents of transhumanism are identified and listed here in alphabetical order:\nSpirituality.\nAlthough many transhumanists are atheists, agnostics, or secular humanists, some have religious or spiritual views. Despite the prevailing secular attitude, some transhumanists pursue hopes traditionally espoused by religions, such as immortality, while several controversial new religious movements from the late 20th century have explicitly embraced transhumanist goals of transforming the human condition by applying technology to alter the mind and body, such as Ra\u00eblism. But most thinkers associated with the transhumanism focus on the practical goals of using technology to help achieve longer and healthier lives, while speculating that future understanding of neurotheology and the application of neurotechnology will enable humans to gain greater control of altered states of consciousness, which were commonly interpreted as spiritual experiences, and thus achieve more profound self-knowledge. Transhumanist Buddhists have sought to explore areas of agreement between various types of Buddhism and Buddhist-derived meditation and mind-expanding neurotechnologies. They have been criticised for appropriating mindfulness as a tool for transcending humanness.\nSome transhumanists believe in the compatibility between the human mind and computer hardware, with the theoretical implication that human consciousness may someday be transferred to alternative media (a speculative technique commonly known as mind uploading). One extreme formulation of this idea that interests some transhumanists is the proposal of the Omega Point by Christian cosmologist Frank Tipler. Drawing upon ideas in digitalism, Tipler has advanced the notion that the collapse of the Universe billions of years hence could create the conditions for the perpetuation of humanity in a simulated reality within a megacomputer and thus achieve a form of \"posthuman godhood\". Before Tipler, the term Omega Point was used by Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, a paleontologist and Jesuit theologian who saw an evolutionary telos in the development of an encompassing noosphere, a global consciousness.\nViewed from the perspective of some Christian thinkers, the idea of mind uploading is asserted to represent a denigration of the human body, characteristic of gnostic manichaean belief. Transhumanism and its presumed intellectual progenitors have also been described as neo-gnostic by non-Christian and secular commentators.\nThe first dialogue between transhumanism and faith was a one-day conference at the University of Toronto in 2004. Religious critics alone faulted transhumanism for offering no eternal truths or relationship with the divine. They commented that a philosophy bereft of these beliefs leaves humanity adrift in a foggy sea of postmodern cynicism and anomie. Transhumanists responded that such criticisms reflect a failure to look at the actual content of transhumanist philosophy, which, far from being cynical, is rooted in optimistic, idealistic attitudes that trace back to the Enlightenment. Following this dialogue, William Sims Bainbridge, a sociologist of religion, conducted a pilot study, published in the Journal of Evolution and Technology, suggesting that religious attitudes were negatively correlated with acceptance of transhumanist ideas and indicating that people with highly religious worldviews tended to perceive transhumanism as a direct, competitive (though ultimately futile) affront to their spiritual beliefs.\nSince 2006, the Mormon Transhumanist Association sponsors conferences and lectures on the intersection of technology and religion. The Christian Transhumanist Association was established in 2014.\nSince 2009, the American Academy of Religion holds a \"Transhumanism and Religion\" consultation during its annual meeting, where scholars in the field of religious studies seek to identify and critically evaluate any implicit religious beliefs that might underlie key transhumanist claims and assumptions; consider how transhumanism challenges religious traditions to develop their own ideas of the human future, in particular the prospect of human transformation, whether by technological or other means; and provide critical and constructive assessments of an envisioned future that place greater confidence in nanotechnology, robotics and information technology to achieve virtual immortality and create a superior posthuman species.\nThe physicist and transhumanist thinker Giulio Prisco states that \"cosmist religions based on science, might be our best protection from reckless pursuit of superintelligence and other risky technologies.\" He also recognizes the importance of spiritual ideas, such as those of Russian Orthodox philosopher Nikolai Fyodorovich Fyodorov, to the origins of the transhumanism movement.\nPractice.\nWhile some transhumanists such as Ray Kurzweil and Hans Moravec take an abstract and theoretical approach to the perceived benefits of emerging technologies, others have offered specific proposals for modifications to the human body, including heritable ones. Transhumanists are often concerned with methods of enhancing the human nervous system. Though some, such as Kevin Warwick, propose modification of the peripheral nervous system, the brain is considered the common denominator of personhood and is thus a primary focus of transhumanist ambitions.\nIn fact, Warwick has gone a lot further than merely making a proposal. In 2002 he had a 100 electrode array surgically implanted into the median nerves of his left arm to link his nervous system directly with a computer and thus to also connect with the internet. As a consequence, he carried out a series of experiments. He was able to directly control a robot hand using his neural signals and to feel the force applied by the hand through feedback from the fingertips. He also experienced a form of ultrasonic sensory input and conducted the first purely electronic communication between his own nervous system and that of his wife who also had electrodes implanted.&lt;ref name=\"doi10.1001/archneur.60.10.1369|noedit\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nAs proponents of self-improvement and body modification, transhumanists tend to use existing technologies and techniques that supposedly improve cognitive and physical performance, while engaging in routines and lifestyles designed to improve health and longevity. Depending on their age, some transhumanists, such as Kurzweil, express concern that they will not live to reap the benefits of future technologies. However, many have a great interest in life extension strategies and in funding research in cryonics to make the latter a viable option of last resort, rather than remaining an unproven method.\nWhile most transhumanist theory focuses on future technologies and the changes they may bring, many today are already involved in the practice on a very basic level. It is not uncommon for many to receive cosmetic changes to their physical form via cosmetic surgery, even if it is not required for health reasons. Human growth hormones attempt to alter the natural development of shorter children or those who have been born with a physical deficiency. Doctors prescribe medicines such as Ritalin and Adderall to improve cognitive focus, and many people take \"lifestyle\" drugs such as Viagra, Propecia, and Botox to restore aspects of youthfulness that have been lost in maturity.\nOther transhumanists, such as cyborg artist Neil Harbisson, use technologies and techniques to improve their senses and perception of reality. Harbisson's antenna, which is permanently implanted in his skull, allows him to sense colours beyond human perception such as infrareds and ultraviolets.\nTechnologies of interest.\nTranshumanists support the emergence and convergence of technologies including nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology and cognitive science (NBIC), as well as hypothetical future technologies like simulated reality, artificial intelligence, superintelligence, 3D bioprinting, mind uploading, chemical brain preservation and cryonics. They believe that humans can and should use these technologies to become more than human. Therefore, they support the recognition or protection of cognitive liberty, morphological freedom and procreative liberty as civil liberties, so as to guarantee individuals the choice of using human enhancement technologies on themselves and their children. Some speculate that human enhancement techniques and other emerging technologies may facilitate more radical human enhancement no later than at the midpoint of the 21st century. Kurzweil's book \"The Singularity is Near\" and Michio Kaku's book \"Physics of the Future\" outline various human enhancement technologies and give insight on how these technologies may impact the human race.\nSome reports on the converging technologies and NBIC concepts have criticised their transhumanist orientation and alleged science fictional character. At the same time, research on brain and body alteration technologies has been accelerated under the sponsorship of the U.S. Department of Defense, which is interested in the battlefield advantages they would provide to the supersoldiers of the United States and its allies. There has already been a brain research program to \"extend the ability to manage information\", while military scientists are now looking at stretching the human capacity for combat to a maximum 168 hours without sleep.\nNeuroscientist Anders Sandberg has been practicing on the method of scanning ultra-thin sections of the brain. This method is being used to help better understand the architecture of the brain. It is currently being used on mice. This is the first step towards hypothetically uploading contents of the human brain, including memories and emotions, onto a computer.\nDebate.\nThe very notion and prospect of human enhancement and related issues arouse public controversy. Criticisms of transhumanism and its proposals take two main forms: those objecting to the likelihood of transhumanist goals being achieved (practical criticisms) and those objecting to the moral principles or worldview sustaining transhumanist proposals or underlying transhumanism itself (ethical criticisms). Critics and opponents often see transhumanists' goals as posing threats to human values.\nThe human enhancement debate is, for some, framed by the opposition between strong bioconservatism and transhumanism. The former opposes any form of human enhancement, whereas the latter advocates for all possible human enhancements. But many philosophers hold a more nuanced view in favour of some enhancements while rejecting the transhumanist carte blanche approach.\nTranshumanists argue that parents have a moral responsibility called procreative beneficence to make use of these methods, if and when they are shown to be reasonably safe and effective, to have the healthiest children possible. They believe this responsibility is a moral judgment best left to individual conscience, rather than imposed by law, in all but extreme cases. In this context, the emphasis on freedom of choice is called procreative liberty.\nSome of the best-known critiques of the transhumanist program are novels and fictional films. These works, despite presenting imagined worlds rather than philosophical analyses, are touchstones for some of the more formal arguments. Various arguments have been made to the effect that a society that adopts human enhancement technologies may come to resemble the dystopia depicted in Aldous Huxley's 1932 novel \"Brave New World\".\nSome authors consider humanity already transhuman, because recent medical advances have significantly altered our species. But this has not happened in a conscious and therefore transhumanistic way. From such a perspective, transhumanism is perpetually aspirational: as new technologies become mainstream, the adoption of still unadopted technologies becomes a new shifting goal.\nGiuseppe Vattino, a member of Italy's parliament, believes transhumanism will make people \"less subject to the whims of nature, such as illness or climate extremes\".\nFeasibility.\nIn a 1992 book, sociologist Max Dublin pointed to many past failed predictions of technological progress and argued that modern futurist predictions would prove similarly inaccurate. He also objected to what he saw as scientism, fanaticism and nihilism by a few in advancing transhumanist causes. Dublin also said that historical parallels existed between Millenarian religions and Communist doctrines.\nAlthough generally sympathetic to transhumanism, public health professor Gregory Stock is skeptical of the technical feasibility and mass appeal of the cyborgization of humanity predicted by Kurzweil, Hans Moravec, and Kevin Warwick. He said that, throughout the 21st century, many humans will be deeply integrated into systems of machines, but remain biological. Primary changes to their own form and character would arise not from cyberware, but from the direct manipulation of their genetics, metabolism and biochemistry.\nIn her 1992 book \"Science as Salvation\", philosopher Mary Midgley traces the notion of achieving immortality by transcendence of the material human body (echoed in the transhumanist tenet of mind uploading) to a group of male scientific thinkers of the early 20th century, including J. B. S. Haldane and members of his circle. She characterizes these ideas as \"quasi-scientific dreams and prophesies\" involving visions of escape from the body coupled with \"self-indulgent, uncontrolled power-fantasies\". Her argument focuses on what she perceives as the pseudoscientific speculations and irrational, fear-of-death-driven fantasies of these thinkers, their disregard for laymen and the remoteness of their eschatological visions.\nAnother critique is aimed mainly at \"algeny\" (a portmanteau of \"alchemy\" and \"genetics\"), which Jeremy Rifkin defined as \"the upgrading of existing organisms and the design of wholly new ones with the intent of 'perfecting' their performance\". It emphasizes the issue of biocomplexity and the unpredictability of attempts to guide the development of products of biological evolution. This argument, elaborated in particular by the biologist Stuart Newman, is based on the recognition that cloning and germline genetic engineering of animals are error-prone and inherently disruptive of embryonic development. Accordingly, so it is argued, it would create unacceptable risks to use such methods on human embryos. Performing experiments, particularly ones with permanent biological consequences, on developing humans would thus be in violation of accepted principles governing research on human subjects (see the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki). Moreover, because improvements in experimental outcomes in one species are not automatically transferable to a new species without further experimentation, it is claimed that there is no ethical route to genetic manipulation of humans at early developmental stages.\nAs a practical matter, international protocols on human subject research may not present a legal obstacle to attempts by transhumanists and others to improve their offspring by germinal choice technology. According to legal scholar Kirsten Rabe Smolensky, existing laws protect parents who choose to enhance their child's genome from future liability arising from adverse outcomes of the procedure.\nTranshumanists and other supporters of human genetic engineering do not dismiss practical concerns out of hand, insofar as there is a high degree of uncertainty about the timelines and likely outcomes of genetic modification experiments in humans. But bioethicist James Hughes suggests that one possible ethical route to the genetic manipulation of humans at early developmental stages is the building of computer models of the human genome, the proteins it specifies and the tissue engineering he argues that it also codes for. With the exponential progress in bioinformatics, Hughes believes that a virtual model of genetic expression in the human body will not be far behind and that it will soon be possible to accelerate approval of genetic modifications by simulating their effects on virtual humans. Public health professor Gregory Stock points to artificial chromosomes as a safer alternative to existing genetic engineering techniques.\nThinkers who defend the likelihood of accelerating change point to a past pattern of exponential increases in humanity's technological capacities. Kurzweil developed this position in his 2005 book \"The Singularity Is Near\".\nIntrinsic immorality.\nSome argue that, in transhumanist thought, humans attempt to substitute themselves for God. The 2002 Vatican statement \"Communion and Stewardship: Human Persons Created in the Image of God,\" stated that \"changing the genetic identity of man as a human person through the production of an infrahuman being is radically immoral\", implying, that \"man has full right of disposal over his own biological nature\". The statement also argues that creation of a superhuman or spiritually superior being is \"unthinkable\", since true improvement can come only through religious experience and \"realizing more fully the image of God\". Christian theologians and lay activists of several churches and denominations have expressed similar objections to transhumanism and claimed that Christians attain in the afterlife what radical transhumanism promises, such as indefinite life extension or the abolition of suffering. In this view, transhumanism is just another representative of the long line of utopian movements which seek to create \"heaven on earth\". On the other hand, religious thinkers allied with transhumanist goals such as the theologians Ronald Cole-Turner and Ted Peters hold that the doctrine of \"co-creation\" provides an obligation to use genetic engineering to improve human biology.\nOther critics target what they claim to be an instrumental conception of the human body in the writings of Minsky, Moravec, and some other transhumanists. Reflecting a strain of feminist criticism of the transhumanist program, philosopher Susan Bordo points to \"contemporary obsessions with slenderness, youth and physical perfection\", which she sees as affecting both men and women, but in distinct ways, as \"the logical (if extreme) manifestations of anxieties and fantasies fostered by our culture.\" Some critics question other social implications of the movement's focus on body modification. Political scientist Klaus-Gerd Giesen, in particular, has asserted that transhumanism's concentration on altering the human body represents the logical yet tragic consequence of atomized individualism and body commodification within a consumer culture.\nBostrom responds that the desire to regain youth, specifically, and transcend the natural limitations of the human body, in general, is pan-cultural and pan-historical, not uniquely tied to the culture of the 20th century. He argues that the transhumanist program is an attempt to channel that desire into a scientific project on par with the Human Genome Project and achieve humanity's oldest hope, rather than a puerile fantasy or social trend.\nLoss of human identity.\nIn his 2003 book \"Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age\", environmental ethicist Bill McKibben argued at length against many of the technologies that are postulated or supported by transhumanists, including germinal choice technology, nanomedicine and life extension strategies. He claims that it would be morally wrong for humans to tamper with fundamental aspects of themselves (or their children) in an attempt to overcome universal human limitations, such as vulnerability to aging, maximum life span and biological constraints on physical and cognitive ability. Attempts to \"improve\" themselves through such manipulation would remove limitations that provide a necessary context for the experience of meaningful human choice. He claims that human lives would no longer seem meaningful in a world where such limitations could be overcome technologically. Even the goal of using germinal choice technology for clearly therapeutic purposes should be relinquished, since it would inevitably produce temptations to tamper with such things as cognitive capacities. He argues that it is possible for societies to benefit from renouncing particular technologies, using as examples Ming China, Tokugawa Japan and the contemporary Amish.\nBiopolitical activist Jeremy Rifkin and biologist Stuart Newman accept that biotechnology has the power to make profound changes in organismal identity. They argue against the genetic engineering of human beings because they fear the blurring of the boundary between human and artifact. Philosopher Keekok Lee sees such developments as part of an accelerating trend in modernization in which technology has been used to transform the \"natural\" into the \"artefactual\". In the extreme, this could lead to the manufacturing and enslavement of \"monsters\" such as human clones, human-animal chimeras, or bioroids, but even lesser dislocations of humans and non-humans from social and ecological systems are seen as problematic. The film \"Blade Runner\" (1982) and the novels \"The Boys From Brazil\" (1976) and \"The Island of Doctor Moreau\" (1896) depict elements of such scenarios, but Mary Shelley's 1818 novel \"Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus\" is most often alluded to by critics who suggest that biotechnologies could create objectified and socially unmoored people as well as subhumans. Such critics propose that strict measures be implemented to prevent what they portray as dehumanizing possibilities from ever happening, usually in the form of an international ban on human genetic engineering.\nScience journalist Ronald Bailey claims that McKibben's historical examples are flawed and support different conclusions when studied more closely. For example, few groups are more cautious than the Amish about embracing new technologies, but, though they shun television and use horses and buggies, some are welcoming the possibilities of gene therapy since inbreeding has afflicted them with a number of rare genetic diseases. Bailey and other supporters of technological alteration of human biology also reject the claim that life would be experienced as meaningless if some human limitations are overcome with enhancement technologies as extremely subjective.\nWriting in \"Reason\" magazine, Bailey has accused opponents of research involving the modification of animals as indulging in alarmism when they speculate about the creation of subhuman creatures with human-like intelligence and brains resembling those of \"Homo sapiens\". Bailey insists that the aim of conducting research on animals is simply to produce human health care benefits.\nA different response comes from transhumanist personhood theorists who object to what they characterize as the anthropomorphobia fueling some criticisms of this research, which science fiction writer Isaac Asimov termed the \"Frankenstein complex\". For example, Woody Evans argues that, provided they are self-aware, human clones, human-animal chimeras and uplifted animals would all be unique persons deserving of respect, dignity, rights, responsibilities, and citizenship. They conclude that the coming ethical issue is not the creation of so-called monsters, but what they characterize as the \"yuck factor\" and \"human-racism\", that would judge and treat these creations as monstrous. In book 3 of his \"Corrupting the Image\" series, Douglas Hamp goes so far as to suggest that the Beast of John's Apocalypse is himself a hybrid who will induce humanity to take \"the mark of the Beast\", in the hopes of obtaining perfection and immortality.\nAt least one public interest organization, the U.S.-based Center for Genetics and Society, was formed, in 2001, with the specific goal of opposing transhumanist agendas that involve transgenerational modification of human biology, such as full-term human cloning and germinal choice technology. The Institute on Biotechnology and the Human Future of the Chicago-Kent College of Law critically scrutinizes proposed applications of genetic and nanotechnologies to human biology in an academic setting.\nSocioeconomic effects.\nSome critics of libertarian transhumanism have focused on the likely socioeconomic consequences in societies in which divisions between rich and poor are on the rise. Bill McKibben, for example, suggests that emerging human enhancement technologies would be disproportionately available to those with greater financial resources, thereby exacerbating the gap between rich and poor and creating a \"genetic divide\". Even Lee M. Silver, the biologist and science writer who coined the term \"reprogenetics\" and supports its applications, has expressed concern that these methods could create a two-tiered society of genetically engineered \"haves\" and \"have nots\" if social democratic reforms lag behind implementation of enhancement technologies. The 1997 film \"Gattaca\" depicts a dystopian society in which one's social class depends entirely on genetic potential and is often cited by critics in support of these views.\nThese criticisms are also voiced by non-libertarian transhumanist advocates, especially self-described democratic transhumanists, who believe that the majority of current or future social and environmental issues (such as unemployment and resource depletion) must be addressed by a combination of political and technological solutions (like a guaranteed minimum income and alternative technology). Therefore, on the specific issue of an emerging genetic divide due to unequal access to human enhancement technologies, bioethicist James Hughes, in his 2004 book \"Citizen Cyborg: Why Democratic Societies Must Respond to the Redesigned Human of the Future\", argues that progressives or, more precisely, techno-progressives, must articulate and implement public policies (i.e., a universal health care voucher system that covers human enhancement technologies) to attenuate this problem as much as possible, rather than trying to ban human enhancement technologies. The latter, he argues, might actually worsen the problem by making these technologies unsafe or available only to the wealthy on the local black market or in countries where such a ban is not enforced.\nSometimes, as in the writings of Leon Kass, the fear is that various institutions and practices judged as fundamental to civilized society would be damaged or destroyed. In his 2002 book \"Our Posthuman Future\" and in a 2004 \"Foreign Policy\" magazine article, political economist and philosopher Francis Fukuyama designates transhumanism as the world's most dangerous idea because he believes it may undermine the egalitarian ideals of democracy (in general) and liberal democracy (in particular) through a fundamental alteration of \"human nature\". Social philosopher J\u00fcrgen Habermas makes a similar argument in his 2003 book \"The Future of Human Nature\", in which he asserts that moral autonomy depends on not being subject to another's unilaterally imposed specifications. Habermas thus suggests that the human \"species ethic\" would be undermined by embryo-stage genetic alteration. Critics such as Kass and Fukuyama hold that attempts to significantly alter human biology are not only inherently immoral, but also threaten the social order. Alternatively, they argue that implementation of such technologies would likely lead to the \"naturalizing\" of social hierarchies or place new means of control in the hands of totalitarian regimes. AI pioneer Joseph Weizenbaum criticizes what he sees as misanthropic tendencies in the language and ideas of some of his colleagues, in particular Minsky and Moravec, which, by devaluing the human organism per se, promotes a discourse that enables divisive and undemocratic social policies.\nIn a 2004 article in the libertarian monthly \"Reason,\" science journalist Ronald Bailey contested Fukuyama's assertions by arguing that political equality has never rested on the facts of human biology. He asserts that liberalism was founded not on the proposition of effective equality of human beings, or \"de facto\" equality, but on the assertion of an equality in political rights and before the law, or \"de jure\" equality. Bailey asserts that the products of genetic engineering may well ameliorate rather than exacerbate human inequality, giving to the many what were once the privileges of the few. Moreover, he argues, \"the crowning achievement of the Enlightenment is the principle of tolerance\". In fact, he says, political liberalism is already the solution to the issue of human and posthuman rights since in liberal societies the law is meant to apply equally to all, no matter how rich or poor, powerful or powerless, educated or ignorant, enhanced or unenhanced. Other thinkers sympathetic to transhumanist ideas, such as Russell Blackford, have also objected to the appeal to tradition and what they see as alarmism involved in \"Brave New World\"-type arguments.\nCultural aesthetics.\nIn addition to the socioeconomic risks and implications of transhumanism, there are indeed implications and possible consequences in regard to cultural aesthetics. Currently, there are a number of ways in which people choose to represent themselves in society. The way in which a person dresses, hair styles, and body alteration all serve to identify the way a person presents themselves and is perceived by society. According to Foucault, society already governs and controls bodies by making them feel watched. This \"surveillance\" of society dictates how the majority of individuals choose to express themselves aesthetically.\nOne of the risks outlined in a 2004 article by Jerold Abrams is the elimination of differences in favor of universality. This, he argues, will eliminate the ability of individuals to subvert the possibly oppressive, dominant structure of society by way of uniquely expressing themselves externally. Such control over a population would have dangerous implications of tyranny. Yet another consequence of enhancing the human form not only cognitively, but physically, will be the reinforcement of \"desirable\" traits which are perpetuated by the dominant social structure.\nNew eugenics.\nThe tradition of human enhancement originated with the eugenics movement that was once prominent in the biological sciences, and was later politicized in various ways. This continuity is especially clear in the case of Julian Huxley himself.\nThe major transhumanist organizations strongly condemn the coercion involved in such policies and reject the racist and classist assumptions on which they were based, along with the pseudoscientific notions that eugenic improvements could be accomplished in a practically meaningful time frame through selective human breeding. Instead, most transhumanist thinkers advocate a \"new eugenics\", a form of egalitarian liberal eugenics. In their 2000 book \"From Chance to Choice: Genetics and Justice\", non-transhumanist bioethicists Allen Buchanan, Dan Brock, Norman Daniels and Daniel Wikler have argued that liberal societies have an obligation to encourage as wide an adoption of eugenic enhancement technologies as possible (so long as such policies do not infringe on individuals' reproductive rights or exert undue pressures on prospective parents to use these technologies) to maximize public health and minimize the inequalities that may result from both natural genetic endowments and unequal access to genetic enhancements. Most transhumanists holding similar views nonetheless distance themselves from the term \"eugenics\" (preferring \"germinal choice\" or \"reprogenetics\") to avoid having their position confused with the discredited theories and practices of early-20th-century eugenic movements.\nHealth law professor George Annas and technology law professor Lori Andrews are prominent advocates of the position that the use of these technologies could lead to human-posthuman caste warfare.\nExistential risks.\nIn his 2003 book \"Our Final Hour\", British Astronomer Royal Martin Rees argues that advanced science and technology bring as much risk of disaster as opportunity for progress. However, Rees does not advocate a halt to scientific activity. Instead, he calls for tighter security and perhaps an end to traditional scientific openness. Advocates of the precautionary principle, such as many in the environmental movement, also favor slow, careful progress or a halt in potentially dangerous areas. Some precautionists believe that artificial intelligence and robotics present possibilities of alternative forms of cognition that may threaten human life.\nTranshumanists do not necessarily rule out specific restrictions on emerging technologies so as to lessen the prospect of existential risk. Generally, however, they counter that proposals based on the precautionary principle are often unrealistic and sometimes even counter-productive as opposed to the technogaian current of transhumanism, which they claim is both realistic and productive. In his television series \"Connections\", science historian James Burke dissects several views on technological change, including precautionism and the restriction of open inquiry. Burke questions the practicality of some of these views, but concludes that maintaining the \"status quo\" of inquiry and development poses hazards of its own, such as a disorienting rate of change and the depletion of our planet's resources. The common transhumanist position is a pragmatic one where society takes deliberate action to ensure the early arrival of the benefits of safe, clean, alternative technology, rather than fostering what it considers to be anti-scientific views and technophobia.\nNick Bostrom argues that even barring the occurrence of a singular global catastrophic event, basic Malthusian and evolutionary forces facilitated by technological progress threaten to eliminate the positive aspects of human society.\nOne transhumanist solution proposed by Bostrom to counter existential risks is control of differential technological development, a series of attempts to influence the sequence in which technologies are developed. In this approach, planners would strive to retard the development of possibly harmful technologies and their applications, while accelerating the development of likely beneficial technologies, especially those that offer protection against the harmful effects of others.\nIn their 2021 book \"Calamity Theory\", Joshua Schuster and Derek Woods critique existential risks by arguing against Bostrom's transhumanist perspective, which emphasizes controlling and mitigating these risks through technological advancements. They contend that this approach relies too much on fringe science and speculative technologies and fails to address deeper philosophical and ethical problems about the nature of human existence and its limitations. Instead, they advocate an approach more grounded in secular existentialist philosophy, focusing on mental fortitude, community resilience, international peacebuilding, and environmental stewardship to better cope with existential risks.\nAntinatalism and pronatalism.\nAlthough most people focus on the scientific and technological barriers on the road to human enhancement, Robbert Zandbergen argues that contemporary transhumanists' failure to critically engage the cultural current of antinatalism is a far bigger obstacle to a posthuman future. Antinatalism is a stance seeking to discourage, restrict, or terminate human reproduction to solve existential problems. If transhumanists fail to take this threat to human continuity seriously, they run the risk of seeing the collapse of the entire edifice of radical enhancement.\nSimone and Malcolm Collins, founders of Pronatalist.org, are activists known primarily for their views and advocacy related to a secular and voluntaristic form of pronatalism, a stance encouraging higher birth rates to reverse demographic decline and its negative implications for the viability of modern societies and the possibility of a better future. Critical of transhumanism, they have expressed concern that life extension would worsen the problem of gerontocracy, causing toxic imbalances in power. The Collinses lament that voluntarily childfree transhumanists who \"want to live forever believe they are the epitome of centuries of human cultural and biological evolution. They don\u2019t think they can make kids that are better than them.\"\nPropagandistic use.\nCommon enemy to anti-democratic movements.\nTranshumanism has increasingly been co-opted by anti-democratic movements as a common enemy stereotype. These movements range from Putin sympathizers to radical anti-vaxxers and Christian fundamentalists. Critics argue that nonsensical claims often stem from deliberate ignorance, and terms like \"Putin sympathizer\" or \"conspiracy theorist\" are used to defame legitimate criticism.\nPolitical scientists like Markus Linden point out that Putin, in his speeches, argues against the so-called \"liberal-globalist American egocentrism\" and cancel culture, which parallels the agitation seen in alternative media. These discourses also occur on platforms like \"Nachdenkseiten\", \"Rubikon\", and \"Compact\", where they are presented as analyses of the decline of Western democracy.\nThe propagandistic use of the term \"transhumanism\" aims to create a comprehensive counter-narrative that unites right-wing extremists, theocratic groups, and liberals. Transhumanism is portrayed as a threat to traditional values and human nature. These narratives can also be found among ideologues like Alexander Dugin, who condemns transhumanism as the work of the devil, and Christian fundamentalists who equate it with the denial of traditional values.\nThe use of the term \"transhumanism\" as an ideological rallying point for the \"Querfront\" is also evident in the fusion of right-wing, left-wing, and libertarian ideas that collectively oppose liberal democracies. This development emphasizes individual conceptions of humanity that are often incompatible with a pluralistic society. It requires a critical examination of the political implications of transhumanism and its instrumentalization by anti-democratic forces."}
{"id": "30302", "revid": "1893804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30302", "title": "TARDIS", "text": "Fictional time-travelling device\nThe TARDIS (; acronym for \"Time And Relative Dimension(s) In Space\") is a fictional hybrid of a time machine and spacecraft that appears in the British science fiction television series \"Doctor Who\" and its various spin-offs. While a TARDIS is capable of disguising itself, the exterior appearance of the Doctor's TARDIS typically mimics a police box, an obsolete type of telephone kiosk that was once commonly seen on streets in Britain in the 1940s and 50s. Its interior is shown as being much larger than its exterior, commonly described as being \"bigger on the inside\".\nDue to the significance of \"Doctor Who\" in popular British culture, the shape of the police box is now more strongly associated with the TARDIS than its real-world inspiration. The name and design of the TARDIS is a registered trademark of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), although the design was originally created by the Metropolitan Police Service.\nName.\nTARDIS is an acronym of \"Time And Relative Dimension in Space\". The word \"Dimension\" is alternatively rendered in the plural. The first story, \"An Unearthly Child\" (1963), used the singular \"Dimension\". The 1964 novelisation \"Doctor Who in an Exciting Adventure with the Daleks\" used \"Dimensions\" for the first time and the 1965 serial \"The Time Meddler\" introduced the plural in the television series \u2013 although the script had it as singular, actor Maureen O'Brien changed it to \"Dimensions\". Both continued to be used during the classic series; in \"Rose\" (2005), the Ninth Doctor uses the singular (although this was a decision of actor Christopher Eccleston\u2014 the line was plural in the script for the episode). The acronym was explained in the first episode of the show, \"An Unearthly Child\" (1963), in which the Doctor's granddaughter Susan claims to have made it up herself. Despite this, the term is used commonly by other Time Lords to refer to both the Doctor's and their own time ships.\nGenerally, \"TARDIS\" is written in all uppercase letters, but may also be written in title case as \"Tardis\". The word \"Tardis\" first appeared in print in the Christmas 1963 edition of \"Radio Times\", which refers to \"the space-time ship \"Tardis\"\".\nDescription.\nIn the fictional universe of the \"Doctor Who\" television show, TARDISes are space- and time-travel vehicles of the Time Lords, an alien species from the planet Gallifrey. Although many TARDISes exist and are sometimes seen on-screen, the television show mainly features a single TARDIS used by the show's protagonist, a Time Lord who goes by the name of the Doctor.\nTARDISes are built with a \"chameleon circuit\", a type of camouflage technology that changes the exterior form of the ship to blend into the environment of whatever time or place it lands in. The Doctor's TARDIS always resembles a 1960s London police box, an object that was very common in Britain at the time of the show's first broadcast, owing to a malfunction in the chameleon circuit before the events of the first episode of the show, \"An Unearthly Child\". The Doctor has attempted to repair the chameleon circuit, unsuccessfully in \"Logopolis\" (1981) and with only temporary success in \"Attack of the Cybermen\" (1985). In \"Boom Town\", the Doctor reveals that he has stopped trying to repair the circuit as he has become fond of its appearance. The other TARDISes that appear in the series have chameleon circuits that are fully functional.\nThe TARDIS is famously \"bigger on the inside\". A much larger control room lies inside the police box, at the centre of which is a console for operating the TARDIS. In the middle of the console is a moving tubular device called a time rotor. The presence of a physically larger space contained within the police box is explained as \"dimensionally transcendental\", with the interior being a whole separate dimension containing an infinite number of rooms, corridors and storage spaces, all of which can change their appearance and configuration.\nThe TARDIS also allows the Doctor and others to communicate with people who speak languages other than their own, as well as turn all written languages to English. The translation circuit has been explored in comparison with real-world machine translation, with researchers Mark Halley and Lynne Bowker concluding that \"when it comes to the science of translation technology, \"Doctor Who\" gets it wrong more often than it gets it right. However, perhaps we can forgive the artistic license if we recognise that, as in other science fiction works, the presentation of some type of ubiquitous translation tool is necessary to explain to the audience how people from other countries, time periods, and even other worlds, can understand each other and indeed appear to speak (mostly) flawless English.\" The TARDIS is also able to generate a \"perception filter\" that causes people to ignore it, thinking that it is normal.\nConceptual history.\nExterior design.\nWhen \"Doctor Who\" was being developed in 1963 the production staff discussed what the Doctor's time machine would look like. To keep the design within budget it was decided to make the outside resemble a police telephone box, a common piece of street furniture that had originally been designed in the 1920s by the Scottish architect Gilbert Mackenzie Trench. The idea for the police-box disguise came from a BBC staff writer, Anthony Coburn, who rewrote the programme's first episode from a draft by C. E. Webber. While there is no known precedent for this notion, a November 1960 episode of the popular radio comedy show \"Beyond Our Ken\" included a sketch featuring a time machine described as \"a tall telephone box\".\nThe concept of a cloaking mechanism (later referred to as the \"chameleon circuit\") was devised to explain this. In the first episode, \"An Unearthly Child\" (1963), the TARDIS is first seen hidden in a London scrapyard in 1963, and after travelling back in time (\"The Cave of Skulls\") to the Paleolithic era, the police box exterior persists. In a subsequent story, \"The Time Meddler\" (1965), the First Doctor explains that the TARDIS should automatically adopt a disguise, such as a howdah (a carrier on the back of an Indian elephant in the Indian Mutiny) or a rock on a beach.\nAccounts differ as to the origin of the police box prop. While the BBC asserts that it was constructed specially for \"Doctor Who\", it has been claimed that the box was a reused prop from the BBC television police dramas \"Z-Cars\" or \"Dixon of Dock Green\" (a claim repeated by \"Doctor Who\" producer Steven Moffat).\nThe dimensions and colour of the TARDIS police box props used in the series have changed many times, as a result of damage and the requirements of the show, and none of the BBC props has been a faithful replica of the original MacKenzie Trench model. Numerous details have been altered over time, including the shape of the roof, the signage, the shade of blue paint, the presence of a St John Ambulance emblem and the overall height of the box. The original prop remained in use for around 13 years until it collapsed \u2013 reportedly on Elisabeth Sladen's head. A new prop was introduced for \"The Masque of Mandragora\" in 1976, and there have been at least six versions in total. The evolution of the prop design was referenced on-screen in the episode \"Blink\" (2007), when the character Detective Inspector Shipton says the TARDIS \"isn't a real [police box]. The phone's just a dummy, and the windows are the wrong size.\"\nInterior design.\nThe TARDIS console room was designed for the first episode by set designer Peter Brachacki and was unusually large for a BBC production of this time. It was noted for its innovative, gleaming white \"futuristic\" appearance.\nLike the police box prop, the set design of the TARDIS interior has evolved over the years. From the inception of the show in 1963 up until the end of the \"classic series\" in 1989, the design of the TARDIS console room remained largely unchanged from Brachacki's original set, a brightly lit white chamber, lined with a pattern of roundels on the walls and with a central hexagonal console which contained a cylindrical \"time rotor\" that moved when the TARDIS was in transit. Numerous alterations were made to the central console and to the layout, but the overall concept remained constant. In Season 14 (1976\u201377), a dark wood-panelled \"Control Room Number 2\" was briefly used for a few episodes, but the white console room set was reinstated in Season 15, due to damage to the set. After the cancellation of the television show, a radically redesigned TARDIS set was used in the 1996 TV movie, heralding a move to a more steampunk-inspired set design, which later influenced the set design in the revived series from 2005 onwards.\nDepiction of time travel.\nThe production team conceived of the TARDIS travelling by dematerialising at one point and rematerialising elsewhere, although sometimes in the series it is shown also to be capable of conventional space travel. In the 2006 Christmas special, \"The Runaway Bride\", the Doctor remarks that for a spaceship, the TARDIS does remarkably little flying. The ability to travel simply by fading into and out of different locations became one of the trademarks of the show, allowing for a great deal of versatility in setting and storytelling without a large expense in special effects. The distinctive accompanying sound effect \u2013 a cyclic wheezing, groaning noise \u2013 was originally created in the BBC Radiophonic Workshop by sound technician Brian Hodgson by recording on tape the sound of his mother's house key scraping up and down the strings of an old piano. Hodgson then re-recorded the sound by changing the tape speed up and down and splicing the altered sounds together. When employed in the series, the sound is usually synchronised with the flashing light on top of the police box, or the fade-in and fade-out effects of a TARDIS. Writer Patrick Ness has described the ship's distinctive dematerialisation noise as \"a kind of haunted grinding sound\", while the \"Doctor Who Magazine\" comic strips traditionally use the onomatopoeic phrase \"vworp vworp vworp\".\nOther appearances.\nTelevision spin-offs.\nThe sound of the Doctor's TARDIS featured in the final scene of the \"Torchwood\" episode \"End of Days\" (2007). As Torchwood Three's hub is situated at a rift of temporal energy, the Doctor often appears on Roald Dahl Plass directly above it in order to recharge the TARDIS. In the episode, Jack Harkness hears the tell-tale sound of the engines, smiles and afterwards is nowhere to be found; the scene picks up in the cold open of the \"Doctor Who\" episode \"Utopia\" (2007) in which Jack runs to and holds onto the TARDIS just before it disappears.\nFormer companion Sarah Jane Smith has a diagram of the TARDIS in her attic, as shown in \"The Sarah Jane Adventures\" episode \"Invasion of the Bane\" (2007). In the two-part serial \"The Temptation of Sarah Jane Smith\" (2008), Sarah Jane becomes trapped in 1951 and briefly mistakes an actual police public call box for the Doctor's TARDIS (the moment is even heralded by the Doctor's musical cue, frequently used in the revived series). It makes a full appearance in \"The Wedding of Sarah Jane Smith\" (2009), in which the Doctor briefly welcomes Sarah Jane's three adolescent companions into the control room. It then serves as a backdrop for the farewell scene between Sarah Jane and the Tenth Doctor, which echoed nearly word-for-word her final exchange with the Fourth Doctor aboard the TARDIS in 1976. It reappears in \"Death of the Doctor\" (2010), where it is stolen by the Shansheeth who try to use it as an immortality machine, and transports Sarah Jane, Jo Grant and their adolescent companions (Rani Chandra, Clyde Langer and Santiago Jones).\nTheatrical films.\nThe TARDIS appears in the two film productions, \"Dr. Who and the Daleks\" (1965) and \"Daleks' Invasion Earth 2150 A.D.\" (1966). In both films the Doctor, played by Peter Cushing, is an eccentric scientist who invented the TARDIS himself.\nCultural impact.\nMerchandising.\nAs one of the most recognisable images connected with \"Doctor Who\", the TARDIS has appeared on numerous items of merchandise associated with the programme. TARDIS scale models of various sizes have been manufactured to accompany other \"Doctor Who\" dolls and action figures, some with sound effects included. Fan-built full-size models of the police box are also common. There have been TARDIS-shaped video games, play tents for children, toy boxes, cookie jars, book ends, key chains, and even a police-box-shaped bottle for a TARDIS bubble bath. The 1993 VHS release of \"The Trial of a Time Lord\" was contained in a special-edition tin shaped like the TARDIS.\nWith the 2005 series revival, a variety of TARDIS-shaped merchandise has been produced, including a TARDIS coin box, TARDIS figure toy set, a TARDIS that detects the ring signal from a mobile phone and flashes when an incoming call is detected, TARDIS-shaped wardrobes and DVD cabinets, and a USB hub in the shape of the TARDIS. The complete 2005 season DVD box set, released in November 2005, was issued in packaging that resembled the TARDIS.\nOne of the original-model TARDISes used in the television series' production in the 1970s was sold at auction in December 2005 for \u00a310,800.\nBBC trademark.\nIn 1996 the BBC applied to the UK Intellectual Property Office to register the TARDIS as a trademark. This was challenged by the Metropolitan Police, who felt that they owned the rights to the police box image. However, the Patent Office found that there was no evidence that the Metropolitan Police \u2013 or any other police force \u2013 had ever registered the image as a trademark. In addition, the BBC had been selling merchandise based on the image for over three decades without complaint by the police. The Patent Office issued a ruling in favour of the BBC in 2002.\nThe word TARDIS is listed in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nLegacy police boxes.\nA number of legacy police boxes are still standing on streets around the United Kingdom. Although now no longer used for their original function, many have been repurposed as coffee kiosks, and are often affectionately referred to as TARDISes. A police box in the Somerton area of Newport in South Wales is known as the Somerton TARDIS.\nIn science and computing.\nAn asteroid discovered in 1984 by astronomer Brian A. Skiff was named 3325 TARDIS on account of its cuboid appearance. A number of geological features on Charon, the largest moon of the dwarf planet Pluto, have been named after mythological or fictional vessels, and one is named the Tardis Chasma.\nA data storage manufacturer called tarDISK markets a flash memory drive for Apple MacBook which it claims is \"bigger on the inside\". They also claim native integration with Apple's Time Machine backup software.\nThe European Space Agency has sent 3,000 tardigrades (\"water bears\") into orbit on the \"outside\" of a rocket; 32% survived. The experiment was named Tardigrades in Space, or Tardis.\nIn popular culture.\nCultural references to the TARDIS are many and varied.\nIn music, The KLF (performing as \"The Timelords\") released a novelty pop single in 1988 entitled \"Doctorin' the Tardis\". The record reached number one in the UK Singles Chart and had chart success worldwide. It was a reworking of several songs (principally Gary Glitter's \"Rock and Roll Part 2\", The Sweet's \"Block Buster!\" and the \"Doctor Who\" theme music) with lyrics referencing \"Doctor Who\", specifically the TARDIS. In 2007, the British rock band Radiohead included the song \"Up on the Ladder\" on their album \"In Rainbows\" which begins with the line \"I'm stuck in the TARDIS\".\nIn 2001, Turner Prize-winning artist Mark Wallinger created a piece or artwork entitled \"Time and Relative Dimensions in Space\" that is structurally a police box shape faced with mirrors. The BBC website describes it as \"recent proof of [the TARDIS'] enduring legacy\".\nIn July 2014, the Monty Python comedy troupe opened their reunion show, \"Monty Python Live (Mostly)\", with a trademark animation featuring the Tardis \u2013 dubbed the \"retardis\" \u2013 flying through space before the Pythons came on stage.\nIn film, the TARDIS makes a cameo appearance in a number of productions, including \"Iron Sky\" (2012) and \"\" (2019). The TARDIS has also featured within the gameplay of a number of popular video games, including \"Lego Dimensions\" and \"Fortnite Battle Royale\".\nTo promote the \"Barbie\" film released in July 2023, a pink TARDIS was unveiled next to Tower Bridge in London on 11 July, as Ncuti Gatwa would appear in both \"Barbie\" as a Ken and in \"Doctor Who\" as the Fifteenth Doctor.\nOther references to the TARDIS have included a $2 silver commemorative coin depicting the TARDIS, issued on Niue Island in the South Pacific Ocean by the Perth Mint to mark the 50th anniversary of the \"Doctor Who\" television show; and Tardis Environmental, a British sewage company, in reference to the similarity of their portable toilets to a police box.\n\"Tardis\" has also become a slang term used in the British real estate industry, to suggest that a house or apartment is actually substantially bigger on the inside than it looks on the outside.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30304", "revid": "8260261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30304", "title": "The X-Files", "text": "American television series\nThe X-Files is an American science fiction drama television series created by Chris Carter. The original series aired from September 10, 1993, to May 19, 2002, on Fox, spanning nine seasons, with 202 episodes. A tenth season of six episodes ran from January to February 2016. Following the ratings success of this revival, \"The X-Files\" returned for an eleventh season of ten episodes, which ran from January to March 2018. In addition to the television series, two feature films have been released: the 1998 film \"The X-Files\" and the stand-alone film \"\", released in 2008, six years after the original television run ended.\nThe series revolves around Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Special Agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson), who investigate the eponymous \"X-Files\": marginalized, unsolved cases involving paranormal phenomena. Mulder is a skilled criminal profiler, an ardent supernaturalist, and a conspiracy theorist who believes in the existence of the paranormal, whereas Scully is a medical doctor and skeptic who has been assigned to scientifically analyze Mulder's case files. Early in the series, both agents apparently become pawns in a much larger conflict and come to trust only each other and select others. The agents discover what appears to be a governmental agenda to hide evidence of extraterrestrial life. Mulder and Scully's shared adventures initially lead them to develop a close platonic bond, which develops into a complex romantic relationship. Roughly one third of the series' episodes follow a complicated mythopoeia-driven story arc about a planned alien invasion, whereas the other two-thirds may be described as \"monster of the week\" episodes that focus on a single villain, mutant, or monster.\n\"The X-Files\" was inspired by earlier television series featuring elements of suspense, horror, and speculative science fiction, including \"The Twilight Zone\", \"Night Gallery\", \"Tales from the Darkside\", \"Twin Peaks\", and especially \"\". When creating the main characters, Carter sought to reverse gender stereotypes by making Mulder a believer and Scully a skeptic. The first seven seasons featured Duchovny and Anderson relatively equally. In the eighth and ninth seasons, Anderson took precedence while Duchovny appeared intermittently. New main characters were introduced: FBI Special Agents John Doggett (Robert Patrick) and Monica Reyes (Annabeth Gish), among others. Mulder and Scully's immediate superior, Assistant Director Walter Skinner (Mitch Pileggi), began to appear regularly. The first five seasons of \"The X-Files\" were filmed in Vancouver, British Columbia, before production eventually moved to Los Angeles, apparently to accommodate Duchovny's schedule. However, the series later returned to Vancouver with the filming of \"The X-Files: I Want to Believe\" as well as the tenth and eleventh seasons.\n\"The X-Files\" was a hit for the Fox network and received largely positive reviews, although its long-term story arc was criticized near the conclusion. Initially considered a cult series, it turned into a pop culture touchstone that tapped into public mistrust of governments and large institutions and embraced conspiracy theories and spirituality. Both the series and lead actors Duchovny and Anderson received multiple awards and nominations, and by its conclusion the show was the longest-running science fiction series in American television history. The series also spawned a franchise that includes spin-offs \"Millennium\" and \"The Lone Gunmen\", two theatrical films, and accompanying merchandise.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPremise.\nGeneral.\n\"The X-Files\" follows Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Special Agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson). Special Agent Mulder is a talented profiler and conspiracy theorist, and an ardent supernaturalist. He is also adamant about the existence of intelligent extraterrestrial life and its presence on Earth. These beliefs earn him the nickname \"Spooky Mulder\" and an assignment to a little-known department that deals with unsolved cases, the X-Files. His belief in the paranormal springs from the claimed alien abduction of his sister Samantha Mulder when Mulder was 12. Her abduction drives Mulder throughout most of the series. Because of this, as well as more nebulous desires for vindication and the revelation of truths kept hidden by human authorities, Mulder struggles to maintain objectivity in his investigations.\nSpecial Agent Scully is a foil for Mulder in this regard. As a medical doctor and natural skeptic, Scully approaches cases with detachment, even when Mulder, despite his considerable training, loses his objectivity. She is partnered with Mulder initially so that she can debunk Mulder's nonconforming theories, often supplying logical, scientific explanations for the cases' apparently unexplainable phenomena. Although she is frequently able to offer scientific alternatives to Mulder's deductions, she is rarely able to refute them completely. Over the course of the series, she becomes increasingly dissatisfied with her own ability to approach the cases scientifically. After Mulder's abduction at the hands of aliens in the seventh season finale \"Requiem\", Scully becomes a \"reluctant believer\" who explains the paranormal with science.\nVarious episodes also deal with the relationship between Mulder and Scully, originally platonic, but that later develops romantically. Mulder and Scully are joined by John Doggett (Robert Patrick) and Monica Reyes (Annabeth Gish) late in the series, after Mulder is abducted. Doggett replaces him as Scully's partner and helps her search for him, later involving Reyes, of whom Doggett had professional knowledge. The initial run of \"The X-Files\" ends when Mulder is secretly subjected to a military tribunal for breaking into the top-secret Mount Weather Emergency Operations Center and viewing plans for alien invasion and colonization of Earth. He is found guilty and sentenced to death but escapes punishment with the help of the other agents, and he and Scully become fugitives.\nMythology.\nKey episodes, known as the \"mytharc\", were recognized as the \"mythology\" of the series canon; these episodes carried the extraterrestrial/conspiracy storyline that evolved throughout the series. \"Monster of the week\"\u2014often abbreviated as \"MotW\" or \"MoW\"\u2014came to denote the remainder of \"The X-Files\" episodes. These episodes, forming the majority of the series, dealt with paranormal (and in certain cases, merely criminal) phenomena, including: serial killers (with or without supernatural powers), cryptids, ghosts, mutants, science fiction technology, horror monsters and religious phenomena. Some of the \"monster of the week\" episodes featured satiric elements and comedic story lines. The main story arc involves the agents' efforts to uncover a government conspiracy that covers up the existence of extraterrestrials and their sinister collaboration with said government. Mysterious men constituting a shadow element within the U.S. government, known as the Syndicate, are the major villains in the series; late in the series it is revealed that The Syndicate acts as the only liaison between mankind and a group of extraterrestrials that intends to destroy humanity. They are usually represented by the Cigarette Smoking Man (William B. Davis), a ruthless killer, masterful politician, negotiator, failed novelist, and the series' principal antagonist.\nAs the series goes along, Mulder and Scully learn about evidence of the alien invasion piece by piece. It is revealed that the extraterrestrials plan on using a sentient virus, known as the black oil (also known as \"Purity\"), to infect mankind and turn the population of the world into a slave race. The Syndicate\u2014having made a deal to be spared by the aliens\u2014have been working to develop an alien-human hybrid that will be able to withstand the effects of the black oil. The group has also been secretly working on a vaccine to overcome the black oil; this vaccine is revealed in the latter parts of season five, as well as the 1998 film. Counter to the alien colonization effort, another faction of aliens, the faceless rebels, are working to stop alien colonization. Eventually, in the season six episodes \"Two Fathers\" and \"One Son\", the rebels manage to destroy the Syndicate. The colonists, now without human liaisons, dispatch the \"Super Soldiers\": beings that resemble humans, but are biologically alien. In the latter parts of season eight, and the whole of season nine, the Super Soldiers manage to replace key individuals in the government, forcing Mulder and Scully to go into hiding.\nProduction.\nConception.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMulder and Scully came right out of my head. A dichotomy. They are the equal parts of my desire to believe in something and my inability to believe in something. My skepticism and my faith. And the writing of the characters came very easily to me. I want, like a lot of people do, to have the experience of witnessing a paranormal phenomenon. At the same time I want not to accept it, but to question it. I think those characters and those voices came out of that duality.\n\u2014Chris Carter on creating the characters of Mulder and Scully.\nCalifornia native Chris Carter was given the opportunity to produce new shows for the Fox network in the early 1990s. Carter was tired of the comedies he had been working on for Walt Disney Pictures. A report that said 3.7\u00a0million Americans believed they may have been abducted by aliens, the Watergate scandal, and the 1970s horror series \"\" all contributed to trigger the idea for \"The X-Files\". He wrote the pilot episode in 1992.\nCarter's initial pitch for \"The X-Files\" was rejected by Fox executives. He fleshed out the concept and returned a few weeks later, whereupon they commissioned the pilot. Carter worked with \"NYPD Blue\" producer Daniel Sackheim to further develop the pilot, drawing stylistic inspiration from the 1988 documentary \"The Thin Blue Line\" and the British television series \"Prime Suspect\". Inspiration also came from Carter's memories of \"The Twilight Zone\" as well as from \"The Silence of the Lambs\", which provided the impetus for framing the series around agents from the FBI, to provide the characters with a more plausible reason for being involved in each case than Carter believed was present in \"Kolchak\". Carter was determined to keep the relationship between the two leads strictly platonic, basing their interactions on the characters of Emma Peel and John Steed in \"The Avengers\" series.\nThe early 1990s series \"Twin Peaks\" was a major influence on the show's dark atmosphere and its often surreal blend of drama and irony. Duchovny had appeared as a transgender DEA agent in \"Twin Peaks\" and the Mulder character was seen as a parallel to that show's FBI Agent Dale Cooper. The producers and writers cited \"All the President's Men\", \"Three Days of the Condor\", \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\", \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\", \"Rashomon\", \"The Thing\", \"The Boys from Brazil\", \"The Silence of the Lambs\" and \"JFK\" as other influences. Episodes written by Darin Morgan often referred to or referenced other films.\nCasting.\nDuchovny had worked in Los Angeles for three years prior to \"The X-Files\", focusing on feature films. In 1993 his manager Melanie Green gave him the script for the pilot episode of \"The X-Files\". Green and Duchovny were both convinced it was a good script so he auditioned for the lead. Duchovny's audition was \"terrific\", though he talked rather slowly. While the casting director of the show was very positive toward him, Carter thought that he was not particularly intelligent. He asked Duchovny if he could \"please\" imagine himself as an FBI agent in \"future\" episodes. Duchovny, however, turned out to be one of the best-read people that Carter knew.\nAnderson auditioned for the part of Scully in 1993. \"I couldn't put the script down\", she recalled. For the role, the network wanted either a more established actress or one that was \"taller, leggier, blonder and breastier\" than the 24-year-old Anderson, a theater veteran with minor film experience. After auditions, Carter felt she was the only choice. Carter insisted that Anderson had the kind of \"no-nonsense integrity that the role required.\" For portraying Scully, Anderson won numerous major awards: the Screen Actors Guild Award in 1996 and 1997, an Emmy Award in 1997, and a Golden Globe Award 1997.\nThe character Walter Skinner was played by actor Mitch Pileggi, who had unsuccessfully auditioned for the roles of two or three other characters on \"The X-Files\" before getting the part. At first, being asked back to audition for the recurring role puzzled him, until he discovered the reason he had not previously been cast in those roles\u2014Carter had been unable to envision Pileggi as any of those characters, because the actor had been shaving his head. When Pileggi auditioned for Walter Skinner, he had been in a grumpy mood and had allowed his hair to grow. His attitude fit well with Skinner's character, causing Carter to assume that the actor was only pretending to be grumpy. Pileggi later realized he had been lucky that he had not been cast in one of the earlier roles, as he believed he would have appeared in only a single episode and would have missed the opportunity to play the recurring role.\nBefore the seventh season aired, Duchovny filed a lawsuit against 20th Century Fox, claiming that Fox had undersold the rights to its own affiliates, thereby costing him huge sums of money. Eventually, the lawsuit was settled, and Duchovny was awarded a settlement of about $20\u00a0million, but the lawsuit put strain on Duchovny's professional relationships. Neither Carter nor Duchovny was contracted to work on the series beyond the seventh season; however, Fox entered into negotiations near the end of that season to bring the two on board for an eighth season. After settling his contract dispute, Duchovny quit full-time participation in the show after the seventh season. This contributed to uncertainties over the likelihood of an eighth season. Carter and most fans felt the show was at its natural endpoint with Duchovny's departure, but it was decided that Mulder would be abducted at the end of the seventh season and would return in 12 episodes the following year. The producers then announced that a new character, John Doggett, would fill Mulder's role.\nMore than 100 actors auditioned for the role of Doggett, but only about ten were seriously considered. Lou Diamond Phillips, Hart Bochner, and Bruce Campbell were among the ten. The producers chose Robert Patrick. Carter believed that the series could continue for another ten years with new leads, and the opening credits were accordingly redesigned in both seasons eight and nine to emphasize the new actors (along with Pileggi, who was finally listed as a main character). Doggett's presence did not give the series the ratings boost the network executives were hoping for. The eighth-season episode \"This is Not Happening\" marked the first appearance of Monica Reyes, played by Gish, who became a main character in season nine. Her character was developed and introduced due to Anderson's possible departure at the end of the eighth season. Although Anderson ultimately stayed through the ninth season, Gish became a series regular.\nMinor recurring characters.\nGlen Morgan and James Wong's early influence on \"The X-Files\" mythology led to their introduction of popular secondary characters who continued for years in episodes written by others: Scully's father, William (Don S. Davis); her mother, Margaret (Sheila Larken); and her sister, Melissa (Melinda McGraw). The conspiracy-inspired trio The Lone Gunmen were also secondary characters. The trio was introduced in the first-season episode \"E.B.E.\" as a way to make Mulder appear more credible. They were originally meant to appear in only that episode, but due to their popularity, they returned in the second-season episode \"Blood\" and became recurring characters. Cigarette Smoking Man, portrayed by William B. Davis, was initially cast as an extra in the pilot episode. His character, however, grew into the main antagonist.\nFilming.\nDuring the early stages of production, Carter founded Ten Thirteen Productions and began to plan for filming the pilot in Los Angeles. However, unable to find suitable locations for many scenes, he decided to \"go where the good forests are\" and moved production to Vancouver. It was soon realized by the production crew that since so much of the first season would require filming on location, rather than on sound stages, a second location manager would be needed. The show remained in Vancouver for the first five seasons; production then shifted to Los Angeles beginning with the sixth season. Duchovny was unhappy over his geographical separation from his wife, T\u00e9a Leoni, although his discontent was popularly attributed to frustration with Vancouver's persistent rain. Anderson also wanted to return to the United States, and Carter relented following the fifth season. The season ended in May 1998 with \"The End\", the final episode shot in Vancouver and the final episode with the involvement of many of the original crew members, including director and producer R.W. Goodwin and his wife Sheila Larken, who played Margaret Scully and would later return briefly.\nWith the move to Los Angeles, many changes behind the scenes occurred, as much of the original \"The X-Files\" crew was gone. New production designer Corey Kaplan, editor Lynne Willingham, writer David Amann and director and producer Michael Watkins joined and stayed for several years. Bill Roe became the show's new director of photography and episodes generally had a drier, brighter look due to California's sunshine and climate, as compared with Vancouver's rain, fog and temperate forests. Early in the sixth season, the producers took advantage of the new location, setting the show in new parts of the country. For example, Vince Gilligan's \"Drive\", about a man subject to an unexplained illness, was a frenetic action episode, unusual for \"The X-Files\" largely because it was set in Nevada's stark desert roads. The \"Dreamland\" two-part episode was also set in Nevada, this time in Area 51. The episode was largely filmed at \"Club Ed\", a movie ranch located on the outskirts of Lancaster, California.\nAlthough the sixth through ninth seasons were filmed in Los Angeles, the series' second movie, \"The X-Files: I Want to Believe\" (2008), was filmed in Vancouver, According to Spotnitz, the film's script was written for the city and surrounding areas. The 2016 revival was also shot there.\nMusic.\nThe music was composed by Mark Snow, who got involved with \"The X-Files\" through his friendship with executive producer Goodwin. Initially Carter had no candidates. A little over a dozen people were considered, but Goodwin continued to press for Snow, who auditioned around three times with no sign from the production staff as to whether they wanted him. One day, however, Snow's agent called him, talking about the \"pilot episode\" and hinting that he had got the job.\nThe theme, \"The X-Files\", used more instrumental sections than most dramas. The theme song's famous whistle effect was inspired by the track \"How Soon Is Now?\" from the US edition of The Smiths' 1985 album \"Meat Is Murder\". After attempting to craft the theme with different sound effects, Snow used a Proteus 2 rackmount sound module with a preset sound called \"Whistl'n Joe\". After hearing this sound, Carter was \"taken aback\" and noted it was \"going to be good\". According to the \"Behind the Truth\" segment on the first season DVD, Snow created the echo effect on the track by accident. He felt that after several revisions, something still was not right. Carter walked out of the room and Snow put his hand and forearm on his keyboard in frustration. By doing so, he accidentally activated an echo effect setting. The resulting riff pleased Carter; Snow said, \"this sound was in the keyboard. And that was it.\" The second episode, \"Deep Throat\", marked Snow's debut as solo composer for an entire episode. The production crew was determined to limit the music in the early episodes. Likewise, the theme song itself first appeared in \"Deep Throat\".\nSnow was tasked with composing the score for both \"The X-Files\" films. The films marked the first appearance of real orchestral instruments; previous music had been crafted by Snow using digitally sampled instrument sounds. Snow's soundtrack for the first film, ', was released in 1998. For the second film, Snow recorded with the Hollywood Studio Symphony in May 2008 at the Newman Scoring Stage at 20th Century Fox in Century City. UNKLE recorded a new version of the theme music for the end credits. Some of the unusual sounds were created by a variation of silly putty and dimes tucked into piano strings. Snow commented that the fast percussion featured in some tracks was inspired by the track \"Prospectors Quartet\" from the \"There Will Be Blood\" soundtrack. The soundtrack score, ', was released in 2008.\nOpening sequence.\nThe opening sequence was made in 1993 for the first season, and remained unchanged until Duchovny left the show. Carter sought to make the title an \"impactful opening\" with \"supernatural images\". These scenes notably include a split-screen image of a seed germinating and a \"terror-filled, warped face\". The latter was created when Carter found a video operator who was able to create the effect. The sequence was extremely popular and won the show its first Emmy Award, which was for Outstanding Graphic Design and Title Sequences. Producer Paul Rabwin was particularly pleased with the sequence, and felt that it was something that had \"never [been] seen on television before\". In 2017, James Charisma of \"Paste\" ranked the show's opening sequence #8 on a list of \"The 75 Best TV Title Sequences of All Time\".\nThe premiere episode of season eight, \"Within\", revealed the first major change to the opening credits. Along with Patrick, the sequence used new images and updated photos for Duchovny and Anderson, although Duchovny only appears in the opening credits when he appears in an episode. Carter and the production staff saw Duchovny's departure as a chance to change things. The replacement shows various pictures of Scully's pregnancy. According to executive producer Frank Spotnitz, the sequence also features an \"abstract\" way of showing Mulder's absence in the eighth season: he falls into an eye. Season nine featured an entirely new sequence. Since Anderson wanted to move on, the sequence featured Reyes and Skinner. Duchovny's return to the show for the ninth-season finale, \"The Truth\" marked the largest number of cast members to be featured in the opening credits, with five. The revival seasons use the series' original opening credits sequence.\nThe sequence ends with the tagline \"The Truth Is Out There\", which is used for the majority of the episodes. For certain episodes, the tagline was changed to be more thematically-relevant; a list of the episodes that received alternate taglines is as follows:\nBroadcast and release.\nNielsen ratings.\nThe pilot premiered on September 10, 1993, and reached 12\u00a0million viewers. As the season progressed, ratings began to increase and the season finale garnered 14\u00a0million viewers. The first season ranked 105th out of 128 shows during the 1993\u201394 television season. The series' second season increased in ratings\u2014a trend that would continue for the next three seasons\u2014and finished 63rd out of 141 shows. These ratings were not spectacular, but the series had attracted enough fans to receive the label \"cult hit\", particularly by Fox standards. Most importantly, it made great gains among the 18-to-49 age demographic sought by advertisers. During its third year, the series ranked 55th and was viewed by an average of 15.40\u00a0million viewers, an increase of almost seven percent over the second season, making it Fox's top-rated program in the 18\u201349-year-old demographic. Although the first three episodes of the fourth season aired on Friday night, the fourth episode \"Unruhe\" aired on Sunday night. The show remained on Sunday until its end. The season hit a high with its twelfth episode, \"Leonard Betts\", which was chosen as the lead-out program following Super Bowl XXXI. The episode was viewed by 29.1\u00a0million viewers, the series' highest-rated episode. The fifth season debuted with \"Redux I\" on November 2, 1997, and was viewed by 27.34\u00a0million people, making it the highest-rated non-special broadcast episode of the series. The season ranked as the eleventh-most watched series during the 1997\u201398 year, with an average of 19.8\u00a0million viewers. It was the series' highest-rated season as well as Fox' highest-rated program during the 1997\u201398 season.\nThe sixth season premiered with \"The Beginning\", watched by 20.24\u00a0million viewers. The show ended season six with lower numbers than the previous season, beginning a decline that would continue for the show's final three years. \"The X-Files\" was nevertheless Fox's highest-rated show that year. The seventh season, originally intended as the show's last, ranked as the 29th most-watched show for the 1999\u20132000 year, with 14.20\u00a0million viewers. This made it, at the time, the lowest-rated year of the show since the third season. The first episode of season eight, \"Within\", was viewed by 15.87\u00a0million viewers. The episode marked an 11% decrease from the seventh season opener, \"The Sixth Extinction\". The first part of the ninth season opener, \"Nothing Important Happened Today\", only attracted 10.6\u00a0million viewers, the series' lowest-rated season premiere.\nThe original series finale, \"The Truth\", attracted 13.25\u00a0million viewers, the series' lowest rated season finale. The ninth season was the 63rd most-watched show for the 2001\u201302 season, tying its season two rank. On May 19, 2002, the finale aired and the Fox network confirmed that \"The X-Files\" was over. When talking about the beginning of the ninth season, Carter said, \"We lost our audience on the first episode. It's like the audience had gone away and I didn't know how to find them. I didn't want to work to get them back because I believed what we are doing deserved to have them back.\" While news outlets cited declining ratings because of lackluster stories and poor writing, \"The X-Files\" production crew blamed September 11 terrorist attacks as the main factor. At the end of 2002, \"The X-Files\" had become the longest-running consecutive science fiction series ever on American broadcast television. This record was later surpassed by \"Stargate SG-1\" in 2007 and \"Smallville\" in 2011.\nThe debut episode of the 2016 revival, \"My Struggle\", first aired on January 24, 2016, and was watched by 16.19\u00a0million viewers. In terms of viewers, this made it the highest-rated episode of \"The X-Files\" to air since the eighth-season episode \"This Is Not Happening\" in 2001, which was watched by 16.9\u00a0million viewers. When DVR and streaming are taken into account, \"My Struggle\" was seen by 21.4\u00a0million viewers, scoring a 7.1 Nielsen rating. The season ended with \"My Struggle II\", which was viewed by 7.60\u00a0million viewers. In total, the season was viewed by an average of 13.6\u00a0million viewers; it ranked as the seventh most-watched television series of the 2015\u201316 year, making it the highest-ranked season of \"The X-Files\" to ever air. A few years later, the premiere episode of the eleventh season, \"My Struggle III\", was watched by 5.15\u00a0million viewers. This was a decrease from the previous season's debut; it was also the lowest-rated premiere for any season of the show. The season concluded with \"My Struggle IV\", which was seen by 3.43\u00a0million viewers, which was also a decrease from the previous season. \"My Struggle IV\", which became the de facto finale for the series, was also the show's lowest-rated finale. In total, the season was viewed by an average of 5.34\u00a0million viewers, and it ranked as the 91st most-watched television series of the 2018\u201319 year.\nSVOD viewership.\nAccording to the streaming aggregator JustWatch, \"The X-Files\" was the ninth most streamed television series across all platforms in the United States, during the week ending November 7, 2021.\nFilms.\nAfter several successful seasons, Carter wanted to tell the story of the series on a wider scale, which ultimately turned into a feature film. He later explained that the main problem was to create a story that would not require the viewer to be familiar with the broadcast series. The movie was filmed in the hiatus between the show's fourth and fifth seasons and re-shoots were conducted during the filming of the show's fifth season. Due to the demands on the actors' schedules, some episodes of the fifth season focused on just one of the two leads. On June 19, 1998, the eponymous \"The X-Files\", also known as \"The X-Files: Fight the Future\" was released. The crew intended the movie to be a continuation of the season five finale \"The End\", but it was also meant to stand on its own. The season six premiere, \"The Beginning\", began where the film ended.\nThe film was written by Carter and Spotnitz and directed by series regular Rob Bowman. In addition to Mulder, Scully, Skinner and Cigarette Smoking Man, it featured guest appearances by Martin Landau, Armin Mueller-Stahl and Blythe Danner, who appeared only in the film. It also featured the last appearance of John Neville as the Well-Manicured Man. Jeffrey Spender, Diana Fowley, Alex Krycek and Gibson Praise\u2014characters who had been introduced in the fifth-season finale and/or were integral to the television series\u2014do not appear in the film. Although the film had a strong domestic opening and received mostly positive reviews from critics, attendance dropped sharply after the first weekend. Although it failed to make a profit during its theatrical release\u2014due in part to its large promotional budget\u2014\"The X-Files\" film was more successful internationally. Eventually, the worldwide theatrical box office total reached $189\u00a0million. The film's production cost and ad budgets were each close to $66\u00a0million. Unlike in the series, Anderson and Duchovny received equal pay for the film.\nIn November 2001, Carter decided to pursue a second film adaptation. Production was slated to begin after the ninth season, with a projected release in December 2003. In April 2002, Carter reiterated his desire and the studio's desire to do a sequel film. He planned to write the script over the summer and begin production in spring or summer 2003 for a 2004 release. Carter described the film as independent of the series, saying, \"We're looking at the movies as stand-alones. They're not necessarily going to have to deal with the mythology.\" Bowman, who had directed various episodes of \"The X-Files\" in the past as well as the 1998 film, expressed an interest in the sequel, but Carter took the job. Spotnitz co-authored the script with Carter. \"\" became the second film based on the series, after 1998's \"The X-Files: Fight the Future\". Filming began in December 2007 in Vancouver and finished on March 11, 2008.\nThe film was released in the United States on July 25, 2008, grossing $4\u00a0million on its opening day. It opened fourth on the U.S. weekend box office chart, with a gross of $10.2\u00a0million. By the end of its theatrical run, it had grossed $20,982,478 domestically and an additional $47,373,805 internationally, for a total worldwide gross of $68,369,434. Among 2008 domestic releases, it finished in 114th place. The film's stars both claimed that the timing of the movie's release, a week after the highly popular Batman film \"The Dark Knight\", negatively affected its success. The film received mixed to negative reviews. Metacritic, which assigns a rating out of 100 reviews from mainstream film critics, reported \"mixed or average\" reviews, with an average score of 47 based on 33 reviews. Rotten Tomatoes reported that 32% of 160 listed film critics gave the film a positive review, with an average rating of 4.9 out of 10. The website wrote of the critics' consensus, stating, \"The chemistry between leads David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson do live [sic] up to \"The X-Files\"' televised legacy, but the roving plot and droning routines make it hard to identify just what we're meant to believe in.\"\nRevival.\nIn several interviews around the release, Carter said that if the \"X-Files: I Want to Believe\" film proved successful at the box office, a third installment would be made going back to the TV series' mythology, focusing specifically on the alien invasion and colonization of Earth foretold in the ninth-season finale, due to occur on December 22, 2012. In an October 2009 interview, David Duchovny likewise said he wanted to do a 2012 \"X-Files\" movie, but did not know if he would get the chance. Anderson stated in August 2012 that a third \"X-Files\" film is \"looking pretty good\". As of July 2013, Fox had not approved the movie, although Carter, Spotnitz, Duchovny and Anderson expressed interest. At the New York Comic Con held October 10\u201313, 2013, Duchovny and Anderson reaffirmed that they and Carter were interested in making a third film, with Anderson saying, \"If it takes fan encouragement to get Fox interested in that, then I guess that's what it would be.\"\nOn January 17, 2015, Fox confirmed that they were looking at the possibility of bringing \"The X-Files\" back, not as a movie, but as a limited run television season. Fox chairman Dana Walden told reporters that \"conversations so far have only been logistical and are in very early stages\", and that the series would only go forward if Carter, Anderson, and Duchovny were all on board, and that it was a matter of ensuring all of their timetables are open. On March 24, 2015, it was confirmed the series would return with series creator Chris Carter and lead actors David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson. It premiered on January 24, 2016. A year later, on April 20, 2017, Fox officially announced that \"The X-Files\" would be returning for an eleventh season of ten episodes, which premiered on January 3, 2018.\nFuture.\nIn January 2018, Gillian Anderson confirmed that season 11 would be her final season of \"The X-Files\". The following month, Carter stated in an interview that he could see the show continuing without Anderson. In May 2018, Fox's co-CEO Gary Newman commented that \"there are no plans to do another season at the moment.\"\nIn October 2020, Chris Carter said: \"I always thought there would be even more \"X-Files\".\" He admitted that continuing the series at this point with Duchovny and Anderson is unlikely, but has plans to continue the franchise with an upcoming animated spinoff. \"Being that Gillian has decided to move on with her career, we certainly couldn't do Mulder and Scully again. But that's not to say there isn't another way to do \"The X-Files\". And so right now I think the future is unwritten.\" The rights are now owned by Disney. By July 2025, Ryan Coogler was writing and producing a reboot of the series.\nHome media.\nOn September 24, 1996, the first \"wave\" set of \"The X-Files\" VHS tapes were released. Wave sets were released covering the first through fourth seasons. Each \"wave\" was three VHS tapes, each containing two episodes, for a total of six episodes per wave and two waves per season. For example, the home video release of wave one drew from the first half of the first season: \"Pilot\"/\"Deep Throat\", \"Conduit\"/\"Ice\" and \"Fallen Angel\"/\"Eve\". Each wave was also available in a boxed set. Unlike later DVD season releases, the tapes did not include every episode from the seasons. Ultimately twelve episodes\u2014approximately half the total number aired\u2014were selected by Carter to represent each season, including nearly all \"mythology arc\" episodes and selected standalone episodes. Carter briefly introduced each episode with an explanation of why the episode was chosen and anecdotes from the set. These clips were later included on the full season DVDs. Wave eight, covering the last part of the fourth season, was the last to be released. No Carter interviews appeared on DVDs for later seasons. Many of the waves had collectible cards for each episode.\nAll nine seasons were released on DVD along with the two films. Seasons 1 to 4 were in fullscreen and seasons 5 and onward were in widescreen with the top and bottom of the opening credits cropped off. It is not widely known how accurate this is to the original broadcasts. The entire series was re-released on DVD in early 2006, in a \"slimmer\" package. The first five slim case versions did not come with some bonus materials that were featured in the original fold-out versions. However, seasons six, seven, eight and nine all contained the bonus materials found in the original versions. Episodic DVDs have also been released in Region 2, such as \"Deadalive\", \"Existence\", \"Nothing Important Happened Today\", \"Providence\" and \"The Truth\". Various other episodes were released on DVD and VHS. In 2005, four DVD sets were released containing the main story arc episodes of \"The X-Files\". The four being \"Volume 1 \u2013 Abduction\", \"Volume 2 \u2013 Black Oil\", \"Volume 3 \u2013 Colonization\" and \"Volume 4 \u2013 Super Soldiers\". A boxed set containing all nine seasons and the first film was made available in 2007, which contains all of the special features from the initial releases. The set also includes an additional disc of new bonus features and various collectibles, including a poster for the first film, a comic book, a set of collector cards and a guide to all 202 episodes across all nine seasons and the first film. Due to the fact that the set was released in 2007, the second film, which was released in 2008, is not included.\nRelease of \"The X-Files\"' seasons on Blu-ray, restored in high-definition, was rumored to begin in late 2013. The German TV channel ProSieben Maxx began airing first-season episodes reformatted in widescreen and in high-definition on January 20, 2014. On April 23, 2015, Netflix began streaming episodes of \"The X-Files\" in high definition, marking the first time that the series has been made available in the high resolution format in North America. In October 2015, it was confirmed that the complete series would be reissued on Blu-ray, and the full set was released on December 8, 2015. The set was criticized for using the wrong fonts for the title sequence and season 8 was affected by color balance issues making the picture appear darker in most episodes (an issue known as \"black crush\"). These issues led to Fox offering corrected discs and eventually issuing new sets with the correct color balance.\nSpin-offs.\n\"The Lone Gunmen\".\n\"The Lone Gunmen\" is an American science fiction television series created by Carter and broadcast on Fox and was crafted as a more humorous spin-off of \"The X-Files\". The series starred the eponymous Lone Gunmen and was first broadcast in March 2001, during \"The X-Files\"'s month-long hiatus. Although the debut episode garnered 13.23\u00a0million viewers, its ratings began to steadily drop. The program was cancelled after thirteen episodes. The last episode was broadcast in June 2001 and ended on a cliffhanger which was partially resolved in a ninth-season episode of \"The X-Files\" titled \"Jump the Shark\", included in the DVD release of the series.\nComic books.\n\"The X-Files\" was converted into a comic book series published by Topps Comics during the show's third and fourth seasons. The initial comic books were written solely by Stefan Petrucha. According to Petrucha, there were three types of stories: \"those that dealt with the characters, those that dealt with the conspiracy, and the monster-of-the-week sort of stuff\". Petrucha cited the latter as the easiest to write. Petrucha saw Scully as a \"scientist [...] with real world faith\", and that the difference between [Mulder and Scully] is not that Mulder believes and Scully doesn't; it's more a difference in procedure.\" In this manner, Mulder's viewpoint was often written to be just as valid as Scully's, and Scully's science was often portrayed to be just as convincing as Mulder's more outlandish ideas. Petrucha was eventually fired and various other authors took up the job. Topps published 41 regular issues of \"The X-Files\" from 1995\u201398.\nA crossover graphic novel between \"The X-Files\" and \"30 Days of Night\" was published by WildStorm in 2010. It follows Mulder and Scully to Alaska as they investigate a series of murders that may be linked to vampires.\nIn 2013, it was announced that \"The X-Files\" would return to comic book form with \"Season 10\", now published by IDW. The series, which follows Mulder and Scully after the events of \"\", was released in June 2013. Joe Harris wrote the series, and Michael Walsh and Jordie Bellaire provided the artwork. It was later announced that Carter himself would be the executive producer for the series and would be \"providing feedback to the creative team regarding scripts and outlines to keep the new stories in line with existing and on-going canon.\" The series restarted the series' mythology, and the first arc of the story focused on \"seek[ing] to bring the mythology of the Alien Conspiracy back up to date in a more paranoid, post-terror, post-WikiLeaks society.\" In addition, sequels to popular \"monster of the week\" episodes were made. \"The X-Files Season 10\" concluded on July 1, 2015, after 25 issues.\nIn August 2015, the \"X-Files Season 11\" comic book began, also published by IDW. The eight-issue series served as a continuation of the TV show. Chris Carter was the Executive Producer of the comic book series, while the issues were written by Joe Harris and illustrated by Matthew Dow Smith and Jordie Bellaire.\nPotential series.\nIn August 2020, Fox announced that an animated comedy-oriented reboot series was in development, under the working title \"The X-Files: Albuquerque\". In March 2023, it was confirmed the series would not be moving forward. The same month, it was reported that Ryan Coogler is developing a new reboot of the series, per series creator Chris Carter. In February 2024, Carter confirmed he is not involved with its production. In April 2025, Coogler said the \"X-Files\" reboot would be his next project after the film \"Sinners\", and he began working on the project by October of that year; Coogler said that he chose to work on the project due to his mother's love for the original series.\nReception.\nCritical reception.\n\"The X-Files\" received positive reviews from television critics, with many calling it one of the best series that aired on American television in the 1990s. Ian Burrell from the British newspaper \"The Independent\" called the show \"one of the greatest cult shows in modern television\". Richard Corliss from \"Time\" magazine called the show the \"cultural touchstone of\" the 1990s. Hal Boedeker from the \"Orlando Sentinel\" said in 1996 that the series had grown from a cult favorite to a television \"classic\". The \"Evening Herald\" said the show had \"overwhelming influence\" on television, in front of such shows as \"The Simpsons\". In 2012, \"Entertainment Weekly\" listed the show at #4 in the \"25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years\", describing it as \"a paean to oddballs, sci-fi fans, conspiracy theorists and Area 51 pilgrims everywhere. Ratings improved every year for the first five seasons, while Mulder and Scully's believer-versus-skeptic dynamic created a TV template that's still in heavy use today.\"\nIn 2004 and 2007, \"The X-Files\" ranked #2 on \"TV Guide\"'s \"Top Cult Shows Ever\". In 2002, the show ranked as the 37th best television show of all time. In 1997, the episodes \"Clyde Bruckman's Final Repose\" and \"Small Potatoes\" respectively ranked #10 and #72 on \"TV Guide's 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time\". In 2013, \"TV Guide\" included it in its list of the \"60 Greatest Dramas of All Time\" and ranked it as the #4 science fiction show and the #25 best series of all time. In 2007, \"Time\" included it on a list of the \"100 Best TV Shows of All Time\". In 2008, \"Entertainment Weekly\" named it the fourth-best piece of science fiction media, the fourth best TV show in the last 25 years and in 2009, named it the fourth-best in their list of the \"20 Greatest Sci-fi TV Shows\" in history. \"Empire\" magazine ranked \"The X-Files\" ninth best TV show in history, further claiming that the best episode was the third season entry \"Jose Chung's From Outer Space\". In 2013, the Writers Guild of America ranked \"The X-Files\" #26 on their list of the 101 Best Written TV Series. In 2015, on \"The Hollywood Reporter\"'s entertainment-industry ranked TV list \"Hollywood's 100 Favorite TV Shows\", \"The X-Files\" appeared at #3. According to \"The Guardian\", MediaDNA research discovered that \"The X-Files\" was on top of the list of the most innovative TV brands. In 2009, it was announced that the show's catchphrase \"The Truth Is Out There\" was among Britain's top 60 best-known slogans and quotes.\n\"The X-Files\" has been criticized for being unscientific and privileging paranormal and supernatural ideas (e.g. the hypotheses made by Mulder). For instance, in 1998, Richard Dawkins wrote that \"\"The X-Files\" systematically purveys an anti-rational view of the world which, by virtue of its recurrent persistence, is insidious.\"\nAccolades.\n\"The X-Files\" received prestigious awards over its nine-year run, totaling 62 Emmy nominations and 16 awards. Capping its successful first season, \"The X-Files\" crew members James Castle, Bruce Bryant and Carol Johnsen won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Graphic Design and Title Sequences in 1994. In 1995, the show was nominated for seven Emmy Awards with one win. The following year, the show won five Emmys out of eight nominations, including Darin Morgan for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series. In 1997, \"The X-Files\" won three awards out of twelve, including Gillian Anderson for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series. In 1998, the show won one of fifteen. In 1999, it won one out of eight in the category for Outstanding Makeup for a Series. Season seven won three Emmys from six nominations. The following season would not be as successful, catching only two nominations and winning again in the Makeup category for \"Deadalive\". The ninth season received one nomination in Outstanding Music Composition for a Series (Dramatic Underscore).\nThe show was nominated for 12 Golden Globe Awards overall, winning five. The first nomination came in 1994, when the show won Best Series \u2013 Drama. The following year, Anderson and Duchovny were nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role and Best Actress in a Leading Role, respectively. In 1997, the series won three awards; Anderson and Duchovny for Best Actress and Actor and for Best Series \u2013 Drama. In 1998 and 1999, the show received the same three nominations. In 1998 the series won Best Series \u2013 Drama\". In 1999, the series won no award and received no nominations thereafter.\nThe show was nominated for 14 SAG Awards overall, winning twice. In 1996 and 1997, Anderson won for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series. In 1996, the show won a Peabody Award for being able \"to convey ideas that are both entertaining and thought-provoking\". The show has also been nominated for two American Cinema Editors awards, three Directors Guild of America Awards, nine Television Critics Association Awards and two Writers Guild of American Awards. \"The X-Files\" was nominated for nine Satellite Awards, winning two, and two Young Artist Awards, winning one.\nInfluence.\nFandom.\nAs \"The X-Files\" saw its viewership expand from a \"small, but devoted\" group of fans to a worldwide mass cult audience, digital telecommunications were becoming mainstream. According to \"The New York Times\", \"this may have been the first show to find its audience growth tied to the growth of the Internet\". Fans of the show became commonly known as \"X-Philes\", a term coined from the Greek root \"-phil-\" meaning love or obsession. X-Philes reviewed episodes on unofficial websites, formed communities with other fans through Usenet newsgroups and listservs, and wrote their own fan fiction.\n\"The X-Files\" also \"caught on with viewers who wouldn't ordinarily consider themselves sci-fi fans\". While Carter argued that the show was plot-driven, many fans saw it as character-driven. Duchovny and Anderson were characterized as \"Internet sex symbols\". As the show grew in popularity, subgroups of fans developed, such as \"shippers\", hoping for a romantic or sexual partnership between Mulder and Scully, or those who already perceived one between the lines. The usage of the term \"ship\" in its relationship sense appears to have been originated by Internet fans of \"The X-Files\".\nOther groups arose to pay tribute to the stars or their characters, while others joined the subculture of \"slash\" fiction. In the summer of 1996, a journalist wrote, \"There are entire forums online devoted to the 'M/S' [Mulder and Scully] relationship.\" In addition to \"MOTW\", Internet fans invented acronyms such as \"UST\", meaning \"unresolved sexual tension\", and \"COTR\", standing for \"conversation on the rock\"\u2014referencing a popular scene in the third-season episode \"Quagmire\"\u2014to aid in their discussions of the agents' relationship, which was itself identified as the \"MSR\".\nThe producers did not endorse some fans' readings, according to a study on the subject: Not content to allow Shippers to perceive what they wish, Carter has consistently reassured NoRomos [those against the idea of a Mulder/Scully romance] that theirs is the preferred reading. This allows him the plausible deniability to credit the show's success to his original plan even though many watched in anticipation of a romance, thanks, in part, to his strategic polysemy. He can deny that these fans had reason to do so, however, since he has repeatedly stated that a romance was not and would never be. The Scully-obsessed writer in Carter's 1999 episode \"Milagro\" was read by some as his alter ego, realizing that by this point \"she has fallen for Mulder despite his authorial intent\". The writers sometimes paid tribute to the more visible fans by naming minor characters after them. For example, Leyla Harrison, played by Jolie Jenkins and introduced in the eighth-season episode \"Alone\", was created and named in memory of an Internet fan and prolific writer of fan fiction of the same name, who died of cancer on February 10, 2001.\nMerchandise.\n\"The X-Files\" spawned an industry of spin-off products. In 2004, U.S.-based Topps Comics, and most recently DC Comics imprint Wildstorm, launched a new series of licensed tie-in comics. During the series run, the Fox Broadcasting Company published the official \"The X-Files Magazine\". \"The X-Files\" Collectible Card Game was released in 1996, and an expansion set was released in 1997. \n\"The X-Files\" has inspired four video games. In 1997, Fox Interactive released ', a game-style database for Windows and Mac, which allowed users access to every case file. In 1998, \"The X-Files Game\" was released for the PC and Macintosh and a year later for the PlayStation. This game is set within the timeline of the second or third season and follows an Agent Craig Willmore in his search for the missing Mulder and Scully. In 2004, ' was released. The survival-horror game for the PlayStation 2 is an original story set in the seventh season. It allows the player control of both Mulder and Scully. Both games feature acting and voice work from members of the series' cast. A mobile mystery investigation game \"\" was released in February 2018. The story of the game takes place between seasons 9 and 10 of the show and follows two FBI agents, Casey Winter and Garret Dale, as they investigate a conspiracy. A six-player pinball game, \"The X-Files\", was produced by Sega in 1997.\nLegacy.\n\"The X-Files\" directly inspired other TV series, including \"Strange World\", \"The Burning Zone\", \"Special Unit 2\", \"Mysterious Ways\", \"Lost\", \"Dark Skies\", \"The Visitor\", \"Fringe\", \"Warehouse 13\", \"Supernatural\", and \"Gravity Falls\", with key aspects carried over to more standard crime dramas, such as \"Eleventh Hour\" and \"Bones\". The influence can be seen on other levels: television series such as \"Lost\" developed their own complex mythologies. In terms of characterization, the role of Dana Scully was seen as innovative, changing \"how women [on television] were not just perceived but behaved\" and perhaps influencing the portrayal of other \"strong women\" investigators. Russell T Davies said \"The X-Files\" had been an inspiration on his series \"Torchwood\", describing it as \"dark, wild and sexy... \"The X-Files\" meets \"This Life\"\". Other shows have been influenced by the tone and mood of \"The X-Files\". For example, \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" drew from the mood and coloring of \"The X-Files\", as well as from its occasional blend of horror and humor; creator Joss Whedon described his show as \"a cross between \"The X-Files\" and \"My So-Called Life\"\".\n\"The X-Filess great popularity led to it becoming a touchstone of popular culture. The show was parodied in \"The Simpsons\" season eight episode \"The Springfield Files\", which aired on January 12, 1997. In it, Mulder and Scully\u2014voiced by Duchovny and Anderson\u2014are sent to Springfield to investigate an alien sighting by Homer Simpson, but end up finding no evidence other than Homer's word and depart. Cigarette Smoking Man appears in the background when Homer is interviewed, and the show's theme plays during one scene. Nathan Ditum from \"Total Film\" ranked Duchovny and Anderson's performances as the fourth-best guest appearances in \"The Simpsons\" history. In the ' episode \"Trials and Tribble-ations\", Benjamin Sisko is interviewed by Federation Department of Temporal Investigations agents Dulmer and Lucsly, anagrams of Mulder and Scully, respectively. The pair were later expanded upon in Christopher L. Bennett's book \"Watching the Clock\". \"The X-Files\" has also been parodied or referenced in shows such as \"3rd Rock from the Sun\", \"Archer\", \"NewsRadio\", \"American Horror Story\", \"The Big Bang Theory\", \"Bones\", \"Breaking Bad\", \"Californication\" (which stars David Duchovny), \"Supernatural\", \"Castle\", \"Family Guy\", \"Hey Arnold!\", \"King of the Hill\", \"South Park\", and \"Two and a Half Men\". It also inspired themes in video games \"Deus Ex\" and \"Perfect Dark\".\nIn the musical realm, the British band Catatonia released the single \"Mulder and Scully\", which became a top ten hit on the UK Singles Chart in 1998. American singer and songwriter Bree Sharp wrote a song in 1999 called \"David Duchovny\" about the actor that heavily references the show. Although never a mainstream hit, the song became popular underground and gained a cult following. Finnish band Sonata Arctica released, in 1999, \"Letter to Dana\", in which the title character, Dana O'Hara, is named after Scully. The series has also been referenced in songs such as \"The Bad Touch\" by the Bloodhound Gang, \"A Change\" by Sheryl Crow, \"Year 2000\" by Xzibit, and \"One Week\" by Barenaked Ladies.\nCarter, Duchovny and Anderson celebrated the 20th anniversary of the series at a July 18, 2013, panel at San Diego Comic-Con hosted by \"TV Guide\". During the discussion, Anderson discussed Scully's influence on female fans, relating that a number of women have informed her that they pursued physics careers because of the character. Anderson also indicated that she was not in favor of an \"X-Files\" miniseries, and Duchovny ruled out working with her on an unrelated project, but both expressed willingness to do a third feature film. Carter was more reserved at the idea, stating, \"You need a reason to get excited about going on and doing it again.\" On July 16, 2008, Carter and Spotnitz donated several props from the series and new film to the Smithsonian's National Museum of American History, including the original pilot script and the \"I Want to Believe\" poster from Mulder's office.\nIn a 2018 interview with \"The Straits Times\", series' writers Jim Wong and Glenn Morgan acknowledged that the show likely played a role in bringing conspiracy theories to a mainstream audience, helping to erode trust in public institutions. Similarly, in a 2021 \"New York Times\" op-ed, series creator Chris Carter wrote: \"'The Truth Is Out There,' 'Trust No One,' 'Deny Everything' went the provocative catchphrases on \"The X-Files\", but that was in the '90s, when we had a relatively shared reality. The slogans are now a fact of life.\" \"Vanity Fair\" writer Jordan Hoffman suggested that Carter's op-ed was imbued with \"a bit of a \"mea culpa\" vibe\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30305", "revid": "39778511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30305", "title": "Third World", "text": "Former group of states non-aligned with the Soviet Union, nor with NATO\nThe term Third World arose during the Cold War to define countries that remained non-aligned with either NATO or the Warsaw Pact. The United States, Canada, Japan, South Korea, the Southern Cone, Western European countries and other allies represented the \"First World\", while the Soviet Union, China, Cuba, North Korea, Vietnam, and their allies represented the \"Second World\". This terminology provided a way of broadly categorizing the nations of the Earth into three groups based on political divisions. Due to the complex history of evolving meanings and contexts, there is no clear or agreed-upon definition of the Third World. Strictly speaking, \"Third World\" was a political, rather than economic, grouping. \nSince most Third World countries were economically poor and non-industrialized, it became a stereotype to refer to developing countries as \"third-world.\" In political discourse, the term Third World was often associated with being underdeveloped. China was labeled \"Third World\" for several decades in the 20th century before its robust development of the 21st century. Some countries in the Eastern Bloc, such as Cuba, were often regarded as Third World. The Third World was normally seen to include many countries with colonial pasts in Africa, Latin America, Oceania, and Asia. It was also sometimes taken as synonymous with countries in the Non-Aligned Movement. In the dependency theory of thinkers like Ra\u00fal Prebisch, Walter Rodney, Theot\u00f4nio dos Santos, and others, the Third World has also been connected to the world-systemic economic division as \"periphery\" countries dominated by the countries comprising the economic \"core\".\nIn the Cold War, some European democracies (Austria, Finland, Ireland, Sweden, and Switzerland) were neutral in the sense of not joining NATO, but were prosperous, never joined the Non-Aligned Movement, and seldom self-identified as part of the Third World.\nSince the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, the term \"Third World\" has decreased in use. It is being replaced with terms such as developing countries, least developed countries or the Global South.\nEtymology.\nThe demographer, anthropologist, and historian Alfred Sauvy, in an article published in the French magazine \"\", August 14, 1952, coined the term \"third world\" (), referring to countries that were playing a small role in international trade and business. His usage was a reference to the Third Estate (), the commoners of pre-revolutionary France, who, in the Estates General, opposed the clergy and nobles, respectively the First and Second Estates (hence the use of the older form rather than the modern for \"third\"). Sauvy wrote, \"This third world ignored, exploited, despised like the third estate also wants to be something.\" In the context of the Cold War, he conveyed the concept of political non-alignment with either the capitalist or communist bloc. Simplistic interpretations quickly led to the term merely designating these unaligned countries.\nRelated concepts.\nThird World vs. Three Worlds.\nThe \"Three Worlds Theory\" developed by Mao Zedong is different from the Western theory of the Three Worlds or Third World. For example, in the Western theory, China and India belong respectively to the second and third worlds, but in Mao's theory both China and India are part of the Third World which he defined as consisting of exploited nations.\nThird Worldism.\nThird Worldism is a political movement that argues for the unity of third-world nations against first-world influence and the principle of non-interference in other countries' domestic affairs. Groups most notable for expressing and exercising this idea are the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and the Group of 77 which provide a base for relations and diplomacy between not just the third-world countries, but between the third-world and the first and second worlds. The notion has been criticized as providing a fig leaf for human rights violations and political repression by dictatorships.\nInitially, the term \u201cthird world\u201d meant a nation was under-developed or impoverished. Nowadays, it means \u201cdeveloping\".\nGreat Divergence and Great Convergence.\nMany times there is a clear distinction between First and Third Worlds. When talking about the Global North and Global South, the majority of the time the two go hand in hand. People refer to the two as \"Third World/South\" and \"First World/North\" because the Global North is more affluent and developed, whereas the Global South is less developed and often poorer.\nTo counter this mode of thought, some scholars began proposing the idea of a change in world dynamics that began in the late 1980s, and termed it the Great Convergence. As Jack A. Goldstone and his colleagues put it, \"in the twentieth century, the Great Divergence peaked before the First World War and continued until the early 1970s, then, after two decades of indeterminate fluctuations, in the late 1980s, it was replaced by the Great Convergence as the majority of Third World countries reached economic growth rates significantly higher than those in most First World countries\".\nOthers have observed a return to Cold War-era alignments (MacKinnon, 2007; Lucas, 2008), this time with substantial changes between 1990\u20132015 in geography, the world economy and relationship dynamics between current and emerging world powers; not necessarily redefining the classic meaning of \"First\", \"Second\", and \"Third World\" terms, but rather which countries belong to them by way of association to which world power or coalition of countries, such as the G7, the European Union, OECD; G20, OPEC, N-11, BRICS, ASEAN; the African Union, and the Eurasian Union.\nHistory.\nMost Third World countries are former colonies. Having gained independence, many of these countries, especially smaller ones, were faced with the challenges of nation- and institution-building on their own for the first time. Due to this common background, many of these nations were \"developing\" in economic terms for most of the 20th century, and many still are. This term, used today, generally denotes countries that have not developed to the same levels as OECD countries, and are thus in the process of \"developing\".\nIn the 1980s, economist Peter Bauer offered a competing definition for the term \"Third World\". He claimed that the attachment of Third World status to a particular country was not based on any stable economic or political criteria, and was a mostly arbitrary process. The large diversity of countries considered part of the Third World, ranged widely from economically primitive to economically advanced and from politically non-aligned to Soviet- or Western-leaning. An argument could also be made for how parts of the U.S. are more like the Third World.\nThe only characteristic that Bauer found common in all Third World countries was that their governments \"demand and receive Western aid,\" which he strongly opposed. The aggregate term \"Third World\" was challenged as misleading even during the Cold War period, because it had no consistent or collective identity among the countries it supposedly encompassed.\nDevelopment aid.\nDuring the Cold War, unaligned countries of the Third World were seen as potential allies by both the First and Second World. Therefore, the United States and the Soviet Union went to great lengths to establish connections in these countries by offering economic and military support to gain strategically located alliances (e.g., the Soviet Union in Cuba). By the end of the Cold War, many Third World countries had adopted capitalist or communist economic models and continued to receive support from the side they had chosen. Throughout the Cold War and beyond, the countries of the Third World have been the priority recipients of Western foreign aid and the focus of economic development through mainstream theories such as modernization theory and dependency theory.\nBy the end of the 1960s, the idea of the Third World came to represent countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America that were considered underdeveloped by the West based on several characteristics: low economic development, low life expectancy, high rates of poverty and disease, and others. These countries became the targets for aid and support from governments, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and individuals from wealthier nations. One popular model, known as Rostow's stages of growth, argued that development took place in five stages: traditional society, pre-conditions for take-off, take-off, drive to maturity, and age of high mass consumption. W. W. Rostow argued that \"take-off\" was the critical stage with which the Third World was struggling, which some argued could be facilitated through foreign aid.\nPerceived \"End of the Third World\".\nSince 1990 the term \"Third World\" evolved to denote countries with less economic development. The term \"Third World\" is increasingly perceived to be politically incorrect or outdated, as it is a historical term that isn't as relevant in modern day geopolitics. Around the early 1960s, the term \"underdeveloped countries\" was frequently used to refer to roughly the same group of countries. This term was in turn replaced by 'developing' and 'less-developed' countries, as politicians found that the earlier term contributed to stereotypes or disrespect of this group of countries. \nThe general definition of the Third World can be traced back to the history that nations positioned as neutral and independent during the Cold War were considered as Third World Countries, and normally these countries are defined by high poverty rates, lack of resources, and unstable financial standing. \nThe differences among nations of the Third World are continually growing throughout time, and it will be hard to use the Third World to define and organize groups of nations based on their common political arrangements since most countries live under diverse creeds in this era, such as Mexico, El Salvador, and Singapore, which each have their distinct political systems. The Third World categorization becomes anachronistic since its political classification and economic system are distinct to be applied in today's society. Based on the Third World standards, any region of the world can be categorized into any of the four types of relationships among state and society, and will eventually end in four outcomes: praetorianism, multi-authority, quasi-democratic and viable democracy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30307", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30307", "title": "Twin Peaks", "text": "American drama television series (1990\u201391, 2017)\nTwin Peaks is an American surrealist mystery-horror drama television series created by David Lynch and Mark Frost. It premiered on ABC on April 8, 1990, and ran for two seasons until its cancellation in 1991. The show returned in 2017 for a third season on Showtime.\nSet in the fictional Pacific Northwest town of Twin Peaks, the series follows an investigation led by FBI special agent Dale Cooper (Kyle MacLachlan) into the murder of local teenager Laura Palmer (Sheryl Lee). The show's narrative draws on the characteristics of detective fiction, but its uncanny tone, supernatural elements, and campy, melodramatic portrayal of eccentric characters also draw from American horror and soap opera tropes. Like much of Lynch's work, it is distinguished by surrealism, distinctive cinematography, and offbeat humor. The musical score was composed by Angelo Badalamenti with Lynch.\nThe original run was followed by the 1992 feature film \"\", which serves as a prequel to the series. The success of the series sparked a media franchise, leading to the release of several tie-in books, including \"The Secret Diary of Laura Palmer\". Under Lynch's direction, the show's 2017 revival included much of the original cast.\nIn the years following the first two seasons, the show has gained a devoted cult following and been referenced in a wide variety of media, earning widespread critical acclaim and various accolades. \"Twin Peaks\" is considered a landmark turning point in television drama and often listed among the greatest television series of all time. The 2017 revival also received widespread critical acclaim; film journal \"Cahiers du cin\u00e9ma\" named it the best film of the 2010s.\nPlot and series overview.\nSeason 1.\nIn 1989, local logger Pete Martell discovers a naked corpse wrapped in plastic on the bank of a river outside the town of Twin Peaks, Washington. When Sheriff Harry S. Truman, his deputies, and doctor Will Hayward arrive, the body is identified as high school senior and homecoming queen Laura Palmer. A second girl, Ronette Pulaski, is discovered as well, who is badly injured and dissociative just across the state border.\nFBI Special Agent Dale Cooper is called in to investigate. Cooper's initial examination of Laura's body reveals a tiny typed letter \"R\" inserted under her fingernail. At a town conference, Cooper informs the community that Laura's death matches the signature of a killer who murdered another girl in southwestern Washington the previous year, and that the evidence potentially indicates the killer being from Twin Peaks.\nThrough Laura's diaries, local law enforcement alongside Agent Cooper discover that she had been living a double life. She was cheating on her boyfriend, football captain Bobby Briggs, with biker James Hurley, and prostituting herself with the help of truck driver Leo Johnson and drug dealer Jacques Renault. Laura was also addicted to cocaine, which she obtained through coercing Bobby into doing business with Jacques.\nLaura's father, attorney Leland Palmer, suffers a nervous breakdown after her death. Her best friend Donna Hayward begins a relationship with James. With the help of Laura's cousin Maddy Ferguson, Donna and James discover that Laura's psychiatrist, Dr. Lawrence Jacoby, was obsessed with her, but he is proven innocent of the murder.\nHotelier Ben Horne, the wealthiest man in Twin Peaks, plans to destroy the town's lumber mill along with its owner, Josie Packard, and murder his lover, Josie's sister-in-law and Pete's wife Catherine Martell, so he can purchase the land at a reduced price and complete a development project called Ghostwood. Horne's sultry, troubled daughter, Audrey, becomes infatuated with Agent Cooper and spies on her father for clues in an effort to win Agent Cooper's affection.\nCooper has a dream in which he is approached by a one-armed otherworldly being who calls himself MIKE. MIKE says that Laura's murderer is a similar entity, Killer BOB, a feral, denim-clad man with long gray hair. Cooper finds himself decades older with Laura and a dwarf in a red business suit, who engages in coded dialogue with Cooper. The next morning, Cooper tells Truman that if they can decipher the dream, they can find out who murdered Laura.\nCooper and the sheriff's department find the one-armed man from Cooper's dream, a traveling shoe salesman named Phillip Gerard. Gerard knows a Bob, the veterinarian who treats Renault's pet bird. Cooper interprets these events to mean that Renault is the murderer, and with Truman's help, tracks Renault to One-Eyed Jack's, a brothel owned by Horne across the border in Canada. He lures Renault back onto U.S. soil to arrest him, but Renault is shot while trying to escape and is hospitalized.\nLeland, learning that Renault has been arrested, sneaks into the hospital and smothers him to death. The same night, Horne orders Leo to burn down the lumber mill with Catherine trapped inside and has Leo gunned down by Hank Jennings to ensure Leo's silence. Cooper returns to his room following Renault's arrest and is shot by a masked gunman.\nSeason 2.\nLying hurt in his hotel room, Cooper has a vision in which a giant appears and reveals three clues: \"There is a man in a smiling bag,\" \"the owls are not what they seem,\" and \"without chemicals, he points.\" He takes a gold ring off Cooper's finger and explains that when Cooper understands the three premonitions, his ring will be returned.\nLeo Johnson survives his shooting but is left brain-damaged. Catherine Martell disappears, presumed killed in the mill fire. Leland Palmer, whose hair has turned white overnight, returns to work but behaves erratically. Cooper deduces that the \"man in the smiling bag\" is the corpse of Jacques Renault in a body bag.\nMIKE is inhabiting the body of Phillip Gerard. His personality surfaces when Gerard forgoes the use of a certain drug. MIKE reveals that he and BOB once collaborated in killing humans and that BOB is similarly inhabiting a man in the town. Cooper and the sheriff's department use MIKE, in control of Gerard's body, to help find BOB (\"without chemicals, he points\").\nDonna befriends an agoraphobic orchid grower named Harold Smith whom Laura entrusted with her second, secret diary. Harold catches Donna and Maddy attempting to steal the diary from him and hangs himself in despair. Cooper and the sheriff's department take possession of Laura's secret diary and learn that BOB, a friend of her father's, had been sexually abusing her since childhood and she used drugs to cope. They initially suspect that the killer is Ben Horne and arrest him, but Leland Palmer is revealed to viewers to be BOB's host when he kills Maddy.\nCooper begins to doubt Horne's guilt, so he gathers all of his suspects in the belief that he will receive a sign to help him identify the killer. The Giant appears and confirms that Leland is BOB's host and Laura's and Maddy's killer, giving Cooper back his ring. Cooper and Truman take Leland into custody. In control of Leland's body, BOB admits to a string of murders, before forcing Leland to commit suicide. As Leland dies, he is freed of BOB's influence and begs for forgiveness. BOB's spirit disappears into the woods in the form of an owl and the lawmen wonder if he will reappear.\nCooper is set to leave Twin Peaks when he is framed for drug trafficking by Jean Renault and is suspended from the FBI. Another FBI agent, Denise Bryson, comes to Twin Peaks to help him. Renault holds Cooper responsible for the death of his brothers, Jacques and Bernard. Jean Renault is killed in a shootout with police, and Cooper is cleared of all charges.\nWindom Earle, Cooper's former mentor and FBI partner, escapes from a mental institution and comes to Twin Peaks. Cooper had previously been having an affair with Earle's wife, Caroline, while she was under his protection as a witness to a federal crime. Earle murdered Caroline and wounded Cooper. He now engages Cooper in a twisted game of chess during which Earle murders someone whenever a piece is captured.\nInvestigating BOB's origin and whereabouts with the help of Major Garland Briggs, Cooper learns of the existence of the White Lodge and the Black Lodge, two extra-dimensional realms whose entrances are somewhere in the woods surrounding Twin Peaks.\nCatherine returns to town disguised as a Japanese businessman, having survived the mill fire, and manipulates Ben Horne into signing the Ghostwood project over to her. Andrew Packard, Josie's husband, is revealed to be still alive while Josie Packard is revealed to be the person who shot Cooper at the end of the first season. Andrew forces Josie to confront his business rival and her tormentor from Hong Kong, the sinister Thomas Eckhardt. Josie kills Eckhardt, but she mysteriously dies when Truman and Cooper try to apprehend her.\nCooper falls in love with a new arrival in town, Annie Blackburn. Earle captures the brain-damaged Leo for use as a henchman and abandons his chess game with Cooper. When Annie wins the Miss Twin Peaks contest, Earle kidnaps her and takes her to the entrance to the Black Lodge, whose power he seeks to use for himself.\nThrough a series of clues Cooper discovers the entrance to the Black Lodge, which turns out to be the strange, red-curtained room from his dream. He is greeted by the Man From Another Place, the Giant, and Laura Palmer, who each give Cooper cryptic messages. Searching for Annie and Earle, Cooper encounters doppelg\u00e4ngers of various people, including Maddy Ferguson and Leland Palmer. Cooper finds Earle, who demands Cooper's soul in exchange for Annie's life. Cooper agrees but BOB appears and takes Earle's soul for himself. BOB then turns to Cooper, who is chased through the lodge by a doppelg\u00e4nger of himself.\nOutside the lodge, Andrew Packard, Pete Martell and Audrey Horne are caught in an explosion at a bank vault, a trap laid by the dead Eckhardt.\nCooper and Annie reappear in the woods, both injured. Annie is taken to the hospital but Cooper recovers in his room at the Great Northern Hotel. It becomes clear that the \"Cooper\" who emerged from the Lodge is in fact his doppelg\u00e4nger, under BOB's control. He smashes his head into a bathroom mirror and laughs maniacally.\nSeason 3.\nThe third season takes place 25 years after the cliffhanger ending of season two, and also expands on narrative elements introduced in the prequel film, \"\" released after the second season. Cooper remains trapped in the Black Lodge and prepares his return to the world. For the previous two decades, Cooper's evil doppelg\u00e4nger has lived in Cooper's place and works to prevent his own imminent return to the Black Lodge with the help of various associates. Meanwhile, the mysterious murder of a librarian in Buckhorn, South Dakota attracts the attention of Cole and his colleagues, while a message from the Log Lady (Catherine Coulson) leads members of the Twin Peaks Sheriff's Department to reopen investigations into the events surrounding the 1989 murder of Laura Palmer and Cooper's subsequent disappearance.\nSeason 3 of \"Twin Peaks\" was announced on October 6, 2014, as a limited series that would air on Showtime. David Lynch and Mark Frost wrote all the episodes, and Lynch directed. Frost emphasized that the new episodes were not a remake or reboot, but a continuation of the series and film, and the passage of 25 years is an important element of the plot. The third season is also known as \"Twin Peaks: The Return\" and \"Twin Peaks: A Limited Event Series\".\nMost of the original cast returned, including Kyle MacLachlan, M\u00e4dchen Amick, Sherilyn Fenn, Sheryl Lee, Ray Wise, and several others. Additions included Jeremy Davies, Laura Dern, Robert Forster, Tim Roth, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Amanda Seyfried, Matthew Lillard, and Naomi Watts.\nCast.\nSecondary cast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nIn the 1980s, Mark Frost worked for three years as a writer for the television police drama \"Hill Street Blues\" (1981\u20131987), which featured a large cast and extended story lines. Following his success with \"The Elephant Man\" (1980) and \"Blue Velvet\" (1986), David Lynch was hired by a Warner Bros. executive to direct a film about the life of Marilyn Monroe named \"Venus Descending\", based on the best-selling book \"Goddess\". Lynch recalls being \"sort of interested. I loved the idea of this woman in trouble, but I didn't know if I liked it being a real story.\"\nLynch and Frost first worked together on the \"Goddess\" screenplay, and although the project was dropped by Warner Bros., they became good friends. They went on to work as writer and director for \"One Saliva Bubble\", a film with Steve Martin attached to star, but it was never made either. Lynch's agent, Tony Krantz, encouraged him to do a television show. Lynch said: \"Tony I don't want to do a TV show.\"\nHe took Lynch to Nibblers restaurant in Los Angeles and said: \"You should do a show about real life in America\u2014your vision of America the same way you demonstrated it in \"Blue Velvet\".\" Lynch got an \"idea of a small-town thing\", and though he and Frost were not keen on it, they decided to humor Krantz. Frost wanted to tell \"a sort of Dickensian story about multiple lives in a contained area that could sort of go perpetually\". Originally, the show was to be titled \"North Dakota\" and set in the Plains region of North Dakota.\nAfter Frost, Krantz, and Lynch rented a screening room in Beverly Hills and screened \"Peyton Place\", they decided to develop the town before its inhabitants. Due to the lack of forests and mountains in North Dakota, the title was changed from \"North Dakota\" to \"Northwest Passage\" (the title of the pilot episode), and the location to the Pacific Northwest, specifically Washington. They then drew a map and decided that there would be a lumber mill in the town. Then they came up with an image of a body washing up on the shore of a lake.\nLynch remembers: \"We knew where everything was located and that helped us determine the prevailing atmosphere and what might happen there.\" Frost remembers that he and Lynch came up with the notion of the girl next door leading a \"desperate double life\" that would end in murder. The idea was inspired, in part, by the unsolved 1908 murder of Hazel Irene Drew in Sand Lake, New York.\nLynch and Frost pitched the idea to ABC during the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike in a ten-minute meeting with the network's drama head, Chad Hoffman, with nothing more than this image and a concept. According to the director, the mystery of who killed Laura Palmer was initially going to be in the foreground, but would recede gradually as viewers got to know the other townsfolk and the problems they were having. Lynch and Frost wanted to mix a police investigation with a soap opera. ABC liked the idea and asked Lynch and Frost to write a screenplay for the pilot episode. They had been talking about the project for three months and wrote the screenplay in 10 days. Frost wrote more verbal characters, like Benjamin Horne, while Lynch was responsible for Agent Cooper. According to Lynch, \"He says a lot of the things I say.\"\nABC Entertainment President Brandon Stoddard ordered the two-hour pilot for a possible fall 1989 series. He left the position in March 1989 as Lynch went into production. They filmed the pilot for $4\u00a0million with an agreement with ABC that they would shoot an additional \"ending\" to it so that it could be sold directly to video in Europe as a feature film if the TV show was not picked up. ABC's Bob Iger and his creative team took over, saw the dailies, and met with Frost and Lynch to get the arc of the stories and characters.\nAlthough Iger liked the pilot, he had difficulty persuading the rest of the network executives. Iger suggested showing it to a more diverse, younger group, who liked it, and the executive subsequently convinced ABC to buy seven episodes at $1.1\u00a0million apiece. Some executives figured that the show would never get on the air or that it might run as a seven-hour mini-series, but Iger planned to schedule it for the spring. The final showdown occurred during a bi-coastal conference call between Iger and a room full of New York executives; Iger won, and \"Twin Peaks\" was on the air.\nEach episode took a week to shoot, and after directing the second episode, Lynch went off to complete \"Wild at Heart\", while Frost wrote the remaining segments. Standards and Practices had an issue with a scene from the first season: an extreme close-up in the pilot of Cooper's hand as he slid tweezers under Laura's fingernail and removed a tiny \"R\". They wanted the scene to be shorter because it made them uncomfortable, but Frost and Lynch refused, and the scene remained.\nCasting.\n\"Twin Peaks\" features members of a loose ensemble of Lynch's favorite character actors, including Jack Nance, Kyle MacLachlan, Grace Zabriskie, and Everett McGill. Isabella Rossellini, who had worked with Lynch on \"Blue Velvet\", was originally cast as Giovanna Packard, but she dropped out of the production before shooting began on the pilot episode. The character was then reconceived as Josie Packard, of Chinese ethnicity, and the role given to actress Joan Chen. The cast includes several actors who rose to fame in the 1950s and 1960s, including 1950s film stars Richard Beymer, Piper Laurie, and Russ Tamblyn. Other veteran actors included British actor James Booth (\"Zulu\"), former \"The Mod Squad\" star Peggy Lipton, and Michael Ontkean, who co-starred in the 1970s crime drama \"The Rookies\". Kyle MacLachlan was cast as Agent Dale Cooper. Stage actor Warren Frost was cast as Dr.\u00a0Will Hayward.\nDue to budget constraints, Lynch intended to cast a local girl from Seattle as Laura Palmer, reportedly \"just to play a dead girl\". The local girl ended up being Sheryl Lee. Lynch stated: \"But no one\u2014not Mark, me, anyone\u2014had any idea that she could act, or that she was going to be so powerful just being dead.\" And then, while Lynch shot the home movie that James takes of Donna and Laura, he realized that Lee had something special. \"She did do another scene\u2014the video with Donna on the picnic\u2014and it was that scene that did it.\" As a result, Sheryl Lee became a semi-regular addition to the cast, appearing in flashbacks as Laura, and portraying another, recurring character: Maddy Ferguson, Laura's similar-looking cousin.\nThe character of Phillip Gerard's appearance in the pilot episode was originally intended to be only a \"kind of homage to \"The Fugitive\". The only thing he was gonna do was be in this elevator and walk out\", according to David Lynch. However, when Lynch wrote the \"Fire walk with me\" speech, he imagined Al Strobel, who played Gerard, reciting it in the basement of the Twin Peaks hospital\u2014a scene that appeared in the European version of the pilot episode, and surfaced later in Agent Cooper's dream sequence. Gerard's full name, Phillip Michael Gerard, is also a reference to Lieutenant Phillip Gerard, a character in \"The Fugitive\".\nLynch met Michael J. Anderson in 1987. After seeing him in a short film, Lynch wanted to cast the actor in the title role in \"Ronnie Rocket\", but that project failed to get made.\nRichard Beymer was cast as Ben Horne because he had known Johanna Ray, Lynch's casting director. Lynch was familiar with Beymer's work in the 1961 film \"West Side Story\" and was surprised that Beymer was available for the role.\nSet dresser Frank Silva was cast as the mysterious \"Bob\". Lynch himself recalls that the idea originated when he overheard Silva moving furniture around in the bedroom set, and then heard a woman warning Silva not to block himself in by moving furniture in front of the door. Lynch was struck with an image of Silva in the room. When he learned that Silva was an actor, he filmed two panning shots, one with Silva at the base of the bed, and one without; he did not yet know how he would use this material.&lt;ref name=\"Lynch https://archive.org/details/catchingbigfishm00lync/page/77 77\u201378\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nLater that day, during the filming of Sarah Palmer having a vision, the camera operator told Lynch that the shot was ruined because \"Frank [Silva] was reflected in the mirror.\" Lynch comments: \"Things like this happen and make you start dreaming. And one thing leads to another, and if you let it, a whole other thing opens up.\" Lynch used the panning shot of Silva in the bedroom, and the shot featuring Silva's reflection, in the closing scenes of the European version of the pilot episode. Silva's reflection in the mirror can also be glimpsed during the scene of Sarah's vision at the end of the original pilot, but it is less clear. A close-up of Silva in the bedroom later became a significant image in episodes of the TV series.\nRepresentation.\nDenise Bryson (David Duchovny) is a transgender FBI agent who is introduced in season two. When she is reintroduced to audiences in the third season, she has a conversation where Gordon Cole (David Lynch) informs Bryson that he told her transphobic colleagues to \"fix their hearts or die.\" Over the years, this quote has been adopted by the LGBTQ+ community, particularly those in the trans community, with Bryson becoming a cult icon for transgender women.\nThrough the run of \"Twin Peaks\", there is a limited cast of characters of color. Frank Guan of \"Vulture\" stated that \"Lynch's focus on archetypes and myths necessarily ties him to stereotype,\" specifically referring to the treatment of Black and Asian characters within Lynch's collected work. Yellowface is also present in season two with Catherine Martell (Piper Laurie) masquerading as a Japanese businessman named Mr. Tojamura for several episodes. The secret of Laurie's true \"identity\" of being Mr. Tojamura was a closely kept secret between her and Lynch on set. Deputy Hawk (Michael Horse) is a Native American deputy who, some say, functioned to be a \"generic Native American tasked with ameliorating settler guilt\" through cryptic dialogue.\nMusic.\nThe score for \"Twin Peaks\" has received acclaim; \"The Guardian\" wrote that it \"still marks the summit of TV soundtracks\". In fall 1989, composer Angelo Badalamenti and Lynch created the score for the show. In 20\u00a0minutes they produced the signature theme for the series. Badalamenti called it the \"Love Theme from \"Twin Peaks\"\". Lynch told him: \"You just wrote 75% of the score. It's the mood of the whole piece. It is \"Twin Peaks\".\"\nWhile creating the score, Lynch often described the moods or emotions he wanted the music to evoke, and Badalamenti began to play the piano. In the scenes dominated by young men, they are accompanied by music that Badalamenti called Cool Jazz. The characters' masculinity was enhanced by finger-snapping, \"cocktail-lounge electric piano, pulsing bass, and lightly brushed percussion.\" A handful of the motifs were borrowed from Julee Cruise's 1989 album \"Floating into the Night\", which was written in large part by Badalamenti and Lynch and was released in 1989. This album also serves as the soundtrack to another Lynch project, \"Industrial Symphony No. 1\", a live Cruise performance also featuring Michael J. Anderson.\nAn instrumental version of the song \"Falling\" became the theme to the show, and the songs \"Rockin' Back Inside My Heart\", \"The Nightingale\", \"The World Spins\", and \"Into the Night\" (found in their full versions on the album) were all, except the last, used as Cruise's roadhouse performances during the show's run. The lyrics for all five songs were written by Lynch. A second volume of the soundtrack was released on October 30, 2007, to coincide with the Definitive Gold Box DVD set.\nIn March 2011, Lynch began releasing \"The Twin Peaks Archive\" \u2013 a collection of previously unavailable tracks from the series and the film via his website. As of February 2024, the site is no longer active and it appears there is no way to legally obtain the bundle of all files previously offered for sale.\nFilming locations.\nAgent Cooper states, in the pilot episode, that Twin Peaks is \"five miles south of the Canadian border, and twelve miles west of the state line.\" This places it in the Salmo-Priest Wilderness, near the real life location of Metaline Falls, Washington. Lynch and Frost started their location search in Snoqualmie, Washington, on the recommendation of a friend of Frost. They found all of the locations that they had written into the pilot episode.\nThe towns of Snoqualmie, North Bend and Fall City \u2013 which became the primary filming locations for stock \"Twin Peaks\" exterior footage \u2013 are about an hour's drive from the town of Roslyn, Washington, the town used for the series \"Northern Exposure\". Many exterior scenes were filmed in wooded areas of Malibu, California. Most of the interior scenes were shot on standing sets in a San Fernando Valley warehouse.\nThe soap opera show-within-the-show \"Invitation to Love\" was not shot on a studio set, but in the Ennis House, an architectural landmark designed by Frank Lloyd Wright in the Hollywood area of Los Angeles.\nFilming.\nMark Frost and David Lynch made use of repeating and sometimes mysterious motifs such as trees (especially fir and pines), coffee and doughnuts, cherry pie, owls, logs, ducks, water, fire \u2014 and numerous embedded references to other films and TV shows.\nDuring the filming of the scene in which Cooper first examines Laura's body, a malfunctioning fluorescent lamp above the table flickered constantly, but Lynch decided not to replace it, since he liked the disconcerting effect that it created.\nCooper's dream at the end of the third episode, which became a driving plot point in the series's first season and ultimately held the key to the identity of Laura's murderer, was never scripted. The idea came to Lynch one afternoon after touching the side of a hot car left out in the sun: \"I was leaning against a car\u2014the front of me was leaning against this very warm car. My hands were on the roof and the metal was very hot. The Red Room scene leapt into my mind. 'Little Mike' was there, and he was speaking backwards... For the rest of the night I thought only about the Red Room.\"\nThe footage was originally shot along with the pilot, to be used as the conclusion were it to be released as a feature film. When the series was picked up, Lynch decided to incorporate some of the footage; in the fourth episode, Cooper, narrating the dream, outlines the shot footage which Lynch did not incorporate, such as Mike shooting Bob and the fact that he is 25 years older when he meets Laura Palmer's spirit.\nReception and legacy.\nBefore the one-and-a-half-hour pilot premiered on TV, a screening was held at the Museum of Broadcasting in Hollywood. Media analyst and advertising executive Paul Schulman said: \"I don't think it has a chance of succeeding. It is not commercial, it is radically different from what we as viewers are accustomed to seeing, there's no one in the show to root for.\" The show's Thursday night time slot had not been a good one for soap operas, as both \"Dynasty\" and its short-lived spin-off \"The Colbys\" did poorly.\nInitially, the show received a positive response from TV critics. Tom Shales, in \"The Washington Post\", wrote: \"\"Twin Peaks\" disorients you in ways that small-screen productions seldom attempt. It's a pleasurable sensation, the floor dropping out and leaving one dangling.\" In \"The New York Times\", John J.\u00a0O'Connor wrote: \"\"Twin Peaks\" is not a send-up of the form. Mr.\u00a0Lynch clearly savors the standard ingredients\u00a0... but then the director adds his own peculiar touches, small passing details that suddenly, and often hilariously, thrust the commonplace out of kilter.\" \"Entertainment Weekly\" gave the show an \"A+\" rating, and Ken Tucker wrote: \"Plot is irrelevant; moments are everything. Lynch and Frost have mastered a way to make a weekly series endlessly interesting.\" Richard Zoglin in \"Time\" magazine said that it \"may be the most hauntingly original work ever done for American TV\".\nThe two-hour pilot was the highest-rated movie for the 1989\u201390 season with a 22 rating and was viewed by 33% of the audience. In its first broadcast as a regular one-hour drama series, \"Twin Peaks\" scored ABC's highest ratings in four years in its 9:00\u00a0pm Thursday time slot. The show also reduced NBC's popular sitcom \"Cheers\"'s ratings. \"Twin Peaks\" had a 16.2 rating, with each point equaling 921,000 homes with TVs. The episode added new viewers because of what ABC's senior vice-president of research, Alan Wurtzel, called \"the water cooler syndrome\", in which people talk about the series the next day at work.\nThe show's third episode lost 14% of the audience that had tuned in a week before. That audience had dropped 30% from the show's first appearance on Thursday night. This was a result of competing against \"Cheers\", which also appealed to the same demographic that watched \"Twin Peaks\". A production executive from the show spoke of being frustrated with the network's scheduling of the show. \"The show is being banged around on Thursday night. If ABC had put it on Wednesday night it could have built on its initial success. ABC has put the show at risk.\"\nIn response, the network aired the first-season finale on a Wednesday night at 10:00\u00a0pm instead of its usual 9:00\u00a0pm Thursday slot. The show achieved its best ratings since its third week on the air with a 12.6 and a 22 share of the audience. On May 22, 1990, it was announced that \"Twin Peaks\" would be renewed for a second season.\nIn the first and second season, the search for Laura Palmer's killer served as the engine for the plot and captured the public's imagination, although the creators admitted that this was largely a MacGuffin. Each episode was really about the interactions between the townsfolk. The unique and often bizarre personalities of each citizen formed a web of minutiae that ran contrary to the town's quaint appearance. Adding to the surreal atmosphere was the recurrence of Dale Cooper's dreams, in which the FBI agent is given clues to Laura's murder in a supernatural realm that may or may not be of his imagination. The first season contained only eight episodes, including the two-hour pilot episode. It was considered technically and artistically revolutionary for television at the time and geared toward reaching the standards of film.\nCritics have noted that \"Twin Peaks\" began the trend of accomplished cinematography now commonplace in today's television dramas. Lynch and Frost maintained tight control over the first season and served as showrunners, handpicking all of the directors, including some whom Lynch had known from his days at the American Film Institute (e.g., Caleb Deschanel and Tim Hunter) and some referred to him by those he knew personally. Lynch and Frost's control lessened in the second season as the two became less involved with the series, corresponding with what is generally regarded as a decrease in the show's quality once the identity of Laura Palmer's murderer was revealed.\nWhile Frost and Lynch technically remained showrunners after \"Episode 14\", the episode in which the killer's identity was revealed, Lynch had little creative control over the direction of the series from that point forward other than the season finale. Frost became less involved after \"Episode 16\" and became more involved again with \"Episode 26\" onwards. After \"Episode 14\", series producers Harley Peyton and Robert Engels served as additional showrunners along with Frost and Lynch.\nThe aforementioned \"water cooler effect\" put pressure on the show's creators to solve the mystery. Although they claimed to have known from the series' inception the identity of Laura's murderer, Lynch never wanted to solve the murder, while Frost felt that they had an obligation to the audience to solve it. This created tension between the two men.\nIts ambitious style, paranormal undertones, and engaging murder mystery made \"Twin Peaks\" an unexpected hit. Its characters, particularly MacLachlan's Dale Cooper, were unorthodox for a supposed crime drama, as was Cooper's method of interpreting his dreams to solve the crime. During its first season, the show's popularity reached its zenith, and elements of the program seeped into mainstream popular culture, prompting parodies, including one in the 16th-season premiere of \"Saturday Night Live\", hosted by MacLachlan.\nCritical acclaim.\nFor its first season, \"Twin Peaks\" received fourteen nominations at the 42nd Primetime Emmy Awards, for Outstanding Drama Series, Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series (Kyle MacLachlan), Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series (Piper Laurie), Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series (Sherilyn Fenn), Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series (David Lynch), Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series (David Lynch and Mark Frost), Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series (Harley Peyton), \nOutstanding Art Direction for a Single-Camera Series (Patricia Norris and Leslie Morales), Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music (Angelo Badalamenti and David Lynch), Outstanding Music Composition for a Series (Original Dramatic Score) (Angelo Badalamenti), Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics (Angelo Badalamenti and David Lynch), and Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series.\nOut of its fourteen nominations, it won for Outstanding Achievement in Costume Design for a Drama or Comedy Series (Patricia Norris) and Outstanding Editing for a Series \u2013 Single Camera Production. On Rotten Tomatoes, the first season received a 91 percent approval rating with an average score of 8.95 out of 10 based on 118 reviews, with a critics consensus of: \"\"Twin Peaks\" plays with TV conventions to deliver a beguiling \u2013 and unsettling \u2013 blend of seemingly disparate genres, adding up to an offbeat drama with a distinctly unique appeal.\" Metacritic scored the season 96 out of 100 based on 17 reviews.\nFor its second season, it received four nominations at the 43rd Primetime Emmy Awards, for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series (Kyle MacLachlan), Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series (Piper Laurie), Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series, and Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series. On Rotten Tomatoes, the second season received a 65 percent approval rating with an average score of 7.65 out of 10 based on 175 reviews, with a critics consensus of: \"\"Twin Peaks\" answers its central question with diminishing returns while struggling to establish worthy new mysteries, but there are enough mesmeric flourishes to keep devotees dreaming of what lies in the Red Room.\"\nAt the 48th Golden Globe Awards, it won for Best Television Series \u2013 Drama, Kyle MacLachlan won for Best Performance by an Actor in a TV Series \u2013 Drama, Piper Laurie won for Best Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Series, Mini-Series or Motion Picture Made for TV; while Sherilyn Fenn was nominated in the same category as Laurie.\nThe pilot episode was ranked 25th on \"TV Guide\"'s 1997 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time. It placed 49th on \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s \"New TV Classics\" list. In 2004 and 2007, \"Twin Peaks\" was ranked 20th and 24th on \"TV Guide\"'s Top Cult Shows Ever, and in 2002, it was ranked 45th of the \"Top 50 Television Programs of All Time\" by the same guide. In 2007, UK broadcaster Channel 4 ranked \"Twin Peaks\" 9th on their list of the \"50 Greatest TV Dramas\". In 2007, \"Time\" included the show on their list of the \"100 Best TV Shows of All-Time\". In 2011, \"Empire\" listed \"Twin Peaks\" as the 24th best TV show in their list of \"The 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time\".\nIn 2012, \"Entertainment Weekly\" listed the show at no.\u00a012 in the \"25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years\", saying: \"The show itself was only fitfully brilliant and ultimately unfulfilling, but the cult lives, fueled by nostalgia for the extraordinary pop phenomenon it inspired, for its significance to the medium (behold the big bang of auteur TV!), and for a sensuous strangeness that possesses you and never lets you go.\" The series has been nominated for the TCA Heritage Award six consecutive years since 2010, winning the award in 2024. It was ranked 20th on \"The Hollywood Reporter\"'s list of Hollywood's 100 Favorite TV Shows.\nDeclining ratings.\nWith the resolution of \"Twin Peaks\"' main drawing point (Laura Palmer's murder) in the middle of the second season, and with subsequent story lines becoming more obscure and drawn out, public interest began to wane. This discontent, coupled with ABC changing its timeslot on a number of occasions, led to a huge drop in the show's ratings after being one of the most watched television programs in the United States in 1990. Due to the Gulf War, \"Twin Peaks\" was moved from its usual time slot \"for six weeks out of eight\" in early 1991, according to Frost, preventing the show from maintaining audience interest. A week after the season's 15th episode placed 85th in the ratings out of 89 shows, ABC put \"Twin Peaks\" on indefinite hiatus, a move that usually leads to cancellation.\nAn organized letter-writing campaign, dubbed COOP (Citizens Opposed to the Offing of \"Peaks\"), attempted to save the show from cancellation. The campaign was partly successful, as the season returned to airing on Thursday nights for four weeks from late March. The series then went on another hiatus, before the final two episodes of the season aired back-to-back on June\u00a010.\nAccording to Frost, the main storyline after the resolution of Laura Palmer's murder was planned to be the second strongest element from the first season that audiences responded to: the relationship between Agent Cooper and Audrey Horne. Frost explained that Lara Flynn Boyle, who was romantically involved with Kyle MacLachlan at the time, had effectively vetoed the Audrey\u2013Cooper relationship, forcing the writers to come up with alternative storylines to fill the gap. Sherilyn Fenn corroborated this claim in a 2014 interview, stating: \"[Boyle] was mad that my character was getting more attention, so then Kyle started saying that his character shouldn't be with my character because it doesn't look good, 'cause I'm too young... I was not happy about it. It was stupid.\"\nThis meant the artificial extension of secondary storylines, such as James Hurley and Evelyn Marsh, to fill in the space. After ratings began to decline, Agent Cooper was given a new love interest, Annie Blackburn (Heather Graham), to replace the writers' intended romance between him and Audrey Horne. Despite ending on a deliberate audience-baiting cliffhanger, the series finale did not sufficiently boost interest, and the show was not renewed for a third season, leaving the cliffhanger unresolved.\nLynch expressed his regret at having resolved the Laura Palmer murder, saying that he and Frost had never intended for the series to answer the question until the very end of the series, after many seasons, and that doing so \"killed the goose that laid the golden egg.\" Lynch blamed network pressure for the decision to resolve the Palmer storyline prematurely. Frost agreed, noting that people at the network had wanted the killer to be revealed by the end of season one. Their statements were corroborated by former ABC executive Bob Iger in his 2019 memoir, \"The Ride of a Lifetime\", where he wrote that after ABC pushed for the killer to be revealed prematurely, there was an immediate decrease in the show's quality.\nLooking back, Frost has admitted that he wished he and Lynch had \"worked out a smoother transition\" between storylines and that the Laura Palmer story was a \"tough act to follow\". Regarding the second season, Frost felt that \"perhaps the storytelling wasn't quite as taut or as fraught with emotion.\"\nPrequel film.\nThe 1992 film \"Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me\", serves as a prequel to the television series. It tells of the investigation into the murder of Teresa Banks, and the last seven days in the life of Laura Palmer. David Lynch and most of the television cast returned for the film, with the notable exceptions of Lara Flynn Boyle, who declined to return as Donna Hayward and was replaced by Moira Kelly, and Sherilyn Fenn due to scheduling conflicts. Kyle MacLachlan returned reluctantly as he wanted to avoid typecasting at the time. As a result, his presence in the film is smaller than originally planned. Lynch shot about five hours of footage that was cut down to two hours and fourteen minutes. The cut footage, which included scenes with characters from the show's original run who were not in the film, was arranged into a 2014 compilation film, \"Twin Peaks: The Missing Pieces\".\n\"Fire Walk with Me\" polarized critics upon its release, especially in comparison to the widespread acclaim of the series. The film was nominated for the Palme d'Or at the 1992 Cannes Film Festival. It grossed US$1.8\u00a0million in 691 theaters on its opening weekend, and went on to gross a total of $4.2\u00a0million in North America. The film has developed a cult following over time and been positively reevaluated in the 21st century, and it is now widely regarded as one of Lynch's major works and one of the greatest films of the 1990s.\nThe release of the third season in 2017, which made many references to the film, led to additional renewed critical and scholarly interest.\nInfluence.\nWhile the series is not usually described as science fiction, it has been noted to have been influential on that genre.\nIn 2018, the mayors of Snoqualmie and North Bend, which were both used for filming the series, declared Twin Peaks Day to be held on February 24. That was in recognition of the date mentioned in the first episode of the series.\nTelevision industry.\nWriting for \"The Atlantic\" in 2016, Mike Mariani wrote that \"It would be tough to look at the roster of television shows any given season without finding several that owe a creative debt to \"Twin Peaks\",\" stating that \"Lynch's manipulation of the uncanny, his surreal non-sequiturs, his black humor, and his trademark ominous tracking shots can be felt in a variety of contemporary hit shows.\"\n\"The X-Files\" notably takes major inspiration from \"Twin Peaks\", especially in execution of atmosphere and attempts to blend comedic moments and horror. David Duchovny appeared as Denise Bryson in \"Twin Peaks\" prior to his role as Fox Mulder on \"The X-Files\". In an interview celebrating the third season, David Chase, the creator of \"The Sopranos,\" stated that \"Anybody making one-hour drama[s] today who says he wasn't influenced by David Lynch is lying.\" In 2010, the television series \"Psych\" paid tribute to the series by reuniting some of the cast in the fifth-season episode \"Dual Spires\".\nCarlton Cuse, the co-creator of \"Bates Motel\", cited \"Twin Peaks\" as a key inspiration for his series, stating, \"We pretty much ripped off \"Twin Peaks.\"\" Cuse and Damon Lindelof, who both co-produced \"Lost\", cited both \"Twin Peaks\" and David Lynch as a major influence on their work. Lindelof stated \"There is no show in television history that had more impact on me than \"Twin Peaks.\"\" Noah Hawley, creator of \"Fargo\" and \"Legion\", cited \"Twin Peaks\" as a major inspiration on his work, particularly \"Fargo\". Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa, the creator of \"Riverdale\", remarked that \"all roads on \"Riverdale\" lead back to \"Twin Peaks\" given its thematic similarities.\nThe TV series \"Atlanta\" has been cited by its creator, Donald Glover, as being inspired by the show, labeling it as \"Twin Peaks\" with rappers.\" Additionally, the animated series \"Gravity Falls\" repeatedly referenced the Black Lodge along with other elements of \"Twin Peaks\" throughout its run. Critics have also noted similarities and borrowed elements from Lynch's \"Fire Walk with Me\" and \"Twin Peaks\" in Veena Sud's American adaptation of \"The Killing\".\nMusic.\nThe show's score, helmed by Angelo Badalamenti, Julee Cruise, and David Lynch, was a notable influence for many genres of music, specifically dream pop. Cruise's compositions inspired the likes of Lana Del Rey and the score of the show was a direct inspiration for dream pop duo Beach House, who have a history of paying homage to the show; the latter's lead singer, Victoria Legrand, was also inspired by the show to write one of the lyrics to their 2010 song \"Silver Soul.\" The show's legacy of honoring dream pop and indie rock compositions is observed in the third season, with its inclusion of performances from contemporaries such as Sharon Van Etten, Nine Inch Nails, and the Veils.\nBands like Bastille have penned songs in honor of the show like \"Laura Palmer\", which was influenced by the \"slightly weird, eerie\" atmosphere of the show. Xiu Xiu completed and released a 2017 tribute album titled \"Plays the Music of Twin Peaks\", where they performed several tracks from the show's main soundtrack and leaned into a more experimental sound.\nVideo games.\nTwin Peaks has influenced a number of survival horror and psychological thriller video games, most notably games produced by Sam Lake at Remedy Entertainment, such as the \"Remedy Connected Universe\" of games, which includes the \"Alan Wake\" series, and the game \"Control.\" For \"Alan Wake II\", the developers took heavy inspiration specifically from the third season of \"Twin Peaks.\" The Remedy-produced \"Max Payne\" series also takes inspiration. Other games of the genre that take heavy inspiration include \"Deadly Premonition\", and the \"Silent Hill\" series.\n\"Twin Peaks\" served as an inspiration for the 1993 video game \"\", with director Takashi Tezuka citing the series as the main factor for the creation of the \"suspicious\" characters that populate the game, as well as the mystery elements of the story. The 1998 open world adventure video game \"Mizzurna Falls\" was highly reminiscent and an homage to \"Twin Peaks\".\nThe Velvet Room featured in the \"Persona\" video game series is inspired by the Black Lodge, and is also a reference to a previous Lynch film, \"Blue Velvet.\" Other games and video game series influenced by \"Twin Peaks\" include the \"Life Is Strange\" series, and the indie games \"Disco Elysium\", \"Virginia\", \"Kentucky Route Zero\", \"Thimbleweed Park\", and \"Puzzle Agent\".\nMerchandise.\nHome media.\nThe series was released on VHS in a six-tape collection in April 1995. It did not include the original pilot episode. The series was released on LaserDisc in a sixteen-disc set in 1991 in Japan. The same set was released in the United States across four different volumes from 1993 to 1994. Neither release contained the original pilot or \"Fire Walk with Me\".\nIn December 2001, the first season (episodes 1\u20137, minus the pilot) of \"Twin Peaks\" was released on DVD in Region 1 by Artisan Entertainment. The box set featured digitally remastered video and was noted for being the first TV series to have its audio track redone in DTS.\nThe second-season release was postponed several times. The release was originally canceled in 2003 by Artisan due to low sales figures for the season\u00a01 DVD. In April 2007, the second season was released in the United States and Canada, via Paramount Pictures Home Entertainment/CBS DVD.\nIn October 2007, the broadcast version of the pilot received a legitimate U.S. release as part of the \"Twin Peaks\" \"Definitive Gold Box Edition\". This set includes both U.S. original network broadcast and international versions of the pilot. The set includes all episodes from both seasons, deleted scenes for both seasons, and a feature-length retrospective documentary. \"Entertainment Weekly\" gave the box set a \"B+\" rating and wrote: \"There are numerous fascinatingly frank mini-docs here, including interviews with many \"Peaks\" participants; together, they offer one of the best available portraits of how a TV hit can go off the rails.\"\nIn May 2014, it was announced that the Blu-ray box set containing the complete series of \"Twin Peaks\", the film \"Fire Walk With Me\", and \"The Missing Pieces\", 90 minutes of deleted scenes from the film, would be released in July 2014. In December 2019, \"Twin Peaks: From Z to A\", a 21-disc limited edition Blu-ray box set was released, which includes all the television episodes, \"Fire Walk with Me\", \"The Missing Pieces\", previously released special features, six hours of new behind-the-scenes content, and 4K versions of the original pilot and \"Part 8\" of season 3. In October 2019, \"Twin Peaks: The Television Collection\" was released, a Blu-ray and DVD collection of every season, and all previously released special features.\nBooks, audio and virtual reality.\nDuring the show's second season, Pocket Books released three official tie-in books, each authored by the show's creators (or their family), which offer a wealth of backstory. \"The Secret Diary of Laura Palmer\", written by Lynch's daughter Jennifer Lynch, is the diary as seen in the series and written by Laura, chronicling her thoughts from her twelfth birthday to the days leading up to her death. Frost's brother Scott wrote \"The Autobiography of F.B.I. Special Agent Dale Cooper: My Life, My Tapes\". Kyle MacLachlan also recorded \"Diane: The Twin Peaks Tapes of Agent Cooper\", which combined audio tracks from various episodes of the series with newly recorded monologues.\n\"Twin Peaks: Visual Soundtrack\" is a LaserDisc that plays like an elaborate music video. The show's entire soundtrack album is played over silent video footage shot by a Japanese TV crew visiting the Snoqualmie, Washington, locations where the series was shot.\nPublished in October 2016, \"The Secret History of Twin Peaks\", a novel by series co-creator Mark Frost, \"places the unexplained phenomena that unfolded in Twin Peaks in a layered, wide-ranging history, beginning with the journals of Lewis and Clark and ending with the shocking events that closed the finale\". In October 2017, \"\" was released. A follow-up to \"The Secret History of Twin Peaks\", it was also written by Frost. The novel fills in details of the 25 years between the second and third seasons, and expands on some of the mysteries raised in the new episodes.\nIn December 2019, \"Twin Peaks VR\" was released, a virtual reality game developed by Collider Games and Showtime in collaboration with David Lynch. Players can explore familiar locations while solving puzzles to help Special Agent Cooper and Gordon Cole. The game is available on Oculus Rift, Vive and Valve Index.\nStreaming.\nAll three seasons began streaming on Mubi on June 13, 2025. All three seasons are also available on Paramount+, while the first two seasons are available on Pluto TV.\nFuture.\nSince the third season ended in 2017, Lynch and Frost had expressed interest in making another season of \"Twin Peaks\". Lynch had been asked in several interviews if he would continue, once saying \"I don't know, I have a box of ideas, and I'm working with producer Sabrina S. Sutherland, kind of trying to go through and see if there's any gold in those boxes.\"\nLynch said one more story was \"calling to him\" involving the character of Carrie Page. In a Reddit AMA in June 2020, star Kyle MacLachlan said Cooper was his \"favorite role of all time\" and that he would \"absolutely\" return to another season \"without even seeing the script.\" Lynch died in January 2025, making the production of any future episodes or any sort of revival of the series unlikely.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30309", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30309", "title": "Thallium", "text": "element with atomic number 81 (Tl)\nThallium is a chemical element; it has symbol Tl and atomic number 81. It is a silvery-white post-transition metal that is not found free in nature. When isolated, thallium resembles tin, but discolors when exposed to air. Chemists William Crookes and Claude-Auguste Lamy discovered thallium independently, in 1861, in residues of sulfuric acid production. Both used the newly developed method of flame spectroscopy, in which thallium produces a notable green spectral line. Thallium, from Greek , , meaning \"green shoot\" or \"twig\", was named by Crookes. It was isolated by both Lamy and Crookes in 1862, Lamy by electrolysis and Crookes by precipitation and melting of the resultant powder. Crookes exhibited it as a powder precipitated by zinc at the International Exhibition, which opened on 1 May that year.\nThallium tends to form the +3 and +1 oxidation states. The +3 state resembles that of the other elements in group 13 (boron, aluminium, gallium, indium). However, the +1 state, which is far more prominent in thallium than the elements above it, recalls the chemistry of alkali metals and thallium(I) ions are found geologically mostly in potassium-based ores and (when ingested) are handled in many ways like potassium ions (K+) by ion pumps in living cells.\nCommercially, thallium is produced not from potassium ores, but as a byproduct from refining of heavy-metal sulfide ores. Approximately 65% of thallium production is used in the electronics industry and the remainder is used in the pharmaceutical industry and in glass manufacturing. It is also used in infrared detectors. The radioisotope thallium-201 (as the soluble chloride TlCl) is used in small amounts as an agent in a nuclear medicine scan, during one type of nuclear cardiac stress test.\nSoluble thallium salts (many of which are nearly tasteless) are highly toxic and they were historically used in rat poisons and insecticides. Because of their nonselective toxicity, use of these compounds has been restricted or banned in many countries. Thallium poisoning usually results in hair loss. Because of its historic popularity as a murder weapon, thallium has gained notoriety as \"the poisoner's poison\" and \"inheritance powder\" (alongside arsenic).\nCharacteristics.\nA thallium atom has 81 electrons, arranged in the electron configuration [Xe]4f145d106s26p1; of these, the three outermost electrons in the sixth shell are valence electrons. Due to the inert pair effect, the 6s electron pair is relativistically stabilised and it is more difficult to get these involved in chemical bonding than it is for the heavier elements. Thus, very few electrons are available for metallic bonding, similar to the neighboring elements mercury and lead. Thallium, then, like its congeners, is a soft, highly electrically conducting metal with a low melting point, of 304\u00a0\u00b0C.\nA number of standard electrode potentials, depending on the reaction under study, are reported for thallium, reflecting the greatly decreased stability of the +3 oxidation state:\nThallium is the first element in group 13 where the reduction of the +3 oxidation state to the +1 oxidation state is spontaneous under standard conditions. Since bond energies decrease down the group, with thallium, the energy released in forming two additional bonds and attaining the +3 state is not always enough to outweigh the energy needed to involve the 6s-electrons. Accordingly, thallium(I) oxide and hydroxide are more basic and thallium(III) oxide and hydroxide are more acidic, showing that thallium conforms to the general rule of elements being more electropositive in their lower oxidation states.\nThallium is malleable and sectile enough to be cut with a knife at room temperature. It has a metallic luster that, when exposed to air, quickly tarnishes to a bluish-gray tinge, resembling lead. It may be preserved by immersion in oil. A heavy layer of oxide builds up on thallium if left in air. The metal also reacts with water, forming thallium hydroxide. Sulfuric and nitric acids dissolve thallium rapidly to make the sulfate and nitrate salts, while hydrochloric acid forms an insoluble thallium(I) chloride layer.\nIsotopes.\nThallium has 41 known isotopes with atomic masses from 176 to 216. 203Tl and 205Tl are the only stable isotopes and make up all natural thallium. The five short-lived isotopes 206Tl through 210Tl inclusive occur in nature, but only as part of the natural decay chains of heavier elements. 204Tl is the most stable radioisotope, with a half-life of 3.78 years; the next most stable are 202Tl (half-life 12.31 days) and 201Tl (half-life 3.0421 days). It is made by the neutron activation of stable thallium in a nuclear reactor.\nThe isotope 201Tl is useful in nuclear medicine; it decays by electron capture, emitting X-rays (~70\u201380\u00a0keV), and gamma rays of 135 and 167\u00a0keV; therefore, it has good imaging characteristics without an excessive patient-radiation dose. It is the most popular isotope used for thallium nuclear cardiac stress tests.\nCompounds.\nThallium(III).\nThallium(III) compounds resemble the corresponding aluminium(III) compounds. They are moderately strong oxidizing agents and are usually unstable, as illustrated by the positive reduction potential for the Tl3+/Tl couple. Some mixed-valence compounds are also known, such as Tl4O3 and TlCl2, which contain both thallium(I) and thallium(III). Thallium(III) oxide, Tl2O3, is a black solid which decomposes above 800\u00a0\u00b0C, forming the thallium(I) oxide and oxygen.\nThe simplest possible thallium compound, thallane (TlH3), is too unstable to exist in bulk, both due to the instability of the +3 oxidation state as well as poor overlap of the valence 6s and 6p orbitals of thallium with the 1s orbital of hydrogen. The trihalides are more stable, although they are chemically distinct from those of the lighter group 13 elements and are still the least stable in the whole group. For instance, thallium(III) fluoride, TlF3, has the \u03b2-BiF3 structure rather than that of the lighter group 13 trifluorides, and does not form the {{chem|Tl|F|4|-}} complex anion in aqueous solution. The trichloride and tribromide disproportionate just above room temperature to give the monohalides, and thallium triiodide contains the linear triiodide anion ({{chem|I|3|-}}) and is actually a thallium(I) compound. Thallium(III) sesquichalcogenides do not exist.\nThallium(I).\nThe thallium(I) halides are stable. In keeping with the large size of the Tl+ cation, the chloride and bromide have the caesium chloride structure, while the fluoride and iodide have distorted sodium chloride structures. Like the analogous silver compounds, TlCl, TlBr, and TlI are photosensitive and display poor solubility in water. The stability of thallium(I) compounds demonstrates its differences from the rest of the group: a stable oxide, hydroxide, and carbonate are known, as are many chalcogenides.\nThe double salt {{chem|Tl|4|(OH)|2|CO|3|}} has been shown to have hydroxyl-centred triangles of thallium, {{chem|[Tl|3|(OH)]|2+}}, as a recurring motif throughout its solid structure.\nThe metalorganic compound thallium ethoxide (TlOEt, TlOC2H5) is a heavy liquid (\u03c1 {{val|3.49|u=g\u00b7cm\u22123}}, m.p. \u22123\u00a0\u00b0C), often used as a basic and soluble thallium source in organic and organometallic chemistry.\nOrganothallium compounds.\nOrganothallium compounds tend to be thermally unstable, in concordance with the trend of decreasing thermal stability down group 13. The chemical reactivity of the Tl\u2013C bond is also the lowest in the group, especially for ionic compounds of the type R2TlX. Thallium forms the stable [Tl(CH3)2]+ ion in aqueous solution; like the isoelectronic Hg(CH3)2 and [Pb(CH3)2]2+, it is linear. Trimethylthallium and triethylthallium are, like the corresponding gallium and indium compounds, flammable liquids with low melting points. Like indium, thallium cyclopentadienyl compounds contain thallium(I), in contrast to gallium(III).\nHistory.\nThallium (Greek {{lang|el|\u03b8\u03b1\u03bb\u03bb\u03cc\u03c2}}, {{lang|el-Latn|thallos}}, meaning \"a green shoot or twig\") was discovered by William Crookes and Claude Auguste Lamy, working independently, both using flame spectroscopy (Crookes was first to publish his findings, on March 30, 1861). The name comes from thallium's bright green spectral emission lines derived from the Greek 'thallos', meaning a green twig.\nAs both scientists discovered thallium independently and a large part of the work, especially the isolation of the metallic thallium was done by Lamy, Crookes tried to secure his own priority on the work. Lamy was awarded a medal at the International Exhibition in London 1862: \"For the discovery of a new and abundant source of thallium\" and after heavy protest Crookes also received a medal: \"thallium, for the discovery of the new element.\" The controversy between both scientists continued through 1862 and 1863. Most of the discussion ended after Crookes was elected Fellow of the Royal Society in June 1863.\nThe dominant use of thallium was the use as poison for rodents. After several accidents the use as poison was banned in the United States by Presidential Executive Order 11643 in February 1972. In subsequent years several other countries also banned its use.\nOccurrence and production.\nThallium concentration in the Earth's crust is estimated to be 0.7\u00a0mg/kg, mostly in association with potassium-based minerals in clays, soils, and granites. The major source of thallium for practical purposes is the trace amount that is found in copper, lead, zinc, and other heavy-metal-sulfide ores.\nThallium is found in the minerals crookesite TlCu7Se4, hutchinsonite TlPbAs5S9, and lor\u00e1ndite TlAsS2. Thallium also occurs as a trace element in iron pyrite, and thallium is extracted as a by-product of roasting this mineral for the production of sulfuric acid.\nThallium can also be obtained from the smelting of lead and zinc ores. Manganese nodules found on the ocean floor contain some thallium. In addition, several other thallium minerals, containing 16% to 60% thallium, occur in nature as complexes of sulfides or selenides that primarily contain antimony, arsenic, copper, lead, and silver. These minerals are rare, and have had no commercial importance as sources of thallium. The Allchar deposit in southern North Macedonia was the only area where thallium was actively mined. This deposit still contains an estimated 500\u00a0tonnes of thallium, and it is a source for several rare thallium minerals, for example lor\u00e1ndite.\nThe United States Geological Survey (USGS) estimates that the annual worldwide production of thallium is 10\u00a0metric tonnes as a by-product from the smelting of copper, zinc, and lead ores. Thallium is either extracted from the dusts from the smelter flues or from residues such as slag that are collected at the end of the smelting process. The raw materials used for thallium production contain large amounts of other materials and therefore a purification is the first step. The thallium is leached either by the use of an alkali or sulfuric acid from the material. The thallium is precipitated several times from the solution to remove impurities. At the end it is converted to thallium sulfate and the thallium is extracted by electrolysis on platinum or stainless steel plates. The production of thallium decreased by about 33% in the period from 1995 to 2009 \u2013 from about 15\u00a0metric tonnes to about 10\u00a0tonnes. Since there are several small deposits or ores with relatively high thallium content, it would be possible to increase the production if a new application, such as a thallium-containing high-temperature superconductor, becomes practical for widespread use outside of the laboratory.\nApplications.\nHistoric uses.\nThe odorless and tasteless thallium sulfate was once widely used as rat poison and ant killer. Since 1972 this use has been prohibited in the United States due to safety concerns. Many other countries followed this example. Thallium salts were used in the treatment of ringworm, other skin infections and to reduce the night sweating of tuberculosis patients. This use has been limited due to their narrow therapeutic index, and the development of improved medicines for these conditions.\nOptics.\nThallium(I) bromide and thallium(I) iodide crystals have been used as infrared optical materials, because they are harder than other common infrared optics, and because they have transmission at significantly longer wavelengths. The trade name KRS-5 refers to this material. Thallium(I) oxide has been used to manufacture glasses that have a high index of refraction. Combined with sulfur or selenium and arsenic, thallium has been used in the production of high-density glasses that have low melting points in the range of 125 and 150 Celsius\u00b0. These glasses have room-temperature properties that are similar to ordinary glasses and are durable, insoluble in water and have unique refractive indices.\nElectronics.\nThallium(I) sulfide's electrical conductivity changes with exposure to infrared light, making this compound useful in photoresistors. Thallium selenide has been used in bolometers for infrared detection. Doping selenium semiconductors with thallium improves their performance, thus it is used in trace amounts in selenium rectifiers. Another application of thallium doping is the sodium iodide and cesium iodide crystals in gamma radiation detection devices. In these, the sodium iodide crystals are doped with a small amount of thallium to improve their efficiency as scintillation generators. Some of the electrodes in dissolved oxygen analyzers contain thallium.\nHigh-temperature superconductivity.\nResearch activity with thallium is ongoing to develop high-temperature superconductors for such applications as magnetic resonance imaging, storage of magnetic energy, magnetic propulsion, and electric power generation and transmission. The research in applications started after the discovery of the first thallium barium calcium copper oxide superconductor in 1988. Thallium cuprate superconductors have been discovered that have transition temperatures above 120 K. Some mercury-doped thallium-cuprate superconductors have transition temperatures above 130 K at ambient pressure, nearly as high as the world-record-holding mercury cuprates.\nNuclear medicine.\nBefore the widespread application of technetium-99m in nuclear medicine, the radioactive isotope thallium-201, with a half-life of 73 hours, was the main substance for nuclear cardiography. The nuclide is still used for stress tests for risk stratification in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD). This isotope of thallium can be generated using a transportable generator, which is similar to the [[technetium-99m generator]]. The generator contains [[lead-201]] (half-life 9.33 hours), which decays by [[electron capture]] to thallium-201. The lead-201 can be produced in a [[cyclotron]] by the bombardment of thallium with [[proton]]s or [[deuteron]]s by the (p,3n) and (d,4n) reactions.\nThallium stress test.\nA thallium stress test is a form of [[scintigraphy]] in which the amount of thallium in tissues correlates with tissue blood supply. Viable cardiac cells have normal [[Na+/K+-ATPase|Na+/K+ ion-exchange pumps]]. The Tl+ cation binds the K+ pumps and is transported into the cells. Exercise or [[dipyridamole]] induces widening ([[vasodilation]]) of arteries in the body. This produces [[coronary steal]] by areas where arteries are maximally dilated. Areas of infarct or [[Ischemia|ischemic tissue]] will remain \"cold\". Pre- and post-stress thallium may indicate areas that will benefit from myocardial [[revascularization]]. Redistribution indicates the existence of coronary steal and the presence of ischemic [[coronary artery disease]].\nOther uses.\nA mercury\u2013thallium alloy, which forms a [[eutectic]] at 8.5% thallium, is reported to freeze at\u00a0\u221260\u00a0\u00b0C, some 20\u00a0\u00b0C below the freezing point of mercury. This alloy is used in thermometers and low-temperature switches. In organic synthesis, thallium(III) salts, as thallium trinitrate or triacetate, are useful reagents for performing different transformations in aromatics, ketones and olefins, among others. Thallium is a constituent of the alloy in the [[anode]] plates of [[magnesium battery|magnesium seawater batteries]]. Soluble thallium salts are added to [[gold plating]] baths to increase the speed of plating and to reduce grain size within the gold layer.\nA saturated solution of equal parts of thallium(I) [[formate]] (Tl(HCO2)) and thallium(I) [[malonate]] (Tl(C3H3O4)) in water is known as [[Clerici solution]]. It is a mobile, odorless liquid which changes from yellowish to colorless upon reducing the concentration of the thallium salts. With a density of 4.25\u00a0g/cm3 at 20\u00a0\u00b0C, Clerici solution is one of the heaviest aqueous solutions known. It was used in the 20th century for measuring the density of minerals by the [[Buoyancy|flotation]] method, but its use has discontinued due to the high toxicity and corrosiveness of the solution.\nThallium iodide is frequently used as an additive in [[metal-halide lamp]]s, often together with one or two halides of other metals. It allows optimization of the lamp temperature and color rendering, and shifts the spectral output to the green region, which is useful for underwater lighting.\nToxicity.\nThallium and its compounds are extremely toxic, with numerous recorded cases of fatal thallium poisoning. The [[Occupational Safety and Health Administration]] (OSHA) has set the legal limit ([[permissible exposure limit]]) for thallium exposure in the workplace as 0.1\u00a0mg/m2 skin exposure over an eight-hour workday. The [[National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health]] (NIOSH) also set a [[recommended exposure limit]] (REL) of 0.1\u00a0mg/m2 skin exposure over an eight-hour workday. At levels of 15\u00a0mg/m2, thallium is [[IDLH|immediately dangerous to life and health]].\nContact with skin is dangerous, and adequate ventilation is necessary when melting this metal. Thallium(I) compounds have a high aqueous solubility and are readily absorbed through the skin, and care should be taken to avoid this route of exposure, as [[cutaneous]] absorption can exceed the absorbed dose received by inhalation at the [[permissible exposure limit]] (PEL). Exposure by inhalation cannot safely exceed 0.1\u00a0mg/m2 in an eight-hour time-weighted average (40-hour work week). The [[Centers for Disease Control and Prevention]] (CDC) states, \"Thallium is not classifiable as a carcinogen, and it is not suspected to be a carcinogen. It is unknown whether chronic or repeated exposure to thallium increases the risk of reproductive toxicity or developmental toxicity. Chronic high level exposure to thallium through inhalation has been reported to cause nervous system effects, such as numbness of fingers and toes.\" For a long time, thallium compounds were readily available as rat poison. This, and that it is water-soluble and nearly tasteless, led to frequent intoxication caused by accident or criminal intent.\nOne of the main methods of removing thallium, both radioactive and stable, from humans is to use [[Prussian blue]], a material which absorbs thallium. Up to 20\u00a0grams per day of Prussian blue is fed by mouth to the patient, and it passes through the patient's digestive system and comes out in the patient's stool. [[Hemodialysis]] and [[hemoperfusion]] are also used to remove thallium from the blood serum. At later stages of the treatment, additional potassium is used to mobilize thallium from the tissues.\nAccording to the [[United States Environmental Protection Agency]] (EPA), artificially-made sources of thallium pollution include gaseous emission of [[Cement#Heavy metal emissions in the air|cement factories]], coal-burning power plants, and metal sewers. The main source of elevated thallium concentrations in water is the leaching of thallium from ore processing operations.\nExternal links.\n[[Category:Thallium| ]]\n[[Category:Chemical elements]]\n[[Category:Post-transition metals]]\n[[Category:1861 introductions]]\n[[Category:1861 in science]]\n[[Category:Chemical elements with hexagonal close-packed structure]]"}
